# Neuron-level Interpretation of Deep NLP Models: A Survey

CorpusID: 237353268 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Definitions
### Question: What are the definitions and objectives of neuron analysis in neural networks?

#Reference=1

(p1.0) In this section, we define the terminologies used in the paper and the objective of neuron analysis more formally.

(p1.1) Neuron Neural networks, such as RNNs or Transformer models consist of various components such as gates/cells, blocks, layers, attention heads, etc. We use the term neuron (also called as features, experts, and units in the literature) to refer to the output of a single dimension from any neural network component. For example, in the BERT base model, the output of a layer block has 768 neurons and the output of an attention head has 64 neurons. Moreover, we refer to individual neurons that learn a single concept as focused neurons, and a set of neurons that in combination represent a concept as group neurons.

(p1.2) Concept A concept represents a coherent fragment of knowledge, such as "a class containing certain objects as elements, where the objects have certain properties" (Stock, 2010). For example, a concept could be lexical: e.g. words ending with suffix "ed", morphological: e.g. gerund verbs, or semantic: e.g. names of cities. We loosely define a concept C as a group of words that are coherent w.r.t to a linguistic property. Table 1 shows an example sentence with different concept annotations.

(p1.3) Objective Figure 1 presents an overview of various objectives in neuron analysis. Formally, given a model M and a set of neurons N (which may consist of all the neurons in the network or a specific subset from particular components like a layer or an attention head) and a concept C, neuron analysis aims to achieve one of the following objectives:

(p1.4) • For a concept C, find a ranked list of |N | neurons with respect to the concept (dotted blue line)

(p1.5) • Given a neuron n i ∈ N , find a set of concepts |C| the neuron represents (dashed purple line)

(p1.6) • Given a set of neurons, find a subset of neurons that encode similar knowledge (solid green line)

(p1.7) The former two aim to understand what concepts are encoded within the learned representation. The last objective analyzes how knowledge is distributed across neurons. Each neuron n i ∈ N is represented as a vector of activation values over some dataset D. Here, every element of the vector corresponds to a word. For phrase or sentence-level concepts, an aggregation of neuron activations over words in the phrase/sentence is used. Alternatively, [CLS] token representation is also used for transformer models that are transfer learned towards a downstream NLP task.
## (s2) Neuron Analysis Methods
### Question: What are the five broad categories of neuron analysis methods?

#Reference=0

(p2.0) We have classified the work done on neuron analysis into 5 broader categories of methods, namely: i) visualizations, ii) corpus-based, iii) probingbased, iv) causation-based and v) miscellaneous methods, based on a set of attributes we describe below:

(p2.1) • Scope: Does the method provide global or local interpretation? Global methods accumulate statistics across a set of examples to discover the role of a neuron. Local methods   provide interpretation of a neuron in a particular example and may not necessarily reflect its role over a large corpus.

(p2.2) • Input and Output: What is the input (e.g. a set of neurons or concepts) to the method and what does it output?

(p2.3) • Scalability: Can the method be scaled to a larger set of neurons?

(p2.4) • HITL: Does the method require a human-inthe-loop for interpretation?

(p2.5) • Supervision: Does the method depend on labeled data to provide interpretation?

(p2.6) • Causation: Is the interpretation connected with the model's prediction? Table 2 summarizes and compares each method in the light of these attributes. We discuss them in detail below. †
## (s3) Visualization
### Question: What are the benefits and limitations of visualizing neuron activations in deep NLP models?

#Reference=3

(p3.0) A simple way to discover the role of a neuron is by visualizing its activations and manually identifying the underlying concept over a set of sentences (Karpathy et al., 2015;Fyshe et al., 2015;Li et al., 2016a). Given that deep NLP models are † Table 3 in Appendix gives a more comprehensive list. trained using billions of neurons, it is impossible to visualize all the neurons. A number of clues have been used to shortlist the neurons for visualization, for example, selecting saturated neurons, high/low variance neurons, or ignoring dead neurons (Karpathy et al., 2015) when using ReLU activation function. ‡ Limitation While visualization is a simple approach to find an explanation for a neuron, it has some major limitations: i) it is qualitative and subjective, ii) it cannot be scaled to the entire network due to an extensive human-in-the-loop effort, iii) it is difficult to interpret polysemous neurons that acquire multiple roles in different contexts, iv) it is ineffective in identifying group neurons, and lastly and v) not all neurons are visually interpretable. Visualization nevertheless remains a useful tool when applied in combination to other interpretation methods that are discussed below.
## (s4) Corpus-based Methods
### Question: How do corpus-based methods interpret and analyze neuron roles in neural networks?

#Reference=2

(p4.0) Corpus-based methods discover the role of neurons by aggregating statistics over data activations. They establish a connection between a neuron and a concept using co-occurrence between a neuron's activation values and existence of the concept in ‡ Saturated neurons have a gradient value of zero. Dead neurons have an activation value of zero.  the underlying input instances (e.g. word, phrases or the entire sentence). Corpus-based methods are global interpretation methods as they interpret the role of a neuron over a set of inputs. They can be effectively used in combination with the visualization method to reduce the search space for finding the most relevant portions of data that activates a neuron, thus significantly reducing the humanin-the-loop effort. Corpus-based methods can be broadly classified into two sets: i) the methods that take a neuron as an input and identify the concept the neuron has learned (Concept Search), ii) and others that take a concept as input and identify the neurons learning the concept (Neuron Search).

(p4.1) Concept Search This set of methods take a neuron as an input and search for a concept that the neuron has learned. They sort the input instances based on the activation values of the given neuron. The top activating instances represent a concept the neuron represents. Kádár et al. (2017) discovered neurons that learn various linguistic con-cepts using this approach. They extracted top-20, 5-gram contexts for each neuron based on the magnitude of activations and manually identified the underlying concepts. This manual effort of identifying concepts is cumbersome and requires a human-in-the-loop. Na et al. (2019) addressed this by using lexical concepts of various granularities. Instead of 5-gram contexts, they extracted top-k activating sentences for each neuron. They parsed the sentences to create concepts (words and phrases) using the nodes of the parse trees. They then created synthetic sentences that highlight a concept e.g. a particular word occurring in all synthetic sentences. The neurons that activates largely on these sentences are considered to have learned the concept. This methodology is useful in analyzing neurons that are responsible for multi-word concepts such as phrases and idiomatic collocations. However, the synthetic sentences are often ungrammatical and lead towards a risk of identifying neurons that exhibit arbitrary behavior (like repetition) instead of concept specific behavior.
## (s5) Neuron Search
### Question: What are Neuron Search methods in corpus-based approaches for concept discovery?

#Reference=1

(p5.0) The second class of corpusbased methods aim to discover neurons for a given concept. The underlying idea is the same i.e. to establish a link between the concept and neurons based on co-occurrences stats, but in the opposite direction. The activation values play a role in weighing these links to obtained a ranked list of neurons against the concept. Mu and Andreas (2020) achieved this by creating a binary mask of a neuron based on a threshold on its activation values for every sentence in the corpus. Similarly, they created a binary mask for every concept based on its presence or absence in a sentence. They then computed the overlap between a given neuron mask vector and a concept mask vector using intersection-over-union (IoU), and use these to generate compositional explanations. Differently from them, Suau et al. (2020) used the values of neuron activations as prediction scores and computed the average precision per neuron and per concept. Finally, Antverg and Belinkov (2022) considered the mean activation values of a neuron with respect to instances that posses the concept of interest.

(p5.1) The two methods give an alternative view to neuron interpretation. While Neuron Search methods aim to find the neuron that has learned a concept, Concept Search methods generate explanations for neurons by aligning them with a concept.

(p5.2) Limitation The corpus-based methods do not model the selection of group neurons that work together to learn a concept. Concept Search methods consider every neuron independently. Similarly, Neuron Search methods do not find the correlation of a group of neurons with respect to the given concept.
## (s7) Linear Classifiers
### Question: How do regularization techniques affect linear classifiers in concept learning?

#Reference=4

(p7.0) The idea is to train a linear classifier towards the concept of interest, using the activation vectors generated by the model being analyzed. The weights assigned to neurons (features to the classifier) serve as their importance score with respect to the concept. The regularization of the classifier directly effects the weights and therefore the ranking of neurons. Radford et al. (2019) used L1 regularization which forces the classifier to learn spiky weights, indicating the selection of very few specialized neurons learning a concept, while setting the majority of neurons' weights to zero. Lakretz et al. (2019) on the other hand used L2 regularization to encourage grouping of features. This translates to discovering group neurons that are jointly responsible for a concept. Dalvi et al. (2019) used ElasticNet regularization which combines the benefits of L1 and L2, accounting for both highly correlated group neurons and specific focused neurons with respect to a concept.

(p7.1) Limitation A pitfall to probing classifiers is whether a probe faithfully reflects the concept learned within the representation or just memorizes the task (Hewitt and Liang, 2019;Zhang and Bowman, 2018). Researchers have mitigated this pitfall for some analyses by using random initialization of neurons (Dalvi et al., 2019) and control tasks  to demonstrate that the knowledge is possessed within the neurons and not due to the probe's capacity for memorization. Another discrepancy in the neuron probing framework, that especially affects the linear classifiers, is that variance patterns in neurons differ strikingly across the layers.  suggested to apply z-normalization as a pre-processing step to any neuron probing method to alleviate this issue.

(p7.2) Gaussian Classifier Hennigen et al. (2020) trained a generative classifier with the assumption that neurons exhibit a Gaussian distribution. They fit a multivariate Gaussian over all neurons and extracted individual probes for single neurons. A caveat to their approach is that activations do not always follow a Gaussian prior in practice -hence restricting their analysis to only the neurons that satisfy this criteria. Moreover, the interpretation is limited to single neurons and identifying groups of neurons requires an expensive greedy search.

(p7.3) Limitation In addition to the shortcomings discussed above, a major limitation of probing-based methods is the requirement of supervised data for training the classifier, thus limiting the analysis only to pre-defined or annotated concepts.
## (s8) Causation-based methods
### Question: What are causation-based methods in neural network analysis?

#Reference=9

(p8.0) The methods we have discussed so far are limited to identifying neurons that have learned the encoded concepts. They do not inherently reflect their importance towards the model's performance. Causation-based methods identify neurons with respect to model's prediction.

(p8.1) Ablation The central idea behind ablation is to notice the affect of a neuron on model's performance by varying its value. This is done either by clamping its value to zero or a fixed value and observe the change in network's performance. Ablation has been effectively used to find i) salient neurons with respect to a model (unsupervised), ii) salient neurons with respect to a particular output class in the network (supervised). The former identifies neurons that incur a large drop in model's performance when ablated (Li et al., 2016a). The latter selects neurons that cause the model to flip its prediction with respect to a certain class (Lakretz et al., 2019). Here, the output class serves as the concept against which we want to find the salient neurons.

(p8.2) Limitation Identifying group neurons require ablating all possible combinations of neurons which is an NP-hard problem (Binshtok et al., 2007). Several researchers have tried to circumvent this by using leave-one-out estimates (Zintgraf et al., 2017), beam search (Feng et al., 2018), by learning end-to-end differentiable prediction model (De Cao et al., 2020) and by using correlation clustering to group similar neurons before ablation . Nevertheless all these approaches are approximations and may incur search errors.

(p8.3) Knowledge Attribution Method Attributionbased methods highlight the importance of input features and neurons with respect to a prediction (Dhamdhere et al., 2018;Lundberg and Lee, 2017;Tran et al., 2018). Dai et al. (2021) used an attribution-based method to identify salient neurons with respect to a relational fact. They hypothesized that factual knowledge is stored in the neurons of the feed-forward neural networks of the Transformer model and used integrated gradient (Sundararajan et al., 2017) to identify top neu-rons that express a relational fact. The work of Dai et al. (2021) shows the applicability of attribution methods in discovering causal neurons with respect to a concept of interest and is a promising research direction.

(p8.4) Limitation The attribution-based methods highlight salient neurons with respect to a prediction. What concepts these salient neurons have learned is unknown. Dai et al. (2021) worked around this by limiting their study to model classes where each class serves as a concept. Attribution-based methods can be enriched by complementing them with other neuron analysis methods such as corpus search that associate salient neurons to a concept.
## (s10) Evaluation
### Question: How are neuron analysis methods evaluated for correctness without standard benchmarks?

#Reference=0

(p10.0) In this section, we survey the evaluation methods used to measure the correctness of the neuron analysis methods. Due to the absence of interpretation benchmarks, it is difficult to precisely define "correctness". Evaluation methods in interpretation mostly resonate with the underlying method to discovered salient neurons. For example visualization methods often require qualitative evaluation via human in the loop, probing methods claim correctness of their rankings using classifier accuracy as a proxy. Antverg and Belinkov (2022) highlighted this discrepancy and suggested to disentangle the analysis methodology from the evaluation framework, for example by using a principally different evaluation method compared to the underlying neuron analysis method. In the following, we summarize various evaluation methods and their usage in the literature.
## (s11) Ablation
### Question: How does ablation help evaluate neuron importance in models?

#Reference=0

(p11.0) While ablation has been used to discover salient neurons for the model, it has also been used to evaluate the efficacy of the selected neurons. More concretely, given a ranked list of neurons (e.g. the output of the probing method), we ablate neurons in the model in the order of their importance and measure the effect on the performance. The idea is that removing the top neurons should result in a larger drop in performance compared to randomly selected neurons. Dalvi et al. (2019);  used ablation in the probing classifier to demonstrate correctness of their neuron ranking method. Similarly Bau et al. (2019) showed that ablating the most salient neurons, discovered using multi-model search, in NMT models lead to a much bigger drop in performance as opposed to removing randomly selected neurons.
## (s12) Classification Performance
### Question: How is the performance of salient neurons evaluated in concept classification?

#Reference=0

(p12.0) Given salient neurons with respect to a concept, a simple method to evaluate their correctness is to train a classifier using them as features and predict the concept of interest. The performance of the classifier relative to a classifier trained using random neurons and least important neurons is used as a metric to gauge the efficacy of the selected salient neurons. However, it is important to ensure that the probe is truly representing the concepts encoded within the learned representations and not memorizing them during classifier training. Hewitt and Liang (2019) introduced Controlled Tasks Selectivity as a measure to gauge this.  adapted controlled tasks for neuronprobing to show that their probes indeed reflect the underlying linguistic tasks.
## (s18) Lexical Concepts
### Question: How do neurons capture lexical concepts in neuron analysis research?

#Reference=5

(p18.0) Some of the research done on neuron analysis particularly the work using visualization and concept search methods identified neurons that capture lexical concepts.

(p18.1) Visualizations Karpathy et al. (2015) found neurons that learn position of a word in the input sentence: activating positively in the beginning, becoming neutral in the middle and negatively towards the end. Li et al. (2016a) found intensification neurons that activate for words that intensify a sentiment. For example "I like this movie a lot" or "the movie is incredibly good". Similarly they discovered neurons that captured "negation". Both intensification neurons and sentiment neurons are relevant for the sentiment classification task, for which the understudied model was trained. Kádár et al. (2017) identified neurons that capture related groups of concepts in a multi-modal image captioning task. For example, they discovered neurons that learn electronic items "camera, laptop, cables" and salad items "broccoli, noodles, carrots etc". Similarly Na et al. (2019) found neurons that learn lexical concepts related to legislative terms, e.g. "law, legal" etc. They also found neurons that learn phrasal concepts. Poerner et al. (2018) showed that Concept Search can be enhanced via Corpus Generation. They provided finer interpretation of the neurons by generating synthetic instances. For example, they showed that a "horse racing" neuron identified via concept search method was in fact a general "racing" neuron by generating novel contexts against this neuron.
## (s20) Linguistic Concepts
### Question: How do neurons in NMT models capture linguistic concepts?

#Reference=9

(p20.0) A number of studies probed for neurons that capture core-linguistic concepts such as morphology, semantic tags, etc. Probing for linguistic structure is important to understand models' capacity to generalize (Marasović, 2018). § For example, the holy grail in machine translation is that a proficient model needs to be aware of word morphology, grammatical structure, and semantics to do well (Vauquois, 1968;Jones et al., 2012). Below we discuss major findings along this line of work:

(p20.1) Neurons specialize in core linguistic concepts Dalvi et al. (2019) in their analysis of LSTMbased NMT models found neurons that capture core linguistic concepts such as nouns, verb forms, numbers, articles, etc. They also showed that the number of neurons responsible for a concept varies based on the nature of the concept. For example: closed class ¶ concepts such as Articles (morphological category), Months of Year (semantic category) are localized to fewer neurons, whereas open class concepts such as nouns (morphological category) or event (semantic category) are distributed among a large number of neurons.

(p20.2) Neurons exhibit monosemous and polysemous behavior. Xin et al. (2019) found neurons exhibiting a variety of roles where a few neurons were exclusive to a single concept while others were polysemous in nature and captured several § but is not the only reason to carry such an analysis. ¶ closed class concepts are part of language where new words are not added as the language evolves, for example functional words such as can, be etc. In contrast open class concepts are a pool where new words are constantly added as the language evolve, for example "chillax" a verb formed blending "chill" and "relax". concepts. Suau et al. (2020) discovered neurons that capture different senses of a word. Similarly, Bau et al. (2019) found a switch neuron that activates positively for present-tense verbs and negatively for the past tense verbs.

(p20.3) Neurons capture syntactic concepts and complex semantic concepts. Lakretz et al. (2019) discovered neurons that capture subject-verb agreement within LSTM gates. Karpathy et al. (2015) also found neurons that activate within quotes and brackets capturing long-range dependency. Na et al. (2019) aligned neurons with syntactic parses to show that neurons learn syntactic phrases. Seyffarth et al. (2021) analyzed complex semantic properties underlying a given sentence.
## (s21) Salient Neurons for Models
### Question: How do researchers identify and evaluate the importance of salient neurons in neural networks?

#Reference=1

(p21.0) In contrast to analyzing neurons with respect to a pre-defined concept, researchers also interpreted the concepts captured in the most salient neurons of the network. For example, in the analysis of the encoder of LSTM-based models, Bau et al.

(p21.1) (2019) used Pearson correlation to discover salient neurons in the network. They found neurons that learn position of a word in the sentence among the most important neurons. Other neurons found included parentheses, punctuation and conjunction neurons. Moreover, Li et al. (2016b) found that the two most salient neurons in Glove were the frequency neurons that play an important role in all predictions.

(p21.2) The question of whether core-linguistic concepts are important for the end performance has been a less explored area. Dalvi et al. (2019) compared neurons learning morphological concepts and semantic concepts with unsupervised ranking of neurons with respect to their effect on the end performance. They found that the model is more sensitive to the top neurons obtained using unsupervised ranking compared to linguistic concepts. They showed that the unsupervised ranking of neurons is dominated by position information and other closed class categories such as conjunction and punctuation which according to the ablation experiment are more critical concepts for the end performance than linguistic concepts.
## (s23) Information Distribution
### Question: How do pre-trained language models represent linguistic hierarchy according to neuron distribution?

#Reference=3

(p23.0) Human languages are hierarchical in structure where morphology and phonology sit at the bottom followed by lexemes, followed by syntactic structures. Concepts such as semantics and pragmatics are placed on the top of the hierarchy.  analyzed linguistic hierarchy by studying the spread of neurons across layers in various pre-trained language models. They extracted salient neurons with respect to different linguistic concepts (e.g. morphology and syntax) and found that neurons that capture word morphology were predominantly found in the lower and middle layers and those learning about syntax were found at the higher layers. The observation was found to be true in both LSTMand the transformer-based architectures, and are inline with the findings of representation analysis (Liu et al., 2019;Tenney et al., 2019;Belinkov et al., 2020b). Similarly Suau et al. (2020) analyzed sub-modules within GPT and RoBERTa transformer blocks and showed that lower layers within a transformer block accumulate more salient neurons than higher layers on the tasks of word sense disambiguation or homograph detection. They also found that the neurons that learn homographs are distributed across the network as opposed to sense neurons that were more predominantly found at the lower layers.
## (s24) Distributivity and Redundancy
### Question: How do training choices like dropout affect information distribution in neural networks?

#Reference=1

(p24.0) While it is exciting to see that networks somewhat preserve linguistic hierarchy, many authors found that information is not discretely preserved at any individual layer, but is distributed and is redundantly present in the network. This is an artifact of various training choices such as dropout that encourages the model to distribute knowledge across the network. For example, Li et al. (2016b) found specialized frequency neurons in a GloVe model trained without dropout, as opposed to the variant trained with dropout where the information was more redundantly available.  showed that a significant amount of redundancy existed within pre-trained models. They showed that 85% of the neurons across the network are redundant and at least 92% of the neurons can be removed when optimizing towards a downstream task in feature-based transfer learning.
## (s25) Comparing Architectures
### Question: How do neuron distributions vary across different neural network architectures?

#Reference=2

(p25.0) The distribution of neurons across the network has led researchers to draw interesting crossarchitectural comparisons. Wu et al. (2020) performed correlation clustering of neurons across architectures and found that different architectures may have similar representations, but their individual neurons behave differently. Hennigen et al. (2020) compared neurons in contextualized (BERT) embedding with neurons in the static embedding (fastText) and found that fastText required two neurons to capture any morphosyntactic phenomenon as opposed to BERT which required up to 35 neurons to obtain the same performance.  showed that the linguistic knowledge in BERT (auto-encoder) is highly distributed across the network as opposed to XLNet (auto-regressive) where neurons from a few layers are mainly responsible for a concept (see Figure 2). Similarly Suau et al. (2020) compared RoBERTa and GPT (auto-encoder vs. generative) models and found differences in the distribution of expert neurons.  extended the cross-architectural comparison towards fine-tuned models. They showed that after finetuning on GLUE tasks, the neurons capturing linguistic knowledge are regressed to lower layers in RoBERTa and XLNet as opposed to BERT where it is still retained at the higher layers.
## (s26) Summary of Findings
### Question: What do neurons in Deep NLP models learn according to recent studies?

#Reference=3

(p26.0) Below is a summary of the key findings that emerged from the work we covered in this survey. Neurons learned within Deep NLP models capture non-trivial linguistic knowledge ranging from lexical phenomenon such as morphemes, words and multi-word expressions to highly complex global phenomenon such as semantic roles and syntactic dependencies. Neuron analysis resonates with the findings of representation analysis (Belinkov et al., 2017a,b;Tenney et al., 2019;Liu et al., 2019) in demonstrating that the networks follow linguistic hierarchy. Linguistic neurons are distributed across the network based on their complexity, with lower layers focused on the lexical concepts and middle and higher layers learning global phenomenon based on long-range contextual dependencies. While the networks preserve linguistic hierarchy, many authors showed that information is not discretely preserved, but is rather distributed and redundantly present in the network. It was also shown that a small optimal subset of neurons w.r.t any concept can be extracted from a network. On another dimension, a few works showed that some concepts are localized to fewer neurons while others are distributed to a large group. Finally, some interesting cross architectural analyses were drawn based on how the neurons are distributed within their layers.
## (s28) Controlling Model's Behavior
### Question: How can identified neurons control a model's behavior regarding specific concepts?

#Reference=1

(p28.0) Once we have identified neurons that capture a certain concept learned in a model, these can be utilized for controlling the model's behavior w.r.t to that concept. Bau et al. (2019) identified Switch Neurons in NMT models that activate positively for the present-tense verbs and negatively for the past-tense verbs. By manipulating the values of these neurons, they were able to successfully change output translations from present to past tense during inference. The authors additionally found neurons that capture gender and number agreement concepts and manipulated them to control the system's output. Another effort along this line was carried by Suau et al. (2020) Controlling model's behavior using neurons en-ables on-the-fly manipulation of output, for example it can be used to debias the output of the model against sensitive attributes like race and gender.
## (s29) Model Distillation and Efficiency
### Question: How does model distillation improve efficiency in deep NLP models?

#Reference=0

(p29.0) Deep NLP models are trained using hundreds of millions of parameters, limiting their applicability in computationally constrained environments. Identifying salient neurons and sub-networks can be useful for model distillation and efficiency.  devised an efficient featurebased transfer learning procedure, stemmed from their redundancy analysis. By exploiting layer and neuron-specific redundancy in the transformer models, they were able to reduce the feature set size to less than 10% neurons for several tasks while maintaining more than 97% of the performance. The procedure achieved a speedup of up to 6.2x in computation time for sequence labeling tasks as opposed to using all the features.
## (s31) Compositional Explanations
### Question: How do compositional explanations help understand model predictions?

#Reference=1

(p31.0) Knowing the association of a neuron with a concept enables explanation of model's output. Mu and Andreas (2020) identified neurons that learn certain concepts in vision and NLP models. Using a composition of logical operators, they provided an explanation of model's prediction. Figure 3 presents an explanation using a gender-sensitive neuron. The neuron activates for contradiction when the premise contains the word man. Such explanations provide a way to generate adversarial examples that change model's predictions.
