# Occupational Exposures and Neurodegenerative Diseases-A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analyses

CorpusID: 59342107 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s15) Strengths and Limitations
(p15.0) All previously published meta-analyses on the neurodegenerative diseases ALS, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are based on all publications on the topic that were identified, irrespective of the scientific quality of the study design. One strength of our study is that our meta-analyses were based on a systematic literature review that included only studies of a high scientific standard. Based on the detailed checklist proposed by Armon [25] we used an elaborate protocol for scrutinizing publications [20]. Another strength of our meta-analyses is that we focused heavily on finding all possible sources of bias, using stratification of data with regard to possible confounders. For evaluation of possible publication bias, we used several methods including funnel plots, specific tests and stratification by publication year as well as precision of risk estimates.

LLM judge: YES

What strengths does the study on neurodegenerative diseases ALS, Alzheimer's, and Parkinson's present in its approach to meta-analysis compared to previously published analyses?

Human judge: NO

This paragraph is more about the methodology of how to do meta-analyses and the strengths of the study, instead of the knowledge that was gained from the study. It does not provide any new information about the diseases themselves, but rather about the process of conducting the study. Probably good to avoind "limitation section" in the pipeline.
