# A Review on Iron Chelators in Treatment of Iron Overload Syndromes

CorpusID: 10915610 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d45b44e3378bf9a63f0e8b00be2bf85a273b8ab5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d45b44e3378bf9a63f0e8b00be2bf85a273b8ab5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) DEFERASIROX
(p5.0) Tridentate iron chelating agent that binds iron in a 2:1 ratio. This combination has high affinity for iron and very low affinity for copper and zinc. 50 The most common side effects of DFX are abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, skin rashes and ophthalmic complication. These reactions frequently occur in older patients with predisposition to myelodysplastic syndrome, renal or hepatic disease and patients with low platelet counts. 51 Serum creatinine level, serum transaminases, bilirubin and CBC should be regularly monitored. One of troublesome factors in Deferasirox therapy is proximal renal tubular dysfunction 52 and other complications including drastic level of metabolic acidosis, hypophosphatemia and hypokalemia. In study from Al-Khabori, et al. 52 Deferasirox withdrawal and replacement therapy in 4 patients with similar conditions rapidly resulted in normal balance of electrolytes. It is worth noting that in order to prevent these complications; the patients should avoid the use of antacid containing aluminum such as Maalox and Mylanta during Deferasirox therapy. 53
## (s9) CONCLUSION
(p9.0) Several conditions including severity of iron overload, treatment period, final costs of treatment and the results of recent studies must be taken into consideration in order to select the proper chelation therapy for a particular clinical situation. Furthermore, the additional expenses of treatment and cost of medications should be considered. Iron is also an important element in the proliferation of tumor cells. Hence, in the absence of this vital element, the proliferation of malignant cells will be also difficult. 63 Therefore, in the near future, the potential role of chelation therapy in treatment and control of cancers will be considered. Finally, the importance of knowledge and information on complete and perfect iron chelation will be revealed in the future. 64 
