# Reconstruction of the alveolar cleft: can growth factor-aided tissue engineering replace autologous bone grafting? A literature review and systematic review of results obtained with bone morphogenetic protein-2

CorpusID: 137196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9c4f1ba2abd42fb81c1096dbbe3707833d27686)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s1) Tissue engineering
(p1.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p1.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p1.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
## (s24) Tissue engineering
(p24.0) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.1) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].

(p24.2) The three vital components necessary for the engineering of bone are bone-forming cells, osteoinductive growth hormone and an osteoconductive scaffold. The osteoconductive scaffold provides immediate mechanical support, mimics the bony extracellular matrix and guides the formation of bone in the desired shape and place. The scaffold should be biocompatible and biodegradable. The rate of degradation is ideally inversely proportional to the rate of bone formation. Several synthetic and organic polymers and also ceramics have been proposed as materials to produce scaffolds [9,10].

(p24.3) The scaffold may also serve as a carrier for the osteoinductive growth hormone. The growth hormone is thus delivered locally and ideally over a sustained period of time. The main role of the growth hormone is to recruit mesenchymal stem cells to the area and make them differentiate into an osteogenic cell lineage [9][10][11].
