# A review on hepatitis D: From virology to new therapies

CorpusID: 131951802 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0606ef90d7b1589ba043e0714a0c85b002b413c2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0606ef90d7b1589ba043e0714a0c85b002b413c2)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s10) Assembly and release
(p10.0) As mentioned previously, although HDV can replicate and synthesise new RNPs independently of HBV, its release from hepatocytes depends on the presence of HBsAg in the same cell. HDV assembly depends on the specific interaction between the farnesylated N-terminus of L-HDAg and the S region of HBsAg [82], and it has been shown that, unlike HBV, HDV RNP can efficiently be assembled with the small form of HBsAg (S-HBsAg) [83]. However, the large form of HBsAg (L-HBsAg) is needed to form infectious virions (as mentioned earlier, it mediates the interaction between the virus and its hepatocyte receptor, NTCP). The relevance of the non-infectious, S-HBsAg enveloped, HDV particles in a natural infection is still to be demonstrated.

(p10.1) In the context of a HBV infection, the three forms of HBsAg, which are produced in much higher amounts than required for HBV virion production, can self-assemble and be secreted as ''empty" subviral particles (SVPs). These non-infectious SVPs (constituted of an envelope devoid of HBV capsid or nucleic acids) are secreted in large excess relative to the infectious virions and are thought to play a role in HBV escape to the immune response. HBV SVPs are secreted through the Golgi, while infectious virions follow the multivesicular body pathway [84]. Given that the composition of the HDV envelope is close to that of SVPs and that titers of circulating HDV virions are higher than those of HBV virions, approaching those of HBV SVPs [2,85], it is likely that HDV uses the SVP secretion pathway for its assembly and release.
## (s21) Lonafarnib
(p21.0) As mentioned before, farnesylation of L-HDAg is an important post-translational modification, as it enables the interaction of HDV RNP with the HBV envelope. Lonafarnib is a farnesyltransferase inhibitor preventing the farnesylation of L-HDAg and consequently its interaction with HBsAg ( Fig. 2) and has been shown to abrogate the secretion of HDV viral particles both in vitro and in vivo [80,81]. A 2015 phase IIa clinical study showed that HDV RNA levels were significantly reduced in patients treated with lonafarnib for 28 days, in comparison to placebo (0.73 log10 IU/ml and 1.54 log10 IU/ml in the 100 mg and 200 mg group, respectively) and these reductions were proportional to the circulating drug levels [152]. However, lonafarnib has significant adverse effects, such as nausea, diarrhoea, abdominal bloating and weight loss.
