# A Survey on Service Composition Middleware in Pervasive Environments

CorpusID: 15264530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d96105828f2994fd7d02a9a6cc807e508663e621)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s5) Broker Approach for Service Composition
(p5.0) Broker [6] presents a distributed architecture and associated protocols for service composition in mobile environments that take into consideration mobility, dynamic changing service topology, and device resources. The composition protocols are based on distributed brokerage mechanisms (Evaluator) and utilize a distributed service discovery process over adhoc network connectivity. The proposed architecture is based on a composition manager, a device that manages the discovery, integration (Generator), and execution of a composite request (Builder). Two broker selectionbased protocols -dynamic one and distributed one -are proposed in order to distribute the composition requests IJCSI IJCSI 6 to the composition managers available in the environment. These protocols depend on device-specific potential value, taking into account services available on the devices, computation and energy resources and the service topology of the surrounding vicinity.
## (s9) WebDG: Semantic Web Services Composition
(p9.0) WebDG [12] proposes an ontology-based framework for the automatic composition of web services. [12] presents an algorithm to generate composite services from high level declarative descriptions. The algorithm uses composability rules, in order to compare the syntactic and semantic features of web services to determine whether two services are composable.  7 WebDG architecture is depicted under SCM model in Figure 7. The service composition approach is depicted under four phases of request specification (Translator), service description matchmaking (Generator), composition plan selection (Evaluator) and composite service generation (Builder). A prototype implementation WebDG is provided and tested on a E-government Web service applications. The WebDG evaluation aims to test the possibility of generating plans for a large number of service interfaces, the effectiveness and speed of the matchmaking algorithm, and the role of the selection phase (QoC parameters) in reducing the number of generated plans. The result show that most of the time is spent on checking message composability. On the other hand, a relatively low value of composition completeness generates more plans, each plan containing a small number of composable operations. In contrast, a high value of this ratio generates a smaller number of plans, each plan having more composable operations.
