# A Comparative Survey of Recent Natural Language Interfaces for Databases

CorpusID: 195316636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c4e3955219e8b008e4a14fbd0a1aac17cdba568d)

Fields: Computer Science, Linguistics

## (s11) Synonymy
(p11.0) The difficulty of synonymy is that a simple lookup or matching is not enough. For example, the question 'All movies starring Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.' (Q3) could also be phrased as 'All movies playing Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.'. The answer should be the same, but because in the sample world no element is named 'playing', a lookup would not find an answer. Therefore, it is necessary that the system takes synonyms into account. A possible solution is the use of a translation dictionary. Usually such a dictionary is based on DBpedia (Lehmann et al, 2012) and/or WordNet (Miller, 1995).

(p11.1) The difficulty of synonymy is that a simple lookup or matching is not enough. For example, the question 'All movies starring Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.' (Q3) could also be phrased as 'All movies playing Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.'. The answer should be the same, but because in the sample world no element is named 'playing', a lookup would not find an answer. Therefore, it is necessary that the system takes synonyms into account. A possible solution is the use of a translation dictionary. Usually such a dictionary is based on DBpedia (Lehmann et al, 2012) and/or WordNet (Miller, 1995).
## (s32) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p32.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.
## (s48) SPARKLIS
(p48.0) SPARKLIS (Ferré, 2017) is a guided query builder for SPARQL using natural language for better understanding. It guides the users during their query phrasing by giving the possibilities to search through concepts, entities and modifiers in natural language. It relies on the rules of SPARQL to ensure syntactically correct SPARQL queries all the time during the process. The interaction with the system makes the question formulation more constrained, slower and less spontaneous, but it provides guidance and safeness with intermediate answers and suggestions at each step. The translation process for SPARKLIS is reversed: it translates possible SPARQL queries into natural language such that the users can understand their choices.
## (s79) Synonymy
(p79.0) The difficulty of synonymy is that a simple lookup or matching is not enough. For example, the question 'All movies starring Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.' (Q3) could also be phrased as 'All movies playing Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.'. The answer should be the same, but because in the sample world no element is named 'playing', a lookup would not find an answer. Therefore, it is necessary that the system takes synonyms into account. A possible solution is the use of a translation dictionary. Usually such a dictionary is based on DBpedia (Lehmann et al, 2012) and/or WordNet (Miller, 1995).

(p79.1) The difficulty of synonymy is that a simple lookup or matching is not enough. For example, the question 'All movies starring Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.' (Q3) could also be phrased as 'All movies playing Brad Pitt from 2000 until 2010.'. The answer should be the same, but because in the sample world no element is named 'playing', a lookup would not find an answer. Therefore, it is necessary that the system takes synonyms into account. A possible solution is the use of a translation dictionary. Usually such a dictionary is based on DBpedia (Lehmann et al, 2012) and/or WordNet (Miller, 1995).
## (s100) QuestIO (QUESTion-based Interface to Ontologies)
(p100.0) QuestIO (Damljanovic et al, 2008) is an NLI to query ontologies using unconstrained natural language. It automatically extracts human-understandable lexicalization from the ontology. Therefore, the quality of the semantic information in the ontology has to be very high to contain enough human-understandable labels and/or descriptions. For example, the attribute Movie.Release-Date would be extracted as 'Release Date', which is a human-understandable label. In contrast, the attribute Movie.OriginalLang would result in 'Original Lang', where the token 'Lang' is a shortened version for 'Language' and is not human-understandable.
## (s116) SPARKLIS
(p116.0) SPARKLIS (Ferré, 2017) is a guided query builder for SPARQL using natural language for better understanding. It guides the users during their query phrasing by giving the possibilities to search through concepts, entities and modifiers in natural language. It relies on the rules of SPARQL to ensure syntactically correct SPARQL queries all the time during the process. The interaction with the system makes the question formulation more constrained, slower and less spontaneous, but it provides guidance and safeness with intermediate answers and suggestions at each step. The translation process for SPARKLIS is reversed: it translates possible SPARQL queries into natural language such that the users can understand their choices.
