# Urbanization and Waterborne Pathogen Emergence in Low-Income Countries: Where and How to Conduct Surveys?

CorpusID: 210330772 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77e0602c01953be5670241add983ba03b66c7890](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77e0602c01953be5670241add983ba03b66c7890)

Fields: Medicine, Geography, Environmental Science

## (s10) Technical Approaches and Pitfalls in Genomic Analysis
(p10.0) The first step of metagenomic approaches is to obtain good-quality DNA or cDNA, which needs (i) biomass collection, (ii) DNA/RNA preservation, (iii) total RNA extraction, and cDNA synthesis [119]. Preservation of RNA from environmental biotopes or extraction of high-molecular-weight DNA are not straightforward [142] and require quantitative approaches, to ensure the representativity of the material [129]. The high-molecular-weight DNA will be used as a template for sequencing libraries of different sizes (200/300 bp to 3/5 kb) to facilitate genome assembly. When the DNA quantity is not sufficient in the sample, new strategies of whole genome amplification can be used. However, the quality of the data obtained in this way is usually very low. Up to 90% of the sequences generated can be from the self-amplification of primers. At the same time, under-represented DNA cannot be fully sequenced according to the deepness of the sequencing step, and the choice of the polymerase used for amplification will impact the quality and representativity of data [143].
## (s12) Conclusions
(p12.0) Rapid, inadequate, unplanned urbanization and high population densities are associated with poor environmental and sanitary contexts. In low-income countries, urban runoffs or open sewage channels are major sources of fecal contamination of the environment. Surface waters and urban aquatic ecosystems are thus collecting and concentrating pathogen populations, which secondarily mix with environmental microorganisms. For these pathogens, genetic drift, chemical pressure, and lateral genetic transfer facilitate acquisition of virulence, long-term survival, and multidrug resistance genes. This contributes to the emergence or re-emergence of waterborne pathogens. Virus emergence from rural (and forest) areas like Ebola or Lassa are well documented by the mass-media, whereas no attention is paid to bacteria evolving to be highly resistant in crowed suburbs of tropical cities. The use of urban surface water for bathing, farming, fishing, or as an unimproved drinking-water source means that pathogens and contaminants are discharged in water resources and mix with environmental aquatic microbiota, before coming back to humans. In the same time, between 2000 and 2010, the consumption of antibiotic drugs increased by 35% [22] with a huge increase in drug resistance and deaths. The emergency is to preserve the efficacy of existing drugs for future generations [170]. Modern analytical processes, i.e., metagenomic approaches, have to be implemented to comprehensively study this complex biotope as many of these microorganisms are not cultivable and escape classical microbiology approaches. In the same line, the places to carry out sampling to study bacteria drift cannot be simply water and sediments as classically done but must take into account new habitats associated with floating macroaggregates, especially plastics. The pervasiveness of plastics is said to be the ultimate geological proxy for characterizing our new Anthropocene era. The ubiquity of plastics reshapes aquatic habitats, deeply impacting microbial communities and their interactions. Resistance gene transfer pathways might thus be noticeably enhanced, with huge potential epidemiological consequences. 
