# A survey of parameterized algorithms and the complexity of edge modification *

CorpusID: 210839434 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff)

Fields: Computer Science, Mathematics

## (s37) Open problem 4.1. Is it possible to give efficient FPT algorithms for DCE(S) and/or WDCE(S) parameterized by k + r for general degree list functions?
(p37.0) For the case vertex deletion ∈ S ⊆ {vertex deletion, edge deletion} and single-element degree lists, Mathieson and Szeider [219] showed that WDCE(S) admits a kernel with O(kr(k + r)) vertices. For general degree lists, they demonstrated a kernel with O(k 2 r k+1 + kr k+2 ) vertices. These results were complemented by Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127], who proved that if only edge additions are allowed (i.e, for the completion problem), then DCE(S) has kernels with O(kr 2 ) and O(r 5 ) vertices, that is, it admits a polynomial kernel whose size depends only on r. To obtain the latter result, they prove that the problem can be solved in polynomial time if k is sufficiently large (greater that some polynomial of r). The latter result is based on a clever application of combinatorial results about existence of f -factors. Hence, the following win-win approach can be used: if k is large, then the problem is solved in polynomial time, and if k is bounded by a polynomial of r, then the kernelization algorithm for the case where the parameter is k + r is applied. Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127] also give lower bounds by proving that DCE(S) parameterized by k + r has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if S = {vertex deletion} or S = {edge addition}. Another lower bound for this parameterization was given by Golovach [133] who proved that DCE(S) with degree lists of size one has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if {vertex deletion, edge addition} ⊆ S.
## (s44) Open problem 4.4. Investigate the parameterized complexity of variants of DCF(S) and EECG for directed graphs.
(p44.0) Besides vertex degree constraints, it could be interesting to consider edge degree constraints or combined vertex and edge degree constraints. In particular, Mathieson [218] considered a number of problems of this type. For a edge weighted graph, the weighted degree of a vertex is defined as the sum of weights of incident edges. Respectively, the weighted sum of an edge is the sum of the vertex degrees of its end-points. Mathieson [218] considered the following problems for edge weighted graphs:
## (s63) Π-Degree Sequence Completion (Π-DSC)
(p63.0) Notice that Π is a tuple property. In particular, DCE({edge addition)} is not a special case of Π-DSC, but Anonymization({edge addition}) is. They introduced the auxiliary Π-Decision problem that asks whether an n-tuple T = (d 1 , . . . , d n ) of non-negative integers satisfies Π and proved, using the previous results about Anonymization({edge addition}) [162], that if Π-Decision is FPT when parameterized by ∆ = max{d i | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, then Π-DSC is FPT when parameterized by ∆ + k. Recall now that Bredereck et al. [39] proved that Anonymization({edge addition}) is FPT when parameterized by ∆ and has a kernel with O(∆ 7 ) vertices. Generalizing this result, Froese et al. [127] defined the Π-Number Sequence Completion (Π-NSC) problem that asks for a sequence d 1 , . . . , d n of non-negative integers and two non-negative integers k and ∆ , whether there are non-negative integers x 1 , . . . , x n such that the n-tuple T = (d 1 + x 1 , . . . , d n + x n ) satisfies Π,
