# Techniques for In Vivo Measurement of Ligament and Tendon Strain: A Review

CorpusID: 222184086 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering

## (s13) Advantages and Limitations
(p13.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.
## (s15) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
(p15.0) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).
## (s43) Advantages and Limitations
(p43.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.
## (s45) Measurement Technology and Experimental Methods
(p45.0) For both strain measurement techniques, the ultrasound transducers must be fixed to the body during dynamic movement to image a tissue. Typically, the ultrasound transducer is housed in a foam orthotic and strapped to the body using athletic tape. 50 In many experiments, a treadmill is used so that the ultrasound cart can remain stationary. Commonly, markers are attached to the transducer and the ultrasound system is synchronized with a motion analysis system so that the transformation between the image field of view and other anatomic landmarks can be calculated (Fig. 5).
