# Cell Sources and Influencing Factors of Liver Regeneration: A Review e929129-1

CorpusID: 229173162 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Liver regeneration (LR) involves complicated mechanisms and a tremendous amount of detail. Even after more than 100 years of extensive studies, the process of LR is not completely understood. Currently, the main points of LR include the following: (1) LR is a complicated process involving numerous intrahepatic and extrahepatic components and a large number of signal molecules in a specific microenvironment. Owing to the extremely important functions of the liver, the interaction modules constituted by the saturated signaling pathways rigidly regulate the initiation, maintenance, and termination of LR to achieve homeostasis even in cases of severe injury [1]. (2) Surprisingly, the human liver can regrow with no or almost no loss of function and can survive after sustaining huge damage. This is because of the extensive cell sources and the cell plasticity of LR. According to the level of liver injury and different intrahepatic backgrounds, such as liver fibrosis and liver steatosis, LR can occur in different patterns [2]. (3) The human body is a complicated organism that participates in all life activities as a whole. Various extrahepatic factors, such as partial hepatectomy (PH), aging, platelets, nerves, hormones, bile acid (BA), and gut microbiota can affect LR, thereby creating difficulties in basic research.
## (s9) Partial hepatectomy
(p9.0) In hepatectomy-induced LR, resected volume is closely correlated with the pattern of regeneration. In 90% hepatectomy models, the limited remained resources first meet the liver metabolic function to maintain the homeostasis of the body, resulting in the delay of LR [81]. For 70% hepatectomy models, traditional opinion suggests that almost all residual hepatocytes re-enter the cell cycle for mitosis. However, this is not the case. The adult human liver is comprised of more than 20% polyploid cells, while the number of polyploid cells is as high as 70% in rodents. After PH, polyploid hepatocytes achieve the increase in liver mass through hypertrophy [82].

(p9.1) Many studies have suggested that the volume of LR is significantly negatively correlated with future remnant liver volume (FRLV). However, the removal of a larger volume of liver may cause an increase in the release of mitogens such as TNF-a and IL-6 [83]. Pagano et al. reported that the imbalance between the remaining liver's function and the body's metabolic requirement became the most important factor in the regulation of LR. After determining the safe boundary of FRLV to avoid "small liver syndrome" and other related complications, a lower FRLV can promote LR [84].
## (s12) Neural regulation and hormones
(p12.0) Previous studies have discovered that there is a direct feedback relationship between the liver and the brain via the autonomic nervous system [101]. Izumi et al. discovered that LR slowed down when the hepatic branches of the vagus nerve were resected in PH rat models [102]. The mechanism functions when the excessive vagus signal activates macrophages by acetylcholine, and activated macrophages could promote LR through the IL-6/STAT3/FoxM1 pathway. Although only sparse vagus can be observed around the portal vein zone in the liver, the precise multistep regulation constituted by neural cells, immunocytes, and hepatocytes allows the amplification and transmission of an emergency regeneration signal in the liver. Therefore, it can rapidly and precisely regulate LR initiation in the case of acute injury and achieve the survival of the organism. Another study discovered that nerve signals contribute to the release of serotonin in the enterochromaffin cells after PH, thereby facilitating LR indirectly. This suggests that the relay ganglions and organs are vital [103]. Ishtiaq et al. discovered that stress-activated sympathetic nerves induce the elevation of adreno-cortico-tropic hormone and glucocorticoid levels, activate the JAK/ATAT3/NF-kB/IL-6 pathway, and promote LR. At the same time, increased norepinephrine in the plasma can activate the HGF/C-Met and EGF/EGFR pathways in the hepatocytes and antagonize TGF-b in the early stage of LR [104]. Triiodothyronine (T3) hormone can promote mitosis through mediating cyclin D1 in LR [105]. Similar to T3, the thyroid hormone receptor-b-selective agonist can activate Wnt/b-catenin/ cyclin D1 signaling to induce hepatocyte proliferation [106].
