# Vitamin C: A Review on its Role in the Management of Metabolic Syndrome

CorpusID: 220302678 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bd60858e833af3fca1a74627200ecde9d1d0a5e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bd60858e833af3fca1a74627200ecde9d1d0a5e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) The relationship between circulating vitamin C concentration and MetS
(p5.0) Four cross-sectional studies involving adolescents and adults participating in National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) demonstrated that serum vitamin C concentration was inversely correlated with MetS outcomes [39][40][41][42]. Using data from NHANES between 1988 until 1994, the serum vitamin C concentration was compared among 8,808 adults (aged 20 years and above) with and without MetS. Findings from this study indicated that the age-adjusted concentration of vitamin C was lower in participants with MetS (36.41 ± 1.11 mmol/L) than those without MetS (42.94 ± 0.83 mmol/L). The concentration of vitamin C was inversely correlated with waist circumference (β = -4.090 ± 0.860) and hyperglycaemia (β = -3.066 ± 1.017). Besides, individuals with the highest number of MetS criteria had the lowest serum vitamin C concentration [39].

(p5.1) From the year 2001 to 2006, Beydoun and colleagues performed two cross-sectional studies recruiting 4,285 adolescents (aged 12 -19 years) and 1,574 adults (aged 20 -85 years), respectively. In adolescents, lower concentration of vitamin C in serum was noted in participants with MetS than those without MetS. Inverse relationships were constantly found between vitamin C and MetS using different models, i.e. after controlling for socio-demographic and dietary factors (OR = 0.26; 95% CI 0.11 to 0.62) as well as after inclusion of serum cholesterol and TG (OR = 0.16; 95% CI 0.05 to 0.52) [40]. A similar trend was detected in adults whereby MetS subjects displayed lower vitamin C concentration compared to non-MetS subjects. Vitamin C was inversely related to MetS count and binary outcomes. Every increase of ~28.5 μmol/L in vitamin C concentration was associated with 24% lower prevalence odds of MetS (OR = 0.76; 95% CI 0.58 to 0.98) [41]. More recently, a cross-sectional study was published consisting of data from NHANES between 2005 until 2006. A total of 2,049 MetS subjects were identified using the harmonized criteria from the Joint Interim Statement in this study. The authors unveiled that vitamin C concentration decreased with increasing BMI and number of MetS components. In addition, having lower than the clinical reference range for vitamin C was significantly associated with a greater likelihood of MetS (OR = 1.39; 95% CI 1.01 to 1.90) [42].
## (s6) The effects of vitamin C supplementation on MetS
(p6.0) The earliest clinical trial investigating the effects of vitamin C on MetS was conducted by Czernichow et al. (2009). They designed a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled, primary prevention trial, known as the French SUpplementation en VItamines et Mineraux AntioXydants (SU.VI.MAX) study. A total of 5,220 men and women were included and randomly assigned to receive either a supplement containing a combination of antioxidants (120 mg vitamin C, 30 mg vitamin E, 6 mg β-carotene, 20 mg zinc and 100 μg selenium) or a placebo. The participants were free of MetS during the onset of the study and were followed for 7.5 years. Results from this study pinpointed that antioxidant supplementation for 7.5 years did not affect the incident risk of MetS, as shown by an approximately equal number of MetS events in the placebo and intervention groups. However, higher baseline serum vitamin C concentration was associated with lower odds for MetS incident risk (OR = 0.53; 95% CI 0.35 to 0.80) [49].

(p6.1) The effects of vitamin C supplementation alone or in combination with endurance physical activity were investigated by Farag and co-authors in two randomised controlled trials. In the first study, participants of both sexes with MetS (n=141; aged 30 -50 years old) were randomly divided into six groups receiving placebo, 2000 IU/day vitamin D or 500 mg/day vitamin C with or without 30 minutes/day physical activities for three months. Their data concluded that subjects taking vitamin C alone had a lowered TG level compared to placebo. The level of HDL-C was increased, but TG and waist circumference were decreased in MetS patients subjected to vitamin C supplementation with exercise in relative to the placebo [50]. Another randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled trial by the same group of researchers involved 96 MetS patients aged between 30 to 60 years old. It was worthy to note that vitamin C supplementation alone decreased BMI and LDL-C compared to the placebo group. The MetS patients had lower systolic BP after taking vitamin C supplements and undergoing physical activity for three months than the placebo controls [51].
## (s7) The potential mechanism of action for vitamin C in the management of MetS
(p7.0) The anti-oxidative property of vitamin C Oxidative stress, an imbalance between the production and inactivation of ROS, is the hallmark of MetS [55]. Several biochemical mechanisms of ROS formation during MetS have been postulated. Unhealthy eating habits (such as consuming a diet rich in fat and carbohydrate), as well as low physical activity, are the contributing factors of MetS [6,56]. In the state of overnutrition, the large flux of macronutrients exacerbates oxidation process resulting in higher ROS generation and postprandial oxidative stress response [57]. The increase in adipose tissues stimulates excessive production of pro-inflammatory mediators, which in turn stimulate macrophages and monocytes to generate ROS [14]. Hypertrophied adipocytes also secrete angiotensin II to enhance ROS production from nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase [58]. Under physiological condition, the synthesis of ROS is often counteracted by the natural antioxidant system in the body consisting of a series of enzymatic and non-enzymatic antioxidants. The examples of enzymatic antioxidants are SOD, GPx and catalase (CAT) whereas the non-enzymatic antioxidants include GSH, vitamin C, vitamin E, beta (β)-carotene and other phytochemicals. The perturbation of ROS and antioxidant balance is often due to an increase in ROS production or/and a depression of the antioxidant system. High level of ROS reacts with cellular macromolecules and causes lipid peroxidation [59]. Thus, the products of lipid peroxidations are often the biomarkers for oxidative stress.

(p7.1) The protective effects of vitamin C against oxidative stress have been presented in MetS animal models (Table 1). Using Wistar rats fed with a high-salt diet, the orally supplemented 100 mg/kg vitamin C for 4 weeks increased vitamin C concentration, total antioxidant status and decreased MDA content in animals as compared to non-treated negative controls [22]. Another study showed that the mutant Wrn ∆hel/∆hel mice treated with drinking water enriched with 0.4% sodium ascorbate decreased oxidative stress in liver and heart tissues [the levels of ROS and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) damage decreased] along with the reversal of metabolic phenotypes [24]. In the rabbit model, results from comet assay showed that the DNA damage in lymphocytes of the diabetic group without supplementation of vitamin C was higher (indicated by longer tail length) and a reduction was seen in the vitamin C-treated group. Simultaneously, serum MDA was also higher in diabetic group and decreased after vitamin C supplementation. The serum paraoxonase-1 (PON-1) activity and time required for small dense low-density lipoprotein (sdLDL) oxidation were low in the diabetic group. These parameters increased after vitamin C supplementation [25]. The investigation using animal model of MetS induced by high-fat diet displayed MetS features and high degree of oxidation (MDA level) in the body. Feeding the animals with a fixed-dose combination of vitamin C, green tea polyphenols and grape seed extract proanthocyanidin successfully ameliorated the oxidative stress [28].
