# Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors in COVID-19: A Review Filipe Ferrari 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I Vítor Magnus Martins 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , II Flá vio Danni Fuchs 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I,III Ricardo Stein 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 I,IV, *

CorpusID: 232770549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) COVID-19 and Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors
(p3.0) Evidence of Neutral Effect Based on Observational Studies and in a Randomized Clinical Trial. A population-based case-control study (10) with data from 6,300 patients and 31,000 controls from the Lombardy region in Italy, found no association between the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs and SARS-CoV-2 infection among overall COVID-19 patients or patients with severe or fatal disease. Reynolds et al. (14) evaluated 12,594 individuals who were tested for COVID-19, of whom 4,357 had hypertension. They further analyzed the relationship between treatment with five classes of antihypertensive drugs, including ACE inhibitors (22% of patients) and ARBs (28% of patients), and the probability of a positive or negative COVID-19 test result. No association was observed between the use of RAAS inhibitors and the risk of a positive test result for COVID-19 (14). A study conducted in Saudi Arabia found no differences in ICU admission, ICU admission within 24 hours of hospitalization, ICU stay (days), and ICU death (p=0.19; p=0.23; p=0.13; p=0.58, respectively) (20) among patients receiving ACE inhibitors/ARBs vs. non-ACE inhibitors/ARBs.

(p3.1) A retrospective cohort study conducted in the state of Florida, U.S assessed whether there was an association between ACE inhibitors or ARBs and the likelihood of SARS-CoV-2 infection (40). Approximately 19,000 individuals were tested for COVID-19; among them, 12% used ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Among these patients, 421 tested positive and were admitted to the hospital, 161 were admitted to the ICU, and 111 required mechanical ventilation (40). In Belgium, De Spiegeleer et al. (36) also found no differences between therapy with ACE inhibitors/ARBs and non-ACE inhibitors/ARBs in asymptomatic patients or those with severe clinical outcomes.

(p3.2) A retrospective case series analyzed data from approximately 1,200 patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in China (2). Among individuals with severe and non-severe disease, the proportions of hypertensive patients using ACE inhibitors and ARBs did not differ. The same was observed between nonsurvivors and survivors, suggesting that these drugs are not associated with severity of disease or mortality in COVID-19 among hypertensive patients. A Danish retrospective study evaluated approximately 4,500 patients with COVID-19, 895 of whom received ACE inhibitors or ARBs. No association with mortality or severe illness was observed among patients receiving these medications (27). In Italy, Bravi et al. (33) conducted a retrospective case-control study on adults with COVID-19 (N=1,603), who were followed for a median of 24 days. Multivariate analysis revealed no association between the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs and disease severity among 543 hypertensive patients using these drugs. Male sex, age, and diabetes were the lone predictors of more severe disease. Data from China corroborate these findings. Patients on ACE inhibitor or ARB therapy (N=40) or other classes of antihypertensive drugs (N=61) were compared. No differences were observed between groups in terms of hospital mortality, requirement of ICU support, or invasive mechanical ventilation (42).
## (s4) Evidence of Potential Benefits Based on Observational Studies
(p4.0) In Madrid, Spain, de Abajo et al. (35) conducted a population-based case-control study on patients diagnosed with COVID-19. When users of other antihypertensive drugs were compared to users of RAAS inhibitors, no increased risk was observed with ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Interestingly, they observed a reduction in the odds of hospital admission in diabetic patients receiving RAAS inhibitors. Meng et al. (94) studied hypertensive patients with COVID-19, who were divided into a RAAS inhibitor group (ACE inhibitors/ARBs, N=17) and other antihypertensive agent group, including calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and diuretics (N=25). Patients using ACE inhibitors or ARBs showed an increase in CD3 + and CD8 + T-cell counts, in addition to a lower frequency of severe illness and a trend towards lower interleukin-6 levels in peripheral blood. These findings point to new pathways that may explain the possible benefits of the use of these drugs in hypertensives with COVID-19.

(p4.1) Felice et al. (37) conducted a study on 133 hypertensive patients diagnosed with COVID-19 at a single center in Italy. They were divided into one group of those taking ACE inhibitors (N=40; 70% taking ramipril) or ARBs (N=42, more than 50% taking olmesartan) and another group of patients using non-RAAS inhibitors (N=51). Patients on long term therapy with RAAS inhibitors had lower odds of admission to semi-intensive or intensive care than those treated with   non-RAAS inhibitors. Another observational study conducted in Italy (Rozzano-Milan, Lombardy) suggested a possible mortality reduction in patients using ACE inhibitors/ARBs (34). In this study, approximately 400 patients with COVID-19 were divided into three groups: 1) patients who received continued ACE inhibitor/ARB therapy (14.1%), 2) patients who were discontinuation from ACE inhibitor/ARB therapy at hospitalization (due to hypotension, worsening of renal function, or other factors) (29.5%), and 3) patients who were not on RAAS inhibitors at baseline (56.4%). The primary outcome was mortality within 20 days of hospital admission. The mortality rates in these groups were 12.5%, 27.4%, and 17.4%, respectively (p=0.036), suggesting a reduction in this serious outcome in patients who continued the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs, compared to those who discontinued the therapy (34). These findings were corroborated by another study, in which patients with hypertension were divided into RAAS inhibitor users (N=41) and non-users (N=241). Mortality was significantly lower in RAAS inhibitor users (41), suggesting a better prognosis of hypertensive patients on these medications. Gao et al. (38) evaluated 2,900 hospitalized patients in China, of whom approximately 30% had hypertension. Hypertensive patients had a two-fold increase in the relative risk of mortality compared to normotensive patients. It is important to point out that those with a history of hypertension but not on antihypertensive treatment (N=140) had a significantly higher risk of mortality than those on antihypertensive treatment (N=730).
