# Detecting Fall Risk and Frailty in Elders with Inertial Motion Sensors: A Survey of Significant Gait Parameters

CorpusID: 239485947 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Engineering

## (s3) Frailty Definition and Scoring Tests
(p3.0) Frailty is a syndrome (set of symptoms) associated with aging and represent a decline in different functional abilities [22]. According to Fried et al. [3], a frailty condition is met when three (or more) out of five energy-related criteria are satisfied, as shown in Table 1. Alternatively, frailty has been determined as a risk index by counting the number of deficits accumulated over time (termed "Frailty Index (FI)") [22] including disability, diseases, physical and cognitive impairments, and geriatric syndromes (e.g., falls). However, the fivecomponent phenotype proposed by Fried et al. [3] is easier to use and more practical in a clinical setting, compared to the FI that typically contains thirty to seventy items.

(p3.1) It is commonly accepted that there exist three frailty-related states: robust, prefrail (when one or two above-cited criteria are present), and frail (three or more conditions). Several studies for long periods (about 5 y) [22] showed that more than 50% of the elderly population in nursing homes had at least one transition between any two of the three frailty states. According to Fried et al. [3], in a study for 65+ y persons, 46% did not present any conditions, 32% 1 condition, 15% 2 conditions, and only 6%, 1%, and 0.2% for 3, 4, and 5 conditions simultaneously. The most frequent condition were, in order, low activity (22% of the cases), slow walk and grip strength (20% both), exhaustion (17%), and weight loss (6%).
