# Clinical Medicine A Review on Various Topics on the Thermal Grill Illusion

CorpusID: 237324970 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a16c367d446ad9ce0117b302d8c0f3a4f46ef6a6)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s6) The Response to the TGI in Patients with Chronic Pain
(p6.0) Two studies evaluated whether chronic pain affected the response to the TGI, with conflicting results. Sumracki et al. evaluated the difference in the response to the TGI between patients with chronic pain (n = 18) and pain-free participants (n = 16) [16]. They compared the responses to the TGI in patients with chronic pain with those in pain-free participants. Although there was a minimal difference, the intensity of TGI-related pain and degree of discomfort were significantly lower in patients with chronic pain than in pain-free participants. Sumracki et al. suggested that patients with chronic pain have an altered central integration of ascending pain signals. This proposal is correlated with long-term functional and structural changes in the central nervous system. In contrast to the results of this study, the case report by Heavner et al. showed the opposite response [17]. They reported that a patient with chronic pain due to complex regional pain syndrome experienced an intolerable burning sensation on the thermal grill; however, this result might be unreliable because this study involved only one patient with chronic pain. More studies are needed to clarify whether chronic pain increases the intensity of the pain response to the thermal grill or decreases it. Furthermore, the response to the TGI following pain duration would be an interesting topic for future studies.
