# buildings Application of Low-Cost Sensors for Building Monitoring: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 238827459 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af08fc77b706a63419a5f682e3f5e3ecc0237085](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af08fc77b706a63419a5f682e3f5e3ecc0237085)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s15) Structural Building Monitoring
(p15.0) In this section, low-cost approaches for monitoring structural parameters of buildings are overviewed. Structural monitoring of the buildings using LCSs is the second group of work analyzed. Controlling the aging process of buildings by monitoring acceleration, as well as strain or displacement is crucial for structural safety. Therefore, in this section the existing low-cost technologies for the measurements of the acceleration and displacement or strain are reviewed. Figure 8 illustrates the increment of publications over the years associated with low-cost structural building monitoring. In fact, in the two main subcategories of structural health monitoring, detecting structural response through determination of vibration pattern in buildings is more decisive as it contains 56.8% of reviewed articles published until 2020. The articles of this part were limited to the publications from 2006 onward as this is coincident with development of Arduino at the end of 2005. The first article founded in 2006 aimed to reduce the labor and cost associated with building monitoring [159]. They used low-cost analog sensors and ATmega 128 microcontroller for real time structural monitoring of a half-scale building installed on a shaking table. It can be seen that the quantity of the annually publications related to the low-cost accelerometer are so limited from 2006 until 2013 as they have the share of 28.5% in the whole reviewed articles. However, the number of papers published in the last 7 years has increased by 150% and has the share of 71.5%. Such an increment is in line with the developments of the low-cost data acquisition systems using microcontrollers and low-cost kits. group of work analyzed. Controlling the aging process of buildings by monitoring acceleration, as well as strain or displacement is crucial for structural safety. Therefore, in this section the existing low-cost technologies for the measurements of the acceleration and displacement or strain are reviewed. Figure 8 illustrates the increment of publications over the years associated with low-cost structural building monitoring. In fact, in the two main subcategories of structural health monitoring, detecting structural response through determination of vibration pattern in buildings is more decisive as it contains 56.8% of reviewed articles published until 2020. The articles of this part were limited to the publications from 2006 onward as this is coincident with development of Arduino at the end of 2005. The first article founded in 2006 aimed to reduce the labor and cost associated with building monitoring [159]. They used low-cost analog sensors and ATmega 128 microcontroller for real time structural monitoring of a half-scale building installed on a shaking table. It can be seen that the quantity of the annually publications related to the low-cost accelerometer are so limited from 2006 until 2013 as they have the share of 28.5% in the whole reviewed articles. However, the number of papers published in the last 7 years has increased by 150% and has the share of 71.5%. Such an increment is in line with the developments of the low-cost data acquisition systems using microcontrollers and low-cost kits.  Figure 9 illustrates the number of articles by country. It can be observed that Italy and USA had the most contributed to the low-cost structural building monitoring by reporting 12 and 8 publications, respectively. Then, 3 publications were carried out in China and Taiwan each. Additionally, 2 articles were executed in Japan, and the quantity of the publication for the other 10 countries in the map (Serbia, Portugal, Spain, Indonesia, India, Australia, Greece, Korea, Poland, and Germany) were 1 each.  Figure 9 illustrates the number of articles by country. It can be observed that Italy and USA had the most contributed to the low-cost structural building monitoring by reporting 12 and 8 publications, respectively. Then, 3 publications were carried out in China and Taiwan each. Additionally, 2 articles were executed in Japan, and the quantity of the publication for the other 10 countries in the map (Serbia, Portugal, Spain, Indonesia, India, Australia, Greece, Korea, Poland, and Germany) were 1 each. Buildings 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 32 Figure 9. Distribution of the articles associated with low-cost structural building monitoring.
