# Integron and its role in antimicrobial resistance: A literature review on some bacterial pathogens

CorpusID: 233865798 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s10) Integrons in various bacteria
(p10.0) Escherichia coli E. coli is known as the head of the large family of Enterobacteriaceae. Based on diversity in pathogenesis and clinical symptoms, the strains of E. coli are divided into two intestinal and extra-intestinal. E. coli is one of the most important causes of gastrointestinal and urinary tract infections in humans that has been resistant to a wide range of antibiotics over the past years (25). Acquiring mobile elements, including plasmids, transposons, and integrons among Gram-negative bacteria, it plays an important role in the development of antibiotic resistance (2). Class I integron was reported in 1973 (26). Common cassettes in this class of integron result in resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA1, aadA2, aadB, aadA5), trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA5, dfrA7,  dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrB2, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2), erythromycin (ere2) and broad-spectrum beta-lactams (ESBL) (bla OXA-101 -aac(6')-Ib) (27). Also, class II integron has been reported less frequently. This integron contains gene cassettes dfrA1-sat1-aadA1, dfrA1-sat2-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 (28). Also, recently, a new class II integron has been identified (29), which includes two gene cassettes. One of them is the dfrA14 gene. There are also reports available on the availability of Class III integrons that are commonly seen with class I and III integrons in this bacterium (30). (Table 1) in our study in 2015, we collected E. coli from clinical isolates of patients in the north of Iran, which showed 22% of E. coli isolates carried class I integron ( Table 2) (31).
## (s12) Salmonella spp.
(p12.0) Salmonella spp. are intestinal pathogens that are usually transmitted by contaminated food, especially animals such as meat, poultry, eggs, and milk. Multidrugresistant (MDR) salmonella has been a major public health issue since 1990. Salmonella spp. is associated with different classes of integrons, usually containing one to three gene cassettes (35). Class I integrons play a major role in antibiotic resistance in Salmonella spp. This class has several types of gene cassettes resistant to aminoglycosides (aadA, aadA1, aadA2, aadA5, aadB), beta-lactams (bla CARB-2 ) and trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA7, dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) (27). Although the percentage of class II integrons is relatively lower in this bacterium, it appears in different serotypes of salmonella spp. with dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 cassettes. Class III integrons are not yet found in this bacterium (Table  1)(36). In our study in 2015, the prevalence of Class I integrons in Salmonella infantis was 36% (Table 2) (37).
