# A Review of Shadow Education

CorpusID: 248584090 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/730f68b138a7c5b7bc2aa8d6dae659edc5aa481d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/730f68b138a7c5b7bc2aa8d6dae659edc5aa481d)

Fields: Education

## (s5) Suggestions for Regulating Shadow Education
(p5.0) Researchers agree that the goal of regulating shadow education is to optimize the educational service system in such a way that it can meet students' needs for additional instruction without jeopardizing the equity and fairness of compulsory education. It is critical to enhance the quality of mainstream education and to equalize access to highquality educational resources while also establishing an effective regulatory mechanism to steer shadow education in a positive direction. They are the diametric opposites of one another. Bray (2013) summarizes the global regulatory framework for shadow education and proposes six modes: laisse faire, supervision without intervention, adaptation with control, encouraging, blended, and prohibitive. He suggests that when developing policies and regulations for shadow education, relevant authorities should take into account the history and current state of the practice in their respective countries.
## (s12) Suggestions for Regulating Shadow Education
(p12.0) Researchers agree that the goal of regulating shadow education is to optimize the educational service system in such a way that it can meet students' needs for additional instruction without jeopardizing the equity and fairness of compulsory education. It is critical to enhance the quality of mainstream education and to equalize access to highquality educational resources while also establishing an effective regulatory mechanism to steer shadow education in a positive direction. They are the diametric opposites of one another. Bray (2013) summarizes the global regulatory framework for shadow education and proposes six modes: laisse faire, supervision without intervention, adaptation with control, encouraging, blended, and prohibitive. He suggests that when developing policies and regulations for shadow education, relevant authorities should take into account the history and current state of the practice in their respective countries.
