# Exploring the underutilized novel foods and starches for formulation of low glycemic therapeutic foods: a review

CorpusID: 258241337 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s11) Anti-obesity and hypolipidemic properties
(p11.0) Fu et al. (169) indicated that 6-week supplementation of banana resistant starch (BRS) at low (1.25 g/kg), medium (2.50 g/kg) and high (5.0 g/kg) dose along with high fat diet (HFD), fed to obese rats could prevent rise of glucose (4.16-3.78 mmol/L) when compared to control (fed with HFD only) obese rats (9.77 mmol/L). Even the triglyceride, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein levels were lower in BRS + HFD obese rats (0.44-0.47 mmol/L; 1.45-1.61 mmol/L; 0.49-0.33 mmol/L respectively) than control obese rats (0.65; 1.79; 0.48 respectively). The authors also indicated that the BRS improved the gut microbiota by increasing the ratio of Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes microorganism. Even the serum level of leptin and insulin decrease in rats fed with BRS (leptin: 1.82-1.37 ng/ml; insulin: 11.51-9.29 U/L) than the control rats (leptin: 2.10 ng/ml; insulin: 15.15 U/L). The ghrelin hormone level which was less in obese rat (0.76 mU/L) was improved in rats fed with BRS (0.79-0.92 mU/L). Adiponectin a hormone related to anti-diabetic and cardioprotective activity was low in obese rats (23.60 ng/ml) which was increased to 24.71-34.44 ng/ml in BRS fed rats. Thus, it was concluded that BRS demonstrated antiobesity effect by regulating the glucose and lipid mechanism, reducing the serum hormonal levels of leptin and insulin and increasing the ratio of beneficial gut microbiota (169).
## (s12) Hypoglycemic properties
(p12.0) Low GI and GL foods are known to have hypoglycemic effect, thus are recommended for diabetic patients as part of their diets. Management of diet plays a major role in preventing and maintaining normal blood sugar levels of a diabetic person (171). The current trend of snacking includes consumption of highly processed, high calorie foods, mainly bakery products, fried foods that lack fiber or other essential nutrients and also fall into high GI category. However, efforts are being taken to reduce the GI of some of these snacks like bakery products, by value adding or enriching these products with nutrient dense novel ingredients that are rich source of fiber and bioactive compounds apart from normal nutrients. When white bread enriched with oat fiber (insoluble fiber 10.4 g per portion) was supplemented to overweight and obese women for 3 days, their insulin sensitivity improved. Serum insulin was noted as 29.7 in experimental group while it was 32.3 pmol/l in control (172). Miranda-Ramos and Haros (37) developed bread by addition of amaranth (20%), chia (10%) and quinoa (4%) in wheat flour; which reduced the GI of optimized bread (85%) upon comparison with control (95%). This reduction in GI can be correlated to the GI of quinoa, amaranth and chia in the formulation due to high dietary fiber and decreased starch content. Further, addition of pseudocereals also reduced the starch hydrolysis at 90 mins in optimized bread (68.1%) as compared to control bread (84.6%) thereby providing hypoglycemic effect.
