# Technologies for pollutant removal and resource recovery from blackwater: a review

CorpusID: 256549930 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/992049eb09b313145bda04c8cfa36a0afaf0c59d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/992049eb09b313145bda04c8cfa36a0afaf0c59d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The sharply growing world population has made human excreta an outstanding problem. The safe disposal of human excreta is essential not only to human health, but also to the environment, as poor excreta management will lead to the contamination of water bodies and soils (Rose et al., 2015;Schmitt et al., 2017). Currently, up to 4.5 billion people in the world still lack access to safely managed sanitation services ). An estimated 850,000 people die annually because of a lack of access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene (Reynaert et al., 2020). One of the key solutions to this dilemma is the improved sanitation systems and sustainable treatment technologies for toilet wastewater.
## (s3) Treatment technologies of blackwater
(p3.0) In general, the objective of BW treatment can be classified into two aspects (Fig. 2). One is the removal of pollutants to meet the corresponding discharging or reuse standards. The other is the application of certain methods to recover organic matter or nutrients to produce energy, fertilizer, or other high value-added products. Prior to further treatment, a pretreatment step has always been recommended to decrease the subsequent processing load, or remove the insoluble or suspended solids. For water or nutrient reuse, a post-treatment process should be employed to meet the requirement for microbial or pathogenic indicators (Cid et al., 2022).
## (s23) Introduction
(p23.0) The sharply growing world population has made human excreta an outstanding problem. The safe disposal of human excreta is essential not only to human health, but also to the environment, as poor excreta management will lead to the contamination of water bodies and soils (Rose et al., 2015;Schmitt et al., 2017). Currently, up to 4.5 billion people in the world still lack access to safely managed sanitation services ). An estimated 850,000 people die annually because of a lack of access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene (Reynaert et al., 2020). One of the key solutions to this dilemma is the improved sanitation systems and sustainable treatment technologies for toilet wastewater.
## (s26) Treatment technologies of blackwater
(p26.0) In general, the objective of BW treatment can be classified into two aspects (Fig. 2). One is the removal of pollutants to meet the corresponding discharging or reuse standards. The other is the application of certain methods to recover organic matter or nutrients to produce energy, fertilizer, or other high value-added products. Prior to further treatment, a pretreatment step has always been recommended to decrease the subsequent processing load, or remove the insoluble or suspended solids. For water or nutrient reuse, a post-treatment process should be employed to meet the requirement for microbial or pathogenic indicators (Cid et al., 2022).
