# Comprehensive overview of COVID-19-related respiratory failure: focus on cellular interactions

CorpusID: 255356090 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9676804f7561f9ac517c69c3213e61bf3120afd4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9676804f7561f9ac517c69c3213e61bf3120afd4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Platelets
(p3.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
## (s17) Platelets
(p17.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
## (s31) Platelets
(p31.0) Studies have shown that coagulopathy is a common symptom in patients with severe COVID-19. This could be a result of excessive inflammation. Coagulopathy is characterized by dysregulated coagulation parameters, lower platelet count, increased microthrombi, elevated D-dimer, etc. It is reported that patients with COVID-19 who have lower platelet counts and disseminated intravascular coagulation have a poor prognosis and increased mortality [27,28]. In many viral infections, platelets can be activated, and are involved in inflammation and thrombotic processes. The low platelet level in some patients with COVID-19 could be due to increased consumption and thrombus formation by massively activated platelets [98,99].
