# Impact of climate change-induced natural disasters on intangible cultural heritage related to food: a review

CorpusID: 257163313 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665577e101b1f363fe5638b40bbc84a75d4cb91b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/665577e101b1f363fe5638b40bbc84a75d4cb91b)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s13) Effects of climate-induced natural disasters on ICH in relation to food
(p13.0) The ICH domains of food identified and categorized in 'Food as an intangible cultural heritage' section (Table 1 and Fig. 1) are under threat from climate-induced natural disasters, such as floods, cyclones, hurricanes, droughts, and earthquakes, whose frequency and occurrence have been increasing over the past decade. A single incidence of a climate-induced disaster might impact on more than one ICH domain of food. Disasters such as cyclones, hurricanes, and floods can lead to the erosion of the nutrient-rich topsoil leaving behind soil that is infertile. Erosion of the topsoil can be a drive to the extinction of some of the traditional food crops (dietary culture) that are particular to some specific locations (GIs) and consumed by specific cultural groups as well as being used in some traditional ritual processes (food traditions and customs) which are ICH domains of food. For example, hurricane Allen hit St. Lucia in the Caribbean and destroyed almost ninety percentage of the island's banana crops which by that time comprised of almost eighty-five percent of the country's agricultural export [66]. Floods can submerge land used for agriculture, pastures, and livestock, which could in turn reduce crop yields and animal production. More so, some indigenous food crops might become extinct affecting the dietary culture of the local community. The disasters also destroy the storage infrastructure as well as the socioeconomic activities (food production, processing, and storage) which are linked to the agriculture sector, and this could greatly affect food production and eventually decreases food availability, accessibility, utilization and stability in the region [68].
## (s31) Effects of climate-induced natural disasters on ICH in relation to food
(p31.0) The ICH domains of food identified and categorized in 'Food as an intangible cultural heritage' section (Table 1 and Fig. 1) are under threat from climate-induced natural disasters, such as floods, cyclones, hurricanes, droughts, and earthquakes, whose frequency and occurrence have been increasing over the past decade. A single incidence of a climate-induced disaster might impact on more than one ICH domain of food. Disasters such as cyclones, hurricanes, and floods can lead to the erosion of the nutrient-rich topsoil leaving behind soil that is infertile. Erosion of the topsoil can be a drive to the extinction of some of the traditional food crops (dietary culture) that are particular to some specific locations (GIs) and consumed by specific cultural groups as well as being used in some traditional ritual processes (food traditions and customs) which are ICH domains of food. For example, hurricane Allen hit St. Lucia in the Caribbean and destroyed almost ninety percentage of the island's banana crops which by that time comprised of almost eighty-five percent of the country's agricultural export [66]. Floods can submerge land used for agriculture, pastures, and livestock, which could in turn reduce crop yields and animal production. More so, some indigenous food crops might become extinct affecting the dietary culture of the local community. The disasters also destroy the storage infrastructure as well as the socioeconomic activities (food production, processing, and storage) which are linked to the agriculture sector, and this could greatly affect food production and eventually decreases food availability, accessibility, utilization and stability in the region [68].
