# Protective effects and therapeutic applications of ellagic acid against natural and synthetic toxicants: A review article

CorpusID: 254925099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5063daed4df87ae655993133e9bb13a268adb6de](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5063daed4df87ae655993133e9bb13a268adb6de)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s14) Glutamate
(p14.0) Glutamate, a non-essential amino acid, is a principal excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain. Animal experimental studies have shown it has the potential to induce testicular and neural toxicity (54). Monosodium glutamate which is used as a food additive in commercial foods could be considered an important source of exposure to the high level of glutamate (55), although, at the physiological level, the blood-brain barrier may restrict the passage of glutamate from the blood into the brain (56). Glutamate exposure in rats significantly reduced testicular antioxidant biomarkers including SOD, GPx, GRx, and CAT, and increased myeloperoxidase and XO activity. EA (20 mg/kg, PO) elevated testosterone hormone content, improved histological and ultrastructure testicular damages, and inhibited the redox state in male rats (57) ( Table 2).
## (s20) Phosalone
(p20.0) Phosalone is an organophosphate pesticide that is widely used around the world. Phosalone induced several toxicities in organs including the liver, brain, kidney, and heart by enhancing ROS and LPO which leads to DNA fragmentation (76). Phosalone in rat embryonic fibroblast (REF) cells decreased cell viability and increased oxidative stress markers (ROS and LPO) and inflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NF-κB) (77). However, EA (100 nM) pretreatment protected cells by suppressing free radicals and ROS formation, decreasing the expression and protein levels of p38 and p53, and reduction of inflammatory factors including TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and NF-κB (77). Induction of NF-κB leads to p53 activation which causes cell arrest in G1/S (78) ( Table 3).
## (s28) Carbon tetrachloride
(p28.0) Carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 ), a known hepatotoxic agent, has been used as an effective solvent and cleaning agent in industrial manufacturers (101). Exposure to CCl 4 leads to liver injury and increases levels of GDH, ALP, ALT, and AST (101). EA (10 mg/kg, IP) protected the rat liver against CCl 4 toxicity (102). CCl 4 exposure induces cirrhosis through the activation of ROS formation and angiogenesis by expressing vascular endothelial growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, and increasing caspase-3 activity. These aforementioned effects were noticeably reversed by EA administration (103). EA (15 mg/kg, PO) supplementation also effectively diminished the plasma levels of ALT, AST, and albumin, and significantly suppressed the gene expression of iNOS and collagen I in cirrhosis mice (103) ( Table 5).
