# Comparative Study of Semiconductors for Terahertz Generation by Nonlinear Optical Process: An Overview Email address

CorpusID: 257482338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83a3eae6640676ef854f136e2fbad04dc3ed7ab9)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Engineering

## (s14) GaP
(p14.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p14.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
## (s52) GaP
(p52.0) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 

(p52.1) GaP is another semiconductor nonlinear material of high interest for efficient THz generation, with 2.48 eV direct band gap. But no experimental data for higher order PA after 4PA coefficient are available. Thus, there is a clearly perceived lack of knowledge on important material data. The value of MPA coefficient for GaP at 4PA written here, 2.6 × 10 -4 cm5/GW3 was measured at 1750 nm cm5/GW3 measured at 1750 nm via indirect band gap absorption. The absorption edge is on 3PA as GaP, thus only 3PA and higher order are effective. The choice of the pump wavelength longer than the cut-off for 4PA ensured that no inter-band linear, as well as two-and three-photon absorptions had to be taken into account. GaP also have an indirect band gap mode, that shown to have a slightly different behavior compared to its direct band gap mode [92]. The detailed corresponding values of MPA for GaP are presented in table 4. 
