# Planning and Decision-making for Connected Autonomous Vehicles at Road Intersections: A Review

CorpusID: 254113548 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f31a9b2ba85893c4b02455e22d6e44b841e6cf8)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science, Engineering

## (s6) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
(p6.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p6.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
## (s35) End-to-End Neural Network Approach
(p35.0) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.

(p35.1) One common approach for the neural network (NN) approach is the end-to-end approach, that is, by feeding in the images and sensor information of expert drivers driving at intersections and the actual actions of the drivers at such scenarios, a NN network is trained so that when at a similar scenario, giving the original input from the sensors, the model will be able to directly provide actions as output. This mean that the logic in the decision-making from perception to action is embedded in the NNs. Ref. [64] uses end-to-end methods as the core of its proposed algorithm, however, they used 360-degree camera instead of only using front camera as classical end-to-end planners would do. The trained network has also been carefully modified to adapt to the new censoring format. Also, a route planner is added to help the driving task significantly. Which as result, this proposed method could decrease the chances of collision at intersections. Instead of only having camera input for classical end-to-end methods, Ref. [65] took LIDAR and HD maps as inputs which enables a 3D interpretation, the paper put the newly proposed method into real-world practice, and the learned cost volume could help the ego vehicle perform more safely at intersections, and the vehicle is able to handle traffic light while interacting with the surrounding traffic participants.
