# ALGORITHM FOR THE TREATMENT OF SQUAMOUS NSCLC, Daaboul et al. Algorithm for the treatment of advanced or metastatic squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: an evidence-based overview

CorpusID: 49272755 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33f31cfab774504467901beeebdbabb3f9499c38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33f31cfab774504467901beeebdbabb3f9499c38)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Initial Chemotherapy
(p2.0) Doublet chemotherapy, which must include a platinum agent (cisplatin or carboplatin) and which is given for 4-6 cycles, is a standard of care in first-line treatment of scc of the lung. In a large meta-analysis, two-drug regimens (compared with single-agent chemotherapy) were associated with significantly increased rates of response and overall survival (os) 3 . Such regimens are generally offered to patients with a good performance status, and randomized studies comparing those regimens with best supportive care have shown a benefit in terms of survival and quality of life 4 . A variety of drugs can be paired with platinum, the most common being paclitaxel, gemcitabine, or vinorelbine. Prolonged administration of this initial chemotherapy is not recommended; although chemotherapy use can have an effect on progression-free survival (pfs), its effect on survival has not been formally demonstrated 5 .

(p2.1) No particular platinum-based doublet regimen has been proved to confer a clinically significant advantage over the others 6 . The choice is often based on safety profile and convenience of administration. Treatment intensification by adding a third chemotherapy agent has also not yielded positive outcomes. Response rates were increased, but did not translate into increased survival rates 7 . Histology offers insight into chemotherapy selection, but personalizing chemotherapy in scc of the lung is not yet achievable. Molecular biomarkers such as ERCC1 and RRM1 have not helped to identify potential responders in a clinical setting, despite encouraging preclinical data 8,9 .
## (s10) Combination Immunotherapy With or Without Chemotherapy
(p10.0) Studies have demonstrated that specific chemotherapies commonly used in lung cancer can enhance the immunologic response to cancers 34 . That observation has led to research into combinations of immunotherapy and chemotherapy. Adding chemotherapy might add benefit for patients. It can be associated with higher response rates and more durable responses. It could also make combination therapy a treatment of choice for a broader population 35 .
## (s14) FGFR1
(p14.0) Amplification of fgfr1 occurs in approximately 20% of patients with scc of the lung 57 . The fgfr pathway plays a key role in signal transduction in lung cancer. Activation is responsible for igniting the pi3k/akt and Ras/mapk pathways that stimulate growth and angiogenesis in several cancers, including scc 58 . Amplification of fgfr is associated with smoking and confers a worse prognosis 59,60 .

(p14.1) Inhibitors of fgfr include nintedanib, pazopanib, and ponatinib, which target multiple tyrosine kinases 61 . Originally, fgfr was thought to be a very promising target because some inhibitors showed activity in preclinical models. However, clinical trials in lung cancer have shown only minimal activity of such inhibitors at the cost of increased toxicities, which include hypertension, gastrointestinal side effects, and rash 62 . For example, results with pazopanib have been disappointing. A clinical trial comparing maintenance pazopanib with placebo after platinum doublet chemotherapy in patients with nsclc was terminated at the futility interim analysis 63 .

(p14.2) The phase iii lume-Lung 1 study, in which nintedanib was combined with docetaxel, assessed the efficacy and safety of the combination as second-line therapy for nsclc without any molecular selection. In the nintedanib arm, os was improved only for the adenocarcinoma histology subgroup, but not for the overall cohort (median: 10.1 months vs. 9.1 months; hr: 0.94; 95% ci: 0.83 to 1.05; p = 0.2720) 64 . Studies with nintedanib (NCT01346540 and NCT01948141 at http://ClinicalTrials.gov) are continuing in a molecularly selected population with fgfr1 amplification. Other fgfr inhibitors are also in development and remain in the investigational phase 65,66 .
