# VQE Method: A Short Survey and Recent Developments

CorpusID: 232232828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a)

Fields: Chemistry, Physics

## (s2) Introduction to VQE
(p2.0) The VQE method was introduced to mitigate the significant hardware demands needed by the QPE approach on NISQ devices. VQE is a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm, where the computational workload is shared between the classical and quantum components of the hardware. It starts with a reasonable assumption about the form of the target wave function. The most common choice is to represent a wave function in a basis of atom-centered Gaussian basis functions. However, plane wave basis sets [39] can be used as well as the recently proposed "basis-set free" approach [40]. A trial wave function or ansatz is constructed with adjustable parameters, followed by the design of a quantum circuit capable of realizing this ansatz. The ansatz parameters are then variationally adjusted until the expectation value of the electronic Hamiltonian

(p2.1) is minimized. In equation 1 ψ( θ) is the trial wave function that depends on the vector of variational parameters θ; E is the ground state energy of H el , an electronic Hamiltonian most commonly written in the second quantized form, although the first quantization representation has also been considered [41]. In this work, we focus on the second quantized form of the Hamiltonian

LLM judge: YES

## (s13) Qubit Coupled Cluster Method
(p13.0) The qubit coupled cluster (QCC) method introduced by Ryabinkin et al. [26] resembles the structure of coupled cluster; but instead of using fermionic excitations, the ansatz is built directly in the qubit space. The QCC wave function is of the form

(p13.1) The mean-field wave function |Ω is a product of single-qubit states

(p13.2) where n is the number of spin-orbitals. Each |Ω j is parameterized with Bloch angles φ and θ:

(p13.3) where |↑ j and |↓ j are eigenstates ofẑ j . Entanglement is introduced by the multiqubit rotations with real amplitudes τ = {τ k }:

(p13.4) whereP k are Pauli strings of length from 2 to a number of qubits N q and the number of entanglers N ent is less than or equal to the number ofP k . The ground state energy of the system is obtained through minimization of the Hamiltonian expectation value

(p13.5) Similar to other hardware-efficient methods working directly in the qubit space, QCC ansatz can result in unphysical results, for example breaking of symmetries, such as non-conservation of the total number of particles or obtaining a state with a wrong electronic spin. This problem has been shown [94] to be more a rule than an exception. Therefore, additional constraints need to be used to ensure that results do not violate any physical laws. Yen et al. [105] proposed symmetry projectors that can enforce the symmetries and implemented these projectors with the QCC method.

(p13.6) The total number of operators in the transformed Hamiltonian U (τ ) †Ĥ U (τ ) scales exponentially and contains 3 Nent parameters. Therefore, the operators with the largest contribution to the correlation energy need to be chosen to avoid exponential scaling. In the QCC framework such screening of operators is performed by computing the energy derivative with respect to τ k at τ k = 0:

LLM judge: YES

Human judge: YES