# Review Article Monitoring and Mapping of Insecticide Resistance in Medically Important Mos- quitoes (Diptera: Culicidae) in Iran (2000-2020): A Review

CorpusID: 235998113 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37ee1b652a15d1a2383a44c0c31614b81761d213](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37ee1b652a15d1a2383a44c0c31614b81761d213)

Fields: Biology, Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s5) Review of resistance to insecticides in Aedes caspius
(p5.0) The resistance status of Ae. caspius to different groups of insecticides in Iran (Table 9 and Fig. 11) showed that Ae. caspius is resistant to DDT, Bendiocarb, Malathion, Permethrin and Lambdacyhalothrin (13,44). Actually this species was found to be resistant to all classes of insecticides although in some part this species was susceptible to deltame-thrin (44).

LLM judge: NO

Violates Point 5: It mentions abbreviations such as DDT, which are not explained within the contents. 
Other issues: The content is quite brief and lacks detailed explanation or context. Additionally, it refers to specific tables and figures from the paper which may not be accessible in a question answering dataset.

Human judge: NO

## (s6) Review of resistance to insecticides in Culiseta longiareolata
(p6.0) The susceptibility level of Cs. longiareolata to different groups of insecticides (Table  10 and Fig. 12) indicated that this species similar Ae. caspius was resistant to all classes of insecticides (14,45). There are a few studies about the susceptibility level of Cs. longiareolata and Ae. caspius in Iran, but both of them were found to be resistant to all groups of in-25 http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online:  secticides. In the following resistance to insecticides in medically important mosquitos in Iran resistance to insecticides in mentioned species also can be considered as a problem in the vector control program.                 

LLM judge: NO

Violated Criteria:
- Criteria 6: The content lacks a clear explanation or context for the information presented. It jumps from mentioning the susceptibility level of Cs. longiareolata to the issue of resistance to insecticides in medically important mosquitoes in Iran without connecting the two topics effectively.

Other Issues:
- The content contains a reference link ("http://jad.tums.ac.ir Published Online:") that is not necessary for answering a scientific question.

Human judge: NO