# Flow-controlled ventilation -a new and promising method of ventilation presented with a review of the literature

CorpusID: 246700770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/abc35f5c73fe30d409893d0f8dfef7f455c5edc6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s13) Lobectomy with one-lung ventilation
(p13.0) A 65-year-old woman underwent an elective video thoracoscopic lobectomy of the upper right lobe due to the malignant disease. Past medical history consisted of arterial hypertension, ischaemic heart disease, nephrolithiasis and nicotine addiction. Before the induction of general anaesthesia erector spinae plane block was performed with ropivacaine (Ropimol, Molteni, italy) and lidocaine (Lidocaine, Grindeks, Latvia), induction of general anaesthesia was obtained with propofol (Propofol, Fresenius, Germany), fentanyl (Fentanyl WZF, Polfa, Poland) and cis-atracurium (Nimbex, Aspen Pharma, South Africa), a Robertshaw double lumen endotracheal tube size 39G (Double lumen tube, teleflex, United Kingdom) was used to secure the airways, anaesthesia was maintained with a constant infusion of propofol and boluses of fentanyl and cisatracurium titrated to obtain adequate anaesthesia. Proper placement of the tube was confirmed with flexible bronchofibroscopy; initially conventional volume-controlled ventilation (vcv) was used, then when the need of left lung ventilation emerged, the evone ctA (conventional tube Adapter, ventinova Medical Bv, eindhoven, Netherlands) was connected to the left, bronchial lumen of the tube to allow initiation of flow-controlled ventilation. the initial optimally titrated parameters were set as follows: PeeP 5 cmH 2 O, P peak 16 cmH 2 O, i : e 1 : 1, inspiratory flow of 10 L min -1 , FiO 2 0.6; later, due to sufficient oxygenation FiO 2 was reduced to 0.4, but an increase of cO 2 level caused the need to elevate inspiratory flow to 12 L min -1 and P peak 18 cmH 2 O. No complications were noted. After surgery, the patient was reintubated with a single lumen tube and was moved to the recovery room. dIscussIon the above studies confirm the higher ventilation efficiency of Fcv, the better lung recruitment, the potential to limit lung damage and the benefits of a thin cuffed tube during laryngeal surgery.

(p13.1) the scientific evidence for the clinical benefits for the patient is unequivocal but still limited due to the relatively small number of patients included in clinical studies. Larger, randomised controlled trials are needed to better demonstrate the (potential) benefits of Fcv, as well as whether there are more limitations than described below. the current cOviD pandemic shines a new light on the strategies to manage (compromised) airways [38]. Also the incidence of laryngotracheal stenosis is expected to increase in relation to the frequent long term intubation of patients [39]. the value of the tritube during tracheal resection is being evaluated (trial NL7970 in Dutch clinical trial register). the tritube would allow the surgeons to perform tracheal resections while it is left in place and without the need for cross field intubations, which lead to patient risk and aerosol generation. Also during tracheotomy procedures in the icU aerosol reduction is key. A recent report described the performance of a tracheotomy procedure using a tube-in-tube technique (tritube through a large-bore endotracheal tube), enabling minimal production of airway aerosols and thus increasing the safety of personnel, in addition to providing easy surgical access [40]. Furthermore, in cases of severe stenosis, the tritube might prevent the need for ecMO during surgery, as described in a case of critical tracheal stenosis of 4 mm [41].

LLM judge: NO

Violated Criteria: 1, 5

Other issues:
- The content contains a lot of technical medical terms and abbreviations that may not be easily understandable without further explanation.
- Lack of clear separation between different topics within the content.

Human judge: NO 

This is a case study