# Pollutants: a candidate as a new risk factor for osteoarthritis-results from a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 249675462 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/777a672ea2303dc3762b51830b263a58c463505d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/777a672ea2303dc3762b51830b263a58c463505d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) RMD Open RMD Open RMD Open
(p3.0) born before 1963 were selected and matched with nonexposed control group to participate in an evaluation of morbidity. The risk of arthritis-reported was significantly higher in exposed patients than non-exposed people, in men only: OR 4.1 (95% CI 1.8 to 11.2) (in women OR=1.3 (95% CI 0.8 to 2.3)).

(p3.1) The third study reported the PCB contamination of animals from 1049 farms in Michigan in 1976. 16 The data involved farmers and families who had eaten meat/ dairy products/eggs contaminated. The control group was farmers from another state (Wisconsin). Declarative questionnaires that included questions on joint pain and joint swelling, physical examination and laboratory tests including blood PCB measurement were performed. The prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms was higher in PCB-exposed Michigan farmers (40%) than others farmers (30%), χ2=3.8 p=0.05. However, the prevalence of degenerative arthritis, namely OA, as current illness under treatment was 10% in Michigan farmers versus 17% in others farmers, χ 2 =4.22 p<0.05. In the last publication, they use cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cohort, which accurately reflect the US general population. 1721 participants underwent an interview, a physical examination and a blood sample for pollutants (polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), PCDF, dioxin-like PCB, non-dioxin-like PCB and OC pesticides) measurements. 17 Among these participants, 414 reported arthritis (116 reported OA). According to concentration of these pollutants, participants were ranked in four quartiles. The adjusted factors were age, ethnicity, poverty income ratio, BMI and smoking. Arthritis was more frequent in patients having higher level of pollutants. The risk to report arthritis was higher in PCDD/PCDF/PCB/OC pesticides detectable versus non detectable. Adjusted OR (aOR) between 1.1 and 1.5 in men (non-statistically significant) and between 1.3 and 2.9 in women (p=0.02 for PCB). In women, for subgroups of PCB, higher aOR was 3.2 (95% CI 1.6 to 6.7), p<0.01. Of note, the higher serum concentration of PCB was especially associated with higher risk of arthritis. This association was statistically significant for 5/9 subtypes of PCB (PCB 74, 118, 170, 180, 187). In women, the risk to report arthritis was higher in OC pesticides detectable versus undetectable, with higher aOR 3.1 (95% CI 1.3 to 7.1), p<0.01, statistically significant for only ¼ subtype of OC pesticides (oxychlordane). When the authors differentiated the subtypes of arthritis, the association persisted for rheumatoid arthritis, but not for OA.

LLM judge: YES

Human judge: NO

Layout is wrong due to parsing error

## (s14) RMD Open RMD Open RMD Open
(p14.0) born before 1963 were selected and matched with nonexposed control group to participate in an evaluation of morbidity. The risk of arthritis-reported was significantly higher in exposed patients than non-exposed people, in men only: OR 4.1 (95% CI 1.8 to 11.2) (in women OR=1.3 (95% CI 0.8 to 2.3)).

(p14.1) The third study reported the PCB contamination of animals from 1049 farms in Michigan in 1976. 16 The data involved farmers and families who had eaten meat/ dairy products/eggs contaminated. The control group was farmers from another state (Wisconsin). Declarative questionnaires that included questions on joint pain and joint swelling, physical examination and laboratory tests including blood PCB measurement were performed. The prevalence of musculoskeletal symptoms was higher in PCB-exposed Michigan farmers (40%) than others farmers (30%), χ2=3.8 p=0.05. However, the prevalence of degenerative arthritis, namely OA, as current illness under treatment was 10% in Michigan farmers versus 17% in others farmers, χ 2 =4.22 p<0.05. In the last publication, they use cross-sectional data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) cohort, which accurately reflect the US general population. 1721 participants underwent an interview, a physical examination and a blood sample for pollutants (polychlorinated dibenzo-p-dioxins (PCDD), PCDF, dioxin-like PCB, non-dioxin-like PCB and OC pesticides) measurements. 17 Among these participants, 414 reported arthritis (116 reported OA). According to concentration of these pollutants, participants were ranked in four quartiles. The adjusted factors were age, ethnicity, poverty income ratio, BMI and smoking. Arthritis was more frequent in patients having higher level of pollutants. The risk to report arthritis was higher in PCDD/PCDF/PCB/OC pesticides detectable versus non detectable. Adjusted OR (aOR) between 1.1 and 1.5 in men (non-statistically significant) and between 1.3 and 2.9 in women (p=0.02 for PCB). In women, for subgroups of PCB, higher aOR was 3.2 (95% CI 1.6 to 6.7), p<0.01. Of note, the higher serum concentration of PCB was especially associated with higher risk of arthritis. This association was statistically significant for 5/9 subtypes of PCB (PCB 74, 118, 170, 180, 187). In women, the risk to report arthritis was higher in OC pesticides detectable versus undetectable, with higher aOR 3.1 (95% CI 1.3 to 7.1), p<0.01, statistically significant for only ¼ subtype of OC pesticides (oxychlordane). When the authors differentiated the subtypes of arthritis, the association persisted for rheumatoid arthritis, but not for OA.

LLM judge: YES

Human judge: NO

Layout is wrong due to parsing error
