# A review of total energy-momenta in GR with a positive cosmological constant *

CorpusID: 119533555 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416)

Fields: Physics

## (s19) Three Suggestions of Penrose
(p19.0) In [46] Penrose considered the problem of defining a cosmological total mass in the presence of a positive cosmological constant. He was motivated, at least in part, by his Conformal Cyclic Cosmology (or CCC) rather than by a consideration of isolated systems, which was the motivation of Ashtekar and colleagues considered above. Thus Penrose sought a definition at I + of one aeon which was suitable for carrying through to the next aeon. Interestingly, Penrose considered but rejected the idea of working in a Poincaré patch and using the Killing vector of the steady-state universe to define energy (section 3 of [46]) because galaxies beyond the cosmological event horizon, where this Killing vector is space-like, would be represented as having super-luminal velocities. This could be a problem in a cosmological setting but one that Ashtekar et. al. avoid by considering only isolated bodies.
## (s22) Characteristic data: the work of Chruściel-Ifsits
(p22.0) In [75] Chruściel and Ifsits define a mass from data for the Einstein equations given on an outgoing null hypersurface N , which could be the null cone of a point, in a conformallycompactifiable (n+1)-dimensional space-time. The main interest in [75] is with Λ > 0 but all values of Λ are allowed, and the method is to construct a Bondi coordinate system at N and solve for the space-time metric and connection at N in terms of free data, making assumptions about asymptotic decay rates, for example of any matter content, as required. The paper proposes a definition of mass from a consideration of the TBS mass defined for Λ = 0. The generalised definition is checked against the Λ = 0 case, for which a corresponding calculation was presented in [76], and, by consideration of a variety of examples, with the Λ < 0 case, which is fairly well understood.

(p22.1) The calculation leading to the definition of mass naturally leads to the definition of a renormalised volume for N . This is defined from the integral V (r) of the area A(r) of sections 7 of N of constant r where r is an affine parameter along the generators of N . Given an origin for r, which would be the vertex of N if N were a light-cone but other choices are possible, the authors obtain an expansion: V (r) = r 0 A(r ′ )dr ′ = a 3 r 3 + a 2 r 2 + a 1 r + a ℓ log r + a 0 + a −1 r −1 + o(r −1 ), for coefficients a k given in terms of the data and quantities obtained from the data. Then the coefficient a 0 = V ren is the renormalised volume.

(p22.2) In discussion of the result in the last section of the paper it is observed that the mass defined is geometric and gauge-invariant and coincides in cases of Λ ≤ 0 with other accepted definitions, but that it is not obviously non-negative in general, nor rigid in the sense that vanishing mass implies that the space-time is exactly de Sitter inside the cone N .
