# Cost of dengue outbreaks: literature review and country case studies

CorpusID: 1343358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Economics

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Dengue is geographically a fast-spreading disease (WHO 2012) [1]. Outbreaks hit the economy and health systems of endemic countries with variable epidemiologic magnitude. Resources used for the prevention and treatment of dengue are not available for alternative uses in health systems or in the economy as a whole. Dengue is in competition with other diseases for the limited resources available, especially in endemic countries with dengue-outbreaks, where too there are efforts to bring the costs of dengue interventions within the reach of less wealthy populations. Health technologies available to reduce the consumption of resources used to prevent and treat dengue are therefore of high interest, since resources saved can be allocated to other diseases and sectors of the economy. Investigations on the efficacy of health technologies to combat dengue are nowadays always supplemented by health economic analyses.

(p0.1) As a first step, this paper reviews available literature on cost of dengue outbreaks worldwide. As a second step, country case studies are used to gather first-hand evidence on the direct costs of dengue outbreaks in 2011 in four selected countries: two countries in the Americas (Peru and Dominican Republic) and two countries in South East Asia (Vietnam and Indonesia). The ultimate aim, which is not part of this technical report, is to appraise the efficiency of improved surveillance. Beatty et al. (2011) [2] reviewed the methodology used in the health economic literature on dengue from 1966 to 2009. Although the publication did not focus on reviewing the actual costs of dengue, it classified systematically the available health economic dengue literature. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] estimated the cost of the dengue illness in all the countries in The Americas combined to be about 2.1 billion US$ on average per year. Comparable figures for the Asian region were missing at the time of literature review, but have recently been calculated by Shepard et al. (2013) [4]. The present paper aims at reviewing all available published evidence on cost of dengue outbreaks independently of the methodology employed to calculate these costs. Despite the absence of a unanimous technical definition of a dengue outbreak, the paper aims to introduce a distinction between cost of dengue outbreaks and cost of dengue illness studies. Cost-of-illness implicitly calculates the opportunity cost of an illness versus a theoretical situation where the disease has been eliminated.

(p0.2) The rationale of this research is to provide ministries or official institutions in dengue-endemic countries with evidence on the costs of dengue outbreaks, so as to guide them on the expected returns on their investments in surveillance systems tailored to identify, respond to and stop potential dengue outbreaks at an early stage. The underlying assumption was that by showing the costs of a dengue outbreak, governments would be more inclined to put resources into outbreak prevention, early outbreak detection and response.

(p0.3) Besides the practical difficulties in ascertaining costs of dengue outbreaks in the field, the costing of dengue outbreaks is problematic in several other respects: i) the health systems and the economy of countries are very different in terms of their health systems' structures and the resources deployed to combat dengue. ii) there is no unique worldwide dengue outbreak definition [5]; iii) the measurement of how much of an outbreak could be avoided by certain interventions might be ethically and practically impossible to conduct in a prospective field study.

(p0.4) However, the aim of the literature review is to study the publications on costs of dengue, with respect to: A) how these dengue costs have been measured and B) what were the findings in terms of cost of dengue.
## (s15) Dominican Republic
(p15.0) In the Dominican Republic 12,171 dengue patients were reported during the outbreak in 2011, of which 292 were outpatients, 11,864 were general-ward patients and 15 were intensive-care patients. In the general ward 68% of patients were adults, and 32% were children (<15 years). The exchange rate used for the analysis was 39.03 DOP/ US$ on June 17th, 2012. For the Dominican Republic, hospital records of 5 outpatients, 9 adult general-ward patients, 28 child general-ward patients, and 15 ICU patients were analysed in terms of resource identification, quantification and valuation. The average direct cost per case without personal costs amounted to 117 US$ in 2012. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtain a ratio of indirect to direct cost of 96% for the Dominican Republic. The corresponding indirect cost estimation based on our direct cost estimate is 112 US$. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtained a weighted average estimation of total costs of 430 US$ per dengue case based on their economic model. The cost we obtained for government spending on vector control was a total of 9,165 US$ per year on average over the years 2009 to 2012. Cost for collecting, storing, analysing and communicating surveillance data amounted to 2,550 US$. Our total cost estimate was around 2.8 million US$ (Figure 4). The comparability of the reviewed studies was restricted due to variations in the perspective taken to collect costs, the definition and reporting of costs, and the inclusion or  exclusion of certain cost items within a micro-costing approach. Finally, precise details on the year of cost accounting (year of prices), the exchange rate used and the transformations conducted to calculate costs (discounting, inflation adjustment) were missing. The Asian countries had been neglected in terms of methodologically comparable cost of illness studies as produced by Shepard et al. [3] for the Americas. Sensitivity analyses would increase the validity of produced cost figures.
## (s16) Discussion and conclusions
(p16.0) Moreover, the calculation of dengue costs posed technical problems. Under-and over-reporting of dengue cases made the exact number of dengue cases uncertain, even after correcting with an expansion factor. For example the average expansion factor of 2.3 for the Americas had a range of 1.4 to 3.3 in a hospitalized setting and an average of 15 and a range of 9 to 28 in an ambulatory setting. Moreover the average cost per dengue case varied according to country, treatment (ambulatory, hospitalized) and geographical (urban, rural) setting, patient age and hospital type (private, public) and therefore should be calculated as a weighted average, in those situations when the data for each setting is available.

(p16.1) Average total costs per case for all the countries in the Americas based on the costs collected and modelled by Shepard et al. 2011 [3] showed the important variations in costs between countries studied. Average costs per case in the Americas was given as 571 US$, with a 95% confidence interval of 362 to 752 US$, illustrating the important variation between countries. On average, the share of indirect costs to total costs amounts to 60% (40% direct costs), but there is also large variation between countries in the Americas. Moreover, depending on the year considered, the cost of dengue could vary, which was very well illustrated by Shepard et al. 2011 [3], but had been neglected by prior cost of illness studies in dengue, which did not average costs over several successive years. Finally, variations in total costs were substantial depending on the assumed expansion factor, and the share of hospitalized cases or average ambulatory cost per case -varied from 1 to 4 billion US$ in the Americas according to Shepard et al. 2011 [3].
