# African Journal of Agricultural Research Some maize agronomic practices in Ethiopia: A review of research experiences and lessons from agronomic panel survey in Oromia and Amhara regions

CorpusID: 207984649 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e72ba4da9026095406135953cf1ee181d7353ee8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e72ba4da9026095406135953cf1ee181d7353ee8)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s24) Trend of fertilizer application in maize production
(p24.0) The application of chemical fertilizer in maize production is a recent phenomenon as it began in 1993, following the government campaign for increased food production in collaboration with Sasakawa Global 2000 (Tsedeke et al., 2017). Thus, the application of chemical fertilizer had the same lifetime as the use of improved maize varieties both of which emerged following the strong collaboration of the government of Ethiopia with SG2000 in addressing food security through enhancing food production in the country. Before that time farmers grow local maize without any chemical fertilizer or with the application of organic fertilizers alone such as manures (Tsedeke et al., 2017). As a consequence maize yield was quite low (about 1 t ha -1 ) (Tsedeke et al., 2017). Later on agronomic research recommended a blanket recommendation of 100 kg DAP and 200 kg Urea (20 kg P ha -1 and 110 kg N ha -1 ) to be used at country level. After that each regional research institute started to  (232) Values in parenthesis are mean values.

(p24.1) develop regional fertilizer recommendations for their own mandate regions, which ranged between 20 kg P ha -1 for most regions to 61 kg P ha -1 for Achefer areas and between 41 kg N ha -1 for Melkasa to 180 kg N ha -1 for Achefer areas (Wakene et al., 2011). As of 2015, soil test (EthioSIS soil map) based fertilizer recommendation emerged with the support of Agricultural Transformation Agency (ATA). So far soil maps were developed and officially released for Tigray, Amhara and SNNP and very lately for Oromia region as well. Soil maps based blended chemical fertilizers are now a day being used by farmers and a shift has already been made from using DAP (18-46) to NPS (19-38-7), which has sulphur blended to it or other blends such as NPSB/NPSBZn.
