# Blockchain Consensus Algorithms: A Survey

CorpusID: 211066631 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/330ed3413bd1ae096a5171271f246bf3abf72e8e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s5) Properties of blockchain
(p5.0) A blockchain exhibits several properties that make it a suitable candidate for several application domains [25]. The properties are discussed below.

(p5.1) • Distributed consensus on the chain state: One of the crucial properties of any blockchain is its capability to achieve a distributed consensus on the state of the chain without being reliant on any trusted third party. This opens up the door of opportunities to build and utilise a system where states and interactions are verifiable by the miners in public blockchain systems or by the authorised entities in private blockchain systems. • Immutability and irreversibility of chain state:

(p5.2) Achieving a distributed consensus with the participation of a large number of nodes ensures that the chain state becomes practically immutable and irreversible after a certain period of time. This also applies to smartcontracts and hence enabling the deployment and execution of immutable computer programs. • Data (transaction) persistence: Data in a blockchain is stored in a distributed fashion, ensuring data persistence as long as there are participating nodes in the P2P network. • Data provenance: The data storage process in any blockchain is facilitated by means of a mechanism called the transaction. Every transaction needs to be digitally signed using public key cryptography, which ensures the authenticity of the source of data. Combining this with the immutability and irreversibility of a blockchain provides a strong non-repudiation instrument for any data in the blockchain. • Distributed data control: A blockchain ensures that data stored in the chain or retrieved from the chain can be carried out in a distributed manner that exhibits no single point of failure. • Accountability and transparency: Since the state of the chain, along with every single interactions among participating entities, can be verified by any authorised entity, a blockchain promotes accountability and transparency.

(p5.3) A blockchain exhibits several properties that make it a suitable candidate for several application domains [25]. The properties are discussed below.

(p5.4) • Distributed consensus on the chain state: One of the crucial properties of any blockchain is its capability to achieve a distributed consensus on the state of the chain without being reliant on any trusted third party. This opens up the door of opportunities to build and utilise a system where states and interactions are verifiable by the miners in public blockchain systems or by the authorised entities in private blockchain systems. • Immutability and irreversibility of chain state:

(p5.5) Achieving a distributed consensus with the participation of a large number of nodes ensures that the chain state becomes practically immutable and irreversible after a certain period of time. This also applies to smartcontracts and hence enabling the deployment and execution of immutable computer programs. • Data (transaction) persistence: Data in a blockchain is stored in a distributed fashion, ensuring data persistence as long as there are participating nodes in the P2P network. • Data provenance: The data storage process in any blockchain is facilitated by means of a mechanism called the transaction. Every transaction needs to be digitally signed using public key cryptography, which ensures the authenticity of the source of data. Combining this with the immutability and irreversibility of a blockchain provides a strong non-repudiation instrument for any data in the blockchain. • Distributed data control: A blockchain ensures that data stored in the chain or retrieved from the chain can be carried out in a distributed manner that exhibits no single point of failure. • Accountability and transparency: Since the state of the chain, along with every single interactions among participating entities, can be verified by any authorised entity, a blockchain promotes accountability and transparency.
## (s116) Properties of blockchain
(p116.0) A blockchain exhibits several properties that make it a suitable candidate for several application domains [25]. The properties are discussed below.

(p116.1) • Distributed consensus on the chain state: One of the crucial properties of any blockchain is its capability to achieve a distributed consensus on the state of the chain without being reliant on any trusted third party. This opens up the door of opportunities to build and utilise a system where states and interactions are verifiable by the miners in public blockchain systems or by the authorised entities in private blockchain systems. • Immutability and irreversibility of chain state:

(p116.2) Achieving a distributed consensus with the participation of a large number of nodes ensures that the chain state becomes practically immutable and irreversible after a certain period of time. This also applies to smartcontracts and hence enabling the deployment and execution of immutable computer programs. • Data (transaction) persistence: Data in a blockchain is stored in a distributed fashion, ensuring data persistence as long as there are participating nodes in the P2P network. • Data provenance: The data storage process in any blockchain is facilitated by means of a mechanism called the transaction. Every transaction needs to be digitally signed using public key cryptography, which ensures the authenticity of the source of data. Combining this with the immutability and irreversibility of a blockchain provides a strong non-repudiation instrument for any data in the blockchain. • Distributed data control: A blockchain ensures that data stored in the chain or retrieved from the chain can be carried out in a distributed manner that exhibits no single point of failure. • Accountability and transparency: Since the state of the chain, along with every single interactions among participating entities, can be verified by any authorised entity, a blockchain promotes accountability and transparency.

(p116.3) A blockchain exhibits several properties that make it a suitable candidate for several application domains [25]. The properties are discussed below.

(p116.4) • Distributed consensus on the chain state: One of the crucial properties of any blockchain is its capability to achieve a distributed consensus on the state of the chain without being reliant on any trusted third party. This opens up the door of opportunities to build and utilise a system where states and interactions are verifiable by the miners in public blockchain systems or by the authorised entities in private blockchain systems. • Immutability and irreversibility of chain state:

(p116.5) Achieving a distributed consensus with the participation of a large number of nodes ensures that the chain state becomes practically immutable and irreversible after a certain period of time. This also applies to smartcontracts and hence enabling the deployment and execution of immutable computer programs. • Data (transaction) persistence: Data in a blockchain is stored in a distributed fashion, ensuring data persistence as long as there are participating nodes in the P2P network. • Data provenance: The data storage process in any blockchain is facilitated by means of a mechanism called the transaction. Every transaction needs to be digitally signed using public key cryptography, which ensures the authenticity of the source of data. Combining this with the immutability and irreversibility of a blockchain provides a strong non-repudiation instrument for any data in the blockchain. • Distributed data control: A blockchain ensures that data stored in the chain or retrieved from the chain can be carried out in a distributed manner that exhibits no single point of failure. • Accountability and transparency: Since the state of the chain, along with every single interactions among participating entities, can be verified by any authorised entity, a blockchain promotes accountability and transparency.
