# Techniques for In Vivo Measurement of Ligament and Tendon Strain: A Review

CorpusID: 222184086 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ab8e05a239fe73415d9d0a898473641c447986a5)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s13) Advantages and Limitations
(p13.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.

(p13.1) Despite the many advantages of the virtual elongation method, there are also several limitations:
## (s43) Advantages and Limitations
(p43.0) The virtual fibre elongation method leverages stateof-the-art dynamic imaging technologies to non-invasively evaluate soft tissue strains throughout functional activities at high frequencies (> 200 Hz). It can quantify regional tissue strains by using multiple fibres to represent the same ligament (Fig. 4). Furthermore, as the fibre attachment locations are manually selected, uncertainty quantification and sensitivity studies can be readily performed. 68 Additionally, the measurement accuracy is not affected by whether the tissue is deep or superficial. Finally, the non-invasive nature of the method allows comparisons of injured or reconstructed tissue function against the healthy contralateral limb.

(p43.1) Despite the many advantages of the virtual elongation method, there are also several limitations:
