# Downlink MIMO-NOMA With and Without CSI: A Short Survey and Comparison

CorpusID: 226853942 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s5) A. System Model
(p5.0) Consider a scenario similar to the previous one, but now with a massive-MIMO BS with M antennas transmitting to users equipped with N antennas. The users are also grouped into L clusters, each of which with K users, all with different channel matrices, however, they all share the same spatial correlation matrix R l . In such cases one can apply the Karhunen-Loève channel decomposition [34,35], according to which the k-th user in the l-th cluster can have its channel matrix written as:

(p5.1) where G l,k ∈ C N ×N denotes a fast fading complex Gaussian matrix, Λ l ∈ C M ×M is a diagonal matrix that contains the eigenvalues of R k and U l ∈ C M ×M is a matrix that contains the eigenvectors of R l , meaning that

(p5.2) since that a correlation matrix is always symmetric. However, R l only has r l non-zero eigenvalues, with r l being the rank of R l . Therefore, Λ l is of the form:

(p5.3) and thus can be reduced to a r l × r l matrix, turning G l,k a N × r l matrix and U l a r l × M matrix. Obtaining CSIT for the fast fading matrix G l,k may often be difficult. Because R l is a slowly-changing channel correlation matrix, its estimation at the BS is easier to obtain. The BS sends a precoded M × 1 NOMA vector with superimposed symbols

(p5.4) where s l,k is the symbol for the k-th user in the l-th cluster, α l,k is the power coefficient for the k-th user in the l-th cluster. The number of effective BS antennas for each cluster isM l = (M − r l (L − 1)) and, P l is the M ×M l precoding matrix of the l-th cluster. w l = [0 · · · 0 1 0 · · · 0] T is theM l × 1 precoding vector that has a 1 in the l-th position. The k-th user in the l-th cluster therefore receives

(p5.5) where n l,k is the noise at the k-th user in the l-th cluster.

(p5.6) Looking at (17), P l needs to satisfy the following constraint to eliminate inter-cluster interference:

(p5.7) Since [U H 1 · · · U H l−1 U H l+1 · · · U H L ] H is always a fat matrix (and thus it always has some non-zero nullspace), then

(p5.8) Using a P l given by (19), the inter-cluster interference is removed and (17) becomes

(p5.9) Without loss of generality, looking at user k = 1 in the first cluster (l = 1) of a system with K = 2 users, (20) leads to:

(p5.10) 1 U 1 P 1 w 1 (α 1,1 s 1,1 + α 1,2 s 1,2 ) + n 1,1 . (21) The information to all users is carried by theM l × 1 vector:

(p5.11) which imposes a limit ofM l to the number of clusters. This vector is then multiplied by the matrix G 1,1 Λ 1 2 1 U 1 P 1 whose dimensions are N ×M , and whose elements will be denoted as c n,m . Disregarding noise, this can be written as:

(p5.12) where only the first column of G 1,1 Λ 1 2 1 U 1 P 1 influences the received N × 1 vector y 1,1 . Applying ZF detection leads tõ   which again, as in the previous closed-loop model, is the intended NOMA mixture for the cluster, added to a noise term.
