# Data-Driven Decision Making in COVID-19 Response: A Survey

CorpusID: 236521932 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s9) Enterprise Policies
(p9.0) Significantly, most psychological intervention guiding measures have been taken up by hospitals and psychological counselling agencies. The decreed isolation policies also prevent enterprises from resuming work. Whether it is a private enterprise or a state-owned enterprise, employees are also isolated to their homes like most people. Due to the isolation policies, face-to-face communication is not possible, so hospitals and consulting agencies have jointly built many online consultation platforms [59]. Zhang et al. [99] proposed a mental health intervention model, which uses an Internet technology platform to provide timely psychological counselling to patients and their families. Doctors need the courage to overcome disease meanwhile, they need to deal with certain extreme emotions of patients due to illness, who can be physically and mentally exhausted. Therefore, their psychological guidance is also a top priority. Chen et al. [25] detailed the psychological guide measures for medical staff, including the establishment of a psychological intervention medical team, the establishment of a psychological assistance hotline team and psychological skills training.
## (s11) Technological Innovation
(p11.0) During the SARS outbreak, because the development of the Internet was not yet mature, and smartphones

(p11.1) were not as popular as today. Online psychological counselling services were not available [24]. Today, with the prevalence of mobile phones, the development of Internet services, and the emergence of the 5G era, major medical platforms have provided online psychological counselling services, allowing people to conduct psychological counselling even if they are isolated at home. For example, the Structured Letter Therapy method [96] and Health Intervention Model [99]. Liu et al. [59] discussed the specific online service counselling during this period. Through psychological questionnaires and counselling, doctors can better understand one's tendencies and guide them in a timely manner through their psychological disorders.
