# COVID-19 and novel mRNA vaccines in pregnancy: an updated literature review

CorpusID: 238991518 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Vertical transmission likelihood
(p5.0) Despite the potential adverse effects to symptomatic women during pregnancy, there is limited evidence of vertical transmission of COVID-19 or of its presence in breastmilk. As of 2 September 2020, 19 neonates were documented found to be COVID-19-positive based on rtPCR nasopharyngeal swabs. Three of these were febrile, 15 were asymptomatic and one was born at 31 +2 weeks; he developed disseminated intravascular coagulopathy but was recovering at the time of publication. Thus far, there have been no reported deaths of COVID-19-positive neonates. 25 Angiotensin converting enzyme 2, a target of SARS-CoV-2 cell entry, and the spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV2 have been found on the syncytiotrophoblast cells of the placental villi that form the interface between mother and fetus in the placenta. 29 Therefore, vertical transmission may be possible, unlike with SARS, where no evidence of vertical transmission exists, but it is unclear whether these 19 cases were infected in utero, intrapartum or postpartum. 25 This study by Pettirosso et al. also states that the risk of vertical transmission was assessed with rtPCR of nasopharyngeal secretions, placenta, cord blood, amniotic fluid and breastmilk. They found that 19 of 655 nasopharyngeal swabs were COVID-19-positive by rtPCR as discussed and four placenta samples and one cord blood sample were positive, but the neonatal nasopharyngeal swabs were negative. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibodies were elevated in the serum of three neonates, suggesting some hope for antibodies of COVID-19 vaccinated mother's, passing to the neonate. 25 In terms of impacts on the fetus, there is limited data about in utero infection, risk of vertical transmission and early positive neonatal testing.
