# Comorbid Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Bipolar Disorder: A Review

CorpusID: 237283585 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7127817ad06a80104789aad1e7738d7ed3c1a938](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7127817ad06a80104789aad1e7738d7ed3c1a938)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s8) NEUROBIOLOGY OF COMORBID PREMENSTRUAL DYSPHORIC DISORDER AND BIPOLAR DISORDER
(p8.0) The neurobiological underpinnings of PMDD comorbid with BD have been little-investigated to date. However, there are some emerging findings related to hormone levels, structural and functional neuroimaging beginning to understand the comorbidity of these disorders.

(p8.1) To our knowledge, no study to date has investigated the genetic underpinnings of comorbid BD and PMDD. Payne and colleagues did not find severe premenstrual mood symptoms in BD-I to exhibit familiality (25).

(p8.2) Our group investigated structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as well as serum levels of several hormones and metabolites in 19 females with BD comorbid with PMDD compared to a female control group (n = 25), 20 females with BD, and 25 females with PMDD during the mid-follicular and late luteal phases of their menstrual cycle. Participants enrolled in the study were euthymic for BD symptoms for at least 2 months prior to enrolling in this study (27). No differences in hormone levels were found for either the mid-follicular or the late luteal phase of the menstrual cycle for the control group, individuals with BD, or BD comorbid with PMDD, for levels of β17-estradiol, progesterone, allopregnanolone, or dehydroepiandosterone sulfate. Notably, levels of allopregnanolone were elevated in individuals with PMDD only, during both the follicular and late luteal phases (27).

(p8.3) As we investigated whole-brain resting-state functional connectivity (Figure 2), we found differences in functional connectivity between the right hippocampus and right premotor cortex in females with BD and PMDD in a seed-based approach. During the late luteal phase, in a seed-to-voxel-based analysis of resting-state functional connectivity MRI, with seeds based in the bilateral hippocampus, our research group found increased functional connectivity between the left hippocampus and right frontal cortex and decreased functional connectivity between the right hippocampus and the right premotor cortex in females with both BD and PMDD, compared to females with BD only. Females with BD and PMDD had increased functional connectivity between the right hippocampus and left frontal cortex, bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and decreased functional connectivity between the right hippocampus and bilateral primary motor cortex, and left hippocampus with left somatosensory cortex compared to females with PMDD only. These findings revealed that specific fronto-limbic pathways are FIGURE 3 | Cortical thickness differences in females with both bipolar disorder and premenstrual dysphoric disorder to a control population, females with premenstrual dysphoric disorder only and females with bipolar disorder only. Red regions indicate higher cortical thickness in the first group compared to females with bipolar disorder and premenstrual dysphoric disorder, while blue regions indicate lower cortical thickness in the first group compared to females with bipolar disorder and premenstrual dysphoric disorder. BD, bipolar disorder; BDPMDD, bipolar disorder with comorbid premenstrual dysphoric disorder; CTRL, healthy controls; PMDD, premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Reproduced with permission from Syan et al. (27).
