# Generative Adversarial Networks: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 232895648 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s12) Inception Score (IS)
(p12.0) During the ILSVRC competition in 2014, Google proposed a network called Inception Net [42]. It not only controlled the number of parameters, but also achieved good classification performance. In 2015, Inception net-v3 was proposed and it was exactly the model required for IS calculation in this part [43,44].

(p12.1) As analyzed above, IS focuses on the sharpness and diversity of images, which IS is not high resolution but clear classification [45]. The formula for IS is as follows.

(p12.2) Generate the 1000-dimensional vector y obtained from the input model of picture x, and the probability distribution of x belonging to each category is

(p12.3) is the marginal distribution of all the images obtained after the input model of a large number of images is generated.

(p12.4) is related to variety.

(p12.5) However, the evaluation index of IS was limited to the use of data set, because the Inception V3 model adopted by IS was trained on ImageNet [46], so the image generation of GAN also needs to rely on ImageNet to serve as a real sample. It no longer makes sense to use the classification model and the generation model in different data sets. At the same time, in the case of insufficient samples, the estimation of sample distribution will become very difficult, so we also need other indicators to evaluate the capability of GAN.
## (s15) Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets (CGAN)
(p15.0) In the second part, we introduced two typical generation models PixelRNN and VAE. The advantage of GAN is that the input does not rely on an expected data distribution; the generated samples can be more real by using direct sampling to input random noise Z. At the same time, such a disadvantage is that the generated samples are too free to control and cannot focus on the specified samples, and we need to add some constraints to GAN. It is from this idea that CGAN came onto the stage of GAN.

(p15.1) Due to GAN's double randomness (random noise and random samples), Mehdi Mirza et al proposed CGAN [65], and y tag was added as input in GAN generator and discriminator. With the addition of y, the input of generator becomes noise and label, while the input of discriminator becomes real sample and generates sample and label.

(p15.2) As for the training process of CGAN, y is increased compared with GAN's formula, the details are as follows.

(p15.3) With the addition of y , the formula becomes a binary minimization maximum problem with conditional probability. The generation of CGAN is controlled by y condition, which realizes the supervision of generator and can generate different samples according to different y values. Since the discriminator also has y input, we can also select the type we need when comparing the sample generated by the generator with the real sample.

(p15.4) CGAN can not only produce samples of specific labels, but also improve the quality of generated samples. Then, semi-supervised GAN (SGAN) [66] proposed by Augustus Odena turned GAN into a semi-supervised model and made it possible to judge its output category labels. It was the thought of the two models that was received, Auxiliary Classifier GAN (ACGAN) [67], which further improved the quality of CGAN's generated samples.

(p15.5) ACGAN's improvement on CGAN is that it not only uses tags in the input of generator, but also adds tags into the real sample, so that the generator can better understand the required sample structure. Two full connection layers are used in the output part of discriminator. Borrowing the idea of SGAN, in addition to generating discriminant results (Real or Fake), the classification results of samples are added. 
## (s31) Summary and perspectives
(p31.0) In recent years, GAN model has flourished in natural language processing, computer vision and other aspects, and has been deeply involved in medicine, physics, security and other fields. The arrival of AI era has raised people's spiritual demands, which has promoted the development of GAN. However, GAN also has many shortcomings, which leads to many optimization models of GAN put forward in recent years. The optimization of GAN is mainly modified and improved from the loss function and structure. We list three optimization models (CGAN, DCGAN, WGAN) that have a profound impact on the development of GAN, and introduce in detail the principles, processes, and variations of these models. According to previous studies, GAN has unlimited development potential. However, there are still some problems yet to be solved in the development of GAN.

(p31.1) The first problem is the convergence problem of GAN. In equation (3), we can theoretically reach Nash equilibrium through iterative training according to the idea of game theory. In reality, the loss function of generator and discriminator, we need to add many parameters to reach the final balance. The two main cases of non-convergence are as follows. On the one hand, the mode collapse means that the generation model cannot solve the problem of sample diversity in GAN function. When the generator is optimized, the gradient descent method is adopted to generate some similar samples that are easy to fool the discriminator. The generation of some similar or identical samples will affect the diversity of the final generated model. On the other hand, gradient disappearance is caused by too many layers or loss function. Since there is a big gap between the initial generation of samples and the real samples, the discriminator can easily achieve a high recognition ability, which leads to the generator being prone to the gradient cannot be updated or even disappear. How to find a better method with a lower cost in the future is the problem that GAN needs to solve.

(p31.2) The second is the quality problem of GAN generating samples. The method of characterizing VQ-VAE [115,116] model proposed by the Google team has surpassed the image generation ability of GAN`s models. The Glow model generated along the flow-based model has gained a foothold in the development of deep learning due to its reversible advantages over GAN. On the one hand, the specific solution is to combine the advantages of other generated models to produce hybrid models. On the other hand, better evaluation criteria are proposed. In section 3.3.2, we introduced some GAN evaluation indicators, but they all have corresponding shortcomings, such as IS cannot solve the over-fitting situation, FID cannot solve the spatial relationship of sample characteristics, etc. How to put forward a better and more identical evaluation index is also an urgent problem to be solved.

(p31.3) Last but not least, GAN model has limitations in application. In the fifth part, we mainly introduce the scene and object of classical GAN application. Due to its limitations in discrete data processing, GAN's achievements in natural language processing are often not as outstanding as those in computer vision. Therefore, GAN is mainly applied in image repair, resolution improvement, medical detection, pedestrian recognition and other directions in daily life. In the sixth part, we mentioned that GAN has great potential in the field of security. At present, few people adopt GAN's idea to achieve a good network anomaly detection method. In the face of DDoS attack and other network attacks with high speed and large flow, timely defense will play a key role in the development of the entire Internet [117]. The application of GAN to the detection of network abnormal behavior such as DDOS attack has a great prospect.

(p31.4) In general, GAN is still one of the hot spots in the field of artificial intelligence. The development of GAN in the future is still expected to optimize the model structure and expand the application field [118]. On the one hand, researchers will propose a more stable internal structure to solve the problem of training and mode collapse. On the other hand, with the increasing application of GAN in the security field, more and more security problems will be solved. The combination of GAN and other deep learning models will also improve its applicability in the security field.
