# A Brief Overview of Results about Uniqueness of the Quantization in Cosmology

CorpusID: 237142194 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e67494490371c63e077d65b91314898884e61548](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e67494490371c63e077d65b91314898884e61548)

Fields: Physics

## (s2) IV. FOCK QUANTIZATION IN NON-STATIONARY COSMOLOGICAL SETTINGS
(p2.0) As we have already mentioned, the Stone-von Neumann uniqueness result fails for infinite number of DoF, and no general result on the uniqueness of the quantization is available for non-stationary situations. This includes, of course, cases of interest in QC. In some of those cases, the underlying theory can be recast in the form of a linear scalar field with a timedependent mass, propagating in an auxiliary background spacetime which is both static and spatially compact. One such situation is the linearly polarized Gowdy model with the spatial topology of a three-torus, where the gravitational degrees of freedom are encoded by a scalar field on S 1 , evolving in time precisely as a linear field with a time-dependent mass of the type m(t) = 1/(4t 2 ) [31,32]. Other situations of interest include free scalar fields in cosmological scenarios, e.g. propagating in (compact) FLRW or the Sitter spacetimes. In those cases, the non-stationarity is transfered from the background to the field efective mass, by means of a simple transformation.
## (s3) A. Gowdy Models
(p3.0) Midisuperspace models are symmetry reductions of full GR that retain an infinite number of degrees of freedom. Typically, these are local degrees of freedom, so that they often describe inhomogeneous scenarios. Therefore, these midisuperspace models must face the inherent ambiguity that affects the quantization of fields. One of the simplest inhomogeneous cosmologies obtained with a symmetry reduction is the linearly polarized Gowdy model on the three-torus, T 3 [7]. This model describes vacuum spacetimes with spatial sections of T 3 -topology containing linearly polarized gravitational waves, with a symmetry group generated by two commuting, spacelike, and hypersurface orthogonal Killing vector fields. In consequence, the local physical degrees of freedom can be parametrized by a scalar field corresponding to those waves, and effectively living in S 1 .

(p3.1) After a partial gauge fixing, the line element of the linearly polarized Gowdy T 3 model can be written as [33] 

(p3.2) where (∂/∂σ) a and (∂/∂δ) a are the two Killing vector fields. The true dynamical field DoF are encoded in φ(θ, t), where t > 0 and θ ∈ S 1 . On the other hand, p is a homogeneous non-dynamical variable, and the field γ is completely determined by p and φ as a result of the gauge-fixing process [33]. There remains a global spatial constraint on the system, giving rise to the symmetry group of (constant) translations in S 1 . Time evolution is dictated by the field equationφ

(p3.3) Here, the prime denotes the derivative with respect to θ and the dot denotes the time derivative.

(p3.4) A complete quantization of the system was obtained in Ref. [34]. Nevertheless, it was soon realized [33,35] that the classical dynamics could not be implemented as a unitary transformation in such quantization. With the purpose of achieving unitarity, and restoring in particular the standard probabilistic interpretation of quantum physics within the quantum Gowdy model, an alternative quantization was introduced by Corichi, Cortez, and Mena Marugán [31,32]. A crucial step towards a quantization with unitary dynamics is the following time-dependent transformation, performed at the level of the classical phase space. Instead of working with the original field φ and its corresponding conjugate momentum P φ , the authors introduced a new canonical pair χ and P χ related to the first one by means of the canonical transformation

(p3.5) taking advantage in this way of the freedom in the scalar field parametrization of the metric of the Gowdy model. The evolution of the new canonical pair turns out to be governed by a time-dependent Hamiltonian that, in our system of units, adopts the expression

(p3.6) The corresponding Hamiltonian equations arė

(p3.7) that combined give the second-order field equation

(p3.8) We can therefore view the system as a linear scalar field with a time-dependent mass of the form m(t) = 1/(4t 2 ), evolving in an effective static spacetime with one-dimensional spatial sections with the topology of the circle 6 . Another relevant aspect of the model is the invariance of the dynamics under (constant) S 1 -translations:

(p3.9) These translations are moreover symmetries generated by a remaining constraint, as we already mentioned. The quantization of the system put forward by Corichi, Cortez, and Mena Marugán in Refs. [31,32] starts from the CCRs satisfied by the canonical pair χ and P χ , or rather by the corresponding Fourier modes. The advantage of using Fourier components, say
## (s5) V. CONCLUSIONS
(p5.0) We have reviewed and discussed several results concerning the quantization of systems with relevant applications in cosmology. In particular, we have focused our attention on results ascertaining the uniqueness of the quantization process. This uniqueness is crucial in order to provide physical robustness to the eventual cosmological predictions of the quantum models in question, which would otherwise be fundamentally affected by ambiguities.

(p5.1) Starting with homogeneous models in this cosmological context, we have discussed a uniqueness result by Engle, Hanusch, and Thiemann, concerning the representation of the Weyl relations commonly used in LQC. Turning to recent investigations carried out by our group and collaborators, the quantization of the family of inhomogeneous cosmologies known as the linearly polarized Gowdy models was reviewed next. Crucial in this discussion is the requirement of unitary implementation (at the quantum level) of the dynamics. Together with invariance under spatial symmetries, the criterion of unitary dynamics has proved very effective in the selection of a unique and physically meaningful quantization, in a variety of situations. A common general mathematical model embodying all these cases is that of a scalar field with a time-dependent mass (with arbitrary time dependence except for some very mild conditions), propagating in a static spacetime with compact spatial sections. Existence and uniqueness of a Fock quantization with unitary dynamics has been proved for such general model, thus providing unique quantizations in cosmological systems, ranging from quantum fields in FLRW backgrounds to the quantization of (perturbative) gravitational DoF.

(p5.2) In particular, it follows from our analysis and the aforementioned discussions that the quantization of linear transformations of physical interest via a unitary implementation does not necessarily require the existence of an invariant state, and that it is worthwhile pursuing alternatives that are not based on such invariance. In fact, what is really required in physical terms is a unitary implementation and not necessarily an invariant state, i.e. unitary implementations via non-invariant states are still physically acceptable and cannot be discarded. Clearly, a proof on the uniqueness of the quantization based just on the unitary implementation of those transformations, rather than on the existence of an invariant state, is a stronger result inasmuch as the requirement of unitarity is weaker than invariance. Note that whereas in some circumstances there are good reasons to restrict attention to invariant states (for instance when there is a time-independent Hamiltonian giving rise to a group of transformations), in the general case of arbitrary transformations the requirement of an invariant state is not so compelling and non-invariant states cannot be simply disregarded. In this sense, it is worth pointing out that invariance can actually be a too much rigid demand in some situations, especially if the considered transformations provide a notion of evolution that is crucial to describe the dynamics. For instance, the unitary implementation of the evolution via (dynamical-)invariant states in typically non-stationary scenarios is of doubtful physical use, and in fact seems hopeless, whereas physically viable states, still leading to unitary dynamics and ensuring uniqueness, are nevertheless available and have direct cosmological applications. In this respect, we conclude with the following remark.

(p5.3) The uniqueness of the Fock quantization of the scalar field with time-dependent mass was obtained by restricting the attention to states that remain invariant under spatial symmetries. Although the removal of this restriction seems unlikely to lead to physically new representations with unitary dynamics, it is nevertheless an open possibility. More precisely, it remains to be disproved the existence of representations with unitary dynamics and a unitary implementation of the spatial symmetries which are nevertheless not unitarily equivalent to the representation defined by an invariant vacuum. Thus, a conceivable line of future research in this area is to consider also Fock representations that, while not possessing an invariant vacuum, still allow a unitary implementation of the spatial symmetries. The uniqueness result would be strengthened if those representations were shown to be equivalent to the previous one, or otherwise new and potentially interesting representations could emerge. Another possibility, with a clearly much higher potential to produce physically inequivalent results, is to use polymer inspired representations for the scalar field, instead of Fock representations. In this Appendix, we are going to consider the simplest example of a linear scalar field in a static spacetime with compact spatial sections, namely the case where the spatial sections are 1-dimensional with the topology of the circle. The field equation reads

(p5.4) where the mass term s(t) can be an (essentially) arbitrary function of time.

(p5.5) Since the spatial manifold is compact, and the field equation is linear, a Fourier decomposition gives us a discrete set of independent modes:

(p5.6) q n cos(nθ) + x n sin(nθ) + q 0 √ 2π .

(p5.7) The configuration space for the scalar field is then described by the set of real variables q n , n ≥ 0, and x n , n > 0, which are completely decoupled. For simplicity, we drop all the modes x n (which can be treated like their cosine counterparts q n for n > 0) and q 0 , and continue with the infinite set {q n , n > 0}. The variable q 0 is dropped just to avoid introducing a special treatment in the case s(t) = 0, since n = 0 corresponds to a zero frequency oscillator, or a free particle, instead of a regular harmonic oscillator. In any case, it describes a single degree of freedom, which cannot affect the considered matters of unitary implementation. The equations of motion for the modes arë q n + [n 2 + s(t)]q n = 0.

(p5.8) The corresponding Hamiltonian equations arė q n = p n ,ṗ n = −[n 2 + s(t)]q n ,

(p5.9) where p n is the momentum canonically conjugate to q n , i.e. {q n , p n ′ } = δ nn ′ . There are many representations of the CCRs satisfied by the infinite set of pairs {(q n , p n ), n > 0}, or of the associated Weyl algebra. For instance, every sequence {µ n , n > 0} of (quasi-invariant 9 ) probability measures in R gives a representation, since it defines a regular product measure in the set of all sequences (q 1 , q 2 , . . .), thus providing a Schrödinger type of quantization, in the Hilbert space of square integrable functions in the configuration space. What is not available, however, is the straightforward generalization of the usual representation in finite dimensions obtained from the Lebesgue measure dq, since no mathematical sense can be made of the formal infinite product ∞ n=1 dq n . In such context, Fock representations of the Weyl relations are given by (normalized) Gaussian measures, which still make perfect sense in infinite dimensions. Even after restricting our attention to Gaussian measures, there are endless possibilities, and many of them lead to inequivalent representations.

(p5.10) In the present case, a particularly important measure in our infinite dimensional configuration space is

(p5.11) which is associated with the quantum operatorŝ q n Ψ = q n Ψ,p n Ψ = −i ∂ ∂q n Ψ + inq n Ψ.

(p5.12) This is precisely the necessary and sufficient conditions for unitary implementability of the dynamics, in the J 0 representation. Thus, there is a Fock representation, defined by a complex structure that remains invariant under the spatial symmetries, such that a unitary quantum dynamics can be achieved. The proof that a quantization with the above characteristics is unique goes as follows. To begin with, any other invariant (under spatial isometries) complex structure J is related to J 0 by J = KJ 0 K −1 , where K is a symplectic transformation given by a block diagonal matrix with 2 × 2 blocks of the form κ n λ n λ nκn , |κ n | 2 − |λ n | 2 = 1, ∀n > 0. (53) Suppose now that the dynamics is unitary in the Fock representation defined by J. It turns out that this is equivalent to the unitary implementability in the J 0 -representation of a modified dynamics, obtained precisely by applying the transformation K to the canonical transformations corresponding to time evolution. A simple computation shows that, for this modified dynamics, the coefficients β n in Equation (50) are replaced with β J n (t, t 0 ) = 2iκ n λ n Im[α n (t, t 0 )] + (κ n ) 2 β n (t, t 0 ) − λ 2 nβ n (t, t 0 ),

(p5.13) where the notation Im denotes the imaginary part. Then it follows from the hypothesis of unitary dynamics that the following condition holds:

(p5.14) Now, a detailed asymptotic analysis [49,50] shows that condition (55) implies that ∞ n |λ n | 2 < ∞.

(p5.15) Given the relation between J and J 0 , this last condition guarantees precisely that the operator J − J 0 is of the Hilbert-Schmidt type, i.e. that the Fock representations defined by J and J 0 are unitarily equivalent.
