# environmental engineering Humic substances and significance of their application -a review

CorpusID: 237204868 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s7) Remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals -cadmium and arsenic
(p7.0) Due to the high content of functional groups containing oxygen, HSs are an effective material used for the remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals. Examples of such metals are Cd and As, the difficulty of their simultaneous removal is caused by the opposite chemical behaviours of these elements. It is important to adjust the washing conditions to the soil properties. Important factors are the pH value, the duration and cycles of washing and the HSs concentration (Bi, Yuan, Wei, Xiao, Feng, Meng and Wang, 2019). The content of Cd and As in soil can be a serious problem in specific places, as is the case in China. A national survey showed that the national standards were exceeded in 7% and 2.7% of the sampling sites for Cd and As, respectively. Cd and As are toxic and carcinogenic elements -their presence in soil poses a threat to the quality of the environment and human health and has a negative effect on food. Therefore, it is so important to minimise the risk by removing these elements from the soil (Bi et. al., 2019).

(p7.1) The research concerns the possibility of using HSs as a washing agent for the simultaneous removal of Cd and As from soil. Dissolved HSs were extracted from leonardite. The efficiency of Cd and As removal with HSs were tested in three types of contaminated soils: red soil, black soil and fluvo-aquic soil. Toxic elements were removed as a result of the complexation of Cd and As with the carboxyl and phenolic groups of HSs. The use of HSs as a washing agent is justified due to their efficiency, cheap availability (coal, peat, sludge) and their positive influence on the physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil (Bi et. al., 2019).

(p7.2) Single washing with HSs for twelve hours at pH 7 resulted in the removal of 88.1% of Cd and 44.2% of As from the red soil. The content of Cd decreased by 75.1% and As decreased by 57.4% in fluvo-aquic soil -washing was performed for twelve hours. The effect of a single six-hour wash of black soil reduced the Cd content by 68.2%, while the As content decreased by 49.9%. Repeated washing resulted in an increased efficiency of toxic-element removal. The pH value of HSs was close to neutral, positively influencing the removal rate and limiting the possible destructive effect on the soil. The high removal efficiency of Cd and As from soils and the low content of other metals (Cd: 0.09, Pb: 5.32, Cu: 8.72, Cr: 6.60, As: 3.69, Ni: 8.39, Zn: 20.36 mg/kg) confirm the applicability of using HSs for the remediation of contaminated soil (Bi et. al., 2019).
