# Pediatric Stroke: Overview and Recent Updates

CorpusID: 235721636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Cardiac Causes
(p4.0) Cerebrovascular diseases in the pediatric population are not as rare as were previously thought. The various types of cerebrovascular diseases along with their frequency and association with stroke have made them the subject of many studies in recent years. The risk factors for cardiac diseases in children range from genetic disorders such as Fabry's disease, to infections such as meningitis. These risk factors increase the likelihood of cardiac conditions like cardio-embolic strokes, which account for the majority of ischemic strokes in children [10]. In addition to congenital heart defects, the pediatric population is susceptible to the same cardiac abnormalities known to present as risk factors for stroke in adults. These etiologies include bacterial and non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis, cardiomyopathies, rheumatic heart disease and other valvulopathies.

(p4.1) The prevalence of patent foramen ovale (PFO) is approximately one quarter of the population and in conjunction with underlying hypercoagulable states, can lead to paradoxical embolism [11]. The prevalence of PFO in cryptogenic stroke patients is approximately 40%. It rises to about 55% in cryptogenic patients under the age of 55. The Risk of Paradoxical Embolism (RoPE) study aimed to create a predictive model to determine the probability of an initial stroke being due to PFO. Many people with PFOs remain asymptomatic and require no intervention. However, those with a high RoPE score were found to be at greater risk for stroke and PFO closure was suggested in those cases. While the RoPE score is not the ultimate deciding factor regarding PFO management, it is highly validated in determining the extent of the causal relationship between PFOs and stroke [11].
