# Data Driven: An Overview and Practical Measures for Organizations

CorpusID: 234173516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d312ccad8524c9e67ab3f4af64233004f66a25eb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d312ccad8524c9e67ab3f4af64233004f66a25eb)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s15) III. EXAMPLES OF DATA-DRIVEN APPROACHES FOR SOLVING PROBLEMS
(p15.0) In this section, some examples of data-driven approaches to solving problems will be explored. It is intended to give a practical view of how the information obtained from the data can provide superior results compared to other forms of decision making. Examples are related to Materials Science, Industrial Productivity, Energy (Gas, Oil and Wind) and Health (wearable devices).

(p15.1) On a new data-driven solution method, without the use of models, used in variational brittle fracture mechanics, the idea was to remove the assumptions of fracture modeling from the formulation and let the behavior constituting the fracture be guided exclusively by a set of material data, while maintaining the epistemic fracture laws that come from variational principles. The results obtained showed excellent agreement with those obtained via counterparts based on standard fracture mechanics. Another important point was the excellent robustness regarding noise in the data set used, despite the quality of these data being sensitive to noise [22]. A data-based approach was shown to diagnose production bottlenecks, using combined knowledge of maintenance and data science. Perceptions about these bottlenecks are obtained using artificial intelligence techniques such as machine learning, and real-world data sets extracted directly from the production line. The tool built in this way helps its users to plan specific maintenance actions to improve the availability of process bottlenecks and thus improve process productivity [23].
