# Hyperprogression under immunotherapy: a new form of immunotherapy response?-a narrative literature review

CorpusID: 237291144 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The treatment of especially metastatic cancer patients has been dramatically improved by the introduction of immunotherapy. There are already 3 immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) that target cytotoxic T lymphocyteassociated molecule-4 (CTLA-4), programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1), and programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) are the most widely studied and recognized. It has been proven that ICIs can increase the overall survival (OS) in variety of malignancies, such as melanoma, nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), renal cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), urothelial bladder cancer, and endometrial stromal sarcoma (1)(2)(3). However, a small subset of patients on immunotherapy may not benefit at all from immunotherapy, instead, they experience a faster and more aggressive progression of the tumor than expected, with a dramatic acceleration of the disease, which is referred to as hyperprogression (HP) or hyperprogressive disease (HPD). Patients with HPD could suffer a deleterious survival effect and significantly shorter OS, suggesting that HP should be managed as fulminant toxicity and needs to be considered before immunotherapy is initiated. Existing literature has reviewed and summarized the definition, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factors and possible mechanisms of HP. However, with the gradual deepening of the exploration of HPD, researchers have made significant breakthroughs in elucidating the mechanism and mechanism of HPD and exploring biomarkers. On this basis, we reviewed and summarized the definition, incidence, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factor and possible mechanisms of HPD in recent years, and briefly introduced a novel perspective that few people mentioned: the potential biomarkers of HPD. We present the following article in accordance with the Narrative Review reporting checklist (available at https://dx.doi. org/10.21037/tlcr-21-575).
