# Avian Eggshell Membrane as a Novel Biomaterial: A Review

CorpusID: 237938241 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1)

Fields: Materials Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) ESM for Joint Health
(p3.0) Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent chronic joint disease, affecting significantly the patients' ability to function and quality of life. Very often, patients rely on dietary supplements for pain relief. The eggshell membrane has been tested as a natural therapeutic for joint and connective tissue disorders and was reported to exert some beneficial effects on joint pain, stiffness, and cartilage turnover induced by overexercise [69]. In a randomized study, postmenopausal women were assigned to a placebo and intervention group, with thirty women taking orally a commercial product, Natural Eggshell Membrane (NEM ® ), 500 mg once per day for 2 weeks while conducting regular exercise on alternate days. The results showed that the cartilage turnover was significantly reduced in the intervention group. The consumption of the eggshell membrane product rapidly improved the recovery from exercise-induced joint pain and stiffness as well as reduced the discomfort immediately after exercise [69].
## (s4) ESM for Wound Healing
(p4.0) ESM has been used as a biomaterial to promote the healing of skin wounds. Solubilized ESM may facilitate the synthesis of type III collagen in the skin of hairless mice as well as significantly improved the elasticity of human skin and reduced facial wrinkles [74].

(p4.1) Non-healing skin wounds are regarded as a major health problem globally, causing high morbidity and mortality. Processed eggshell membrane powder (PEP) offers great potential as a cost-effective wound-healing product. Using the mouse excisional woundsplinting model, researchers showed that PEP facilitated wound closure faster in the treated group than in the untreated groups [23,75]. Furthermore, sPEP stimulated matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) activities in both dermal fibroblasts and mouse skin during a 10-day incubation period. PEP also enhanced the MMP-2 protein levels and promoted the production of alpha-smooth muscle actin [76].
