# A Survey on Common Threats in npm and PyPi Registries

CorpusID: 237266468 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b56f25674afe1140497a8126ab44ddca0059ff86](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b56f25674afe1140497a8126ab44ddca0059ff86)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Software Supply-Chain Attacks
(p4.0) The goal of supply-chain attacks is to inject malicious code into software or library externally. These attacks modify the targeted program so that it is still validly signed by its owner. The attacker simply injects his code into one of the software's dependencies [21]. Theoretically, an attacker can do this injection in any given node in the software's dependency tree. The ultimate goal is to alter the behavior of the root or a specific node, which is the targeted software product, using a child node, which in this case is a dependency node in the tree [21].
## (s9) Direct, Indirect Dependencies, and Heavy Code Reuse
(p9.0) As stated before, code reuse is common in the npm environment. Projects are either directly or indirectly dependent on each other, meaning that project A that uses code from project B has a direct dependency relationship as A directly depends on B. If B depends on project C, then A has an indirect dependency on C, increasing the attack surface. Indirect dependencies are also referred to as "transitive dependencies" as some of the work in the literature uses that term to build their graphs, such as figure 3 that indicates the average number of dependencies projects use over time.  Figure 3 implies that a developer implicitly trusts around 80 other packages by using a library [41]. This trust also means that a hacker's attack surface includes the accounts that maintain the indirectly dependent packages.

(p9.1) Another term based on transitive dependency is the "Package Reach," which refers to the number of transitive dependencies a specific library has [41]. It has been stated that some popular packages have a package reach of over 100000, drastically increasing the attack surface, and this trend has been observed to be increasing [41]. The package reach also increases the size of the dependency graph. If one of the dependent packages is compromised by either a squatting attack or a stolen credentials of a maintainer account, it would be reasonable to assume that a security risk would arise. The average package reach for a single given library seems to be in an increasing trend for the last couple of years, according to figure 4. Once the attacker injects his code into a dependency graph, he can execute it in various phases. The attack tree that outlines wherein an attacker can execute the malicious script is also illustrated in figure 5.

(p9.2) Zimmerman's 2019 USENIX paper seems to be a leading study examining the interdependent structure of packages and their trends in the npm environment. However, it has also been determined that most papers in this field seem to be The attack tree that outlines the possible phases a malicious script can be executed [21] . less than five years. This finding implies that security experts recently started to investigate the interdependent packaging structure of OS environments. Software supply-chain attacks, on the other hand, seemed to be a more mature field.
