# Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors in COVID-19: A Review Filipe Ferrari 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I Vítor Magnus Martins 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , II Flá vio Danni Fuchs 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 , I,III Ricardo Stein 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 I,IV, *

CorpusID: 232770549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cb178e94b7ff995b42b10dcfdb36d11cc9693b3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) SARS-CoV-2 and the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
(p2.0) RAAS exerts key physiological functions in the homeostasis of the cardiovascular and renal systems (85). This complex pathway begins with the release of renin by the juxtaglomerular cells, catalyzing the conversion of angiotensinogen into angiotensin I. This is subsequently converted into angiotensin II in the lungs and kidneys by ACE. Angiotensin II, in turn, is transformed into angiotensin 1-7 by ACE2 (86) (Figure 1).

(p2.1) The finding that the use of ARBs can increase the expression of ACE2 led to the hypothesis that patients on such therapy might be more susceptible to infection with SARS-CoV-2, which has an affinity for this enzyme (87) (Figure 1). For instance, Soro-Paavonen et al. (88) showed that patients with diabetes who were on ACE inhibitors had increased circulating levels of ACE2.

(p2.2) However, a competing hypothesis suggests a beneficial effect of ACE inhibitors or ARBs in patients with COVID-19. According to this hypothesis, the use of these drugs could decrease the production of angiotensin II and increase the generation of angiotensin 1-7 through ACE2 and activation of the Mas receptor, which might play a role in reducing inflammation and pulmonary fibrosis (89,90). Angiotensin II, in turn, can lead to lysosomal internalization of ACE2, causing the expression of ACE2 to be reduced; the use of losartan can prevent this effect through its action on ACE2 via AT1 receptors. Thus, ARBs may reduce SARS-CoV-2 entry into cells. However, a virion needs only one receptor to infect a cell, and the effect of ARBs on the breakdown of angiotensin II to angiotensin 1-7 is still unknown (91).
## (s3) COVID-19 and Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Inhibitors
(p3.0) Evidence of Neutral Effect Based on Observational Studies and in a Randomized Clinical Trial. A population-based case-control study (10) with data from 6,300 patients and 31,000 controls from the Lombardy region in Italy, found no association between the use of ACE inhibitors or ARBs and SARS-CoV-2 infection among overall COVID-19 patients or patients with severe or fatal disease. Reynolds et al. (14) evaluated 12,594 individuals who were tested for COVID-19, of whom 4,357 had hypertension. They further analyzed the relationship between treatment with five classes of antihypertensive drugs, including ACE inhibitors (22% of patients) and ARBs (28% of patients), and the probability of a positive or negative COVID-19 test result. No association was observed between the use of RAAS inhibitors and the risk of a positive test result for COVID-19 (14). A study conducted in Saudi Arabia found no differences in ICU admission, ICU admission within 24 hours of hospitalization, ICU stay (days), and ICU death (p=0.19; p=0.23; p=0.13; p=0.58, respectively) (20) among patients receiving ACE inhibitors/ARBs vs. non-ACE inhibitors/ARBs.
## (s4) Evidence of Potential Benefits Based on Observational Studies
(p4.0) In Madrid, Spain, de Abajo et al. (35) conducted a population-based case-control study on patients diagnosed with COVID-19. When users of other antihypertensive drugs were compared to users of RAAS inhibitors, no increased risk was observed with ACE inhibitors or ARBs. Interestingly, they observed a reduction in the odds of hospital admission in diabetic patients receiving RAAS inhibitors. Meng et al. (94) studied hypertensive patients with COVID-19, who were divided into a RAAS inhibitor group (ACE inhibitors/ARBs, N=17) and other antihypertensive agent group, including calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and diuretics (N=25). Patients using ACE inhibitors or ARBs showed an increase in CD3 + and CD8 + T-cell counts, in addition to a lower frequency of severe illness and a trend towards lower interleukin-6 levels in peripheral blood. These findings point to new pathways that may explain the possible benefits of the use of these drugs in hypertensives with COVID-19.
