# Progress in Emerging Contaminants Removal by Adsorption/Membrane Filtration-Based Technologies: A Review

CorpusID: 238995840 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e204bd907775407fd198339466a4118946afcd68)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s8) Adsorption Mechanism
(p8.0) Adsorbent and adsorbate interact in two ways: chemi-and physisorption. In the former, the adsorbate forms a monolayer. The adsorbate interacts with the external surface of the adsorbent, enters the internal pores through pore diffusion, and interacts with the active sites (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). The adsorbent and the adsorbate form a new electronic configuration through electron sharing or electron transfer, and chemical interaction occurs. In the latter, adsorbent and adsorbate interact through the Van der Waals force in solid-liquid or solid-gas systems (Khulbe & Matsuura, 2018). Electrostatic forces or Van der Waals forces occur without the transfer or sharing of electrons. The adsorbate retains its identity, although a surface force field may deform it.

(p8.1) The illustration of the adsorption process is shown in Figure 6. The process is related to pore surface areas, active sites, chemisorption, and/or physisorption. Cheng et al. (2021) explained that modified biochar could adsorb some ECs with different mechanisms: hydrophobic interaction (for tylosin), ion exchange (for tetracycline and endocrine-disrupting chemicals), electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, and functional groups (for tetracycline and endocrine-disrupting chemicals), and π-π DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.xxxxx/ijost.vXiX p-ISSN 2528-1410 e-ISSN 2527-8045 bond interaction (for ciprofloxacin, tetracycline, sulfate, and endocrinedisrupting chemicals).

(p8.2) The adsorption equilibrium state is reached when there is minimum solute adsorption from the bulk to the adsorbent. The adsorption amount (qe, mmol/g) under equilibrium is given in Equation

(p8.3) where V is the volume of the solution (L); M is the adsorbent mass (g); Co, Ce are adsorbate concentrations in the initial and equilibrium condition, respectively (Rashed, 2013).

(p8.4) The adsorption isotherm is a function of the equilibrium concentration of the solution at a constant temperature. It is defined as the percentage of adsorbate per unit weight of adsorbent. Usually, the adsorption isotherm is given in the Langmuir or Freundlich model (Román et al., 2020) (2) qe = KfCe 1/n (3) where KI (L/mg) is the Langmuir constant; Q0 (mg/g) is the monolayer maximum adsorption capacity; qe (mg/g) is the measured adsorption at Ce; Kf (mg/g)(L/mg) 1/n is the Freundlich constant representing the adsorption capacity, and n is the constant depicting the adsorption intensity.

(p8.5) Adsorption kinetic shows the retention rate or solute release from solution to adsorbent's surface at certain conditions (i.e., the dose of adsorbent, pH, temperature, and flow rate). Examples of adsorption kinetics are pseudo-first-order, intra-particle diffusion, pseudo-second-order, and Elovich models. 
