# Parkinson's Disease and the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Review Article on the Association between SARS-CoV-2 and α-Synucleinopathy

CorpusID: 236471472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0390eade53e2916420b2ca303ed6f1aaa2f2a53d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0390eade53e2916420b2ca303ed6f1aaa2f2a53d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON THE CNS
(p10.0) Even after the presence of a high viral load and severe inflammation, SARS-CoV-2 appears unlikely to exhibit direct neurotropism, and the clinical changes appear to be caused by an inflammatory-mediated brain response rather than viral invasion. 32 Widespread neuronal infection, which causes the production of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, including interleukin (IL)-6, IL-1β, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, upregulates ACE-2 expression and further activates a cytokine storm in the brain. 11,27 TNF-α and IL-1β concurrently mediate the breakdown of the BBB, further permitting infiltration of immune cells and viral particles into the CNS. 11 In addition to inducing direct neuroinflammation, SARS-CoV-2 has an indirect impact related hypoxia, as acute respiratory disease predisposes the brain to edema, disturbed metabolism and subsequent structural and functional damage within the basal ganglia. 11,28 Autopsy reports for 18 consecutive patients that died of SARS-CoV-2 infection showed hypoxic changes but did not reveal any signs of encephalitis. 8 Additionally, ACE-2 present in the vasculature of the brain harbors five hypoxia-responsive elements, the expression of which is upregulated via hypoxia inducible factor-1A independent mechanisms (Figure 2). 11
## (s12) Direct viral invasion
(p12.0) Inflammatory mediated response leading to cytokine storm and BBB breakdowm SARS-CoV-2 related hypoxia promotes brain edema and damage to basal ganglia systemic inflammatory response along with a cytokine storm seems to be easily triggered in patients with conditions associated with chronic inflammation such as diabetes, obesity, and cardiac diseases. 11,33 COVID-19 may also worsen PD through interacting with the dopaminergic system in the brain, and it is also worth noting that PD is worsened when patients acquire other infections, suggesting a vicious cycle between PD and COV-ID-19. 34 PD is common in elderly patients and causes respiratory and cardiac symptoms, which places these patients at a higherrisk for SARS-CoV-2 infection. 35 Table 1 shows the results of various studies on the effect of COVID-19 on patients with PD. However, other studies have revealed that PD patients are not at a higher risk of COVID-19. Moreover, being older (mean 78.3 years) and having a longer disease duration (mean 12.7 years) puts these patients in a higher risk category with a substantially high mortality rate of 40%, while those receiving deep brain stimulation and levodopa infusion are especially vulnerable, with a mortality rate of 50%. 35
## (s26) DRUG INTERACTIONS
(p26.0) Patients with mild COVID-19 have been advised to manage their symptoms at home. This is difficult for PD patients, as selfmedication with over-the-counter (OTC) drugs can interfere with PD symptoms and treatments. 66 The anticholinergic properties of OTC medications that include antihistamines can worsen constipation, confusion, and urinary symptoms in PD patients. If a patient is on anticholinergics for Parkinson' s symptoms and OTC antihistamines or anticholinergics are taken, the side effects can be enhanced, and close monitoring is required. For PD patients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs), serious drug interactions can occur if they take cough suppressants such as dextromethorphan, as MAOIs can enhance the serotonergic effect of dextromethorphan, leading to serotonin syndrome. If MAOIs and nasal decongestants are taken together, the alpha agonist effect of the decongestant can be enhanced, leading to severe hypertensive syndrome. 66 
