# A Survey on Stance Detection for Mis-and Disinformation Identification

CorpusID: 232075945 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14ba97c7e4c7d370965333ecf3835e514c664106](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/14ba97c7e4c7d370965333ecf3835e514c664106)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s9) Shades of Truth
(p9.0) The notion of shades of truth is important in mis-and disinformation detection. For example, fact-checking often goes beyond binary true/false labels, e.g., Nakov et al. (2018) used a third category half-true, Rashkin et al. (2017) included mixed and no factual evidence, and Wang (2017); Santia and Williams (2018) adopted an even finer-grained schema with six labels, including barely true and utterly false. We believe that such shades could be applied to stance and used in a larger pipeline. In fact, fine-grained labels are common for the related task of Sentiment Analysis (Pang and Lee, 2005;Rosenthal et al., 2017).
## (s14) B Additional Formulations of Stance as a Component for Fact-Checking
(p14.0) Beyond the approaches that we outlined in Section 3.2, stance has also been used for detecting misconceptions and for profiling media sources as part of a fact-checking pipeline. Below, we describe some work that follows these formulations.

(p14.1) Misconceptions Hossain et al. (2020) focused on detecting misinformation related to COVID-19, based on known misconceptions listed in Wikipedia. They evaluated the veracity of a tweet depending on whether it agrees, disagrees, or has no stance with respect to a set of misconceptions. A related formulation of the task is detecting previously fact-checked claims (Shaar et al., 2020). This allows to assess the veracity of dubious content by evaluating the stance of a claim regarding already checked stories, known misconceptions, and facts.

(p14.2) Media Profiling Stance detection has also been used for media profiling. Stefanov et al. (2020) explored the feasibility of an unsupervised approach for identifying the political leanings (left, center, or right bias) of media outlets and influential people on Twitter based on their stance on controversial topics. They built clusters of users around core vocal ones based on their behaviour on Twitter such as retweeting, using the procedure proposed by Darwish et al. (2020). This is an important step towards understanding media biases. Tweet: Wow, that is fascinating! I hope you never mock our proud Scandi heritage again.
