# Utilization of CRISPR-Mediated Tools for Studying Functional Genomics in Hematological Malignancies: An Overview on the Current Perspectives, Challenges, and Clinical Implications

CorpusID: 246362613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s17) SUMMARY AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
(p17.0) This review has clearly demonstrated that CRISPR has served well in deciphering and understanding the genetic basis of hematological malignancies and has bloomed to become the new gamechanger in the field of genome editing by overcoming all the limitations that were displayed by other editing techniques earlier. In spite of all the merits posed by this so-called prime technique, CRISPR also come with certain limitations like its earlier predecessors.

(p17.1) Currently, CRISPR systems can be delivered in different modes whereby, gene editing can be achieved through transient or stable delivery system. Viral-based transfection of CRISPR is the most efficient method for producing stablymodified cells (Lino et al., 2018). Nevertheless, there has been a recent paradigm shift where non-viral methods are becoming the main homestay given biosafety and ethical issues when utilizing viral vectors. Non-viral vector systems include systems such as lipid nanoparticles, cell-penetrating peptides (CPPs), DNA "nanoclews," and gold nanoparticles. Having said that, the efficiency of the delivery still remains a challenge in hematological-related malignancies. There has been special technique developed to shuttle the cargo of the CRISPR system into the cell via rapid cell mechanical deformation (Peyravian et al., 2021). This has, to a certain extent, alleviated the limitation posed earlier and has allowed high delivery efficiency in hematological malignancies.

(p17.2) The issue of specificity in the CRISPR system is a major concern since Cas9 binds to unintended genomic sites for cleavage, termed as off-target effects. The target efficiency of the CRISPR system is only determined through 20 nucleotide sequences of guide RNA (gRNA) and PAM sites adjacent to target loci. If there are more than three mismatches between target sequences and 20 nucleotides of gRNA, it can result in off-target effects. Researchers have proposed two types of off-target effects, the first types of off-target effects likely to occur due to the sequence homology of the target loci and the next types of offtarget sites occur in the genome other than the target site (Naeem et al., 2020). The effect causes multiple cellular issues at the genomic level and in turn leads to deletions, alterations in the respective gene, and sometimes could lead to lethal genetic mutations. There are different methods established to validate the off-target effects and the most unique of them all is the Genome-wide Unbiased Identification of DSBs Enabled by Sequencing (GUIDE-seq). This provides an unbiased and genome-wide method for detecting CRISPR RNA-guided DSBs in cells . This groundbreaking study has increased the practical viability of the off-target detection. With standardization of all the methods that has been drawn FIGURE 1 | Timeline describing the research progress of CRISPR applications in hematological malignancies. Key studies contributing to major breakthroughs in the field are highlighted. Frontiers in Genetics | www.frontiersin.org January 2022 | Volume 12 | Article 767298 16 over the years, it makes the gene editing tool known as CRISPR to be a possible therapeutic approach in field of hematological malignancy.

(p17.3) The molecular scissors known as "CRISPR" provides complete silencing, and knockdown of gene can still be a valuable means depending on the type of malignancy. This method of gene silencing usually involves an extended time frame to generate a stable cell line. Taking into consideration on the other gene editing tools available with the likes of ZFN, TALENs, and meganucleases, it can be said that CRISPR is the most efficient, stable, and effective. CRISPR is appropriate for delineating gene functions, and genome-editing technology is the apparent option for creating a true genetic null allele, introducing a point mutation, and correcting a specific mutation.

(p17.4) In conclusion, through current advancement in terms of gene editing, we can say that CRISPR has taken the research world by storm, evidently allowing us to make changes to the once impossible. CRISPR has made its way onto the freezers of labs all around the spectrum, easily accessible for researchers to use it. It is also becoming a mainstream methodology to study cancer biology given its versatility. It has now matured its way from experimental approach toward customized treatment involving cancer patients. CRISPR gene editing tools have also sparked significant advancements in enhancing our knowledge regarding hematological malignancies, which in essence presents us with potential therapeutic applications which holds much promise for alternative treatments for patients with this group of malignancies. Development of CRISPR utilization in studying the functional genomics of haematologic malignancies is depicted in Figure 1 and a general summary for studying functional genomics via CRISPR based tools is presented in Figure 2.  
