# healthcare Does Artificial Intelligence Make Clinical Decision Better? A Review of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Acute Kidney Injury Prediction

CorpusID: 244812316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1896930a162464cb8f802aaab22ca475f632dccc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1896930a162464cb8f802aaab22ca475f632dccc)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s5) Results
(p5.0) In total, 31 studies reported the discriminating ability of machine learning for predicting AKI (Table 1).

(p5.1) As shown in Table 1, the included studies predicted AKI adequately, some studies had AUROC > 0.8, and the study conducted by Koola et al. had the highest AUROC of 0.93 in logistic regression. The models outperformed diagnosis through novel biomarkers. Machine-learning models that were used to predict AKI had four to 57 covariates. These covariates were epidemiological factors, comorbidities, laboratory data, medications, and surgery types. We summarize the most commonly used covariates in these machinelearning prediction models in Figure 1. In the 31 studies, the five most commonly used covariates were creatinine, age, blood pressure, gender, and diabetes mellitus. Among these 31 studies, eight studies focused on patients' undergoing surgery (surgeries were cardiac or aortic surgeries in five studies), and the most commonly used covariates in surgical patients are illustrated in Figure 2; the five most common used covariates were gender, body mass index, age, creatinine, and surgery type.

(p5.2) In Table 2, we summarized the method of feature selection, data splitting and machine learning algorithm choices in enrolled studies. Different performances on predicting AKI by using different machine learning algorithms were also listed in this table. More than half of the enrolled studies used LASSO, XGBoost, or other feature selection methods to choose the covariates for machine learning, but some studies chose covariates according to clinical experience or previous reports.        Churpek et al. [87] gradient boosting embedded method ten-fold cross-validation gradient boosted machine 0.72 Hsu et al. [88] XGBoost and LASSO embedded method five-fold cross-validation logistic regression; 0.767
