# A Review on Machine Learning Styles in Computer Vision-Techniques and Future Directions

CorpusID: 252558821 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59694d8b594ac2bb0f91dd4a0d681133f976939a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/59694d8b594ac2bb0f91dd4a0d681133f976939a)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s15) a: SELF-SUPERVISED LEARNING
(p15.0) In some ways, self-supervised learning is a sort of unsupervised learning because it adheres to the condition that no labels are assigned. Self-supervised learning, on the other hand, instead of looking for high-level patterns for clustering, tries to tackle tasks typically addressed by supervised learning (e.g., image classification) without any labeling provided. Figure 13 displays the working of self-supervised learning from input data till the final output generation. Instead of recommending new self-supervised learning techniques, this learning aims to examine how current selfsupervised learning strategies might be applied to address domain adaption problems [53]. The primary task can learn a domain invariant feature representation thanks to the pretext  job connecting the source and destination domains. In the source domain, the primary job has labels; however, in the destination domain, there is no labeling requirement. In other words, we develop unsupervised domain adaptation through self-supervised learning. The forwarded data flow is represented by solid lines in the diagram, while the optional data flow is indicated by dotted lines [53]. Through multitask learning, the pretext and main task (such as object identification, classification, or semantic segmentation) are simultaneously learned. Advantages of Self-Supervised learning-• The frequency of labeling needed may be reduced with the use of self-supervised learning.

(p15.1) • Self-supervised learning can enhance the effectiveness of robotic surgeries by determining the dense depth of the human body.
