# review Effectiveness and safety of topical tacrolimus monotherapy for repigmentation in vitiligo: a comprehensive literature review *

CorpusID: 25274860 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b269287ef51d8d5cd266798e2410d7df4a229cf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4b269287ef51d8d5cd266798e2410d7df4a229cf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Vitiligo is characterized by the progressive disappearance of melanocytes, resulting in depigmentation of the skin and/or hair. The etiology of vitiligo is unknown. 1 Genetic studies support a non-Mendelian inheritance, suggesting that vitiligo is a multifactorial, polygenic disorder. The autoimmune theory remains the most widely accepted. Vitiligo has frequently been reported in association with autoimmune disorders such as thyroid disease, diabetes mellitus and alopecia areata.

(p0.1) Several studies have suggested that the presence of increased antimelanocyte antibodies and the imbalance of T-cell (CD4+/CD8+ and Tregs) subsets, along with their functional defects, may result in melanocyte destruction in vitiligo patients. 2 The disease affects both genders equally. It can appear at any age and the average age of onset is somewhat variable in different geographic regions. The mean onset age is reportedly 22 in the U.S. and India, 24 in Brazil and 25 in the UK. 3 Vitiligo treatment remains a challenge. Therapeutic options for vitiligo include: topical and systemic corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, calcipotriol, phototherapy, excimer laser, and surgical methods such as skin⁄single-hair grafting, autologous cultured melanocyte or epidermal suspension transplantations.

(p0.2) Topical corticosteroids are most commonly used drug to treat vitiligo but there are concerns over side effects due to long-term use. Steroid application causes skin atrophy, telangiectasia, hypertrichosis and acne.

(p0.3) Tacrolimus and pimecrolimus are used as topical immunomodulators. They inhibit calcineurin action, thus preventing T-cell activation and the production of various inflammatory cytokines.
