# Food flavor enhancement, preservation, and bio-functionality of ginger (Zingiber officinale): a review

CorpusID: 257851880 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47faf1fcb5342ddbe2eacb2c1e2f868932113276](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47faf1fcb5342ddbe2eacb2c1e2f868932113276)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s8) • Prevents menstrual cramps
(p8.0) • By influence on exert abortive and prophylactic effects in migraine headache without any side effects and anti-ulcerogenic.[1]   Ginger in dietary supplement form.

(p8.1) • Promotes heart health and treats cardiovascular diseases.

(p8.2) • Treatment of hyperemesis gravidarum due the inherent heterogeneity by non-pharmacological option.

(p8.3) • By preventing hypercholesterolemia in rats fed a high-cholesterol diet through mechanisms of folliculogenesis and implantation.

(p8.4) [118] [119]   Ginger with fixed concentrations of phenolic compounds.

(p8.5) • Is used as antioxidants and antihydatic agents.

(p8.6) • Protective effects against ferrous sulfate-induced liver and kidney toxicity by reducing lipid peroxidation and chelating iron.

(p8.7) • Used as an antihydatid effect in vitro, their pro- duct protects against host cell death by reducing high levels of nitric oxide (NO).

(p8.8) • It eliminates disorders caused by oxidative and neuroprotective effects such as analgesic effects.

(p8.9) [120]

(p8.10) [121] [122]   Essential oil forms of ginger.

(p8.11) • Prevents skin infections and detoxifies the body.

(p8.12) • Through anti-skin tumor-promoting effects, through inhibition of cellular, biochemical and molecular changes caused by tumor promoters using chemoprotective mechanisms.[123]   Ginger, as spice ingredient, and ginger rhizome extract.

(p8.13) • Prevents stomach and liver ulcers, and aids in proper digestion.

(p8.14) • Improvement of diet-related metabolic abnorm- alities due to its potential effectiveness on metabolic syndrome related to stomach and liver.

(p8.15) • Significantly inhibited gastric damage and showed significant anti-ulcerogenic activity in a promising gastro-protective agent.

(p8.16) [124]

(p8.17) [125]

(p8.18) (Continued)

(p8.19) Food spoilage microorganisms are the main challenges facing most developing countries.These microorganisms, which produce undesirable taste, texture and appearance of food can affect food value.Contaminated food is unfit for human consumption.Various measures must be taken to reduce or eliminate pathogenic bacteria in food.These measures also increase overall food quality, safety, and shelf life.The antimicrobial activity of ginger was tested against Staphylococcus aureus (SA), Bacillus subtilis (BC), Escherichia coli (EC), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA), and Candida albicans (CA) using an agar diffusion method. [149]Ginger-inhibited foodborne pathogens such as S. aureus, E. coli, and Enterococcus species have also been reported. [9]Ginger is rich in naturally occurring bioactive compounds and essential oils that suppress the growth of a variety of food spoilage microorganisms.The antimicrobial activity of ginger depends on its concentration and the type of microbial species.
