# OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY The role of brain oscillations in post-stroke motor recovery: An overview

CorpusID: 251139330 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420a6cb73861ebd1ae1cd5fa94127f1e224f24fc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420a6cb73861ebd1ae1cd5fa94127f1e224f24fc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience
(p7.0) To date, neuromodulation approaches, i.e., FES-NIBS, are valid tools to improve stroke rehabilitation outcomes. In addition, BCI systems could support motor function enhancement by providing visual/somatosensory feedback (Pillette et al., 2020), whereas EEG could provide real-time brain rhythms feedback (Enriquez-Geppert et al., 2017). The high reproducibility of ERD/ERS could be considered a promising predictive outcome measure for evaluating patients with stroke recovery after rehabilitation.

(p7.1) The core articles included in this review are shown in Table 1. Specifically, it has been shown that the above-reported techniques are more effective in the chronic stroke phase, whereas in the acute/post-acute phase, their effectiveness should be better explored. However, these data need to be cautiously taken because of several study limitations. First, this review was conducted as a broad overview of a topic-related research area. Moreover, the search method depends on a non-predefined protocol, which may involve subjective selection bias. Many of these studies have been plagued by methodological problems (i.e., the heterogeneity of the population, the rehabilitation sessions and duration, the ischemic areas involved, timing from the acute event, and the different EEG-BCI-FES-NIBS applied). The Inclusion criteria of studies for review also rely on researchers' experiences. Finally, the selected studies reported different functional outcomes and the scarcity of the data prevented performing systematic review. However, devising novel clinical trials, which consider such limitations, may be helpful to define proper treatment settings, integrating motor system modulation and rehabilitation techniques, to shed new light on the role of brain oscillations in patients with poststroke rehabilitation.
