# R E V I E W Open Access Fluoroacetate in plants -a review of its distribution, toxicity to livestock and microbial detoxification

CorpusID: 256337222 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05277dc9878444e7f7491948aa77b80d46bc807f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05277dc9878444e7f7491948aa77b80d46bc807f)

Fields: Biology, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s8) Rumen microbial transfer
(p8.0) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to na誰ve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].

(p8.1) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to na誰ve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].
## (s23) Rumen microbial transfer
(p23.0) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to na誰ve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].

(p23.1) Amorimia pubiflora is one of the main causes of fluoroacetate poisoning in Brazil. In a recent study researchers were able to induce resistance to toxicity by feeding non-toxic doses of this plant to sheep. In addition transferring rumen contents from the resistant animals to na誰ve sheep was able to confer protection from toxicity [91].
