# Nanomaterials-Based Sensors for Respiratory Viral Detection: A Review

CorpusID: 250144980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e)

Fields: Materials Science, Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s9) VII. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
(p9.0) NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION As discussed previously, many studies support the superiority of nanomaterial-based sensors over the others due to their unmatched physicochemical properties like the prominent surface to volume ratio, high adsorption, the changes in their quantum aspects and their capacity to react. Hence, a lower quantity of analytes is more than sufficient for their successful analysis. Furthermore, rapid processing of the analyte within a lower budget is possible using such sensors [121]. Even carbon-based nanomaterials like graphene and its derivatives are an excellent choice to develop sensors that can detect respiratory viruses because of their ability to attach to ligands and other nanoparticles [26]. Other nanomaterials like silica nanoparticles are also advantageous in creating sensors to detect viruses because they are biocompatible with other elements in biological conditions. Moreover, nanoporous materials have an even better surface to volume ratio which is gives them an upper hand over the other nanoparticles that are currently available [26].
## (s11) IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
(p11.0) Highly sensitive sensors can be successfully developed using nanomaterials, such that they give rapid results which are highly reproducible. In addition to being highly sensitive, nanomaterial-based FET sensors are also highly selective and can detect the analyte in low concentrations. Nanomaterials like graphene and In2O3 have been incorporated in the open gated areas of FET to detect respiratory viruses [124]. Elements like gold nanoparticles and their nanoislands have also been successfully included in immunosensors to detect viruses like MERS and COVID-19 under pico and femto concentration ranges [95], [125]. Furthermore, using nanomaterials in sensor development allows for their miniaturization and reduces their overall production cost. Affinity sensors can be easily created using multiple nanomaterials within the same sensor. Such sensors usually have many electrodes within the same system, which allows for simultaneous detection.

(p11.1) Hence, such nanomaterial-based sensors can be created as small point-of-care devices that hold practical applications, are user-friendly, and do not require trained professionals to detect respiratory viral pathogens.

(p11.2) Moreover, certain aspects of such sensors still need further attention. More work needs to be done to determine the accuracy of the results of nanomaterial-based sensors that can detect actual samples in real-time under natural conditions. Most of the work is usually carried out under laboratory conditions, and hence whether or not they may give similar results even outside the laboratory conditions must be crosschecked. Furthermore, wearable biosensing devices can be created using nanomaterials that offer statistical information like the development of virus within the body, the antibody levels, and compare the respiratory virus infection within the community. This will be particularly useful for uninfected individuals to avoid such areas to prevent further spreading of the disease to neighboring regions. Moreover, such innovative nanomaterial-based sensors can help predict the next pandemic to a large degree. In conclusion, nanomaterial-based sensors can prove to be very promising for the detection of respiratory viral particles. Yet, further work is required to make these user-friendly and provide quick, accurate and early detection of the viruses to prevent any other respiratory virus outbreaks.
