# EDITED BY Digital health in pain assessment, diagnosis, and management: Overview and perspectives

CorpusID: 258172040 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2799587443e5a1ac5881863ea68a66bd32b36375](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2799587443e5a1ac5881863ea68a66bd32b36375)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Digital health applications must follow best practice principles
(p0.0) Of the many concerns in digital health interventions data privacy is primary-the degree to which personal information is saved and used (3). There are, however, broader concerns. There is also ambiguity about when regulatory approval should be sought, and what basic principles must be followed in the development of big data and algorithms to ensure ethical model development. It is important to ensure that the socio-cultural factors associated with digital interventions in pain are considered, and one should question whether the applications are suitable for integration into insurance and healthcare schemes (12). While the Covid-19 pandemic led to an increase and acceptance of many digital health solutions, these advances should be strengthened by implementing a rigorous framework of evaluation for innovations, to ensure impact, accessibility, acceptance and ethical standards.

(p0.1) Digital therapeutics should not be considered as a replacement for clinical intervention, but rather as a complementary component of intervention, that is evidence-based requiring stringent assessment and approval. The Societal Impact of Pain (SIP) published a white paper calling on the European Union to formalise and acknowledge digital healthcare as an intervention, to support interoperable and validated technologies for pain assessment, to allocate funding to digital health interventions, to ensure that the subjective experience of pain remains part of the assessment of pain, and to establish standards for the sharing of information on evidence-based health technology advances (8).

(p0.2) The proliferation of digital health innovations for the impactful treatment and management of pain is welcomed but should be considered within a systemic framework. Factors such as the efficacy of the application, the scalability or affordability of the application, the regulatory approvals (13) required and the extent to which these applications are complementary and sustainable with other protocols, must be considered to ensure the efforts are beneficial, have integrity, and are able to integrate into healthcare systems. Terhorst et al. (2021) conducted research on mobile apps made available to the public with no framework of approval or vetting in place. The researchers considered the pain apps available in Europe and evaluated their privacy features, usability and functionality, and content quality. The authors found significant data privacy concerns and found little to no scientific evaluation with 99.5% not evaluated using randomised control trials. In this sense the potential power of pain apps is being exploited (3). Day and colleagues (2022) assessed the clinical robustness of the claims of digital health start-ups in the United States. Robustness was measured by analysing regulatory filings and clinical trials. Only 20% of companies demonstrated more than 5 out of a possible 10 score on levels of robustness, the remainder were below (20).
