# A scoping review of survey research with gender minority adolescents and youth in low and middle-income countries

CorpusID: 255568744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215aad3c803f4f6f7f5488f7abf0ff8f1212e15d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/215aad3c803f4f6f7f5488f7abf0ff8f1212e15d)

Fields: Medicine, Sociology

## (s8) Sampling and administration
(p8.0) The majority of the studies (n = 22) employed nonrandom sampling, generally leveraging existing social networks to identify and recruit respondents. Some authors justified this approach by noting the more difficult to reach nature of transgender and LGBT populations more generally [37,38]. Rather than survey the general population, these studies tended to focus on gender minority populations, often alongside other specific populations, such as MSM. This more targeted approach perhaps helps to explain why the sample sizes of the studies reviewed were often relatively small; just under half of the studies (n = 15) had fewer than 500 respondents.

(p8.1) Of the articles that relied primarily on network-based sampling (n = 22), nearly all (n = 19) discussed collaborating with institutions to recruit respondents. It was most common (n = 10) to work with local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) or communitybased organizations (CBOs), which then helped through, for example, distributing online surveys and identifying seed respondents. Studies also worked with clinics (n = 3), schools and universities (n = 4) or a combination of these institutions (n = 2) to identify respondents. Two of the four articles that did not mention working with institutions at the sampling phase drew on the same survey in Brazil, which recruited participants through Facebook advertisements [39,40].

(p8.2) The remaining third (n = 11) of the studies employed some form of random sampling in their research design and nearly all of these (n = 9) worked through schools or colleges to recruit their participants. For example, a study in Thailand randomly selected provinces and then secondary schools to obtain a nationally-representative study of around 32,000 secondary school students, the largest number of respondents of any study included in this review [41]. Having asked about gender identity, the data could then be used to compare mental health, drug use, sexual health, and the experience of violence between cisgender and transgender students. Another study, focused on self-harm amongst LGBT youth in Accra, Ghana, recruited the majority of respondents through schools and then incorporated out-of-school youth via charity organizations and census street enumeration areas [42].

(p8.3) These studies tended to have a larger number of respondents and were more likely to include cisgender heterosexual populations, allowing for comparative analysis of the experience of gender minority populations. In some cases, however, this comparative analysis was limited by the small number of transgender respondents in the final sample. For example, the Ghana study had more than 2,000 respondents but grouped transgender respondents (n = 29) with lesbian, gay, and bisexual respondents in the analysis. The authors cited the small total number of LGBT respondents (n = 74) in the sample for taking this approach [42].
## (s9) Gender categorization
(p9.0) Though all papers focused on the experience of gender minority youth, they varied in the extent to which they described how the surveys had captured respondents' gender identity. Around a fifth (n = 7) provided the exact wording of the gender identity questions and the categories offered and just under a third (n = 10) did not provide the wording, but described the type of questions used and how answers were categorized. The rest (n = 16) did not discuss how gender identity was asked about in the survey questionnaire. This, in part, reflects the frequent use of respondent driven sampling and/or the limiting of the sample to certain demographics: nine studies noted gender minority identity as part of the criteria for participation in the study, often alongside MSM or LGBTQ populations more broadly. In these cases, categorization of gender identity appears to have taken place at the recruitment phase rather than as a question in the survey itself, though this is not always clear from the text. A handful of the articles (n = 3) referred the reader to other articles for further details on survey design, though without indicating whether these would include details on assessing gender identity. Explicit discussion of the questions and their options is helpful as though descriptive statistics can provide some indication of how gender identity questions were formulated, they may be misleading given that sometimes categories are grouped together at the analysis phase, as discussed above.

(p9.1) Of the papers that provided some detail on how gender identity was assessed, most (n = 14) used a version of the two-step approach, asking about sex at birth and current gender identity. One paper that used this approach and provided the exact wording was a paper on gender minority students in Brazil. It noted in the methods section: "First, students were asked "What was your sex assigned at birth?" with the options of male, female, or other. . . Students were then asked "What is your gender identity?" Their four response options included (a) male, (b) female, (c) travesti or transexual, or (d) other" [44]. The authors also provided their rationale for why they chose to offer the particular answer categories, discussing the meaning of travesti and transexual in the Brazilian context.

(p9.2) The papers that provided the questions showed that the wording and options offered varied, even if the same question format was used. For example, a study examining the mental health status of secondary school students in Suzhou, China also used the two-step method but phrased the questions differently and offered different answer options to the Brazilian study. Respondents were asked "What was your biological sex assigned at birth (choose from male or female)?" and then, "What do you perceive your gender to be (choose from male, female, neither, or not sure)?" [45]. The authors then explain how based on the answers, students were categorized as either cisgender, transgender, non-binary, or questioning. For one paper that used the two-step approach, sex at birth was part of the eligibility criteria rather than an actual survey question [46].
## (s10) Thematic areas
(p10.0) The studies centered around a few key thematic areas. The two most common were sexual health and bullying/violence-each of these themes comprised about thirty percent of the articles (n = 9 for sexual health and n = 8 for bullying/violence)-followed by mental health (n = 8) and substance abuse (n = 4). While some of the articles explored solely one of these themes, others studied several at once, exploring the connections between them.

(p10.1) Often written by public health scholars, the sexual health studies primarily examined sexual health behavior, including questions around number of partners, condom use, and sexually transmitted infections (STI) testing. Additionally, HIV prevention and testing emerged as a central concern: only one of the articles on sexual health did not reference HIV in the title. Compared to the other themes, articles focused on sexual health were more likely to use survey data collected as part of an intervention. For example, one article drew on cross-sectional survey data collected from participants of a UNICEF-funded voucher initiative that aimed to facilitate access to sexual and reproductive health services amongst young MSM and transgender people in Dhaka, Bangladesh [50]. This study is also illustrative of the fact that the sexual health articles tended to study the experience of transgender populations alongside MSM. Only one of the articles on sexual health focused entirely on transgender or gender minority populations. Some of the studies point out how this more secondary focus on gender minority populations might mean that the surveys are less well-suited in assessing their specific needs and experiences [51]. Indeed, the authors of the Bangladesh study noted that the intervention had much greater success finding young MSM than young transgender people, speculating that this might be a result of the study not having engaged leaders or teachers (guru) in the hijra community to which much of the transgender population in Bangladesh belongs [50].

(p10.2) Most (n = 7) of the bullying/violence articles focused on schools, shedding light on the treatment of school peers and teachers towards gender minority students, while three articles also looked at gender minority youth's experience in their families. One article took a broader approach, asking about classmates and family, but also about respondents' experiences in the workplace, healthcare system, and the general public [52]. There was some overlap between the articles focused on bullying/violence and those on mental health with studies in both groups examining linkages between victimization and different psychological difficulties, including low self-esteem, depression, and suicide ideation. Compared to those focused on sexual health, articles focused on bullying/violence and mental health were more likely to include cisgender and heterosexual populations alongside gender and sexual minorities, facilitating comparisons in experience between groups of youth. For example, one study on the mental health of secondary school students in China found that transgender girls were significantly more likely to be bullied and have had suicidal thoughts compared to cisgender girls [45].
