# A review on the potential effects of environmental and economic factors on sheep genetic diversity: Consequences of climate change

CorpusID: 253649345 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6591b526077c33314f68a18d956cf4c37e55ec52)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Economics

## (s3) Insufficient water
(p3.0) The animal's live body weight is composed of 70 % water. This implies that water is an essential requirement in animal life and hence should be regarded as a major part of animal nutrition as well as the greatest constraint to performance. Despite its vitality, few studies have been conducted on the effects of water on animal production and other related factors. Water availability can be addressed to be either in terms of quantity or quality, both affect the performance of livestock (Umar et al., 2014).

(p3.1) The capacity of sheep to endure water stress depends on the breed hence the genetic background. Generally, indigenous sheep breeds mostly found in arid and semi-arid regions have a more efficient tolerance mechanism to water stress. The effects of water stress are more aggravated by heat stress (Chedid et al., 2014). When the animal is subjected to water stress for a prolonged period, it undergoes dehydration, which is a process of losing water.

(p3.2) Dehydration is positively correlated with heat stress, heat stress causes increased body temperatures which stimulates physiological responses like sweating and vasodilation to increase heat dissipation in the environment (Akerman et al., 2016), which in turn increases water consumption by an animal. Notwithstanding the impacts of water stress on animal production, some studies have suggested that ruminants have developed mechanisms of coping with the negative effects of both heat and water stress (Hussein et al., 2020).
