# A comprehensive overview of metaplastic breast cancer: clinical features and molecular aberrations

CorpusID: 255986670 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
(p9.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p9.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s12) Radiation therapy
(p12.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p12.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
## (s29) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
(p29.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p29.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s32) Radiation therapy
(p32.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p32.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
