# Multi-Agent Deep Reinforcement Learning for Multi-Robot Applications: A Survey

CorpusID: 257884080 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92c590df020b448c06c8eacb17cbf9c869dd88d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92c590df020b448c06c8eacb17cbf9c869dd88d8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine, Mathematics

## (s22) Ref. State
(p22.0) Action Reward [23] The positions, velocities, and distances between UAVs Discreet Determined by the distance from the target and the evader being reached by the pursuer.

(p22.1) [87]

(p22.2) Consists of static obstacle locations and the locations of other agents Discreet Based on the robots' movements toward the goal while avoiding collisions. [94] Contains the sensor data for the location of the target relative to the robot and the last action done by the robot Discreet

(p22.3) Determined by the robot reaching the goal, reducing the number of direction changes, and avoiding collisions. [95] A map that includes the agent's locations, empty cells, obstacle cells, and the location of the tasks Discreet Determined by laying pieces of flooring in the installation area. [110] Map of the environment represented with waypoints, locations of the UAVs, and points of interest Discreet Based on the coverage of the team of robots.

(p22.4) [114]

(p22.5) The positions and tasks of the robots, the state of the robot Discreet Based on minimizing the number of timesteps in an episode.

(p22.6) [96]

(p22.7) Map of the area to be sterilized and the positions of the agents, the cleaning priority, size, and area of the cleaning zone Discreet Based on the agents cleaning priority areas for sanitation. [86] Temperature and "fieryness" of a building, location of the robots, water in the tanks, and busy or idle status Discreet Based on keeping the fires to a minimum "fieryness" level.

(p22.8) [53] Sensory information on obstacles Discreet Based on the UAV's coverage of the area.

(p22.9) [52] Robots' positions and velocities and the machine status Discreet

(p22.10) Determined by robots completing machine jobs to meet the throughput goal, and their motions while avoiding collisions.

(p22.11) [107]

(p22.12) Includes the laser readings of the robots, the goal position, and the robot's velocity Continuous Based on the smooth movements of the robots while avoiding collisions. [22] Includes the laser readings of the robots, the goal position, and the robot's velocity Continuous Based on the time to reach the target while avoiding collisions.

(p22.13) [108] An environment that includes the coordinates of the manipulator arm gripper Continuous Based on reaching the target object.

(p22.14) [109] Laser measurements of the robots and their velocities Continuous Based on the centroid of the robot team reaching the goal. [117] The state of the robot, other robots, obstacles, and the target position Continuous Based on the robots' relative distance from the target location.

(p22.15) [97] Sensed LiDAR data Continuous
