# Academic Editors: Codrina Ancuta medicina Review Depression in Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Narrative Review-Diagnostic Challenges, Pathogenic Mechanisms and Effects

CorpusID: 253538941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s12) Effects of Depression in RA Patients
(p12.0) Depression in patients with RA is associated with poor long-term outcomes. Multiple studies have shown that depression in RA is associated with increased pain, fatigue, and physical disability. This alters treatment compliance, causes more comorbidities, and leads to higher mortality, partly through increased suicide risk. Depression in RA increases health service utilization and healthcare costs directly through hospitalization, but also indirectly through loss of work productivity. It also considerably decreases quality of life (QoL) for RA patients, a fact that is reflected in all domains of QoL questionnaires [41]. Additionally, psychological distress may impact health outcomes by influencing other health behaviors alongside medication adherence, such as smoking and physical activity. Reduced levels of physical activity can result in deconditioning, loss of natural endorphins, and increased pain [13].
## (s18) Discussion
(p18.0) Depression is highly prevalent in RA, and the toll it takes on the quality of life of patients suggests that in routine clinical practice and corresponding follow-up procedures, patients should be screened for the presence of depressive symptoms [5]. Diagnosing and treating depression in this category of patients should be part of standard patient care, but that implies using validated screening questionnaires against the gold standard for detecting depression. A full diagnostic assessment should be made after positive screening results [59] in order to confirm the diagnosis and to minimize the risk of attributing depression to RA in the presence of concomitant etiological disease (such as iatrogenic effects or other psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders associated with depression).

(p18.1) The correlation between rheumatological outcome and depression is strong, without consideration of the direction of causality, so mental health should be addressed as part of a regular procedure in rheumatological randomized controlled trials and cohorts. Assessing depression could be a significant psychomarker of rheumatological outcome. Depression should be assessed before and after starting treatment and also at different time-points during treatment, because there is compelling evidence that depression is highly treatable in patients with co-occurring physical diseases. Disease activity, as assessed by the DAS28 score, is used to make treatment decisions, and the fact that disease activity is influenced by depression scores means that depression scores influence treatment decisions. Correctly detecting and managing depression may be necessary for the effective management of RA [60].

(p18.2) There is a lack of interventional studies in this field. Extensive research should be undertaken in order to evaluate whether treating depression does lead to improved rheumatological outcomes. Further investigation into what type of therapy is the most effective in treating comorbid depression in RA is needed.

(p18.3) There is compelling evidence that cognitive behavioral therapy and mindfulness for depression in RA patients leads to better outcomes. Nursing interventions may be important adjunctive therapies to the medical management of RA patients. Secondly, most studies showed that depression in RA is drug resistant and does not seem to respond well to classical therapy. In line with the treat-to-target and the tight control strategy for disease activity, it has become clearer than ever that depression in RA patients must be addressed.

(p18.4) This review has several study limitations that can influence the conclusions, namely the fact that the literature is vast and highly unlikely to be completely summarized in one review, as well as the possible bias originating from the author's clinical experience.
