# Exploring the underutilized novel foods and starches for formulation of low glycemic therapeutic foods: a review

CorpusID: 258241337 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fcbc5ba051a6b92207ac29426183dfb0c6aec12)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s11) Anti-obesity and hypolipidemic properties
(p11.0) Fu et al. (169) indicated that 6-week supplementation of banana resistant starch (BRS) at low (1.25 g/kg), medium (2.50 g/kg) and high (5.0 g/kg) dose along with high fat diet (HFD), fed to obese rats could prevent rise of glucose (4.16-3.78 mmol/L) when compared to control (fed with HFD only) obese rats (9.77 mmol/L). Even the triglyceride, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein levels were lower in BRS + HFD obese rats (0.44-0.47 mmol/L; 1.45-1.61 mmol/L; 0.49-0.33 mmol/L respectively) than control obese rats (0.65; 1.79; 0.48 respectively). The authors also indicated that the BRS improved the gut microbiota by increasing the ratio of Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes microorganism. Even the serum level of leptin and insulin decrease in rats fed with BRS (leptin: 1.82-1.37 ng/ml; insulin: 11.51-9.29 U/L) than the control rats (leptin: 2.10 ng/ml; insulin: 15.15 U/L). The ghrelin hormone level which was less in obese rat (0.76 mU/L) was improved in rats fed with BRS (0.79-0.92 mU/L). Adiponectin a hormone related to anti-diabetic and cardioprotective activity was low in obese rats (23.60 ng/ml) which was increased to 24.71-34.44 ng/ml in BRS fed rats. Thus, it was concluded that BRS demonstrated antiobesity effect by regulating the glucose and lipid mechanism, reducing the serum hormonal levels of leptin and insulin and increasing the ratio of beneficial gut microbiota (169).

(p11.1) The hypolipidemic properties of consuming RS4 enriched flours was delineated by Nichenametla et al. (170). They indicated that upon 12 weeks consumption of control (RS: 2 g/100 g) and RF4 enriched flours (RS: 25 g/100 g), RS4 enriched composite flour decreased total cholesterol by 7.2%, and the low-density lipoprotein by 5.5% in human subjects (male and female) with metabolic syndrome. Thus, the authors suggested that adding RS4 to daily regular diets can improve dyslipidemia and prevent the risk of metabolic syndrome and associated cardiovascular disorders (CVDs). This encourages the use of these novel ingredients and starches for harnessing therapeutic benefits. 
