# Influence Maximization in Social Networks: A Survey

CorpusID: 261682643 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s30) Adaptive IM
(p30.0) Existing IM problem utilizes a diffusion model as an input to describe how information is propagated through a network where the influence probability is known. In addition, the seed set needs to be determined before the influence propagation process. Unfortunately, the basic diffusion model and its parameters are difficult to obtain in practical applications. Therefore, if the selection of seed nodes is entirely driven by a diffusion model and influence probability distribution, this may lead to a serious overestimation of the actual spread of the selected seed nodes. To address this problem, Adaptive Influence Maximization (AIM) problem was proposed. Hereby adaptive means that the seed candidate can be selected in multiple rounds during the propagation of influence. An AIM algorithm will be able to observe the propagation results of the preceding round and use this knowledge to select the candidate seeds for the next round.

(p30.1) Formally, this problem is defined as:

(p30.2) Definition 6.1. Given a social network = ( , ), integer , the adaptive influence maximization (AIM) problem aims to select nodes as the seed set ( ⊆ ) through an adaptive policy * , such that:

(p30.3) where is the realization of the influence graph (true world), ( , ) represents the seed nodes that have been selected following policy under realization .

(p30.4) Depending on whether the information diffusion model is known or not, existing AIM solutions can be categorized into two groups: Rows 1-7 of Table 3 (with known diffusion model); Rows 8-13 of Table 3 (diffusion model unknown).

(p30.5) We shall elaborate on both types in turn.

(p30.6) 6.8.1 Adaptive IM with Known Information Diffusion Model. Golovin et al. [48] is the first to extend the definition of submodularity and monotonicity to the adaptive setting. In this setting, a batch of nodes is seeded at different time intervals. When a batch is seeded, it eventually spreads according to the classical IC model. Then the algorithm will select the next batch of seeds based on the previously observed cascade. They proved that if the objective function satisfies that the marginal gain of each element for each possible realization does not increase along with the size of the group, it is adaptively monotone and submodular. They assume an edge level feedback mechanism under the IC model and show that the expected spread is adaptively monotone and submodular. Consequently, a hill-climbing strategy guarantees an approximation ratio. The challenges in this problem setting are how many seeds should be selected for each batch and how long should it wait between successive seeds. If the waiting time is long enough, selecting one seed at a time and waiting for the diffusion to complete before the next selection should result in maximum propagation [48].
