# The comparative pathology of severe acute respiratory syndrome and avian influenza A subtype H5N1-a review

CorpusID: 34320905 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f6158fddb2b1d9ab4bcb748a3539d2280e380712)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Discussion
(p5.0) Both SARS and H5N1 share similar pathology and pathogenesis. Pneumocytes are the primary target of the infection. The extensive pneumocyte destruction and the inflammatory and immune reaction elicited by the viruses cause diffuse alveolar damage. The activation of the cytokines is part of the immune reaction to eradicate the virus. The systemic cytokine activation results in reactive hemophagocytic syndrome in the lymphoreticular system and possibly also mediates other organ damage such as the skeletal muscle fiber necrosis. The lymphoid depletion in the spleen and lymph node in fatal cases may be due to combination of lymphoid necrosis and apoptosis and exhaustion of lymphoid proliferation in response to the cytokine overdrive. The acute tubular necrosis is likely to be the consequence of systemic hypoxia and shock rather than direct invasion of the viruses.

(p5.1) Compared with H5N1, SARS appears to show a less fulminant progression of the DAD. Features of acute DAD are often seen in combination with reparative phase in different parts of the lung. In contrast, H5N1 shows more fulminant and rapidly progressive DAD. This is in keeping with the clinical observations. The development of acute respiratory distress syndrome in SARS is generally in the second week of the illness (first peak on day 11) [32], whereas that for H5N1 is at the end of the first week (median time, day 6) [30]. On histology, DAD shows common pathologic features and distinction of the etiologic agent is not possible. Furthermore, there is difficulty in confirming or excluding SARS in a lung biopsy in the early stage of disease because of its focal involvement and the nonspecific changes. The demonstration of SARS-CoV by immunohistochemistry or in situ hybridization in infected cells would be helpful. The presence of atypical multinucleated pneumocytes and multinucleated histiocytes is characteristic of SARS, and these cells are inconspicuous in H5N1. However, such changes are nonspecific because other viral infection such as respiratory syncytial virus and measles may also produce giant cells. Based on the pathologic description and figures in the published reports, the organizing phase of SARS appears quite fibrocellular and intra-alveolar with a BOOP-like pattern. This may explain the empirical success of high-dose corticosteroid in SARS because BOOP is known to respond to corticosteroid. However, in one case treated by high-dose corticosteroid studied by the authors, BOOP still occurred in a lesser extent. For H5N1, the pathologic data are limited. Based on the observation by the authors, the acute DAD appears more necrotizing and hemorrhagic. The alveolar destruction causes foci of fibrosis without pneumocytic regeneration. The organizing phase is also marked by interstitial fibrosis of a hyaline and paucicellular form without BOOP-like pattern.
