# Molecular Sciences An Overview on the Clinical Development of Tau-Based Therapeutics

CorpusID: 4811601 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2182764f0f25d4d668f7c7cd66acd86ea0e8eced](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2182764f0f25d4d668f7c7cd66acd86ea0e8eced)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Targeting Other Tau Post-Translational Modifications
(p2.0) Apart from phosphorylation, tau is also extensively post-translationally modified by lysine acetylation, which leads to impaired tau function and promotes pathological aggregation, which in turn has prompted proposing the use of tau acetylation inhibitors as a potential therapeutic strategy for AD and other tauopathies [6]. Thus, salsalate-a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) approved by the FDA to treat arthritis and other conditions that cause swelling-has been shown to inhibit acetyltransferase p300-induced tau acetylation and improve tau-mediated behavioral impairments and neurodegeneration in an frontotemporal dementia (FTD) mouse model [34]. This compound is about to complete a 6-month multicenter, open label, pilot futility phase I clinical trial to assess the safety, tolerability, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary efficacy of orally administered salsalate in 10 patients with PSP (NCT02422485). More recently, a phase 1b clinical trial has been launched with the aim of evaluating its safety and tolerability in patients with prodromal to mild AD (NCT03277573). Forty participants will be randomized to receive either a placebo or salsalate twice daily for 1 year. Outcomes include changes in cerebrospìnal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, brain MRI, and cognitive function. The study is expected to be completed by the end of 2018.

(p2.1) Another tau post-translational mod ification is glycosylation since tau has been shown to be O-GlcNAc-modified in human brain. In particular, the carbohydrate N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) can form β-glycosidic O-links with serine and threonine residues on tau. This reversible process is regulated by two main enzymes: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) inserts O-GlcNAc, while O-GlcNAcase (OGA) eliminates this modification from proteins. Since in certain cases GlcNAc may affect phosphorylation and aggregation of tau protein [35], it has been hypothesized that increasing tau O-GlcNAc could be a sensible strategy to hamper neurodegeneration brought by pathological tau. In fact, OGA modulators have been developed as a disease-modifying strategy for tauopathies.
