# Open Access A genome-wide transcriptional activity survey of rice transposable element-related genes

CorpusID: 52828534 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f87c08ae8201b616738180c26569496701fbd5a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f87c08ae8201b616738180c26569496701fbd5a3)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s14) Transcription profiles of TE-related genes in rice
(p14.0) TEs account for an overwhelming proportion of plant genomes. To ensure the viability of their host and hence their own survival, the transposition of TEs should be tightly controlled [17]. Transcribed autonomous TEs among TE-related genes have the potential to self-activate or activate transcrip-tion of related nonautonomous TEs. Transcriptional regulation is therefore one major control step used by plants, but it remains insufficiently understood. The recently available rice genome sequence has enabled us to characterize TErelated gene transcription on a genome-wide scale.
## (s47) Transcription profiles of TE-related genes in rice
(p47.0) TEs account for an overwhelming proportion of plant genomes. To ensure the viability of their host and hence their own survival, the transposition of TEs should be tightly controlled [17]. Transcribed autonomous TEs among TE-related genes have the potential to self-activate or activate transcrip-tion of related nonautonomous TEs. Transcriptional regulation is therefore one major control step used by plants, but it remains insufficiently understood. The recently available rice genome sequence has enabled us to characterize TErelated gene transcription on a genome-wide scale.
