# Knowledge translation for realist reviews: a participatory approach for a review on scaling up complex interventions

CorpusID: 53034157 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93cd6e187318d96f994069a7982dd10ea7efdbae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/93cd6e187318d96f994069a7982dd10ea7efdbae)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s9) Review of the literature
(p9.0) Of the four papers reviewed in-depth, two were realist reviews, one was a protocol for a realist review, and another focussed on describing rapid realist reviews (i.e. a realist approach to knowledge synthesis that emphasises producing a time-sensitive product responsive to policy-makers' information needs). Specific types of KT activities identified in the papers included healthcare planning frameworks and tools to support decisionmakers [40,41], publications for academic and lay audiences [41], conference presentations [41], tailored workshops and presentations for knowledge users (e.g. policy-makers) [41,42], and knowledge brokering to understand policy and academic perspectives and develop recommendations that are sensitive to local contexts [43]. Consistent with realist methodology, each paper described knowledge user engagement throughout the review process. The included papers articulated the aim of the KT strategy in different ways. Two papers indicated that their KT efforts would help them achieve goals related to the purpose of the research [41,43]. One paper was more specific in how their findings would be used, stating that findings would inform the development of a new intervention [40]. The methodological paper identified several practical considerations for enabling KT for realist reviews such as engaging knowledge users with demanding time constraints (e.g. agency or government staff) in a reference group rather than an active member of the synthesis team [43]. Data extraction from the four papers is available in Additional file 1.
## (s12) Discussion
(p12.0) We described development of a KT strategy for a realist review on scaling up complex public health interventions. Our approach to developing the strategy, as well as the strategy itself, was an extension of the original study and emerged as the study team learned about the knowledge needs and learning preferences of different knowledge user groups. The process included three main activities, namely an international meeting, a literature review and consultations with knowledge users. Insight gained from each of these activities culminated into a KT strategy consisting of a planning framework to support development of tailored KT activities that meet the needs of different knowledge user groups. The experience we document and share through this paper represents a practical contribution to the field of KT. Most notably, our experience highlights the importance of making KT explicit and the value of participatory approaches in KT planning. This paper also provides guidance about how to tailor findings from realist reviews to specific knowledge users.

(p12.1) Not necessarily unique to realist reviews, our experience demonstrates the importance of making KT planning tasks explicit from the outset, while maintaining openness to adapting plans [44]. Early discussions about KT helped elicit rich perspectives from both researchers and knowledge users about the KT strategy. As the review progressed and findings emerged, the KT strategy became formalised. It helped to have distinct steps that drew in practical experience (e.g. international meeting, consultations with knowledge users), and information from the KT literature. Our experience is consistent with other literature that found integrating and translating the insights from specific planning steps helped produce practical output [40][41][42][43] such as the KT planning framework and its application in the table of tailored KT products and activities.

(p12.2) The value of participatory approaches in KT planning is also apparent from our experience. This insight emerged through a series of interactions with knowledge users, throughout the completion of the realist review Using a variety of KT activities supports the uptake of research findings across the public health system.
