# Persuasive Natural Language Generation -A Literature Review

CorpusID: 231603122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ac35f68ef4290d74551bafdfb09a4ea0983940](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e9ac35f68ef4290d74551bafdfb09a4ea0983940)

Fields: Linguistics, Business, Computer Science

## (s2) Method
### Question: What is the focus and methodology of the literature review on persuasion and NLG?

#Reference=7 ['b75', 'b75', 'b64', 'b55', 'b51', 'b66', 'b43']

(p2.1) The first step is the definition of the review scope of this literature review. It is summarized in Figure 1 (categories applicable to this review on Persuasion and NLG research are highlighted) which is based on the taxonomy adapted by vom Brocke et al. (2009).  Brocke et al. 2009) This literature review focuses on outcomes of applied research in the domains of Persuasion and Natural Language Generation. The goal is to integrate findings with respect to five categories concluded from the business problem of persuading individuals through textual exchange (DeMers 2016). These categories were chosen as they address the psychological and technical aspects of persuasion and are a prerequisite to creating a persuasive NLG artificial intelligence. We selected this field because the artificial generation of persuasion through NLG has, as this literature review reveals, not been addressed in seminal articles following our structured research approach. Persuasion is already commonly studied in psychology (Quirk et al. 1985, Marwell & Schmitt 1967. Also, numerous studies in natural language processing focus on identifying and classifying persuasion in an automated way (Li et al. 2020, Rocklage et al. 2018, Iyer & Sycara 2019). This paper is organized along a conceptual structure. We did not take a particular perspective to provide a neutral representation of the results. As an audience of this review specialized scholars having an interest in the field of persuasion and the artificial generation of it were chosen. For coverage, our literature review can be categorized as representative as our research has been limited to certain journals, but does not consider the totality of the literature. The second step is conceptualization of the topic .

## (s5) Benevolence
### Question: What are the determinants of linguistic appropriacy in persuasive NLG AI?

#Reference=6 ['b86', None, 'b62', 'b64', 'b8', 'b64']

(p5.1) This category subsumes fourteen determinants that facilitate an individual's stylome and aim at matching this with linguistic appropriacy. Such a stylome can be quantified and identified linguistically (Zarouali et al. 2020). Aforementioned Language Expectation Theory identifies written or spoken language as a rule-based system through which persuadees develop expectations (Burgoon & Miller 1985). The reason for profiling the stylome of an individual is to match these expectations (Park et al. 2015). Once implemented, a persuasive NLG AI can achieve congruence between a persuasive message and the persuadee, and thus generate persuasiveness. Table 2 introduces fourteen determinants of linguistic appropriacy in alphabetical order, provides a synopsis (i.e., brief summary, column two), an example for each determinant (column three), and the corresponding academic citation (in column four).  Quirk et al. 1985, Brewer 1980 Evidence Words Tendency to approve or disapprove something. Words such as: according to. Quirk et al. 1985 Familiarity Degree of familiarity of a word or how easily a word can be recognized by an adult. Word Frequency Indication of how often used words occur in a given language.

## (s10) Tools & Datasets
### Question: What tools and datasets are used for persuasion analysis in NLP studies?

#Reference=3 ['b30', None, 'b43']

(p10.0) In the analyzed academic studies, we found that the authors use different datasets and tools to computationally process data for technical analyses of persuasion in NLP or NLG (e.g., in Guerini et al 2008a/b, Li et al. 2020, Iyer/Sycara 2019. Logically, the implementation of a persuasive NLG AI also depends on a variety of relevant tools and datasets which we identified and consolidated in Table 6. This table classifies our findings in types which are either tool or datasets (column one). We identified six tools and seventeen persuasion or message datasets. A software tool that is used in the context of persuasion and NLP, and datasets were chosen if they were used in the context of persuasion, textual exchange/debate and NLP. We further added a synopsis (column three) explaining every tool and Authority Appealing or making reference to higher authority or experts to persuade.

