# Multimodal Learning with Transformers: A Survey

CorpusID: 249642175 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/622428f5122ad12a40229e1768ecb929fd747ee7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/622428f5122ad12a40229e1768ecb929fd747ee7)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s1) Related Surveys
### Question: What distinguishes this survey on multimodal learning and Transformers from others?

#Reference=24 ['b0', 'b10', 'b11', 'b0', 'b0', 'b10', 'b11', 'b47', 'b48', 'b49', 'b50', 'b51', 'b52', 'b53', 'b54', 'b55', 'b56', 'b50', 'b52', 'b53', 'b54', 'b56', 'b57', 'b58']

(p1.0) We relate this paper to existing surveys of the two specific dimensions MML and Transformers. There exist a few MML surveys [1], [11], [12]. In particular, [1] proposed a structured, acknowledged taxonomy by five challenges, which we also adopt as part of our structure. Unlike [1], [11], and [12], which review general machine learning models, we instead focus on Transformer architectures and their self-attention mechanisms. Several surveys dedicated to Transformers have been recently introduced, with a range of emphases including general Transformers [48], efficient designs [49], visualization [50], computer vision tasks [51], [52], [53], [54], medical imaging [55], video tasks [56], and vision language pretraining [57]. While [51], [53], [54], [55] consider MML, their reviews are somewhat limited in the scope, taxonomy, and coverage. To our knowledge, only a few surveys on video-language pretraining (VLP) [57], [58], [59] are relevant to MML. However, VLP is only a subdomain of MML. In this survey, we focus solely on the intersection of multimodal learning and Transformers.

## (s3) Multimodal Learning (MML)
### Question: Why is multimodal machine learning (MML) considered crucial in understanding human societies?

#Reference=12 ['b0', 'b59', 'b60', 'b61', 'b62', 'b63', 'b64', 'b65', 'b66', 'b67', 'b68', 'b69']

(p3.0) MML [1], [60], [61] has been an important research area in recent decades; an early multimodal application -audiovisual speech recognition was studied in 1980s [62]. MML is key to human societies. The world we humans live in is a multimodal environment, thus both our observations and behaviours are multimodal [63]. For instance, an AI navigation robot needs multimodal sensors to perceive the real-world environment [64], [65], [66], e.g., camera, LiDAR, radar, ultrasonic, GNSS, HD Map, odometer. Furthermore, human behaviours, emotions, events, actions, and humour are multimodal, thus various human-centred MML tasks are widely studied, including multimodal emotion recognition [67], multimodal event representation [68], understanding multimodal humor [69], face-body-voice based video person-clustering [70], etc.

## (s4) Transformers: a Brief History and Milestones
### Question: What are the applications and advancements of Vision Transformer in computer vision and multimodal tasks?

#Reference=29 ['b4', 'b91', 'b92', 'b93', 'b94', 'b92', 'b95', 'b96', 'b97', 'b98', 'b99', 'b100', 'b6', 'b101', 'b102', 'b103', 'b104', 'b105', 'b106', 'b107', 'b108', 'b109', 'b110', 'b111', 'b112', 'b113', 'b114', 'b115', 'b116']

(p4.2) Vision Transformer (ViT) [5] is a seminal work that contributes an end-to-end solution by applying the encoder of Transformer to images. Both ViT and its variants have been widely applied to various computer vision tasks, including low-level tasks [92], recognition [93], detection [94], segmentation [95], etc, and also work well for both supervised [93] and self-supervised [96], [97], [98] visual learning. Moreover, some recently-released works provide further theoretical understanding for ViT, e.g., its internal representation robustness [99], the continuous behaviour of its latent representation propagation [100], [101]. Motivated by the great success of Transformer, VideoBERT [7] is a breakthrough work that is the first work to extend Transformer to the multimodal tasks. VideoBERT demonstrates the great potential of Transformer in multimodal context. Following VideoBERT, a lot of Transformer based multimodal pretraining models (e.g., ViLBERT [102], LXMERT [103], VisualBERT [104], VL-BERT [105], UNITER [106], CBT [107], Unicoder-VL [108], B2T2 [109], VLP [110], 12-in-1 [111], Oscar [112], Pixel-BERT [113], ActBERT [114], ImageBERT [115], HERO [116], UniVL [117]) have become research topics of increasing interest in the field of machine learning.

## (s10) Discussion How to understand position embedding to
### Question: How do position embeddings enhance Transformers' understanding of data structures?

#Reference=5 ['b163', 'b162', 'b162', 'b164', 'b165']

(p10.0) Transformers is an open problem. It can be understood as a kind of implicit coordinate basis of feature space, to provide temporal or spatial information to the Transformer. For cloud point [164] and sketch drawing stroke [163], their token element is already a coordinate, meaning that position embedding is optional, not necessary. Furthermore, position embedding can be regarded as a kind of general additional information. In other words, from a mathematical point of view, any additional information can be added, such as detail of the manner of position embedding, e.g., the pen state of sketch drawing stroke [163], cameras and viewpoints in surveillance [165]. There is a comprehensive survey [166] discussing the position information in Transformers. For both sentence structures (sequential) and general graph structures (sparse, arbitrary, and irregular), position embeddings help Transformers to learn or encode the underlying structures. Considered from the mathematical perspective of self-attention, i.e., scaled dot-product attention, attentions are invariant to the positions of words (in text) or nodes (in graphs), if position embedding information is missing. Thus, in most cases, position embedding is necessary for Transformers.

## (s18) Tokenization and Embedding Processing
### Question: How do users prepare multimodal inputs for Transformers?

#Reference=7 ['b4', 'b180', 'b6', 'b106', 'b116', 'b185', 'b186']

(p18.0) Given an input from an arbitrary modality, users only need to perform two main steps, (1) tokenize the input, and (2) select an embedding space to represent the tokens, before inputting the data into Transformers. In practice, both the tokenizing input and selecting embedding for the token are vital for Transformers but highly flexible, with many alternatives. For instance, given an image, the solution of tokenizing and embedding is not unique. Users can choose or design tokenization at multiple granularity levels -coarse-grained vs. fine-grained. e.g., use ROIs (obtained by an object detector) and CNN features as tokens and token embeddings [102], use patches and linear projection as tokens and token embeddings [5], or use graph node (obtained by object detector and graph generator) and GNN features as tokens and token embeddings [181]. Given a tokenization plan, the subsequent embedding approaches can be diverse. For example, for video input, a common tokenization is to treat the non-overlapping windows (down-sampled) over the video as tokens, and their embeddings can then be extracted by various 3D CNNs, e.g., VideoBERT [7], CBT [107], and UniVL [117] use S3D [186], ActBERT uses ResNet-3D [187]. Table 1 summarizes some common practices of multimodal inputs for Transformers, including RGB, video, audio/speech/music, text, graph, etc.

### Question: How are different modalities viewed as graphs in geometric topology?

#Reference=8 ['b77', 'b162', 'b43', 'b43', 'b17', 'b24', 'b23', 'b183']

(p18.1) Discussion When considered from the perspective of geometric topology, each of the modalities listed in Table 1 can be regarded as a graph. An RGB image is essentially a neat grid graph in the pixel space. Both video and audio are clip/segment based graphs over a complex space involving temporal and semantic patterns. Both 2D and 3D drawing sketches [78], [163] are a kind of sparse graph if we consider their key points along the drawing strokes. Similar to sketches, the human pose also is a kind of graph. 3D point cloud is a graph in which each coordinate is a node. Other abstract modalities also can be interpreted as graphs, e.g., source code [44], data flow of source code [44], table [18], SQL database schema [25], text question graph [24], and electronic health records (EHRs) [184].

## (s21) Self-Attention Definitions Streams Formulations Complexities References
### Question: How does VideoBERT encode global multimodal context in its architecture?

#Reference=3 ['b6', 'b187', 'b136']

(p21.12) Thus, all the multimodal token positions can be attended as a whole sequence, such that the positions of each modality can be encoded well by conditioning the context of other modalities. VideoBERT [7] is the one of the first multimodal Transformer works, where video and text are fused via early concatenation that can encode the global multimodal context well [188]. However, the longer sequence after concatenation will increase computational complexity. Early concatenation is also termed "all-attention" or "Co-Transformer" [137].

## (s29) Pretext Tasks
### Question: What are common pretext tasks in Transformer based multimodal pretraining?

#Reference=22 ['b136', 'b136', 'b189', 'b114', 'b187', 'b203', 'b105', 'b115', 'b115', 'b115', 'b3', 'b101', 'b189', 'b190', 'b187', 'b198', 'b116', 'b116', 'b205', 'b206', 'b56', 'b57']

(p29.0) In Transformer based multimodal pretraining, the pretraining tasks/objectives are also termed pretext tasks/objectives. To date, various pretext tasks have been studied, e.g., masked language modelling (MLM) [137], masked image region prediction/classification (also termed masked object classification (MOC)) [137], [190], masked region regression (MRR) [115], visual-linguistic matching (VLM) (e.g., image-text matching (ITM) [188], image text matching (ITM), phrase-region alignment (PRA) [204], word-region alignment (WRA) [106], video-subtitle matching (VSM) [116]), masked frame modelling (MFM) [116], frame order modelling (FOM) [116], next sentence prediction (NSP) [4], [102], [190], masked sentence generation (MSG) [191], masked group modelling (MGM) [188], prefix language modelling (PrefixLM) [199], video conditioned masked language model [117], text conditioned masked frame model [117], visual translation language modelling (VTLM) [206], and image-conditioned masked language modelling (also termed image-attended masked language modelling) [207]. These down-stream task -agnostic pretext pretraining is optional, and the down-stream task objectives can be trained directly, which will be discussed in Section 4.1.2. Table 3 provides the common and representative pretext tasks for Transformer based multimodal pretraining. In practice, pretext tasks can be combined, and some representative cases are summarized in Table 3 of [57], Table 2 of [58].

## (s30) Discussion
### Question: What are the limitations of multimodal pretraining Transformer methods in generative tasks?

#Reference=5 ['b207', 'b207', 'b6', 'b106', 'b136']

(p30.0) In spite of the recent advances, multimodal pretraining Transformer methods still have some obvious bottlenecks. For instance, as discussed by [208] in VLP field, while the BERT-style cross-modal pretraining models produce excellent results on various down-stream visionlanguage tasks, they fail to be applied to generative tasks directly. As discussed in [208], both VideoBERT [7] and CBT [107] have to train a separate video-to-text decoder for video captioning. This is a significant gap between the pretraining models designed for discriminative and generative tasks, as the main reason is discriminative task oriented pretraining models do not involve the decoders of Transformer. Therefore, how to design more unified pipelines that can work for both discriminative and generative down-stream tasks is also an open problem to be solved. Again for instance, common multimodal pretraining models often underperform for fine-grained/instance-level tasks as discussed by [137].

### Question: What strategies improve multimodal pretraining Transformers' performance, and what challenges do they present?

#Reference=5 ['b110', 'b136', 'b209', 'b198', 'b203']

(p30.2) Discussion How to boost the performance for multimodal pretraining Transformers is an open problem. Some practices demonstrate that multi-task training (by adding auxiliary loss) [111], [137] and adversarial training [210] improve multimodal pretraining Transformers to further boost the performance. Meanwhile, overly compound pretraining objectives potentially upgrade the challenge of balancing among different loss terms, thus complicate the training optimization [199]. Moreover, the difficulty of the pretexts is also worth discussing. In general, if aim to learn more explicit object concepts, more complex pretext losses will be used [204]. However, for pretexts, whether more complexity is better remains a question.

## (s35) Fusion
### Question: How do MML Transformers fuse information across different modalities?

#Reference=7 ['b6', 'b103', 'b107', 'b174', 'b246', 'b247', 'b248']

(p35.0) In general, MML Transformers fuse information across multiple modalities primarily at three levels: input (i.e., early fusion), intermediate representation (i.e., middle fusion), and prediction (i.e., late fusion). Common early fusion based MML Transformer models [7], [104], [108] are also known as one-stream architecture, allowing the adoption of the merits of BERT due to minimal architectural modification. The main difference between these one-stream models is the usage of problem-specific modalities with variant masking techniques. With attention operation, a noticeable fusion scheme is introduced based on a notion of bottleneck tokens [175]. It applies for both early and middle fusion by simply choosing to-be-fused layers. We note that the simple prediction-based late fusion [247], [248] is less adopted in MML Transformers. This makes sense considering the motivations of learning stronger multimodal contextual representations and great advance of computing power. For enhancing and interpreting the fusion of MML, probing the interaction and measuring the fusion between modalities [249] would be an interesting direction to explore.

## (s36) Alignment
### Question: How do contrastive learning models facilitate zero-shot transfer in multimodal learning tasks?

#Reference=20 ['b119', 'b262', 'b263', 'b264', 'b265', 'b266', 'b267', 'b268', 'b102', 'b105', 'b111', 'b262', 'b221', 'b262', 'b112', 'b202', 'b269', 'b191', 'b270', 'b262']

(p36.1) A representative practice is to map two modalities into a common representation space with contrastive learning over paired samples. The models based on this idea are often enormous in size and expensive to optimize from millions or billions of training data. Consequently, successive works mostly exploit pretrained models for tackling various downstream tasks [120], [263], [264], [265], [266]. These alignment models have the ability of zero-shot transfer particularly for image classification via prompt engineering [267]. This novel perspective is mind-blowing, given that image classification is conventionally regarded as a unimodal learning problem and zero-shot classification remains an unsolved challenge despite extensive research [268]. This has been studied for more challenging and fine-grained tasks (e.g., object detection [269], visual question answering [103], [106], [112], [263], and instance retrieval [222], [263]) by imposing region (semantic parts such as objects) level alignment. Finegrained alignment will however incur more computational costs from explicit region detection and how to eliminate this whilst keeping the region-level learning capability becomes a challenge. Several ideas introduced recently include random sampling [113], learning concept dictionary [203], uniform masking [270], patch projection [192], joint learning of a region detector [271], and representation aligning before mask prediction [263].

## (s37) Transferability
### Question: What are the challenges and solutions in transferring knowledge across different multimodal tasks?

#Reference=9 ['b207', 'b273', 'b273', 'b274', 'b275', 'b207', 'b6', 'b106', 'b221']

(p37.4) Cross-task gap is another major obstacle to transfer [208], [274], due to the different reasoning and input-output workflows, e.g., how to use multimodal datasets to finetune the language pretrained model is difficult [274]. In real applications, multimodal pretrained Transformers sometimes need to handle the uni-modal data at inference stage due to the issue of missing modalities. One solution is using knowledge distillation, e.g., distilling from multimodal to uni-modal attention in Transformers [275], distilling from multiple uni-modal Transformer teachers to a shared Transformer encoder [276]. There is a huge gap across discriminative and generative multimodal tasks. As discussed in [208], the BERT-like encoder-only multimodal Transformers (e.g., VideoBERT [7], CBT [107]) need separately to train decoders for generation tasks. This could create a pretrain-finetune discrepancy detrimental to the generality. Recently, more and more attempts study this issue further, e.g., GilBERT [222] is a generative VLP models for a discriminative task, i.e., image-text retrieval.

## (s41) Interpretability
### Question: How do Transformers excel in multimodal learning according to recent studies?

#Reference=14 ['b105', 'b298', 'b299', 'b300', 'b301', 'b302', 'b303', 'b304', 'b305', 'b298', 'b105', 'b102', 'b300', 'b105']

(p41.0) Why and how Transformers perform so well in multimodal learning has been investigated [106], [299], [300], [301], [302], [303], [304], [305], [306]. These attempts mainly use probing task and ablation study. Cao et al. [299] design a set of probing tasks on UNITER [106] and LXMERT [103], to evaluate what patterns are learned in pretraining. Hendricks et al. [301] probe the image-language Transformers by fine-grained image-sentence pairs, and find that verb understanding is harder than subject or object understanding. Chen et al. [106] examine the optimal combination of pretraining tasks via ablation study, to compare how different pretexts contribute to the Transformers. Despite these attempts, the interpretability of multimodal Transformers is still under-studied to date.

## (s42) DISCUSSION AND OUTLOOK
### Question: What are the challenges in designing universal MML models for diverse tasks?

#Reference=20 ['b114', 'b298', 'b8', 'b262', 'b8', 'b198', 'b262', 'b136', 'b141', 'b211', 'b248', 'b259', 'b260', 'b264', 'b265', 'b2', 'b306', 'b307', 'b308', 'b248']

(p42.0) Designing the universal MML models to excel across all the unimodal and multimodal down-stream tasks with different characteristics simultaneously [115], [299] is a non-trivial challenge. For instance, two-stream architectures [9], [263] are typically preferred over one-stream ones for cross-modal retrieval-like tasks in efficiency, since the representation of each modality can be pre-computed beforehand and reused repeatedly. That being said, how to design task-agnostic MML architectures is still an open challenge, in addition to other design choices such as pretext and objective loss functions. Furthermore, a clear gap remains between the state-of-the-art and this ultimate goal. In general, existing multimodal Transformer models [9], [199], [263] are superior only for specific MML tasks, as they are designed specifically for only a subset of specific tasks [137], [142], [212], [249], [260], [261], [265], [266]. Encouragingly, several recent studies towards universal modality learning in terms of modality-agnostic network design [3] and more task-generic architecture design [307], [308], [309] have been introduced, and it is hoped this will spark further investigation. To that end, instead of exhaustively exploring the vast model design space, seeking in-depth understanding and interpretation of a MML model's behaviour might be insightful for superior algorithm design, even though the interactions and synergy across different modalities are intrinsically complex and even potentially inconsistent over tasks [249].

### Question: What is critical for achieving fine-grained MML and what challenges does it face?

#Reference=12 ['b102', 'b103', 'b104', 'b105', 'b111', 'b203', 'b309', 'b206', 'b112', 'b202', 'b270', 'b262']

(p42.1) For more fine-grained MML, it is widely acknowledged that discovering the latent semantic alignments across modalities is critical. An intuitive strategy is to leverage semantic parts (e.g., objects) pre-extracted by an off-the-shelf detector for MML [103], [104], [105], [106], [112], [204], [310]. This, however, is not only complex and error-prone, but computationally costly [207]. Several remedies introduced recently include random sampling [113], learning concept dictionary [203], jointly learning a region detector [271], and representation aligning before mask prediction [263]. Given the scale of MML training data, exploring this direction needs exhaustive computational costs, and it is supposed that industrial research teams with rich resources are more likely to afford. Ideally, a favourable MML method would leave fine-grained semantic alignment across modalities to emerge on its own, which is worthy of careful investigation in the future.

