# A review of total energy-momenta in GR with a positive cosmological constant *

CorpusID: 119533555 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416)

Fields: Physics

## (s11) Fields on de Sitter background
Number of References: 7

(p11.0) In Yang-Mills theory on the de Sitter background the meaning of the vanishing of the magnetic field strength on I + , i.e. the meaning of the analog of the condition of the intrinsic conformal flatness of I + , is investigated in [21]. It is shown that this condition removes half the degrees of freedom of the Yang-Mills field; and all the ten de Sitter fluxes, built from the energy-momentum tensor and the ten conformal Killing fields of I + , vanish. A systematic investigation of the Maxwell fields on and of the linear gravitational perturbation of the (steady state part of the) de Sitter spacetime are given in [50]. The covariant phase space method is used to obtain a Hamiltonian for them, in which the 'time translation' is a Killing field which is future pointing timelike only in the intersection of the chronological past of the point (0, 0, 0) of I + and the steady state universe, but spacelike on the interior of the rest of the steady state universe. The resulting energy flux through I + can be negative and arbitrarily large. The requirement of the vanishing of the magnetic field strength, and of the magnetic part of the rescaled Weyl curvature on I + , removes half the degrees of freedom of the Maxwell and linear gravitational perturbations, respectively, and yields vanishing energy flux through I + [50]. Here the 'energy' is defined by using the Killing field (2.2). For a single, isolated source located at the origin, and in the absence of incoming gravitational waves through the null boundary of the steady state part of the de Sitter spacetime, which is the physical situation of principal interest in the body of work here referred to, this energy is proven to be positive. Under the same assumptions, and following a tour de force of calculation, in [51] a generalisation of the Einstein quadrupole formula is derived and discussed. The summary of these results is given in [52,53]. For the calculation of the Penrose mass at a cut of I + in the linearized theory, see [47] and subsection 4.1 below.
## (s12) The general definition of asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) The geometric definition of asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes is based on the idea of conformal compactifiability of the physical spacetime by attaching a boundary hypersurface to it [15]. Explicitly, it is assumed that there is a manifoldM with non-empty boundary ∂M, a Lorentzian metricg ab onM and a smooth function Ω :M → [0, ∞) such that (1) can be extended toM as a smooth field. A systematic investigation of the asymptotic structure of spacetimes satisfying these conditions is given in [32,21]. In particular, the asymptotic form of spacetime metric, the Newman-Penrose spin coefficients, the various pieces of the curvature and the energymomentum tensor, the geometry of asymptotically hyperboloidal hypersurfaces, etc; and also the asymptotic field equations for them are determined. The conformal boundary ∂M is necessarily spacelike, so it consists of the future and past boundary, I + and I − , respectively. (In what follows, we concentrate only on I + . In a cosmological setting I − will usually not be present, being instead replaced by an initial singularity.) The trace-free part of its extrinsic curvature is vanishing and, in an appropriate conformal gauge, its trace can be made zero; but its intrinsic conformal geometry is still completely unrestricted. Therefore, such a general asymptotically de Sitter spacetime cannot admit any of the usual ten de Sitter Killing fields even asymptotically, otherwise they would extend to conformal Killing fields on I + . Thus, as the term is usually used, asymptotically de Sitter spacetimes are not the spacetimes that are asymptotic to de Sitter spacetime. The latter form a very special subset of the former.

(p12.1) In fact, I + admits ten linearly independent conformal Killing vectors precisely when its intrinsic geometry is conformally flat; which is equivalent to the vanishing of the magnetic part of the rescaled Weyl tensor on I + . This condition appears to be unreasonably strong: investigations of linear gravitational perturbations of the de Sitter background reveal that this condition would remove half the gravitational degrees of freedom [21,50] (see subsection 2.2.1 above) and in the full (nonlinear) theory this is confirmed. The existence of a large number of spacetimes with positive Λ admitting a general future conformal boundary has been demonstrated by Friedrich [54]. He shows that the free data for the Einstein equations consist of a pair of symmetric tensors (h ab , E ab ) with h ab the Riemannian metric of I + and E ab the electric part of the rescaled Weyl tensor at I + , subject to
## (s15) A spinorial expression of Kastor and Traschen
Number of References: 7

(p15.0) Using the original Dirac spinor form of the Nester-Witten form [26,25], the Witten-type energy positivity proof of [30], originally given for Λ < 0, has been successfully adapted to the Λ > 0 case and yielded a positivity argument by Kastor and Traschen in [49] (see also [57]). Here, the energy-momentum tensor of the matter fields is assumed to satisfy the dominant energy condition, and, as the boundary condition for the (modified) Witten equation, the Dirac spinor constituents Ψ of the conformal Killing vectors of the background de Sitter spacetime are used.

(p15.1) A generalization C a of the conserved currentK b t ba of subsection 3.1, built from t ab , the 'perturbation' γ ab and an arbitrary vector field ξ a , is also given in [49]: this C a is ∇ a -divergence free, and if ξ a is chosen to be a Killing vector of the de Sitter background, then it reduces toK a t ab . Then, it is shown that the flux integral of C b on Σ with the conformal Killing vector ξ a determined by the Dirac spinor Ψ coincides with the spinorial construction above. Therefore, the present spinorial expression of these authors is a nontrivial generalization of the original construction in [35].
## (s16) Asymptotically-Schwarzschild/Kerr-de Sitter data: work of Chruściel and collaborators
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Chruściel with a range of collaborators has been investigating definitions of mass in a variety of space-times with Λ positive, negative or zero for many years. The investigations are typically motivated by adherence to a Hamiltonian approach to space-times, following the monograph [59], analysing Cauchy data to arrive at definitions of mass and momentum. In this subsection we review their work on asymptotically-Schwarzschild-de Sitter data and asymptotically-Kerr-de Sitter data. These are discussed in [60] and [61] respectively and these in turn rely on families of initial data for the Einstein equations shown to exist in [62] and [63] respectively. The Schwarzschild-de Sitter metric, sometimes called the Kottler solution, can be defined in space-time dimension n + 1 as
## (s19) Three Suggestions of Penrose
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) In [46] Penrose considered the problem of defining a cosmological total mass in the presence of a positive cosmological constant. He was motivated, at least in part, by his Conformal Cyclic Cosmology (or CCC) rather than by a consideration of isolated systems, which was the motivation of Ashtekar and colleagues considered above. Thus Penrose sought a definition at I + of one aeon which was suitable for carrying through to the next aeon. Interestingly, Penrose considered but rejected the idea of working in a Poincaré patch and using the Killing vector of the steady-state universe to define energy (section 3 of [46]) because galaxies beyond the cosmological event horizon, where this Killing vector is space-like, would be represented as having super-luminal velocities. This could be a problem in a cosmological setting but one that Ashtekar et. al. avoid by considering only isolated bodies.

(p19.1) Penrose makes three concrete suggestions: (1) To seek an expression motivated by the conserved currents that one constructs from a trace-free energy-momentum tensor and a conformal Killing vector of de Sitter space. In CCC one expects matter to become massless near I + , so that T ab will become trace-free, and in de Sitter space there do exist time-like conformal Killing vectors. This suggestion is not worked out in detail but the insight also underlay the earlier work of [49], [55] and [57].
## (s21) A general TBS-type spinorial expression
Number of References: 3

(p21.0) As noted above, a key property of the TBS energy in the asymptotically flat case is its positivity and rigidity. Since in the Λ = 0 and Λ < 0 cases the total energy-momenta could be recovered from a unified form based on the integral of the Nester-Witten form (1.2), and moreover the simplest energy positivity proof is arguably the one based on the use of 2-component spinors and Witten-type arguments [28,30], it seems natural to try to formulate the TBS energy-momentum in the presence of a positive Λ in this framework, too. This was done in [32]. 
## (s22) Characteristic data: the work of Chruściel-Ifsits
Number of References: 3

(p22.0) In [75] Chruściel and Ifsits define a mass from data for the Einstein equations given on an outgoing null hypersurface N , which could be the null cone of a point, in a conformallycompactifiable (n+1)-dimensional space-time. The main interest in [75] is with Λ > 0 but all values of Λ are allowed, and the method is to construct a Bondi coordinate system at N and solve for the space-time metric and connection at N in terms of free data, making assumptions about asymptotic decay rates, for example of any matter content, as required. The paper proposes a definition of mass from a consideration of the TBS mass defined for Λ = 0. The generalised definition is checked against the Λ = 0 case, for which a corresponding calculation was presented in [76], and, by consideration of a variety of examples, with the Λ < 0 case, which is fairly well understood.
