# Effects of Exergaming in People with Dementia: Results of a Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 13741618 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5671d40c236fcaaa4a88746879c8b840fed78d7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d5671d40c236fcaaa4a88746879c8b840fed78d7)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s9) Study selection
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) In Fig. 1, the selection process has been summarized according to the PRISMA flow chart [43]. The initial search strategy yielded 1,226 results from the selected databases, consisting of 209 records from PubMed, 353 from Embase.com, 67 from EBSCO/Cinahl, 148 from EBSCO/PsycINFO, 53 from Wiley/Cochrane Library, and 396 from the Web of Science Core Collection. After removal of duplicates, 748 records were screened based on title, abstract, and, if applicable, additional information. Disagreements about in-or exclusion of 41 studies were solved in a team of three authors. In this first stage, 734 records were excluded for the reasons presented in Fig. 1. An example of other reasons for exclusion is that the research participants were animals. The full text was retrieved of the remaining articles (n = 14) and of potentially interesting reviews (n = 57). The lists of references of this total of 71 articles were screened, but this did not lead to any records being added. Fourteen articles were read in full text, of which 11 were excluded. During data extraction, the authors of one study [49] were contacted to request the data and analysis of the subgroups with dementia which were not separately described in the article. The authors of the other studies were contacted about minor questions regarding drop out and locations of the assisted living facility and medical center, which were clarified [50,51].
## (s19) Limitations
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) One of the limitations of this systematic review is that only three studies met our inclusion criteria and that they had their own limitations. We used the original (unpublished) data from one of these studies to conduct additional analysis for the purpose of this review [49]. From the other two included studies the published results were used [50,51]. The search strategy of this review may also have some limitations, and perhaps relevant publications have been missed. For example, no grey literature was searched and some databases (i.e., Google Scholar) were not included. The included databases might have a delay in indexing the most recent publications and potentially relevant journals have not been searched manually. Furthermore, exergaming is a relatively new intervention, especially for people living with dementia. New journals in this area may have emerged which have not yet been indexed by any database.
## (s20) Conclusion
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) Our review showed that hardly any robust scientific research into exergaming and dementia has been conducted. With only three studies of varying research quality included, the answers to our review questions remain inconclusive. However, the included studies did find some effects of exergaming on physical, cognitive and emotional functioning in people with dementia. In addition, some improvements were found that were not statistically significant, which may have been caused by the fact that these studies were underpowered [49][50][51]. No articles were found about the cost-effectiveness of exergaming for people living with dementia.
