# Microbial monoterpene transformations-a review

CorpusID: 1454053 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d3c5ebb711b6b06e1297c0cb1d7adc11d768bdd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d3c5ebb711b6b06e1297c0cb1d7adc11d768bdd)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s5) MONOTERPENES IN THE CARBON CYCLE
Number of References: 10

(p5.0) Habitats with a dense vegetation of wood and flowers are expected to contain larger populations of monoterpene transforming microorganisms. Whereas coniferous forests emit up to 6.7 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 , broadleaf evergreen forest and grassland emit only 3.5 and 2.5 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 , respectively (Tanaka et al., 2012). Monoterpene emission rates between 0.3 and 7 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 for the United States-mainly αand β-pinene, limonene and β-myrcene (Geron et al., 2000)-can support the aerobic growth of 0.15-3.5 g bacteria * m −2 * yr −1 , assuming 50% of carbon incorporated into biomass. This is a significant potential, considering the presence of around 10 g microbial biomass in the top centimeter of soil per square meter.

(p5.1) In marine systems, isoprene and monoterpenes (mainly αpinene) are produced by phytoplankton and algae and partially emitted into the atmosphere (reviewed by Yassaa et al., 2008;Shaw et al., 2010). Isoprene emission was estimated to 0.2-1.2 Tg carbon * yr −1 (Palmer and Shaw, 2005;Gantt et al., 2009;Shaw et al., 2010). For the ocean surface area this results in an emission rate of 0.0025 g carbon * m −2 * yr −1 . Current uncertainties in the size of emission based on shipborne measurements in comparison to satellite data (Luo and Yu, 2010) may be resolved by incorporating an export from the continental atmosphere to the oceanic atmosphere (Hu et al., 2013). Isoprene-amended samples from marine habitats were enriched in bacteria affiliating with Actinobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes and first strains were shown to degrade isoprene and aliphatic hydrocarbons (Acuña Alvarez et al., 2009).
