# An Overview of Self-Administered Health Literacy Instruments

CorpusID: 18227205 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e1aaffed6d3860ef03f1670ad89d7f322892553](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e1aaffed6d3860ef03f1670ad89d7f322892553)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s3) Study selection
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) In order to capture the literature as broadly as possible, we included studies that reported the development and/or validation of a novel measure of health-related literacy. For inclusion, studies must have reported assessing the validity of a measure, as well as providing some description of its administration characteristics. Generic measures, as well as those focussing on more specialized health literacy such as ''nutrition literacy'' [20] and ''eHealth literacy'' [21] were included. We included only those references published in English, which reported the development and/or validation of a measure that was available in English (measures were also included if they were available in English as well as another language). Only one key reference was included for each measure (usually the first to report on a particular measure). We excluded studies that reported the development or validation of literacy measures that were not specifically related to health, as well as those that reported solely on ''numeracy'', since the relationship between numeracy and health outcomes in the absence of literacy assessment remains unclear [22].
## (s18) Relevance to an ongoing research agenda for health literacy measurement
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Researchers and clinicians alike need to consider practicalities of administration, including how long a measure takes to complete, whether it is suitable for selfcompletion (either online or with paper and pencil), and in what other circumstances and populations it has been used. Our review draws attention to the fact that several health literacy assessments require a great deal of time, potentially exceeding the average length of a primary care consultation. In a large European study, for example, Deveugele et al [67] found that the average length of a primary care consultation was 10.7 (6.7) minutes. In the present study, the average time required to administer a clinical or clinical/research health literacy assessment in this review was 20.7 (23.6) minutes. Since primary care was a common location in which these indices were developed and validated, it is critical that future research in this area is attentive to the reality of busy clinical practice. Our review demonstrates that currently, health literacy assessment using most available tools is impractical in clinical practice due to the time required, despite authors' suggestions that some of these measures should be incorporated into consultations. Despite the association between low health literacy and poorer outcomes, there is no evidence that health literacy screening has an effect on health outcomes [68]. It seems unlikely that health literacy assessment will become a fixture of clinical practice. Resources might be better allocated to developing interventions to mitigate the effect of low health literacy on health outcomes, for which there is already a strong evidence-base.

(p18.1) Almost three quarters of available health literacy indices included in this review have been developed and validated in populations in the United States. Indices from the United States may not be fully transferable to another health system, although it should be noted that this review only included English language papers. Again, in contrast to proposed research agendas for health literacy [55,56] it is unclear whether this is best dealt with by undertaking validation of existing indices in other countries and health systems, as opposed to developing new indices to address these issues.
