# A survey of parameterized algorithms and the complexity of edge modification *

CorpusID: 210839434 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bd8126eb05e2f591b8eb1a0382fa6d5dcb4fe5ff)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s10) Open problem 2.4. Do Chordal Deletion and Chordal Editing admit polynomial kernels?
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) The related problem of deleting at most k vertices to obtain a chordal graph admits a polynomial kernel [4,171].
## (s28) Open problem 3.8. What is the parameterized complexity of deciding for given graph G and integers p and q, if G contains a set of vertices X such that |X| = p and |∂(X)| ≤ q with parameter p or q?
Number of References: 2

(p28.0) The related Bisection problem, the problem of separating a graph into two equally large graphs cutting at most k edges, was shown to be solvable in time 2 O(k 3 ) · n O(1) by Cygan et al. [79]. The incompressibility of the problem was shown by van Bevern et al. [248].
## (s33) Modification to satisfy individual degree constraints
Number of References: 2

(p33.0) The investigation of the parameterized complexity of the problems where the aim is to satisfy some degree restrictions for each vertex were initiated by Thilikos and Moser [223] and Mathieson and Szeider [219].
## (s36) Weighted Degree Constraint Editing (S)(WDCE(S))
Number of References: 7

(p36.0) Here, the aim is to obtain a graph such that the (weighted) degree of every vertex is in a given set defined by the list function. They considered WDCE(S) for various non-empty Respectively, the edge addition operation can be applied to an existing edge, and it increases the weight of such an edge by 1. Mathieson and Szeider [219] proved that WDCE(S) and DCE(S) are W[1]-hard when parameterized by k for any non-empty S. Moreover, the hardness for DCE(S) holds even if δ(v) = {r} if vertex deletion ∈ S, that is, for the case where the aim is to obtain an r-regular graph. It is interesting to observe that for the important case of degree lists of size 1, WDCE(S) and DCE(S) can be solved in polynomial time if vertex deletion / ∈ S [219] by the reduction to the Perfect Matching problem. From the positive side, it is proved that WDCE(S) and DCE(S) are FPT when parameterized by k + r for any non-empty S. To achieve this result, Mathieson and Szeider showed that for any k and r, the problems can be expressed in the first-order logic. Applying the similar to the described above arguments of Thilikos and Moser [223], an instance of WDCE(S) or DCE(S) can be reduced to an equivalent instance with a graph of bounded degree. Then the meta-theorem of Frick and Grohe [126] gives the result (the same can be obtained without preprocessing by the meta-theorem of Bulian and Dawar [43]). Clearly, this approach only allows to classify WDCE(S) and DCE(S) to be in FPT. For the special case of DCE(S) with degree lists of size 1, Golovach [133] used the random separation technique (see the book [76] for an introduction to this technique) to show that the problem can be solved in time 2 O(kr 2 +k log k) · poly(n). It gives rise to the following open problem.
## (s37) Open problem 4.1. Is it possible to give efficient FPT algorithms for DCE(S) and/or WDCE(S) parameterized by k + r for general degree list functions?
Number of References: 4

(p37.0) For the case vertex deletion ∈ S ⊆ {vertex deletion, edge deletion} and single-element degree lists, Mathieson and Szeider [219] showed that WDCE(S) admits a kernel with O(kr(k + r)) vertices. For general degree lists, they demonstrated a kernel with O(k 2 r k+1 + kr k+2 ) vertices. These results were complemented by Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127], who proved that if only edge additions are allowed (i.e, for the completion problem), then DCE(S) has kernels with O(kr 2 ) and O(r 5 ) vertices, that is, it admits a polynomial kernel whose size depends only on r. To obtain the latter result, they prove that the problem can be solved in polynomial time if k is sufficiently large (greater that some polynomial of r). The latter result is based on a clever application of combinatorial results about existence of f -factors. Hence, the following win-win approach can be used: if k is large, then the problem is solved in polynomial time, and if k is bounded by a polynomial of r, then the kernelization algorithm for the case where the parameter is k + r is applied. Froese, Nichterlein and Niedermeier [127] also give lower bounds by proving that DCE(S) parameterized by k + r has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if S = {vertex deletion} or S = {edge addition}. Another lower bound for this parameterization was given by Golovach [133] who proved that DCE(S) with degree lists of size one has no polynomial kernel unless NP ⊆ coNP/poly if {vertex deletion, edge addition} ⊆ S.
## (s43) r} is given and it is asked whether it possible to obtain a connected graph G from G with d G (v) ∈ δ(v) for every v ∈ V (G ) by at most k edge deletions and additions.
Number of References: 4

(p43.0) Notice that if we have a choice of degrees, then the structural properties of solutions used in [113,134] could not be applied any more. The problem is open even when the degree constraints are intervals of bounded size. Harraberg in [159] considered the special case where the degree constraints are given by inequalities. More precisely, he considered the Edge Editing to a Connected Upper (Lower) Bounded Degrees (EditUBD and EditLBD, respectively) problems. EditUBD asks, given a (multi) graph G, a non-negative integer k and a function f : V (G) → Z + , whether it is possible to obtain a connected graph G from G with d G (v) ≤ f (v) for every v ∈ V (G ) by at most k edge deletions and additions. It is shown in [159] that this problem is NP-complete, has a kernel with O(k 3 ) vertices and O(k 6 ) edges, and can be solved in time 2 O(k) · poly(n). In EditLBD, it is required that
## (s44) Open problem 4.4. Investigate the parameterized complexity of variants of DCF(S) and EECG for directed graphs.
Number of References: 2

(p44.0) Besides vertex degree constraints, it could be interesting to consider edge degree constraints or combined vertex and edge degree constraints. In particular, Mathieson [218] considered a number of problems of this type. For a edge weighted graph, the weighted degree of a vertex is defined as the sum of weights of incident edges. Respectively, the weighted sum of an edge is the sum of the vertex degrees of its end-points. Mathieson [218] considered the following problems for edge weighted graphs:
## (s63) Π-Degree Sequence Completion (Π-DSC)
Number of References: 3

(p63.0) Notice that Π is a tuple property. In particular, DCE({edge addition)} is not a special case of Π-DSC, but Anonymization({edge addition}) is. They introduced the auxiliary Π-Decision problem that asks whether an n-tuple T = (d 1 , . . . , d n ) of non-negative integers satisfies Π and proved, using the previous results about Anonymization({edge addition}) [162], that if Π-Decision is FPT when parameterized by ∆ = max{d i | 1 ≤ i ≤ n}, then Π-DSC is FPT when parameterized by ∆ + k. Recall now that Bredereck et al. [39] proved that Anonymization({edge addition}) is FPT when parameterized by ∆ and has a kernel with O(∆ 7 ) vertices. Generalizing this result, Froese et al. [127] defined the Π-Number Sequence Completion (Π-NSC) problem that asks for a sequence d 1 , . . . , d n of non-negative integers and two non-negative integers k and ∆ , whether there are non-negative integers x 1 , . . . , x n such that the n-tuple T = (d 1 + x 1 , . . . , d n + x n ) satisfies Π,
