# Evolution and pathology in Chagas disease -A Review

CorpusID: 21966883 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ec5833c3ef2a89e0614d7fbd03cadbbe9b25c4c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ec5833c3ef2a89e0614d7fbd03cadbbe9b25c4c)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s22) Then I would still have this consolation -my joy in unrelenting pain -that I had not denied the words…
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) The availability of the rabbit model for human disease prompted evaluation of treatment of experimental Chagas animals with anti-trypanosomal nitro-derivatives.A dose of 8 mg/kg/day for 60 days of nitroderivatives was intraperitoneally inoculated in infected and uninfected rabbits.Chronic infection was accompanied by the finding of myocarditis in every Chagas heart, regardless of treatment (Fig. 5E).PCR assays with T. cruzi-specific and nDNA-nested sets of primers yielded amplification prod-ucts from Chagas rabbit DNA templates, regardless of treatment (Lauria-Pires et al. 2001).Thus, treatment of infected rabbits with nitroderivatives neither improved the Chagas heart lesions nor prolonged survival of treated animals (Teixeira et al. 1990a).Treated animals died in a time span comparable to infected, untreated rabbits.
## (s23) Carnivora
Number of References: 3

(p23.0) Dogs (Carnivora: Canidae) have been recognized as important animal hosts participating in the peridomicile lifecycle of T. cruzi.Dog (Canis domesticus) mortality in natural ecotopes is substantial with high levels of transmission where dogs eat contaminated bugs.This clinical veterinary problem is recognized in several regions of the American continents.Naturally infected dogs have been identified in Texas, Louisiana, and Oklahoma (Bradley et al. 2000, Beard et al. 2003).In Cuesta Rica, it was shown that 27.7% of the dogs from five rural villages had T. cruzispecific serum antibodies.Positive dogs subjected to Xray and ECG revealed cardiomegaly and ECG alterations consistent with Chagas heart disease (Montenegro et al. 2002).
## (s29) Parasite persistence
Number of References: 3

(p29.0) The earliest hypothesis addressing pathogenesis of Chagas disease stems directly from identification of the parasite in tissues.A precise description of the pathology of acute disease led to the idea that the disease stems from microbial infection.Accordingly, mechanical rupture of parasite nests and degradation of affected tissues could drive chronic inflammation.Nevertheless, the main difficulty in establishing a direct relationship between T. cruzi infection and endemic chronic disease was the absence of parasite nests in pathological sections of tissues from 80% of deceased patients.This difficulty has been resolved with specific immunological tests for indirect identification of parasite antigens and of sensitive genetic markers showing persistence of parasite kDNA in tissues of Chagas patients (Zhang & Tarleton 1999).However, only nDNA detection is indicative of an active T. cruzi infection (Braga et al. 2000, Lauria-Pires et al. 2000) Key questions remained unanswered: (i) why are acute infections usually clinically unperceived before subsiding spontaneously?(ii) Is tissue damage seen in cryptic infections for all patients, or only some patients?(iii) Why do patients showing cryptic chronic chagasic infec-480 480 480 480
## (s31) Integrated kDNA heritability and pathogenesis
Number of References: 2

(p31.0) If these observations are validated, we have created a powerful new research tool for the understanding of Chagas disease (Nitz et al. 2004) Acute Chagas pathology served as an indicator for examining if T. cruzi infection could be established in the goniablasts of the testes and the germinal theca cells of the ovary (see section acute pathology).Although invasion of embryonic stems cells had not been demonstrated, we assayed parasite uptake by stem cells in vitro: embryo stem cells from a 2.5-day-old zygote actively engulfed trypomastigotes (Nitz et al. 2004).Amastigotes loaded the cytoplasm of rabbit embryonic cells, and similar kinetics was observed with infected chicken embryonic cells.The permissiveness of embryonic stem cells to T. cruzi suggested that differentiating cells in the genital crest, which appear at days 4-8.5 of gestation, could acquire integrated kDNA-induced mutations during early parasite invasion.
