# Saudi Journal of Oral and Dental Research Teledentistry: A Review

CorpusID: 219675311 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b88b4635d125832ead473eafd45a76f52a16267c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b88b4635d125832ead473eafd45a76f52a16267c)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s6) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) Teledentistry is -not‖ a new specialty, rather an alternative method for delivering the existing dental services. The utility of teledentistry in distant, remote areas is extensive. The rural and urban areas, where there is unavailability of the specialit consultation, this application stands to be of utmost importance. India, with its huge rural population, diverse landmass and existing health care delivery mechanism collaborated with the advancement in telecommunications technology could be an ideal setting for teledentistry. 6,7 There can be a delivery of a cost-effective dental care through teledentistry by appointing the general dental surgeon and dental hygienists can be appointed at the subcenters. Likewise, graduate dentists with knowledge in teledentistry can be appointed at the community health centers and primary health centers for discussing the diagnosis and treatment plan of the cases with the specialists. The ideal places to serve as a common site for teledentistry consultation are dental colleges as they encompass all the specialists serving under a roof. At remote clinics, a team of specialists could communicate for a few hours on a daily basis with the dentists/hygienists/ patients. The outcomes achieved so far are very motivating setting the milestones for future investigations. Nevertheless, a few things have yet to be addressed before the teledentistry can rise to its peak. However, in order to validate the teledentistry applications, studies involving greater number of participants will be required in future [8].
