# cells Methods for Separation and Characterization of Extracellular Vesicles: Results of a Worldwide Survey Performed by the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee

CorpusID: 221360613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e86577f9085f9add2acb903dda639c262f8a9de](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e86577f9085f9add2acb903dda639c262f8a9de)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Studies of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in health and disease have increasingly confirmed the biological relevance of these membrane-delimited particles. The resulting groundswell of interest in the EV field has provoked an influx of new scientists, who bring fresh ideas to EV research. At the same time, the combination of rapid progress and incomplete penetrance of established experience has led to a certain amount of misunderstanding, miscommunication, and publication of less than rigorous results, in turn rousing continuous scientific debate and presenting opportunities for improved sharing. Since its founding in 2012, the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles (ISEV) has sought to seize these opportunities, expending extensive efforts to increase rigor and reproducibility. These initiatives have included the founding and evolution of a journal, the Journal of Extracellular Vesicles [1], and producing guidelines [2], position papers [3][4][5][6], dedicated courses during ISEV educational days, and massive open online courses (MOOCs) aimed at reaching general scientists interested in EV research. Both MOOC I [7] and MOOC II are freely available through Coursera (www.coursera.org/) and at the ISEV homepage (www.isev.org). Finally, ISEV announced the establishment of a Rigor and Standardization subcommittee at the annual ISEV meeting in Kyoto, Japan, in 2019 (ISEV2019).

(p0.1) An important part of the ISEV efforts for rigor and standardization is taking a regular "pulse" of the field, to understand which techniques are in use and where new developments might be needed. In 2016, Gardiner et al. published the results of a first worldwide survey on "Techniques used for the isolation and characterization of extracellular vesicles". Organized by ISEV, this survey elicited 196 responses from researchers in 30 countries [8]. In addition, Soekmadji et al. performed a worldwide survey with a focus on RNA techniques, which was published in 2018 [2]. These two surveys were aimed at understanding how methods are being used in the EV field and at improving the comparison of results. With the formation of the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee in 2019, a new survey was distributed, not only as a pulse-checking exercise, but also to identify expertise and interest for topic-specific task forces. Here, we report the results of the general survey. The presented data reflect the current status of the field, reveal how the field has evolved, and identify the next steps towards overcoming apparent challenges that are encountered in EV research.
## (s1) The Survey
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Survey questions were generated by the ISEV Rigor and Standardization Subcommittee and are shown in the Supplementary Information (Supplementary Table S1). For comparison, questions from the original survey can be found in the Supplementary Material of Gardiner et al. [8]. The new survey was not simply a recapitulation of the earlier survey, so some questions and options were removed while others were added. The questions about the EV source and EV preparation methods were nearly identical, though, with only a few new options in 2019. ISEV advertised this effort in several electronic messages to the ISEV mailing list, on ISEV social media channels (e.g., Facebook and Twitter), and at the ISEV2019 annual meeting. The survey was opened on 24 March 2019 and closed in mid-August, 2019. A total of 620 full or partial submissions were recorded. Of these, 320 (approximately 52%) were complete (i.e., all questions answered). However, since it was not obligatory to answer all questions, all non-duplicated submissions were accepted for all questions. Overall, engagement was almost twice the level achieved in the previous, 2015 survey [8]. The number of respondents to each question is reported in the corresponding figure legends, and this number was used to calculate the indicated percentages for each answer. Of the respondents 85% were members of ISEV, and 86% belonged to academia. More than half were principal investigators, reflecting a strong level of engagement with the current survey at the senior level. Respondents also included industry participants (5%), government employees, and heads of flow cytometry or other core facilities or good manufacturing practice (GMP) units. As indicated by IP addresses, 40 countries on five continents were represented. The number of respondents per country is indicated (Figure 1). Notably, compared with the 2015 survey [8], there was increased participation of Asia-Pacific countries such China, South Korea, and Australia, as well as European countries such as Italy and Portugal. 
## (s10) Increased Implementation and Diversity of Characterization Methods
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) To characterize EVs, most researchers reported using Western blotting, single particle tracking, protein concentration, and electron microscopy (not including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)) to characterize EVs ( Figure 6). The next most widespread method, with the potential to provide either population-level or single-particle biochemical and physical information, is flow cytometry, also in agreement with the previous survey [8]. In the current survey, researchers were also asked about methodologies that address EV composition, such as mass spectrometry. Various approaches were reported to assess physical characteristics of single EVs (e.g., atomic force microscopy), biochemical composition (such as Raman spectroscopy), or identification/quantification of surface markers (for example, by surface plasmon resonance imaging). Altogether, these results show that respondents now use around four to six EV characterization methods (histogram Figure 6), whereas 60% of the 2015 respondents mentioned three or fewer. Indeed, for all methods queried in both the 2015 and 2019 surveys, usage appears to have increased; protein concentration measurements are two-fold what was reported in 2015 [8]. 
## (s11) Increased Implementation and Diversity of Characterization Methods
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) To characterize EVs, most researchers reported using Western blotting, single particle tracking, protein concentration, and electron microscopy (not including cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM)) to characterize EVs ( Figure 6). The next most widespread method, with the potential to provide either population-level or single-particle biochemical and physical information, is flow cytometry, also in agreement with the previous survey [8]. In the current survey, researchers were also asked about methodologies that address EV composition, such as mass spectrometry. Various approaches were reported to assess physical characteristics of single EVs (e.g., atomic force microscopy), biochemical composition (such as Raman spectroscopy), or identification/quantification of surface markers (for example, by surface plasmon resonance imaging). Altogether, these results show that respondents now use around four to six EV characterization methods (histogram Figure 6), whereas 60% of the 2015 respondents mentioned three or fewer. Indeed, for all methods queried in both the 2015 and 2019 surveys, usage appears to have increased; protein concentration measurements are two-fold what was reported in 2015 [8]. 
