# materials A Review of Functional Separators for Lithium Metal Battery Applications

CorpusID: 224828398 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62259414541eea6f0a73423b8a9f86f8e9c7cfd5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/62259414541eea6f0a73423b8a9f86f8e9c7cfd5)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s50) Artificial Interface Layers between Li-metal Anodes and Electrolytes
Number of References: 2

(p50.0) An artificial SEI layer between a Li-metal anode and electrolyte can suppress Li dendritic growth, which is a function of the separator. Fan et al. demonstrated that a fluorinated SEI layer between a Li-metal anode and LiPS4 (LPS) SE restrains the formation of Li-dendrites and prevents side reactions [157]. An LiF-rich SEI is easily formed by contacting LiFSI-coated/infiltrated LPS onto the Li-metal. An artificial SEI has high interface energy with Li-metal and a strong modulus; thus, it has an important function of suppressing the growth of dendrites. When a symmetric Li|LiFSI@LPS|Li cell was fabricated (Figure 15a), the CE increased from ~88% to ~98% compared with a Li|LPS|Li cell. Moreover, the critical current density increased from 0.7 mA cm −2 to a recordhigh value of >2 mA cm −2 . Hu and co-workers attempted to lower the interfacial resistance by depositing a thin germanium (Ge) layer onto a garnet electrolyte to provide a better contact between the Li-metal anode and the garnet [155] (Figure 14b). To fabricate the garnet pellet, they used LiOH, La 2 O 3 , and ZrO 2 as starting materials, and SE was fabricated with the composition of Li 6.85 La 2.9 Ca 0.1 Zr 1.75 Nb 0.25 O 12 (LLZO) with the addition of CaCO 3 and Nb 2 O 5 to lower the manufacturing temperature. Ge was coated onto the LLZO SE, and a Li-Ge alloy was formed to be used as a Li-ion conductor between Li-metal and the garnet. The Li|Ge-modified-garnet|Li cell exhibited an interfacial resistance of 115 Ω cm 2 . In terms of cycling stability, a Li|Ge-modified-garnet|LFP full cell exhibited capacity of 140 mAh g −1 up to 100 cycles with an efficiency of ≈100% at 1 C.
