# A Review on Oxidative Stress, Diabetic Complications, and the Roles of Honey Polyphenols

CorpusID: 227754696 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f8191620462b04f418319440b24326e24db0e4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f8191620462b04f418319440b24326e24db0e4e)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s4) In Vitro
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) Mechanism of Insulin Resistance Initiated by ROS. There are various mechanisms by which mitochondrial ROS may contribute to insulin resistance, with differing processes based on tissue type. ROS activates MAPKs such as JNK and p38. For example, ROS activates JNK by oxidizing and inactivating MAPK phosphatases (MKPs) (Figure 1), which dephosphorylate and inactivate JNK [26]. Additionally, ROS may oxidize thioredoxin (TRX), resulting in TRX dissociation and apoptotic signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1; kinase MAPK) complexes and a consequent JNK signalling activation [27]. Finally, the JNK inhibitor glutathione S-transferase Pi is oxidized by ROS and promotes JNK dissociation [28].
## (s11) Implications of Nrf2 Transcription Factor in Diabetic
Number of References: 5

(p11.0) Complications. Nrf2 gene, which is also known as NFE2L2, encodes for a transcription factor that controls for ARE genes in the promoter regions. These genes encode for proteins produced in response to environmental stress, metabolic enzymes, injury, and inflammation as well as detoxifying enzymes, including free radical production. Nrf2 in the cytoplasm is linked to Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1) in unstressed circumstances, avoiding its translocation to the nucleus as illustrated in Figure 3 [72]. During stressed conditions (either electrophilic or oxidative stress), the Keap1/Nrf2 complex receives a signal involving phosphorylation and/or redox modification resulting in translocation of Nrf2 into the nucleus. Keap1, however, mediates the rapid ubiquitination and subsequent Nrf2 degradation by the proteasome 26S under basal circumstances. Cullin 3-based ubiquitin E3 (Cul-E3) ligase complex ubiquitinates Nrf2 while Keap1 acts as a substrate adapter which promotes the ubiquitination of Nrf2 by cullin 3. Consequently, Nrf2 has a short half-life (only 20 minutes) under normal circumstances. Oxidative stress is responsible for destroying critical cysteine residues in Keap1, disrupting the Keap1-Cul3 ubiquitination mechanism. However, if Nrf2 is not ubiquitinated, it builds up in the cytoplasm and is translocated to the nucleus (illustrated in Figure 3) [74,75].

(p11.1) Nrf2 associates with the small protein called Maf present in its nucleus to create a heterodimer and initiate transcription in the upstream promoter region of several cytoprotective genes. The cytoprotective genes include the encoding antioxidant and phase-II detoxifying enzymes like superoxide dismutases (SODs), catalase (CAT), NAD(P)H dehydrogenase, γ-glutamyl cysteine synthase (γ-GCS), NQO-1, hemeoxygenase-1 (HO-1), glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPx-1), and glutathione S-transferase (GST). The response shown by the antioxidants to the signalling pathways NFE2L2 and NFE1-NFE2L2/ARE is considered a promising target against diabetic complications affecting the pulmonary, hepatic,   Oxidative Medicine and Cellular Longevity digestive, neural, and cardiovascular systems as well as diabetic nephropathy [76,77].
