# Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review Volume 7 Issue 2 -2020 Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review 64

CorpusID: 234714655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Diabetic neuropathy
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) Diabetic neuropathy has been found to affect over 90% of PWD 24 and is a common complication of both T1DM and T2DM. It has been observed in those who have had the disease for 10 years or longer. One of the main symptoms of diabetic neuropathy is pain. 22 Peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy, autonomic neuropathy or renal failure may be due to the long-term complications of diabetes. 2 Limited joint mobility (LJM) has been found to be more prevalent in patients with diabetic neuropathy. The blood vessels may be affected by autonomic neuropathy, which leads to increased blood flow and cause inflammation and damage to the bones. Autonomic neuropathy has been found in patients with Adhesive capsulitis (AC) often compared to other PWD, which could be an underlying mechanism. 25 Sharp pains, numbness, cramps, burning, tingling or sensory loss have been observed in peripheral neuropathy, 26 which may increase the risk of some forms of OA in PWD. 1
## (s7) Diabetic muscle infarction
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Diabetic Muscle Infarction is an uncommon complication of longstanding diabetes. 58,59 with established vasculopathy. The symptoms include sudden pain and inflammation in the lower limbs and it mostly affects the adductor muscles, quadriceps femoris and calf muscles. 18 Out of 114 PWD, it was found to be more common in females (61.53%), 59.1% had T1DM and 23.8% had T2DM. 59 The underlying factors such as vascular endothelial damage and diffuse diabetic microangiopathy may cause diabetic muscle infarction. 60
