# Generative Adversarial Networks: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 232895648 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c7db4378b9a677a301e25f7340e5ee1db904d571)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s12) Inception Score (IS)
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) During the ILSVRC competition in 2014, Google proposed a network called Inception Net [42]. It not only controlled the number of parameters, but also achieved good classification performance. In 2015, Inception net-v3 was proposed and it was exactly the model required for IS calculation in this part [43,44].
## (s26) Domain Transformation
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Text to image is an input sentence to generate an image. Due to GAN's excellent performance in graphic image processing, many new models have been created on the result of this kind of domain transformation. Scott et al. proposed GAN-INT-CLS [99], which generates a network that inputs text features to obtain images. Then, GAWWN [100] was proposed by this team to improve the accuracy of the generated images. In terms of image to text, Liu et al. proposed the method of generating poetry through images, which for the first-time incorporated image processing and poetry generation into a framework, making the cognition of machines have the ability to approach human beings [101].
## (s29) Cyber Security
Number of References: 2

(p29.0) Nowadays, Cyber Security has attracted more and more attention from researchers because of the progress of big data, Internet of things (IoT), blockchain and other hot spots [108]. At the same time, the gradually increasing numbers of network anomalies threaten the normal operation of the network, such as Challenge Collapsar (CC) attack, distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack, malware, worm [109]. However, network abnormal behavior is not a simple image or text, and it is difficult to process with GAN. Meanwhile, as the detection technology of abnormal network behaviors, the researchers turn to the source of the attack and plan to use the method of generating abnormal behavior samples to simulate the attack, so as to improve the detection ability of the existing detection technology.
