# Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescence e a review

CorpusID: 233886872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Basic results of genetic studies
Number of References: 3

(p3.0) The brain development of voice production related areas in childhood and puberty is genetically structured. At the beginning the activation of the hypothalamic hypophysis gonad axis is a result of a complex network of genes, neurotransmitters, and neuronal interactions in the hypothalamus. It all begins from the nasal placode wherefrom GnRH (gonadotropin releasing hormone) neurons migrate to hypothalamus [10,11]. Fig. 1 shows the central activation of GnRH neurons by leptin, considered necessary for normal pubertal development. The nasal placode, and development of GnRH neurons have been considered a causal mechanism as stimulating factors on KNDy neurons (Kisspeptin, neurokinin B, dynorphins). The genes involved are included in the figure. The neuropeptide alfa-MSH plays a key role in energy homeostasis by mediating the action of leptin and may have a central role to the metabolic control of puberty. From the hypothalamus, at the medio basal area, the arcuate nucleus (ARC), the pituitary gland is stimulated, also by the GnRH-PG (Gonadotropin Releasing Hormone-Prostaglandin), the reaction depending on the GnRH-R e (Receptors). Follicle stimulating and luteinizing hormones stimulate the ovaries in girls, and in boys the production of Leydig-cells' production of testosterone, stimulating puberty. In girls the Anti-Müller hormone (AMH) for egg reserve and inhibin level of hindering FSH production in the pituitary are regulated in balance with E2 (estradiol), stimulating puberty. Extrinsic factors (EDC) and body mass index (BMI) have an impact on the development [6].
## (s6) Specific results in humans
Number of References: 6

(p6.0) Day F et al. [30] recognizes the biological genetic mechanisms and timing of puberty as important. In the recent large-scale genome wide female developmental study, 389 statistically independent signals were found distributed across all 23 chromosome pairs. According to Hollis et al. [31], in a male study, 76 independent genetic signals for male puberty was described. The authors found that genetically the voice break in boys was related to menarche in girls. Day et al. [32] also found 2 genes reportedly disrupted in rare disorders of puberty: LEPR and KAL1. A cluster of imprinted genes on human chromosomes 15 and 14, genetic variants in DLK1 are associated with menarche timing in girls and voice break in boys and pathology thereof.

(p6.1) The genetic and epigenetic approach to puberty is probably important for future aspects as examples in twins have shown for specific hormonal disorders e.g. SOX3 [33,34]. Schriberg et al. [35] have updated overview of percentages of neurodevelopmental disorders of speech/motor-speech.
