# machines Possible Applications of Additive Manufacturing Technologies in Shipbuilding: A Review

CorpusID: 230572342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering

## (s13) The Demand for 3D Printing in Shipbuilding
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) The marine industry is a specific area that generates huge demand for products and services from many other industries, such as carpentry; metallurgy; machinery and electromechanical industries; industrial automation; heating, ventilation air conditioning (HVAC); energy recovery systems; exhaust after treatment systems; corrosion protection systems; fire protection systems and petrochemicals. The supply demand forecast for years 2016-2025 is presented on the Figure 3. structures to α and β microstructure by adding solute, which can refine prior-β grains in Ti alloys. They considered many elements, including silicon, molybdenum, beryllium, chromium, boron, tungsten, iron and rare-earth elements. The result of the research proves the addition of Fe combined with post-processing heat treatment can decompose as-built microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V-3Fe to fully laminar α + β microstructure. Ultrafine eutectic Ti-Fe alloys can gain strength above 2.5 GPa in room temperature and compressive ductility above 10% [24]. In these alloys, grain sizes commonly decrease with increasing growth velocity or cooling rate. This allows significant size-hardening effects and opens a gateway to materials design by rapid solidification techniques. The study presented by Gussone et al. [24] provides the first demonstration of the feasibility of producing eutectic and near-eutectic Ti-Fe alloys by LAM with ultrafine microstructures and mechanical strength as well as compressive ductility attractive for structural applications.
## (s50) Weight Reduction and Simplification of Structures
Number of References: 6

(p50.0) Three dimensional printing provides the ability to reduce weight or volume with greater freedom to optimize the design [46,49]. By optimizing the topology and working with network structures, you can reduce the weight and cost of parts [51]. Naval Group and Centrale Nantes have successfully made a hollow stainless-steel propeller using WAAM technology. The reason being improving the efficiency of the propeller and reducing the noise and vibration emitted compared to conventional ones [52]. The use of multiple materials or different structures in the construction of a single element may reduce its total weight and cost while retaining the highest possible properties [53,54].
## (s51) Easier Part Optimization
Number of References: 4

(p51.0) Thanks to AM, we are able to overcome the constraints of other methods and perform elements that so far have been used as an assembly, in the form of a single part or objects that cannot be done conventionally. This creates completely new design opportunities at a small additional cost [46]. Some spare parts can also be redesigned to improve functionality. The ease and speed of prototyping using AM methods allows the part to be tested long before its production runs and allows for many iterations of the prototype, thanks to which many errors can be eliminated and advanced optimization can be carried out [51]. Three dimensional printing also creates unique alloys and composite materials to increase mechanical strength, modify the coefficient of thermal expansion and control the material properties [55]. In 2019, Wärtsilä, in cooperation with DNV GL, developed a nozzle for the inert gas installation for oil tankers in M-PBF-metal powder bed fusion technology, as shown in Figure 19. Thanks to 3D printing, much better regulation and spray performance was achieved [56]. 
