# polymers Development of Graphene-Based Polymeric Nanocomposites: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 237468825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s6) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/ Polymer Nanocomposites
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38].
## (s7) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/Polymer Nanocomposites
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38]. Scheme 5. Schematic illustration of graphene-based nanomaterials, and covalent and non-covalent functionalization approaches. Taken from reference [38].
## (s11) Grafting-from Methods
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the Gbased material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a pre-functionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.
## (s12) Grafting-from Methods
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the G-based material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a prefunctionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.
## (s18) Scheme 12.
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Schematic representation of the different interactions between PEDOT:PSS and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [74]. Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydrophobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emeraldine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the two nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71].

(p18.1) Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydro phobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emerald ine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the tw nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71]. Scheme 13. Schematic representation of the different interactions between PANI and hexameth ylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [71].
