# information A Comprehensive Survey of Knowledge Graph-Based Recommender Systems: Technologies, Development, and Contributions

CorpusID: 235826036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s12) Path-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p12.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s26) Education
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.
## (s27) Health
Number of References: 8

(p27.0) In the health sector, we found four proposals related to knowledge graphs. In [66,75], the Study Cohort Ontology (SCO) is presented, which facilitates clinicians to perform population analysis and to generate cohort similarity visualizations. In this way, clinicians can select the most appropriate study populations for trial applicability.

(p27.1) Another study is [17], which deals with human care services [17]. In this case, data from different IoT sensors are used to recognize the current situation of a user and to predict future events. According to the authors, the current state of research about smart healthcare services focuses on analyzing user's behavior from single sensor data. Additionally, it focuses on analyzing and diagnosing the current situation of users. Therefore, a method is required to effectively manage and integrate a large amount of IoT sensor data. In the cloud, IoT sensor data stored in individual CKAN can be integrated based on common concepts. As a result, it is possible to generate an integrated knowledge graph considering data interoperability, and the underlying data are used as a base for prescriptive analysis.
## (s33) Interpretability of Recommendations
Number of References: 2

(p33.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].
## (s63) Path-Based Recommendation
Number of References: 4

(p63.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p63.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s77) Education
Number of References: 2

(p77.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.
## (s78) Health
Number of References: 8

(p78.0) In the health sector, we found four proposals related to knowledge graphs. In [66,75], the Study Cohort Ontology (SCO) is presented, which facilitates clinicians to perform population analysis and to generate cohort similarity visualizations. In this way, clinicians can select the most appropriate study populations for trial applicability.

(p78.1) Another study is [17], which deals with human care services [17]. In this case, data from different IoT sensors are used to recognize the current situation of a user and to predict future events. According to the authors, the current state of research about smart healthcare services focuses on analyzing user's behavior from single sensor data. Additionally, it focuses on analyzing and diagnosing the current situation of users. Therefore, a method is required to effectively manage and integrate a large amount of IoT sensor data. In the cloud, IoT sensor data stored in individual CKAN can be integrated based on common concepts. As a result, it is possible to generate an integrated knowledge graph considering data interoperability, and the underlying data are used as a base for prescriptive analysis.
## (s84) Interpretability of Recommendations
Number of References: 2

(p84.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].
