# Hyperprogression under immunotherapy: a new form of immunotherapy response?-a narrative literature review

CorpusID: 237291144 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1a828643f160826aea1f3a7bc769de37551da0dc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) The treatment of especially metastatic cancer patients has been dramatically improved by the introduction of immunotherapy. There are already 3 immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) that target cytotoxic T lymphocyteassociated molecule-4 (CTLA-4), programmed cell death receptor-1 (PD-1), and programmed cell death ligand-1 (PD-L1) are the most widely studied and recognized. It has been proven that ICIs can increase the overall survival (OS) in variety of malignancies, such as melanoma, nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC), renal cancer, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), urothelial bladder cancer, and endometrial stromal sarcoma (1)(2)(3). However, a small subset of patients on immunotherapy may not benefit at all from immunotherapy, instead, they experience a faster and more aggressive progression of the tumor than expected, with a dramatic acceleration of the disease, which is referred to as hyperprogression (HP) or hyperprogressive disease (HPD). Patients with HPD could suffer a deleterious survival effect and significantly shorter OS, suggesting that HP should be managed as fulminant toxicity and needs to be considered before immunotherapy is initiated. Existing literature has reviewed and summarized the definition, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factors and possible mechanisms of HP. However, with the gradual deepening of the exploration of HPD, researchers have made significant breakthroughs in elucidating the mechanism and mechanism of HPD and exploring biomarkers. On this basis, we reviewed and summarized the definition, incidence, diagnostic criteria, reported risk factor and possible mechanisms of HPD in recent years, and briefly introduced a novel perspective that few people mentioned: the potential biomarkers of HPD. We present the following article in accordance with the Narrative Review reporting checklist (available at https://dx.doi. org/10.21037/tlcr-21-575).
## (s3) Appearance, definitions, and diagnosis of HPD
Number of References: 9

(p3.0) HPD is considered to be an acceleration of tumor growth after ICI treatment that is not only due to immune infiltration but also due to real disease progression (4,5). It was first reported in a retrospective study published by Lahmar et al. in 2016. They performed a retrospective study of 89 NSCLC patients treated by ICIs, calculated the tumor growth rate [TGR: the log-scale calibrated change in the sum of the volumes of the target lesions according to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 criteria per month] before and after ICIs treatment, and found that ΔTGR (difference between TGR during ICIs and TGR at baseline) was <0 in 79 patients and >0 in 20 patients; and among these 20 patients, 9 had a ΔTGR >50%, meaning that tumor volume increased at least 50% during immunotherapy (6). In the same year, Chubachi et al. also reported a case of rapid lung cancer progression after 3 cycles of nivolumab treatment and described it as a "disease flare" (7). Later, in 2017, Champiat and his colleagues defined HPD as patients who have been assessed with disease progression by the RECIST for the first evaluation with at least a 2-fold increase in TGR before and after receiving immunotherapy. Subsequently, an increasing number of studies have confirmed the existence of the HPD phenomenon in many types of tumors, like NSCLC, esophageal squamous carcinoma, melanoma, soft tissue sarcoma, etc. (8)(9)(10)(11). HP has become an increasingly recognized phenomenon.
## (s7) Liquid biopsy
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) As a branch of in vitro diagnosis, liquid biopsy is a noninvasive blood test to monitor circulating tumor cells (CTCs), circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) and cellfree DNA (cfDNA) fragments released into the blood by tumors or metastatic lesions. ctDNA and cfDNA can reflect blood-based tumor mutational burden (bTMB) and chromosomal instability of cancer cells, which has been linked to poor prognosis and resistance to treatment in several malignancies. By analyzing the mutations detected in ctDNA, bTMB can be calculated to evaluate tumor response to immunotherapy, and increased TMB has been associated with a higher likelihood of immunotherapy response (37)(38)(39). More importantly, the dynamics of ctDNA may be more sensitive than radiological tests. In a study involving 125 melanoma patients, the researchers found that none of the patients (n=9) who were finally diagnosed with pseudoprogression did not observe a significant increase in ctDNA (even it is detectable at baseline, subsequent ctDNA levels will be reduced by >10 times due to treatment), despite the significant increase in tumor size on imaging (40). And Weiss et al. used chromosomal number instability (CNI) score to evaluate 56 patients treated with immunotherapy across multiple tumor types, six of whom had HP, and in 5 of these 6 cases, the CNI score also predicted progression at an earlier time (∼6-9 weeks) compared with routine imaging (41). This shows that cfDNA is expected to become a potential biomarker for predicting HPD.
