# VQE Method: A Short Survey and Recent Developments

CorpusID: 232232828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2597059cd9794c8016ae098e2c72662d3752006a)

Fields: Physics, Chemistry

## (s2) Introduction to VQE
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) The VQE method was introduced to mitigate the significant hardware demands needed by the QPE approach on NISQ devices. VQE is a hybrid quantum-classical algorithm, where the computational workload is shared between the classical and quantum components of the hardware. It starts with a reasonable assumption about the form of the target wave function. The most common choice is to represent a wave function in a basis of atom-centered Gaussian basis functions. However, plane wave basis sets [39] can be used as well as the recently proposed "basis-set free" approach [40]. A trial wave function or ansatz is constructed with adjustable parameters, followed by the design of a quantum circuit capable of realizing this ansatz. The ansatz parameters are then variationally adjusted until the expectation value of the electronic Hamiltonian
## (s7) Double Unitary Coupled Cluster (DUCC) Ansatz
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) In modeling second-quantized problems, the major challenge comes from the sizable number of qubits that scales linearly with the size of the basis. To address this issue and enable more realistic simulations on NISQ computers, active space approximations are often employed. Along this line, Metcalf et al. [57] recently reported VQE applications based on DUCC ansatz that originate from the subsystem embedding sub-algebras coupled cluster studies [58] to constitute the effective form of the system Hamiltonian
## (s8) Quantum Subspace Expansion (QSE)
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) The QSE scheme is similar to the generalized eigenvalue problem that is often encountered in quantum chemistry, where the Hamiltonian is diagonalized in a general non-orthogonal basis of many-body states, [59,25,60,61,62,63,64,65] Hc = ScE.
## (s12) Symmetry-Preserving State Preparation
Number of References: 10

(p12.0) The idea of imposing symmetries associated with particle number, spin, and timereversal symmetries goes along with the approach that bases the VQE ansatzes on the capabilities of the hardware and performs state preparation through combining parameterized gates available on the processor. [85,86] The ansatzes in this category have the advantage of being compatible with the capabilities of the hardware, but the ad hoc ansatzes of this type can also cause the so-called "barren plateaus" problem [50], where gradients vanish exponentially in a sufficiently expressive parameterized quantum circuits, which in turn requires an exponentially large precision to navigate through the "barren plateaus" landscape. Similar problems (i.e., gradient-vanishing) existed in the early studies of deep neural networks [87,88,89] with mitigation techniques proposed later on. [90,91,92,93] Nevertheless, for hardware-based ansatzes to be successful in solving the problems of interest, most of the approaches have focused on assuring that the hardware-based ansatzes span the part of the Hilbert space that includes the true solution.
