# A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain

CorpusID: 253038400 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Overview of HEVC Coding Structure
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].
## (s5) HEVC Video Forgeries
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p5.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
## (s36) Overview of HEVC Coding Structure
Number of References: 2

(p36.0) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].
## (s40) HEVC Video Forgeries
Number of References: 4

(p40.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p40.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
