# Citation: molecules Stereoselective Synthesis of Flavonoids: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 255521564 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d55f6011a3d20f501717404f8fe2b448e0a027e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d55f6011a3d20f501717404f8fe2b448e0a027e)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 5

(p0.0) Flavonoids constitute a major group of polyphenolic compounds found in plants, fruits, vegetables, and nuts. They are associated with several roles in flora, namely, cell growth modulation and defence against extreme environmental conditions and oxidative stress. Moreover, they contribute to the perfume and colour in fruits and flowers, therefore promoting pollination [1,2]. In addition to flavonoids commonly found in terrestrial plants, some bioactive flavonoids can also be found in marine sources [3]. Structurally, flavonoids are composed of a 15-carbon scaffold with two aromatic rings (A and B) attached through a 3-carbon chain, which could be a heterocyclic ring denominated as a C ring. According to the degree of unsaturation and oxidation of the C ring and the position of the B ring, they can be categorised into different classes ( Figure 1). In nature, this wide array of moieties is obtained through the combination of shikimate and acetate pathways under enzymatic transformation, with chalcones being the intermediates for the biosynthesis of the other classes of flavonoids [2,4].
## (s12) Organocatalysis
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Flavonoids can also be obtained through organocatalytic asymmetric processes with the aim of acquiring enantiomeric pure forms of these natural compounds. Biddle et al. [88] proposed an asymmetric synthesis of flavanones based on the intramolecular conjugated addition of α-substituted chalcones, using thiourea compounds as catalysts ( Figure 19). The application of this methodology culminated in the synthesis of the flavanone scaffold with 94% of enantiomeric excess [88].
## (s14) Organometallic Catalysis
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) In addition to the enantiomeric pure flavonoids mediated by organocatalysis, organometallic compounds were also employed to promote the stereoselective synthesis of this natural compound. Due to their major interest in obtaining these compounds in the enantiomerically pure form, Lestini et al. [90] focused on the conjugate addition of chromones and arylboronic acids via palladium(II)-pyridinooxazoline catalysis to achieve their goal. For the purpose of enhancing the efficiency of the methodology, they undertook the catalytic process in palladium-nanoreactors with the aim of resulting in a catalytic stability increment. Then, they functionalised pyridinooxazoline with an acrylate monomer, which, in turn, was linked to palladium(II) trifluoroacetate and, subsequently, integrated in the nanoparticle, where the enantioselective synthesis of flavanones occurred. The final products were obtained within a range of from 79% to 84% of enantiomeric excess, highlighting the scientific relevance of this method regarding the enantioselective synthesis of natural bioactive compounds with antitumor, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial activities [90] ( Figure 21). 
## (s19) Chiral Pool Methodology
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Another approach to achieve highly enantiomerically pure forms of chiral derivatives of flavonoids is through the chiral pool strategy. This method was employed As a consequence of the medicinal relevance of chiral flavanones, Zhu et al. [101] were inspired by a biomimetic asymmetric reduction in NAD(P)H-dependent to synthesise the enantiomeric forms of these flavonoids. They proceeded to elaborate on the chiral [2.2]paracyclophane-based NAD(P)H models (CYNAMs), in which, after reaction conditions' optimisation, one of the models was applied to obtain enantiomeric tetrasubstituted alkene flavanones (Figure 29), culminating in the formation of most chiral forms in an enantiomeric excess array between 90% and 99% [101]. With this methodology, they were able to reinforce the importance of biocatalysis and the respective cofactors to enable the stereoselective synthesis of flavonoids with higher enantiomeric purity. As a consequence of the medicinal relevance of chiral flavanones, Zhu et al. [101] were inspired by a biomimetic asymmetric reduction in NAD(P)H-dependent to synthesise the enantiomeric forms of these flavonoids. They proceeded to elaborate on the chiral [2.2]paracyclophane-based NAD(P)H models (CYNAMs), in which, after reaction conditions' optimisation, one of the models was applied to obtain enantiomeric tetrasubstituted alkene flavanones (Figure 29), culminating in the formation of most chiral forms in an enantiomeric excess array between 90% and 99% [101]. With this methodology, they were able to reinforce the importance of biocatalysis and the respective cofactors to enable the stereoselective synthesis of flavonoids with higher enantiomeric purity. 
