# SURVEY OF FEDERATED LEARNING MODELS FOR SPATIAL-TEMPORAL MOBILITY APPLICATIONS A PREPRINT

CorpusID: 258564828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1bd8cb97f207dee598c54ea40fd65b3ab7c140d5)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Federated Learning
Number of References: 5

(p1.0) Federated Learning (FL) is a paradigm to perform distributed machine learning at the edge [11,46,72,52]. In FL, models are trained in a decentralized fashion without the need to collect and process user data centrally. The central service provider distributes a shared ML model to multiple users for training on local data, and then aggregates the resulting models into a single, more powerful model, using Federated Averaging [72].
## (s18) Clustering Based Approaches
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) Most existing works in clustering in federated learning are focused on methods to identify and self-organize devices into communities are so to conduct model sharing within those communities. In [13], authors introduce and evaluate a hierarchical clustering for vision models, where the local model is a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) that is trained under supervised learning. The extensive evaluation presents the improvement that hierarchical clustering can bring to federated learning under a non-iid setting where each client holds partitioned data. In [50], the authors propose the dynamic GAN-based clustering in FL to improve the time series forecasting for cases such as cell tower handover prediction. Their proposed approach accounts for the adaptive clusters and non-iid data. IFCA proposed by [36] starts by randomly initializing k models, one per cluster. Each client assigns itself to a cluster at the start of each round of training by evaluating all k models on its local data and choosing the model with the lowest loss to train for m epochs. At the end of each round, the server performs federated averaging within each cluster of clients separately.
