# Anticancer activity of glycoalkaloids from Solanum plants: A review

CorpusID: 254295613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/adb3a9e7128a29e537260970a4a7ec6553fab707](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/adb3a9e7128a29e537260970a4a7ec6553fab707)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Cancer is one of the most common causes of death globally. In 2020, approximately 19 million new cases of cancer and 10 million deaths due to cancer were registered. The number of cancer cases is expected to increase to more than 28 million over the next 20 years (Sung et al., 2021). In men, the most common neoplasms were lung cancer (14.3%) and prostate cancer (14.1%). In women, breast (24.5%) and colorectal cancer (9.4%) are the most frequently diagnosed. In 2020, the highest percentage of cancer deaths in men was caused by lung cancer (21.5%) and liver cancer (10.5%), while in women, breast cancer (15.5%) and lung cancer (13.7%) were the leading causes of death (Sung et al., 2021). These estimations are based on the GLOBOCAN database prepared by the International Agency for Research on Cancer.
## (s8) Conclusion and future perspectives
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Solanaceae GAs seem to be a promising agent for the development of alternative methods of cancer treatment. This study summarizes the latest in silico, in vitro, and in vivo studies on the anticancer properties of these compounds, with a focus on their mechanisms of action. These plant secondary metabolites have the potential to become new pharmaceuticals for the treatment of tumors because they act on different cancer cell lines, even at low concentrations. GAs are involved in many cell signaling pathways; therefore, they can influence cancer cells through diverse mechanisms, such as interactions with microtubules or changes in Bax and Bcl-2 expression. These compounds may be applied separately or in combination with other drugs or therapies, improving their effectiveness. GA extracts from plants also have promising cytotoxic effects on tumor cells due to the synergistic effects of their components. Key factors that influence the anticancer activity of GAs include the location, type, and number of carbohydrate molecules. There is a strong relationship between structure and function; therefore, modification of GA structures may also allow for the discovery of new potential anticancer drugs (Akter et al., 2015;Ahmad, 2019). However, some studies indicate that cytotoxic effects due to these compounds also occur in healthy cells. Therefore, in the search for new directions for the use of GAs, it is important to consider the safety of GA drugs. Taken together, although the effects of GAs on cells have been intensively studied, the precise mechanisms of their action in organisms remain to be elucidated. More research needs to be conducted to explore new, more selective, and less toxic cancer therapies and improve the effectiveness of applied treatment methods because cancer remains one of the leading causes of death worldwide.
