# Ovarian absence: a systematic literature review and case series report

CorpusID: 255847526 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5901f73037c90e6c66a9352a12381ca727cb45d7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5901f73037c90e6c66a9352a12381ca727cb45d7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Case #1
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.

(p8.1) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.
## (s45) Case #1
Number of References: 4

(p45.0) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.

(p45.1) A 15-year-old postmenarchal girl presented to Yale New Haven Children's Hospital for a diagnostic laparoscopy due to chronic abdominal and pelvic pain. Menarche occurred at age 12. She reported regular menses with normal flow and acyclic pelvic and flank pain. She denied being sexually active. Past medical and surgical history were significant for ADHD, dyslexia, nephrolithiasis, constipation, tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy. There was no documented family history of endometriosis, but there was a suspicion for endometriosis necessitating oophorectomy in the maternal grandmother. Physical exam was notable for tenderness with deep palpation in the left upper and lower abdominal quadrants. She had age-appropriate secondary sexual characteristics with Tanner stage 5 breasts and Tanner stage 4 pubic hair. The external inspection of the genitalia revealed normal labia, clitoris, prepuce, external urethra meatus, and annular hymen. Renal ultrasound demonstrated leftsided nonobstructing kidney stones. The transabdominal pelvic ultrasound was unremarkable. Three prior ultrasounds reported normal-appearing ovaries bilaterally. The patient was started on continuous combined ethinyl estradiol-progesterone oral formulation to suppress menses due to suspicion of endometriosis. After four months, she continued to experience pelvic pain and irregular vaginal bleeding. Following a shared decision-making process, the patient and guardian elected to proceed with diagnostic laparoscopy. Surgery revealed a normal appearing uterus with bilateral round ligaments and a normal appearing right fallopian tube leading to an enlarged right ovary. Lesions suspicious for endometriosis were observed and biopsied in the pouch of Douglas, on the sigmoid colon, and the right uterosacral ligament. The left ovary, distal fallopian tube, and utero-ovarian ligament were absent. The left cornua of the uterus had a 3 cm tubular structure which was presumed to be the left fallopian tube remnant. (Fig. 1). The left ureter was clearly observed passing over the external iliac vessels, but no other adnexal structures, including the infundibulopelvic (IP) ligament, were observed. Multiple peritoneal biopsies revealed endometriosis and stage 3 was assigned per American Society for Reproductive Medicine were excluded c encompasses manuscripts that did not mention imaging findings (not stated), or reported non-tuboovarian imaging studies (e.g. chest X-ray) classification [25]. A second gynecology attending physician was consulted intraoperatively and concurred with the incidental finding of the absent left ovary. The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Endometriosis was managed by a 30 mcg-1.5 mg ethinyl estradiolnorethindrone pill in continuous regimen, resulting in amenorrhea and the resolution of both pelvic and flank pain. Postoperative MRI of the abdomen and pelvis did not identify ortho/heterotopic left ovary.
