# Racial disparities in Black men with prostate cancer: A literature review

CorpusID: 252088857 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45b633fd3ac8c9df19692d900ff09bbe098108e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45b633fd3ac8c9df19692d900ff09bbe098108e7)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s4) Crmmuincaricrin
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Communication issues offer further explanations for the racial disparities reported in PCa diagnosis and treatment within the United States. 42 Black men were unlikely to report good physician-patient communication compared with White men (60% vs. 71%, respectively; p < .001), 42 with conversations regarding PSA screening described as infrequent and suboptimal. 35 A retrospective analysis of 1308 men with PCa reported that decisions on PCa and screening among Black men were heavily dependent on information from community members, family, and interpersonal sources, such as barbers and pastors. 43,44 The inclusion of women in community outreach programs and health fairs positively impacted attendance, with men remarking on how women emphasize and start conversions about preventative care. 45 Such preferences for receiving information on PCa highlight how health care programs should be culturally tailored to communicate effectively with Black patients.
## (s5) Kinrwali gi rf PCr wcihcin ihi Balrak armmuinciy
Number of References: 9

(p5.0) Nearly one half of Black men report being uneducated about PCa screening (e.g., PSA testing or digital rectal examination). 37,46,47 Studies evaluating PCa knowledge reported low scores among Black men across various ages, educational levels, and SES levels. 46,47 Assessing knowledge of PCa using a 12-item questionnaire, Ogunsanya et al. reported that 47% of 267 Black patients had no knowledge of the signs of the disease, PSA testing, guidelines for screening age, and posttreatment quality of life. 47 Black men were unlikely to be provided with information Cancer November 1, 2022 essential to shared decision-making (SDM) before PSA testing 35 and, when provided with information, remained confused compared with White men (13.1% vs. 4.8%; p = .008). 44 In addition, more Black men with aggressive, high-risk PCa misperceived the severity of their disease compared with White men and thus were unlikely to pursue treatment. 48 T irimiini raaiii fr Balrak miin
