# Application of named entity recognition method for Indonesian datasets: a review

CorpusID: 255024417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/941c79b384bc652cca8e8fe5b0e406ae971af713)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s8) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
Number of References: 4

(p8.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p8.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
## (s29) Recommendations for illegal Fintech supervision strategies with the NER approach based on social media data and online news
Number of References: 4

(p29.0) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 

(p29.1) Based on the SLR, new ideas emerge to utilize this method in the era of technological and social media transformation. The digital economy can change society and business's economic activities, from what was originally manual to fully automated. This impacts the provision of financial services by startups and Fintech companies. Currently, Fintech practices in Indonesia are very developed, starting from payments, funding, and Robo-advisors. However, in its implementation, Fintech lending (online lending) received special attention because it caused several problems, namely the emergence of illegal fintech. Unreasonable billing processes, issues of personal data protection, and even moral hazards are the focus of the supervision. In Indonesia, a government website channel is available for illegal Fintech complaints, but people tend to use social media to submit their complaints [15]. With the NER concept described in the previous section and the basics of libraries, POS tagging, and named entities, this research becomes the basis for developing ML models in the early identification of platform names on social media. Figure 6 is our proposed Fintech supervision model with social media data and online news that can be used for further research. 
