# DYADIC MODELS FOR FLUID EQUATIONS: A SURVEY

CorpusID: 252408511 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s11) Regularity and blow-up problems.
Number of References: 24

(p11.0) It was first shown in [55] that solutions of (3.6) without external forcing starting from positive initial data develop finite time blow-up when the dissipation degree γ < 1 4 . Later, Cheskidov [16] proved finite time blow-up for (3.6) with γ < 1 3 if the initial data is nonnegative and large. Namely, Theorem 3.10. Let a(t) be a solution to (3.6) with a j (0) ≥ 0 and f j = 0 for all j ≥ 0, and γ < 1 3 . Then for every s > 0 there exists a constant M (s) such that a(t) 3  

(p11.1) and hence, for any n > 4 we have that for d > 0 small enough a blow-up occurs, as θ > 3 in that case. In particular, a blow-up occurs when the dyadic model scales as the five-dimensional NSE. Remarkably, 5D is a common threshold for models exhibiting a blow-up, see [92]. In fact, we conjecture that every solution of the inviscid dyadic model wants to exhibit Onsager's scaling, and solutions of the viscous dyadic model cannot have a blow-up worse than Onsager's, see Subsection 3.1.4 for more discussion. Hence, the blow-up occurs only for viscous dyadic models with critical spaces higher than Onsager's. This suggests that Theorem 3.11 is optimal. We also note the presence of the gap 1 3 ≤ γ < 1 2 between the two scenarios of finite time blow-up and global regularity. The gap was made smaller thanks to a regularity result of Barbato, Morandin and Romito [9]. The authors showed global regularity for (3.6) with γ ≥ 2 5 by finding an invariant region for the vector (a j , a j+1 ) through a dynamical system argument. It is remarkable that γ ≥ 2 5 corresponds to θ ≤ 5 2 and hence d ≥ 0, i.e., this covers the whole physically relevant intermittency regime. Therefore, [9] settles that solutions to the dyadic model corresponding to the 3D NSE are globally regular.

(p11.2) It was first shown in [55] that solutions of (3.6) without external forcing starting from positive initial data develop finite time blow-up when the dissipation degree γ < 1 4 . Later, Cheskidov [16] proved finite time blow-up for (3.6) with γ < 1 3 if the initial data is nonnegative and large. Namely, Theorem 3.10. Let a(t) be a solution to (3.6) with a j (0) ≥ 0 and f j = 0 for all j ≥ 0, and γ < 1 3 . Then for every s > 0 there exists a constant M (s) such that a(t) 3  

(p11.3) and hence, for any n > 4 we have that for d > 0 small enough a blow-up occurs, as θ > 3 in that case. In particular, a blow-up occurs when the dyadic model scales as the five-dimensional NSE. Remarkably, 5D is a common threshold for models exhibiting a blow-up, see [92]. In fact, we conjecture that every solution of the inviscid dyadic model wants to exhibit Onsager's scaling, and solutions of the viscous dyadic model cannot have a blow-up worse than Onsager's, see Subsection 3.1.4 for more discussion. Hence, the blow-up occurs only for viscous dyadic models with critical spaces higher than Onsager's. This suggests that Theorem 3.11 is optimal. We also note the presence of the gap 1 3 ≤ γ < 1 2 between the two scenarios of finite time blow-up and global regularity. The gap was made smaller thanks to a regularity result of Barbato, Morandin and Romito [9]. The authors showed global regularity for (3.6) with γ ≥ 2 5 by finding an invariant region for the vector (a j , a j+1 ) through a dynamical system argument. It is remarkable that γ ≥ 2 5 corresponds to θ ≤ 5 2 and hence d ≥ 0, i.e., this covers the whole physically relevant intermittency regime. Therefore, [9] settles that solutions to the dyadic model corresponding to the 3D NSE are globally regular.
## (s22) Multiplicative noise.
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form
## (s23) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
Number of References: 6

(p23.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p23.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2
## (s49) Regularity and blow-up problems.
Number of References: 24

(p49.0) It was first shown in [55] that solutions of (3.6) without external forcing starting from positive initial data develop finite time blow-up when the dissipation degree γ < 1 4 . Later, Cheskidov [16] proved finite time blow-up for (3.6) with γ < 1 3 if the initial data is nonnegative and large. Namely, Theorem 3.10. Let a(t) be a solution to (3.6) with a j (0) ≥ 0 and f j = 0 for all j ≥ 0, and γ < 1 3 . Then for every s > 0 there exists a constant M (s) such that a(t) 3  

(p49.1) and hence, for any n > 4 we have that for d > 0 small enough a blow-up occurs, as θ > 3 in that case. In particular, a blow-up occurs when the dyadic model scales as the five-dimensional NSE. Remarkably, 5D is a common threshold for models exhibiting a blow-up, see [92]. In fact, we conjecture that every solution of the inviscid dyadic model wants to exhibit Onsager's scaling, and solutions of the viscous dyadic model cannot have a blow-up worse than Onsager's, see Subsection 3.1.4 for more discussion. Hence, the blow-up occurs only for viscous dyadic models with critical spaces higher than Onsager's. This suggests that Theorem 3.11 is optimal. We also note the presence of the gap 1 3 ≤ γ < 1 2 between the two scenarios of finite time blow-up and global regularity. The gap was made smaller thanks to a regularity result of Barbato, Morandin and Romito [9]. The authors showed global regularity for (3.6) with γ ≥ 2 5 by finding an invariant region for the vector (a j , a j+1 ) through a dynamical system argument. It is remarkable that γ ≥ 2 5 corresponds to θ ≤ 5 2 and hence d ≥ 0, i.e., this covers the whole physically relevant intermittency regime. Therefore, [9] settles that solutions to the dyadic model corresponding to the 3D NSE are globally regular.

(p49.2) It was first shown in [55] that solutions of (3.6) without external forcing starting from positive initial data develop finite time blow-up when the dissipation degree γ < 1 4 . Later, Cheskidov [16] proved finite time blow-up for (3.6) with γ < 1 3 if the initial data is nonnegative and large. Namely, Theorem 3.10. Let a(t) be a solution to (3.6) with a j (0) ≥ 0 and f j = 0 for all j ≥ 0, and γ < 1 3 . Then for every s > 0 there exists a constant M (s) such that a(t) 3  

(p49.3) and hence, for any n > 4 we have that for d > 0 small enough a blow-up occurs, as θ > 3 in that case. In particular, a blow-up occurs when the dyadic model scales as the five-dimensional NSE. Remarkably, 5D is a common threshold for models exhibiting a blow-up, see [92]. In fact, we conjecture that every solution of the inviscid dyadic model wants to exhibit Onsager's scaling, and solutions of the viscous dyadic model cannot have a blow-up worse than Onsager's, see Subsection 3.1.4 for more discussion. Hence, the blow-up occurs only for viscous dyadic models with critical spaces higher than Onsager's. This suggests that Theorem 3.11 is optimal. We also note the presence of the gap 1 3 ≤ γ < 1 2 between the two scenarios of finite time blow-up and global regularity. The gap was made smaller thanks to a regularity result of Barbato, Morandin and Romito [9]. The authors showed global regularity for (3.6) with γ ≥ 2 5 by finding an invariant region for the vector (a j , a j+1 ) through a dynamical system argument. It is remarkable that γ ≥ 2 5 corresponds to θ ≤ 5 2 and hence d ≥ 0, i.e., this covers the whole physically relevant intermittency regime. Therefore, [9] settles that solutions to the dyadic model corresponding to the 3D NSE are globally regular.
## (s60) Multiplicative noise.
Number of References: 2

(p60.0) Stochastic dyadic models with multiplicative noise have also been investigated. In particular, Barbato, Flandoli and Morandin [3] considered the inviscid model with multiplicative stochastic forcing in Stratonovich form
## (s61) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
Number of References: 6

(p61.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p61.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2
