# A review of studies of the proteomes of circulating microparticles: key roles for galectin-3-binding protein-expressing microparticles in vascular diseases and systemic lupus erythematosus

CorpusID: 255442988 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7dca47398d703ecc884724088b09e8cf5f549e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7dca47398d703ecc884724088b09e8cf5f549e0)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s6) Venous thromboembolism
Number of References: 4

(p6.0) Ramacciotti et al. [12] found that G3BP was also enriched in plasma MPs in nine patients with deep venous thrombosis (DVT) compared to nine patients with leg pain without DVT and to six healthy controls. Also, complement proteins, immunoglobulins, A2M, CD5 antigen-like protein, clusterin, and polymeric immunoglobulin receptor were increased in MPs from DVT patients. It should be noted that in this study the samples were analysed three times and only A2M and G3BP were consistently identified in all three experiments in each patient. DeRoo et al. [58] explored the role of G3BP and galectin-3 (gal-3) in a mouse model of venous thromboembolism (VTE).
## (s11) The cellular origin of G3BP-expressing microparticles
Number of References: 8

(p11.0) The cellular origin of G3BP-positive MPs under various conditions remains to be established. G3BP has been identified in high abundance in leukocytes, endothelial cells, and red blood cells and has been undetectable or present at a low abundance in platelets or plateletderived MPs in humans. The G3BP gene expression is also dominant in type I IFN-activated neutrophils and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in SLE patients [66]. In contrast, in a mouse model (C57CL/6 strain) G3BP was detected in platelets, circulating MPs, red blood cells, but not leukocytes [58]. This underscores the difficulty of translating animal studies of the molecular pathology of thrombosis (and SLE) to human systems. The available data from studies in humans strongly suggest that the majority of the G3BP-overexpressing MPs in the circulation originate from neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells.

(p11.1) The cellular origin of G3BP-positive MPs under various conditions remains to be established. G3BP has been identified in high abundance in leukocytes, endothelial cells, and red blood cells and has been undetectable or present at a low abundance in platelets or plateletderived MPs in humans. The G3BP gene expression is also dominant in type I IFN-activated neutrophils and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in SLE patients [66]. In contrast, in a mouse model (C57CL/6 strain) G3BP was detected in platelets, circulating MPs, red blood cells, but not leukocytes [58]. This underscores the difficulty of translating animal studies of the molecular pathology of thrombosis (and SLE) to human systems. The available data from studies in humans strongly suggest that the majority of the G3BP-overexpressing MPs in the circulation originate from neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells.
## (s14) Galectin-3-binding protein and venous thromboembolism
Number of References: 16

(p14.0) VTE occurs as a result of blood stasis, hypercoagulability, and increased pro-coagulant adhesion molecules on endothelial cells in conjunction with inflammation. Circulating MPs are pro-coagulant and can contribute to thrombosis by their exposure of TF and phosphatidylserine [4]. Soluble, cell-, and MP-exposed gal-3 and G3BP may modulate thrombogenesis, particularly the involved inflammatory cascades, and are interesting future therapeutic targets [13].

(p14.1) It has been become apparent that inflammation contributes to VTE. In a study by deRoo and coworkers, activated platelets expressed P-selectin and PSGL-1 that lead to increased leukocyte adhesion and thrombus formation. Binding of G3BP to gal-1 on the platelets resulted in an increased P-selectin expression and promoted platelet activation and thrombogenesis [58]. This may trigger increased MP-G3BP release and perpetuate the platelet activation. Also, G3BP and gal-3 affected the cell-cell adhesion on the thrombus-endothelial interface and the thrombus itself and were increased on the endothelium in a mouse model of VTE [58]. Additionally, in this study, during early VTE gal-3 was greatly increased and G3BP and gal-3 co-localized in the leukocyte/endothelial cell interface and leukocytes were attached to the vein wall. The thrombus size correlated with gal-3 and interleukin-6 in the vein wall, and the vein wall inflammatory changes seemed driven by triggering of IL-6 by gal-3 and the proinflammatory chemokine CCL2. In patients with acute VTE elevated levels of circulating G3BP were found. Accordingly, G3BP seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of VTE and thrombophilia. In SLE increased rates of VTE are a prominent feature and G3BP may be a novel thrombophilia risk factor independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies. We have also observed that increased levels of plasma G3BP were a predictor of venous thromboembolic events in SLE patients independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (unpublished data). Clarification of the role of G3BP needs further exploration in VTE. If further studies support an important role for G3BP in thrombosis the development of G3BP or gal-3 blocking compounds seems to be attractive future therapeutic approaches.

(p14.2) VTE occurs as a result of blood stasis, hypercoagulability, and increased pro-coagulant adhesion molecules on endothelial cells in conjunction with inflammation. Circulating MPs are pro-coagulant and can contribute to thrombosis by their exposure of TF and phosphatidylserine [4]. Soluble, cell-, and MP-exposed gal-3 and G3BP may modulate thrombogenesis, particularly the involved inflammatory cascades, and are interesting future therapeutic targets [13].

(p14.3) It has been become apparent that inflammation contributes to VTE. In a study by deRoo and coworkers, activated platelets expressed P-selectin and PSGL-1 that lead to increased leukocyte adhesion and thrombus formation. Binding of G3BP to gal-1 on the platelets resulted in an increased P-selectin expression and promoted platelet activation and thrombogenesis [58]. This may trigger increased MP-G3BP release and perpetuate the platelet activation. Also, G3BP and gal-3 affected the cell-cell adhesion on the thrombus-endothelial interface and the thrombus itself and were increased on the endothelium in a mouse model of VTE [58]. Additionally, in this study, during early VTE gal-3 was greatly increased and G3BP and gal-3 co-localized in the leukocyte/endothelial cell interface and leukocytes were attached to the vein wall. The thrombus size correlated with gal-3 and interleukin-6 in the vein wall, and the vein wall inflammatory changes seemed driven by triggering of IL-6 by gal-3 and the proinflammatory chemokine CCL2. In patients with acute VTE elevated levels of circulating G3BP were found. Accordingly, G3BP seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of VTE and thrombophilia. In SLE increased rates of VTE are a prominent feature and G3BP may be a novel thrombophilia risk factor independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies. We have also observed that increased levels of plasma G3BP were a predictor of venous thromboembolic events in SLE patients independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (unpublished data). Clarification of the role of G3BP needs further exploration in VTE. If further studies support an important role for G3BP in thrombosis the development of G3BP or gal-3 blocking compounds seems to be attractive future therapeutic approaches.
## (s24) Venous thromboembolism
Number of References: 4

(p24.0) Ramacciotti et al. [12] found that G3BP was also enriched in plasma MPs in nine patients with deep venous thrombosis (DVT) compared to nine patients with leg pain without DVT and to six healthy controls. Also, complement proteins, immunoglobulins, A2M, CD5 antigen-like protein, clusterin, and polymeric immunoglobulin receptor were increased in MPs from DVT patients. It should be noted that in this study the samples were analysed three times and only A2M and G3BP were consistently identified in all three experiments in each patient. DeRoo et al. [58] explored the role of G3BP and galectin-3 (gal-3) in a mouse model of venous thromboembolism (VTE).
## (s29) The cellular origin of G3BP-expressing microparticles
Number of References: 8

(p29.0) The cellular origin of G3BP-positive MPs under various conditions remains to be established. G3BP has been identified in high abundance in leukocytes, endothelial cells, and red blood cells and has been undetectable or present at a low abundance in platelets or plateletderived MPs in humans. The G3BP gene expression is also dominant in type I IFN-activated neutrophils and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in SLE patients [66]. In contrast, in a mouse model (C57CL/6 strain) G3BP was detected in platelets, circulating MPs, red blood cells, but not leukocytes [58]. This underscores the difficulty of translating animal studies of the molecular pathology of thrombosis (and SLE) to human systems. The available data from studies in humans strongly suggest that the majority of the G3BP-overexpressing MPs in the circulation originate from neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells.

(p29.1) The cellular origin of G3BP-positive MPs under various conditions remains to be established. G3BP has been identified in high abundance in leukocytes, endothelial cells, and red blood cells and has been undetectable or present at a low abundance in platelets or plateletderived MPs in humans. The G3BP gene expression is also dominant in type I IFN-activated neutrophils and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in SLE patients [66]. In contrast, in a mouse model (C57CL/6 strain) G3BP was detected in platelets, circulating MPs, red blood cells, but not leukocytes [58]. This underscores the difficulty of translating animal studies of the molecular pathology of thrombosis (and SLE) to human systems. The available data from studies in humans strongly suggest that the majority of the G3BP-overexpressing MPs in the circulation originate from neutrophils, monocytes, and endothelial cells.
## (s32) Galectin-3-binding protein and venous thromboembolism
Number of References: 16

(p32.0) VTE occurs as a result of blood stasis, hypercoagulability, and increased pro-coagulant adhesion molecules on endothelial cells in conjunction with inflammation. Circulating MPs are pro-coagulant and can contribute to thrombosis by their exposure of TF and phosphatidylserine [4]. Soluble, cell-, and MP-exposed gal-3 and G3BP may modulate thrombogenesis, particularly the involved inflammatory cascades, and are interesting future therapeutic targets [13].

(p32.1) It has been become apparent that inflammation contributes to VTE. In a study by deRoo and coworkers, activated platelets expressed P-selectin and PSGL-1 that lead to increased leukocyte adhesion and thrombus formation. Binding of G3BP to gal-1 on the platelets resulted in an increased P-selectin expression and promoted platelet activation and thrombogenesis [58]. This may trigger increased MP-G3BP release and perpetuate the platelet activation. Also, G3BP and gal-3 affected the cell-cell adhesion on the thrombus-endothelial interface and the thrombus itself and were increased on the endothelium in a mouse model of VTE [58]. Additionally, in this study, during early VTE gal-3 was greatly increased and G3BP and gal-3 co-localized in the leukocyte/endothelial cell interface and leukocytes were attached to the vein wall. The thrombus size correlated with gal-3 and interleukin-6 in the vein wall, and the vein wall inflammatory changes seemed driven by triggering of IL-6 by gal-3 and the proinflammatory chemokine CCL2. In patients with acute VTE elevated levels of circulating G3BP were found. Accordingly, G3BP seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of VTE and thrombophilia. In SLE increased rates of VTE are a prominent feature and G3BP may be a novel thrombophilia risk factor independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies. We have also observed that increased levels of plasma G3BP were a predictor of venous thromboembolic events in SLE patients independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (unpublished data). Clarification of the role of G3BP needs further exploration in VTE. If further studies support an important role for G3BP in thrombosis the development of G3BP or gal-3 blocking compounds seems to be attractive future therapeutic approaches.

(p32.2) VTE occurs as a result of blood stasis, hypercoagulability, and increased pro-coagulant adhesion molecules on endothelial cells in conjunction with inflammation. Circulating MPs are pro-coagulant and can contribute to thrombosis by their exposure of TF and phosphatidylserine [4]. Soluble, cell-, and MP-exposed gal-3 and G3BP may modulate thrombogenesis, particularly the involved inflammatory cascades, and are interesting future therapeutic targets [13].

(p32.3) It has been become apparent that inflammation contributes to VTE. In a study by deRoo and coworkers, activated platelets expressed P-selectin and PSGL-1 that lead to increased leukocyte adhesion and thrombus formation. Binding of G3BP to gal-1 on the platelets resulted in an increased P-selectin expression and promoted platelet activation and thrombogenesis [58]. This may trigger increased MP-G3BP release and perpetuate the platelet activation. Also, G3BP and gal-3 affected the cell-cell adhesion on the thrombus-endothelial interface and the thrombus itself and were increased on the endothelium in a mouse model of VTE [58]. Additionally, in this study, during early VTE gal-3 was greatly increased and G3BP and gal-3 co-localized in the leukocyte/endothelial cell interface and leukocytes were attached to the vein wall. The thrombus size correlated with gal-3 and interleukin-6 in the vein wall, and the vein wall inflammatory changes seemed driven by triggering of IL-6 by gal-3 and the proinflammatory chemokine CCL2. In patients with acute VTE elevated levels of circulating G3BP were found. Accordingly, G3BP seems to play a role in the pathogenesis of VTE and thrombophilia. In SLE increased rates of VTE are a prominent feature and G3BP may be a novel thrombophilia risk factor independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies. We have also observed that increased levels of plasma G3BP were a predictor of venous thromboembolic events in SLE patients independent of the presence of anti-phospholipid antibodies (unpublished data). Clarification of the role of G3BP needs further exploration in VTE. If further studies support an important role for G3BP in thrombosis the development of G3BP or gal-3 blocking compounds seems to be attractive future therapeutic approaches.
