# Application of crop wild relatives in modern breeding: An overview of resources, experimental and computational methodologies

CorpusID: 253598601 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aeff64fbfec6541b656ed445729243b7f2e58c6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aeff64fbfec6541b656ed445729243b7f2e58c6a)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s6) Pangenomes to capture CWRs genetic variation
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) In recent years, advances in genome sequencing and bioinformatic tool development have extended the means to fully catalogue genetic variation among domestication and CWR populations through the construction of pangenomes Jayakodi et al., 2021;Tay Fernandez et al., 2022). Pangenomes achieve this by providing a comprehensive genomic reference to which both small variants, including single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and structural variants, including presence/absence variation of large nucleotide sections (PAVs), can be identified across diverse populations (Danilevicz et al., 2020). In addition, analysis of pangenomics allows for the more accurate predication of underlying genetics that are associated with phenotypic variation, such as transposable elements, recombination and double-stranded break/repair (Saxena et al., 2014;Dolatabadian et al., 2020;Song et al., 2020). As pangenomes excel in capturing large structural variation, as is increasingly found between highly divergent populations, they are ideally suited for the comparison of domesticated genomes to CWR taxa to capture 'wild genes' that would be overlooked when using a traditional reference genome (Khan et al., 2020). For example, a pangenome assembly of Brassica oleracea with 87 domesticated accessions (Bayer et al., 2021b) identified 58,347 genes across all individuals in comparison to a study that included 8 domesticated accessions and 1 CWR (Golicz et al, 2016) (8 landraces and 1 CWR), which identified a higher number of genes (63,865) (Golicz et al., 2016;Bayer et al., 2021b). Similar findings have been shown in sorghum  and rice (Xu et al., 2012), where the inclusion of CWR individuals led to large increases in the breadth of genes uncovered.
## (s7) Machine learning and CWRs
Number of References: 8

(p7.0) The application of machine learning (ML) has proven its efficiency in handling huge amounts of data and is becoming more popular in various plant science fields including gene identification and classification, and biodiversity analysis (Bayer et al., 2021a). For example, in Arabidopsis a ML model was developed to identify candidate stress-related genes by comparing whole genome expression data between the control and stress samples (Wegrzyn et al., 2014). In soybean, a ML model was developed to predict agronomically important traits, including yield, protein, oil, moisture and height, using SNP markers (Liu et al., 2019). Similarly, Ma et al., 2018., successfully developed a ML model to predict eight phenotypic traits among 2000 wheat individuals using 33,709 DArT (Diversity Array Technology) markers (Ma et al., 2018). ML is now also being used to predict mature yield in early development using a combination of image and genotype data (Danilevicz et al., 2021;Danilevicz et al., 2022). Recently ML models were developed for identification of core and dispensable genes in Oryza sativa L. and Brachypodium distachyon (L.) P. Beauv. using existing pangenomic information. The significant potential of these models is to identify core and dispensable genes in a new species without construction of pangenome (Yocca and Edger, 2022), such approaches can facilitate and speed up genes identification in new cultivated and wild species.
