# Harnessing the Power of LLMs in Practice: A Survey on ChatGPT and Beyond

CorpusID: 258331833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/131c6f328c11706de2c43cd16e0b7c5d5e610b6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/131c6f328c11706de2c43cd16e0b7c5d5e610b6a)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s8) Finetuning data
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) When deploying a model for downstream tasks, it is essential to consider three primary scenarios based on the availability of annotated data: zero, few, and abundant. In this section, we provide a succinct overview of the appropriate models to employ for each scenario. Zero annotated data: In scenarios where annotated data is unavailable, utilizing LLMs in a zero-shot setting proves to be the most suitable approach. LLMs have been shown to outperform previous zero-shot methods [120]. Additionally, the absence of a parameter update process ensures that catastrophic forgetting [49] is avoided since the language model parameters remain unaltered.
## (s21) Use Case with Reasoning.
Number of References: 9

(p21.0) Reasoning, which involves making sense of information, drawing inferences, and making decisions, is one of the essential aspects of human intelligence. It is challenging for NLP. Many existing reasoning tasks can be classified into commonsense reasoning and arithmetic reasoning. Arithmetic reasoning/problem solving. The arithmetic reasoning capability of LLMs benefits greatly from the scaling of model size. For GPT-3, the ability of two-digit addition only becomes apparent when the number of parameters exceeds 13B [16]. Tasks to test arithmetic reasoning are trivial for humans and designed to challenge the capability of transferring natural language into mathematical symbols and multi-step inference. On GSM8k [26], SVAMP [79] and AQuA [61], LLMs, as generalists, have competitive performance with most methods which have task-specific designs. And GPT-4 overperforms any other methods [76], even some huge models particularly tuned for arithmetic problems [104]. Nevertheless, it should be noted that, without the intervention of external tools, LLMs may occasionally make mistakes in performing basic calculations, although chain-of-thought (CoT) prompting [115] can significantly improve LLMs' ability in calculations. Commonsense reasoning. Commonsense reasoning not only requires LLMs to remember factual knowledge but also requires LLMs to do several inference steps about the facts. Commonsense reasoning increases gradually with the growth of model size. Compared to fine-tuned models, LLMs keep the superiority on most datasets, such as StrategyQA [36] and ARC-C [25]. Especially on ARC-C, which contains difficult questions in science exams from grade 3 to grade 9,
