# molecules Sharpless Asymmetric Dihydroxylation: An Impressive Gadget for the Synthesis of Natural Products: A Review

CorpusID: 257658088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e439ac38ec463c282f57d54a439ffd18fa453a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e439ac38ec463c282f57d54a439ffd18fa453a9)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s25) Scheme 21. Synthesis of bryostatin 152.
Number of References: 3

(p25.0) Among recently used microtubule stabilizing agents (MSAs), zampanolide is found to be one of the most rare and effective macrolides that possesses high potential against cancer cells owing to its covalent bonding to β-tubulin [83]. Chen et al. [84] in 2020 reported the synthesis of two new zampanolide impersonators in a number of steps involving name reactions, i.e., Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, Wittig reaction, Yamaguchi esterification and Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons reaction. The first step of total synthesis involved the Wittig reaction between 2-fluorobenzaldehyde 153 and ethyl 2-(triphenyl-phosphoranylidene)acetate 154, followed by reduction leading to the synthesis of compound 155. The chiral centers at position 17 and 18 were imported either via AD-mix-α or via AD-mix-β in the presence of respective ligand (DHQ)2PHAL/(DHDQ)2PHAL and osmium salt. Compound 156 was further made to react with MsCl followed by introduction of epoxide ring via Williamson ether synthesis. Methoxymethyl (MOM) was used as protecting group for alcohol moiety, which was further treated with iodo ether 158 to give a racemic mixture of compound 159 in 22-23% yield. Yamaguchi esterification was carried out to fuse the fragments 159 and 160, followed by treatment with the complex of hydrogen fluoride and pyridine, which resulted in the synthesis of compound 161. Compound 161 was made to react with Dess-Martin periodinane followed by Horner-Wadsworth-Emmons condensation in the presence of barium hydroxide catalyst. In the last step, HCl was used for the deprotection of alcohols, leading to the complete synthesis of zampanolide mimic 162 (Scheme 22). Carreira et al. [85] reported the total synthesis of formosalides A and B, which play an important role in combating cancer. These are macrolides that are isolated from the marine dinoflagellate Prorocentrum sp. Propargylation reaction, i.e., Krische propargylation between 163 and 164 afforded compound 165 in 56% yield with 95% ee and dr >20:1. Several steps were carried out to obtain compound 166 in 44% yield. In the next step, Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation and asymmetric ketene cycloaddition took place one after the other to give compound 167 in 46% yield. As a result of Weinreb ketone synthesis, Evans-Tishchenko reaction and ring-closing alkyne metathesis, compound 168 was obtained in 30% yield. In the last step, Stille coupling resulted in synthesis of two formosalides 169 (Scheme 23).
## (s35) Isoprenylated Chalcone Skeleton/Flavonoid
Number of References: 3

(p35.0) Various anti-cancerous drugs are isolated from natural products such as chalcones [99]. Sanjoseolide, a natural product containing an isoprenylated chalcone skeleton, obtained from Dalea frustecens, has wide pharmacological significance, as it has been found to be effective against inflammation, cancer and diabetes [100]. Owing to its huge medicinal importance, Tian et al. [101] in 2020 reported an efficient method for the synthesis of sanjoseolide by carrying out Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, Stille coupling and Claisen-Schmidt condensation. In the first step, 2,4-dihydroxyacetophenone 208 was treated with I2 and KIO3 followed by protection with a methoxymethyl group, leading to the synthesis of compound 209 in 90% yield. Compound 209 was then reacted with Pd(PPh3)4 and 210 followed by Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, giving compound 211 in 44% yield. Compound 211 was then treated with aldehyde in the presence of potassium hydroxide, and deprotection of hydroxyl groups was carried out in the presence of HCl to obtain sanjoseolide 212 in 49% yield (Scheme 29). 
## (s36) Isoprenylated Chalcone Skeleton/Flavonoid
Number of References: 3

(p36.0) Various anti-cancerous drugs are isolated from natural products such as chalcones [99]. Sanjoseolide, a natural product containing an isoprenylated chalcone skeleton, obtained from Dalea frustecens, has wide pharmacological significance, as it has been found to be effective against inflammation, cancer and diabetes [100]. Owing to its huge medicinal importance, Tian et al. [101] in 2020 reported an efficient method for the synthesis of sanjoseolide by carrying out Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, Stille coupling and Claisen-Schmidt condensation. In the first step, 2,4-dihydroxyacetophenone 208 was treated with I 2 and KIO 3 followed by protection with a methoxymethyl group, leading to the synthesis of compound 209 in 90% yield. Compound 209 was then reacted with Pd(PPh 3 ) 4 and 210 followed by Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, giving compound 211 in 44% yield. Compound 211 was then treated with aldehyde in the presence of potassium hydroxide, and deprotection of hydroxyl groups was carried out in the presence of HCl to obtain sanjoseolide 212 in 49% yield (Scheme 29).
