# REVIEW Open Access Challenges of managing hypertension in Pakistan -a review

CorpusID: 259157357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cef3e0642d59baa606bb85b9f98b261b96d9f8e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cef3e0642d59baa606bb85b9f98b261b96d9f8e0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Obesity
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) The association of BMI with hypertension has been reported in multiple studies, specifically a BMI greater than 23 kg/m 2 [28]. Akram J et al. noted obesity prevalence in Pakistan was 70% and had significant association with hypertension (HTN) (p = 0.0003) [29]. They also found obesity was higher among Pakistani women than men. The childhood obesity epidemic has caused the global prevalence of (HTN) in children to increase from 2 to 4% [21]. However, there is limited data on obese children and HTN in Pakistan.
## (s9) Control rate of hypertension in Pakistan
Number of References: 6

(p9.0) Hypertension control is poor in most Asian countries [48]. In primary care settings, developed countries like Canada have a higher percentage of patients with controlled hypertension (65%) compared to developing nations like Pakistan, where the control rate is 6% [49]. According to the National Health Survey of Pakistan, 17.9% of adults over 15 years had hypertension, and from those only 3% had hypertension under control [50]. The proportion of patients with controlled hypertension differs among developed and developing countries, specifically between primary and tertiary settings. A cross-sectional study from rural areas of Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka showed that low adherence to antihypertensive therapy was one of the critical factors independently associated with high odds of uncontrolled BP [51]. Moreover, most individuals in each country were taking only one antihypertensive medication, due to affordability and availability. Rates of control are better in tertiary care settings. A study coordinated in three different tertiary care centers in Karachi reported that 72.3% of non-diabetic hypertensive patients had controlled BP, defined as an average BP of less than 140/90 mmHg [50]. Higher age, male gender, and greater than 10 years of formal education were significant factors leading to more controlled hypertension. A study from 2019 at a singlecenter tertiary center in Karachi reported that 62.5% of patients took antihypertensive medication daily, and more than half of that studied population had their BP controlled [52]. Like other studies, this study discovered that gender, smoking, additional comorbidities, and medication compliance were significant factors associated with uncontrolled hypertension.
