# Citation: Review on Multiple I-III-VI Quantum materials A Review on Multiple I-III-VI Quantum Dots: Preparation and Enhanced Luminescence Properties

CorpusID: 260052378 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43f2a21c621361fc8f547b38615a0c086d5d94d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43f2a21c621361fc8f547b38615a0c086d5d94d8)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics, Medicine

## (s13) Co-Doped I-III-VI Type QDs
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) In addition to single metal ion doping multiple QDs, multi-ion improve the optical properties of multiple QDs. Zhou et al. [137] co-doped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ . The excitation peak slightly red-shifte at half maximum (FWHM) decreased gradually with the increase o the doped samples fluoresced red light, and the fluorescence intens that of the undoped samples. Galiyeva et al. [138] prepared AIS QDs and Mn 2+ using a one-step method. The PL luminescence peak of with the increase of the Mn 2+ concentration, which may be due to a state. Co-doped AIS QDs also exhibit ferromagnetic and paramag well as long PL lifetimes, which enable them to distinguish signals 
## (s14) Co-Doped I-III-VI Type QDs
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) In addition to single metal ion doping multiple QDs, multi-ion co-doping can also improve the optical properties of multiple QDs. Zhou et al. [137] prepared CIS QDs codoped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ . The excitation peak slightly red-shifted and the full width at half maximum (FWHM) decreased gradually with the increase of reaction time. All the doped samples fluoresced red light, and the fluorescence intensity was higher than that of the undoped samples. Galiyeva et al. [138] prepared AIS QDs co-doped with Zn 2+ and Mn 2+ using a one-step method. The PL luminescence peak of the QDs red-shifted with the increase of the Mn 2+ concentration, which may be due to an Mn 2+ -related trap state. Co-doped AIS QDs also exhibit ferromagnetic and paramagnetic properties, as well as long PL lifetimes, which enable them to distinguish signals from rapidly decaying background PL and biological system PL, and have great potential for development in bioimaging applications.
## (s19) White Light-Emitting Diodes
Number of References: 5

(p19.0) Since the implementation of the Kyoto Protocol in 1997, energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions have become major global challenges, and the public, government, industry and academia have paid great attention to energy-saving technologies. Lighting is the second largest energy source used in buildings. In the United States, lighting accounts for 22% of electricity use and 8% of all energy use [163]. In the UK, different types of lighting consumed around 8 TWh of energy in 2018 [163]. It is well known that traditional lighting devices lead to energy waste due to low power conversion efficiency. WLEDs, as solid-state lighting devices, have attracted wide attention for their advantages of high efficiency, environmental protection and energy saving [164]. At present, the common white light emission is realized by coating yellow phosphor on the blue LED. However, due to the lack of red light emission, the color rendering index of the WLEDs device is relatively low [165]. At the same time, the traditional phosphor particles are too large to cause the self-scattering effect. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new fluorescent materials to further improve the performance of WLEDs [166].
