# Probabilistic Inductive Inference: a Survey *

CorpusID: 3266540 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d19716f9dd0c05b762030c2a87ca2da48574a53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d19716f9dd0c05b762030c2a87ca2da48574a53)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Understanding the process of learning has always fascinated scientists. There are several computational theories of learning. One of the oldest theories is inductive inference established by Gold [15]. This theory considers the process of learning from a viewpoint of the computability theory. Unlike other theories of learning (for example, PAC-learning [37,20]), inductive inference does not make probabilistic assumptions about the world. However, probabilistic algorithms appear in inductive inference and the study of probabilistic inductive inference creates a lot of interesting problems with elements of both computability theory and combinatorics. In this paper, we survey some of these problems.
## (s9) General results for PFIN
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) An alternative approach was proposed in [1]. Instead of trying to find all cutpoints explicitly, [1] focused on studying the general properties of the whole probability structure.
## (s11) Theorem 8 [1] The set A is well-ordered and has a system of notations.
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) A system of notations is an algorithmic description for a well-ordered set. It allows to find preceding elements, given one element. This notion was introduced by Kleene for constructive ordinals [21] and extended to sets of reals (like A) in [1]. Well-orderedness is crucial because it allows to use induction over elements of the set A. Having the system of notations is important to make this induction algorithmic. Using well-orderedness and system of notations, [1] showed the following result.
