# A Review on Automatic Text Summarization Approaches

CorpusID: 33696521 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9638a59852efd53fcc97a5f11d39c007081fab0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9638a59852efd53fcc97a5f11d39c007081fab0)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s16) Medical Summarization
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) The study on automatic summarization was found to be very useful to the medical field. Summarization can help doctors to obtain relevant information about a particular disease or information from the patient records (Becher et al., 2002). It will also be beneficial to patients or users whom turn online to find information pertinent to their health problems (Kaicker et al., 2010). Furthermore, there are extensive resources that provide access to medical information and medical-related databases. For instance, there are over 20 million articles in MEDLINE; a biomedical database. Summarization is thus essential in such condition to treat the problem of information overload. An early summarization system that has been built for medical knowledge is the Centrifuser (Elhadad et al., 2005;Kan et al., 2001). The Centrifuser is a summarizer that helps consumers by producing query-driven summaries in their search for healthcare information. It represents document topics by a tree data structure and perform query mapping from the topic trees to retrieve relevant sentences. Another medical summarizer, proposed by Fiszman et al. (2009), was built to generate summaries based on semantic abstraction to assist physicians find the most salient information in MEDLINE citations for some specified diseases.
## (s17) News Summarization
Number of References: 2

(p17.0) Early work on news summarization can be dated back to 1990s when SUMMONS summarizer was created (McKeown and Radev, 1995). SUMMONS was designed for summarizing single events (news articles related to terrorist events). It was built using a templatedriven message understanding system, MUC-4 (Sundheim, 1992). The system first processes the full text and fills the template slots before synthesizing the summary from the extracted information.
