# Systematic literature review of IL-6 as a biomarker or treatment target in patients with gastric, bile duct, pancreatic and colorectal cancer

CorpusID: 49905119 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Pancreatic cancer
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Three studies assessed the use of IL-6 as a diagnostic biomarker in patients with pancreatic cancer, all finding IL-6 useful ( Table 3). Schultz et al. [26] studied a cohort of 559 patients and compared the use of serum IL-6 to CA 19.9 and found that IL-6 was no better than CA 19.9. More pancreatic cancer patients had elevated CA 19.9 than elevated IL-6. The area under the curve (AUC) for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was higher for CA 19.9 (AUC 0.94) compared to IL-6 (AUC 0.87). Both serum IL-6 and serum CA 19.9 were associated with tumor stage. Mroczko et al. [82] studied the diagnostic applicability of IL-6 in differentiating between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis and found that the AUC was higher for serum IL-6 (AUC 0.94) than serum CA 19.9 (AUC 0.86), CEA (AUC 0.89) and CRP (AUC 0.84).
## (s17) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 6

(p17.0) Hayes [22] highlights that a tumor biomarker test should be used in clinical care only when there is analytic validity, clinical validity and clinical utility, meaning that the measurement should be accurate and reliable and identify a defined disorder or separate a population into groups with distinct clinical outcomes. In addition, the use of the test results should improve measurable clinical outcomes [110]. It has, however, been difficult to achieve a satisfying level of evidence due to a lack of adequate funding, inappropriately designed studies, nonpublication bias and lack of guidelines when approving new biomarkers [111]. Many initiatives have been taken to overcome these difficulties. The REMARK (reporting recommendation for tumor biomarker prognostic studies) guidelines attempt to increase the transparency in information provided by studies investigating possible tumor biomarkers [111]. The REMARK criteria consist of 20 items to report, including research goals, hypotheses, patient characteristics, assay and measurement methods, statistical design and study results [112]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that due to the low level of evidence most tumor biomarker studies achieve, multiple studies must be done to validate the usefulness of a tumor biomarker [111].
