# Auditory distance perception in humans: a review of cues, development, neuronal bases, and effects of sensory loss

CorpusID: 9689033 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ea3bfb3fe32da086674990e70b1853077c279cf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ea3bfb3fe32da086674990e70b1853077c279cf)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s4) Effects of hearing loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception
Number of References: 14

(p4.0) In contrast to investigations of the effects of hearing loss on localization in azimuth (see Keating & King, 2013 for a review), there are relatively few psychophysical studies and no neuronal studies of how auditory distance perception is affected by hearing loss. Effects of hearing aid processing, which potentially may distort available auditory distance cues, also have received relatively little attention. Adverse effects of hearing impairment or hearing-aid processing on auditory distance perception may be compensated to some extent by visual depth information for normally sighted listeners. However, considerable difficulties may occur in situations where vision is degraded, and although hearing loss is an important consideration for blind listeners, this area of enquiry is currently under-researched. The effect of sensory loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception is especially important for older people, because visual and auditory losses are more prevalent in this group. Akeroyd et al. (2007) compared the effectiveness of level and DRR distance cues combined with DRR alone for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired participants. They measured distance discrimination for sentence pairs at virtual distances between 1 and 8 m. Hearing-impaired participants generally performed as well as normally hearing participants when both cues were available, although hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly for simulated distances greater than 5 m. Hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly when the level cue was made unavailable by fixing the overall level of the sounds, suggesting deficits in the ability to discriminate distance using DRR. The scores obtained with DRR cues alone were correlated with selfreported auditory distance perception abilities.

(p4.1) Most modern hearing aids include amplitude compression that applies high gain for low-level sounds and low gain for high-level sounds. This increases the audibility of low-level sounds without making intense sounds uncomfortably loud (Moore, 2008). However, alterations to sound level due to hearing aid processing may alter the cues utilized to perceive distance accurately (Simon & Levitt, 2007). Amplitude compression alters level cues and can affect DRR cues by reducing gain for high-level direct sound while providing high gain for low-level reverberant sound. However, for continuous speech, the reverberant tail only occurs in isolation, during pauses in speech. Thus, adverse effects of hearing aid processing might be expected to be small or negligible. This was found in a study by Akeroyd (2010), who investigated distance discrimination for continuous speech using the design of Akeroyd et al. (2007) described above, with level and DRR cues both available. Akeroyd (2010) did not find any adverse effects of hearing-aid compression produced by the participants' own hearing aids. As the participants were experienced hearing aid users, it is possible that they acclimatized to the effects of their own hearing aids on sound level. It also is possible that no adverse effects were found, because the amount of amplitude compression was small or because the gain changed too slowly to affect the DRR. Effects of hearing-aid compression might be observed for absolute distance judgments rather than the relative distance task utilized in the study (Akeroyd, 2010).
## (s11) Effects of hearing loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception
Number of References: 14

(p11.0) In contrast to investigations of the effects of hearing loss on localization in azimuth (see Keating & King, 2013 for a review), there are relatively few psychophysical studies and no neuronal studies of how auditory distance perception is affected by hearing loss. Effects of hearing aid processing, which potentially may distort available auditory distance cues, also have received relatively little attention. Adverse effects of hearing impairment or hearing-aid processing on auditory distance perception may be compensated to some extent by visual depth information for normally sighted listeners. However, considerable difficulties may occur in situations where vision is degraded, and although hearing loss is an important consideration for blind listeners, this area of enquiry is currently under-researched. The effect of sensory loss and hearing aid processing on auditory distance perception is especially important for older people, because visual and auditory losses are more prevalent in this group. Akeroyd et al. (2007) compared the effectiveness of level and DRR distance cues combined with DRR alone for normal-hearing and hearing-impaired participants. They measured distance discrimination for sentence pairs at virtual distances between 1 and 8 m. Hearing-impaired participants generally performed as well as normally hearing participants when both cues were available, although hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly for simulated distances greater than 5 m. Hearing-impaired participants performed more poorly when the level cue was made unavailable by fixing the overall level of the sounds, suggesting deficits in the ability to discriminate distance using DRR. The scores obtained with DRR cues alone were correlated with selfreported auditory distance perception abilities.

(p11.1) Most modern hearing aids include amplitude compression that applies high gain for low-level sounds and low gain for high-level sounds. This increases the audibility of low-level sounds without making intense sounds uncomfortably loud (Moore, 2008). However, alterations to sound level due to hearing aid processing may alter the cues utilized to perceive distance accurately (Simon & Levitt, 2007). Amplitude compression alters level cues and can affect DRR cues by reducing gain for high-level direct sound while providing high gain for low-level reverberant sound. However, for continuous speech, the reverberant tail only occurs in isolation, during pauses in speech. Thus, adverse effects of hearing aid processing might be expected to be small or negligible. This was found in a study by Akeroyd (2010), who investigated distance discrimination for continuous speech using the design of Akeroyd et al. (2007) described above, with level and DRR cues both available. Akeroyd (2010) did not find any adverse effects of hearing-aid compression produced by the participants' own hearing aids. As the participants were experienced hearing aid users, it is possible that they acclimatized to the effects of their own hearing aids on sound level. It also is possible that no adverse effects were found, because the amount of amplitude compression was small or because the gain changed too slowly to affect the DRR. Effects of hearing-aid compression might be observed for absolute distance judgments rather than the relative distance task utilized in the study (Akeroyd, 2010).
