# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Genomics of bacteria and archaea: the emerging dynamic view of the prokaryotic world

CorpusID: 9840217 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/631aed33530c24035a07c43128c70e89410489ed](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/631aed33530c24035a07c43128c70e89410489ed)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s9) THE NEW, DYNAMIC VIEW OF THE PROKARYOTIC WORLD AND THE DEMISE OF THE TREE OF LIFE
Number of References: 12

(p9.0) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).
## (s11) GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF DISTINCT LIFE STYLES OF BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).
## (s42) THE NEW, DYNAMIC VIEW OF THE PROKARYOTIC WORLD AND THE DEMISE OF THE TREE OF LIFE
Number of References: 12

(p42.0) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).
## (s44) GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF DISTINCT LIFE STYLES OF BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA
Number of References: 6

(p44.0) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).
