# A review of the D1/D5 system and five dimensional black hole from supergravity and brane viewpoints

CorpusID: 119524369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515)

Fields: Physics

## (s1) Construction of the classical solution
Number of References: 11

(p1.0) The aim of this section will be to construct the classical solution representing the fivedimensional black hole in [13]. Rather than presenting the solution and showing that it solves the low energy equations of type II superstring, we will describe some aspects of the art of solution-building. There are many excellent reviews of this area (see, for example, [18,19,20,21,22], other general reviews on black holes in string/M theories include [23,24,25]), so we shall be brief. The method of construction of various classical solutions, we will see, will throw light on the microscopic configurations corresponding to these solutions. We will mainly concentrate on the first one below.

(p1.1) As is well-known by now, classical solutions of type II string theories can be obtained from those of M-theory [26,27] through suitable compactification and dualities. We will accordingly start with classical solutions of M-theory, or alternatively, of 11-dimensional supergravity.
## (s14) Massless modes
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) In order to see the massless degrees of freedom [21,44,45,46] let us look at the following table of zero-point energies (i.e., L 0 values for the Fock space vacua of the oscillators x, ψ R , ψ N S ).
## (s18) Definition of the microstates
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) Let us now concentrate on the maximally twisted sector alone. The states |i are now defined as [63,64] 
## (s30) Fixing the operator using near-horizon Symmetry
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) It has been conjectured recently that if one takes the large gQ (g = g st , Q = Q 1 , Q 5 ) limit (which corresponds to the near-horizon limit in supergravity and the large 'tHooft coupling limit in the gauge-theory of the brane world-volume), a powerful correspondence [14,15,16] can be built between the physics of the bulk and the physics of the branes at the boundary (for a review, see [17]). For the scaling of various quantities in this limit, see the references just mentioned.
## (s37) The AdS/CFT conjecture and Complementarity
Number of References: 9

(p37.0) One of the important aspects of black hole physics is the issue of complementarity, which says, very roughly speaking, that the physics outside the horizon can encode information of "stuff" inside that "makes" the black hole. In a way the AdS/CFT correspondence [14,15,16] captures some of the essence of complementarity. To elaborate, the Hilbert space of the gauge theory/CFT on the brane-world-volume contains information about the microstates of the black hole. Normally one does not suppose supergravity states outside the horizon to carry information about these microstates. However, supergravity states in the near-horizon AdS geometry, by virtue of the AdS/CFT correspondence, are in one-to-one correspondence with the spectrum of operators of the gauge theory/CFT. This implies that physics outside the horizon can, after all, encode complete information about gauge theory fluctuations which may in a sense be regarded as degrees of freedom inside the black hole. It is important to mention, however, that the holographic correspondence has some crucial nonlocal features in it. For example, local (delta-function) boundary fluctuations on the brane, propagated to the bulk by means of the boundary-bulk Green's function [15], have nonlocal support. Similarly, local degrees of freedom in the bulk get holographically projected to nonlocal fluctuations on the boundary. This is also reflected in the nonlocality of the operator algebra [99] on the boundary. Such nonlocality accords with the expectation [100] that in a completely local field theory one cannot have complementarity.

(p37.1) We would like to mention in this context that the AdS/CFT correspondence appears to necessitate a closer look at Hawking's original derivation of thermal radiation from a black hole  Figure 3: Collapsing black hole [10]. One of the crucial assumptions in [10] is that the Hilbert spaces of observables on the future null infinity I + and on the horizon H + (see Fig 3) are independent of each other, implying thereby that the observables belonging to these Hilbert spaces commute. Now, recall that these two sets of observables correspond, respectively, to (a) objects outside the event horizon that escape to infinity and (b) infalling matter. The discussion in the previous paragraph suggests that the observables outside and inside the horizon are not quite independent and should not be regarded as mutually commuting sets. Although that discussion was in the context of nearhorizon (anti-de Sitter) geometries and does not include the asymptotically flat part, it already makes the assumption in [10] of mutually commuting observables far from obvious.
