# Resurgence of Polymyxin B for MDR/XDR Gram-Negative Infections: An Overview of Current Evidence

CorpusID: 11101197 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39361c45df5203e87d2f7ab72dabc13dbd237ef3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39361c45df5203e87d2f7ab72dabc13dbd237ef3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Polymyxins
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Polymyxins which include polymyxin B and colistin (polymyxin E) are the "old" antibiotics which are used clinically. There has been a renewed interest in these antibiotics because of widespread resistance to newer antibiotics. Polymyxins are now labelled as "last resort" for MDR and/or XDR Gram-negative infections [20]. First approved for clinical use in 1940s, polymyxins were not favoured considering their toxicities. However, their growing use in critical care settings has helped understand in vitro and in vivo behaviour [21].
## (s3) Chemistry.
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) Polymyxins are composed of fatty acid chain (hydrophobic region) and amino acids (D and L) arranged in a cyclical heptapeptide ring. A tripeptide side chain binds cyclical ring to fatty acid chain. Single amino acid chain of D-leucine in polymyxin E is replaced by D-phenylalanine in polymyxin B (Figure 1) [20,22].

(p3.1) Polymyxin B is commercially available as sulphate salt for parenteral administration [20]. Different polypeptides component in polymyxin B have different molecular formula. Polymyxin B component polypeptides include B1, B2, B3, and B1-I and sum of these constitutes minimum 80% for polymyxin B. Because of these components, there is batch to batch variation in commercial preparations [20].
## (s4) Mechanism of Action.
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Antibacterial action of polymyxin can be segregated in two parts. Firstly, being positively charged, these cationic polypeptides interact electrostatically with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) present in outer cell membrane of GNB. These interactions displace positively charged Ca ++ and Mg ++ (stabilizers of lipopolysaccharide in outer cell membrane) leading to instability of cell membrane. A detergent-like effect leads to leakage of cell contents resulting in rapid bacterial death. Secondly, polymyxins are reported to have potent antiendotoxin activity and binding of polymyxins to lipid A component of LPS molecules neutralises it. However, the mechanism of septic shock prevention is unclear. It is believed that plasma endotoxin is immediately bound by LPS-binding protein, and the complex is quickly bound to cell-surface CD14 [7,20].  [20,22].
## (s5) Spectrum of
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Bacteria which are intrinsically resistant to polymyxins include Gram-negative isolates like Burkholderia spp., Proteus spp., Providencia spp., Morganella morganii, and Serratia spp. Additionally, Brucella spp., Neisseria spp., and Chromobacterium spp. isolates are also resistant. All Grampositive bacteria and anaerobes are also resistant to all polymyxins [20,22].
## (s9) Efficacy of Polymyxin B: Combination Therapy
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Combination therapy may prove beneficial in management of MDR and extremely drug resistant (XDR) organisms including superbugs. In this era of increasing bacterial resistance, combination therapy with polymyxin B holds promise in critical care setting. Being used commonly clinically, combination treatment holds the promise to effectively increase bactericidal activity and may reduce the development of resistance compared to monotherapy [38]. Rahim et al. [39] reported synergistic efficacy of polymyxin B and chloramphenicol in MDR NDM-producing K. pneumoniae. In these strains, chloramphenicol alone was ineffective whereas polymyxin B monotherapy was associated with rapid regrowth and emergence of resistance. With combination, there were no polymyxin resistant isolates. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) features also were consistent with these findings. They found the formation of projections and blebs on the surface of bacterium which is consistent with mechanism of polymyxin B and they were denser with combination treatment. This provides insights that combination treatment may avert development of resistance to polymyxin B. This also adds to the finding that antibiotics considered "old" can be beneficial even in superbug infections when used in combination.
## (s15) Dosage and Administration of Polymyxin B.
Number of References: 6

(p15.0) Currently, recommended dose of polymyxin B is 1.5 to 2.5 mg/kg/day administered intravenously in two divided doses as one-hour infusion. This dose is well tolerated in empirical setting [21]. Some reports suggest a dose of up to 3 mg/kg/day being used in clinical setting [26,27]. Evidence suggests that daily dose of 200 mg and above is associated with better mortality outcomes. However, renal injury needs to be cautiously monitored at such higher dose. Doses above 3 mg/kg/day cannot be recommended due to safety concerns [26]. Evaluation of baseline renal function may be necessary but dosing is not affected by renal function as polymyxin B is majorly eliminated by nonrenal mechanisms. Prescribing polymyxin B in adequate dosage is essential to avoid underdosing in lieu of renal dysfunction [61,62].
