# Mechanisms of immunosuppression by mesenchymal stromal cells: a review with a focus on molecules MSCs and their immunomodulatory capabilities

CorpusID: 12906655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Chemistry

## (s6) TSG-6
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) TSG-6 is a ~35 kDa secreted protein composed principally of Link and CUB_C domains. It has multifunctional roles and has been identified as a key mediator of the anti-inflammatory effects of MSCs in models including those of myocardial infarction [89], corneal damage [90], traumatic brain surgery [91], would healing [92], and type I diabetes [93].
## (s7) Heme oxygenase
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Heme oxygenase (HO) mediates the degradation of heme to biliverdin and is a rate-limiting enzyme in the metabolic pathway linking heme to bilirubin [102]. Several authors have demonstrated that upregulation of HO-1 plays a crucial role in human MSCs [103,104], but its immunosuppressive role is questioned given several controversial results.
## (s10) ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) It is important to understand the adhesion molecules that are responsible for MSC-lymphocyte binding. Ren et al. [120] showed that ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 induction in mouse BM-MSCs, using the supernatant of activated T cells, could be blocked by an anti-IFN-γ antibody. Neither anti-TNF-α nor anti-IL-1α showed this inhibition, but the latter cytokines acted synergistically to induce high expression of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 in MSCs. ICAM-1-deficient MSCs had a significantly reduced immunosuppressive effect in an OVA-challenged mouse model. ICAM-1 is likely to have many uncharacterized roles. Using an immune-complex-mediated vasculitis murine model, Jiang et al. [121] showed that MSCs suppressed neutrophil activation. This suppression was due to ICAM-1-dependent engulfment of neutrophils by MSCs. They further showed that MSCs constitutively release SOD3, a soluble extracellular form of superoxide dismutase, which can detoxify the superoxide anion radical. This data suggests that MSCs mount an adaptive antioxidant SOD3 response to protect themselves from the threat of neutrophil oxidative burst.
## (s13) PD-L1 and PD-L2
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Several studies including have drawn an attention to the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) pathway. Augello et al. [138] showed that co-culturing of BM-MSC with allogeneic splenocytes and PHA increased programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and PD-L2, although only a part of BM-MSCs showed expression due to heterogeneity. Antibodies blocking PD-1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 showed restoration of the T cell proliferation in the presence of MSCs. Importance of PD-L1 secreted by mouse MSCs is also highlighted by Sheng et al. [139] in the context of IFN-γ priming effect (see below). Priming with TNF-α alone showed no PD-L1 increase [139].
## (s17) MSCs from diverse sources
Number of References: 3

(p17.0) MSCs can be obtained from many tissues including umbilical cord [164]. Expression profile analysis by Panepucci et al. [165] suggested that BM-MSCs are more committed to the osteoblastic and adipocytic lineages whereas umbilical cored-derived MSCs would be more committed to angiogenesis, with higher expression of CXCL6, IL-8, IL-1 receptor-like ligand (or IL1RL1LG) and MMP1 (intestinal collagenase) mRNAs. Cell types are also important for immunomodulatory effects. Although we cannot cover many reports, umbilical cord-derived MSCs did not need to be primed with TNF-α and IFN-γ to inhibit T cell proliferation in a standard PBMC coculture experiment [51]. For umbilical cord-MSCs, priming with these cytokines were not effective as they have naively potent anti-inflammatory activity in in vivo and In vitro. Relative to BM-MSCs, umbilical cord-MSCs express higher level of CD200, CD273, CD274, IL-1β, IL-8, LIF and TGF-β2 mRNA and proteins, suggesting that all or some of them are responsible for the potent immunomodulatory ability of umbilical cord MSCs [51].
