# Cost of dengue outbreaks: literature review and country case studies

CorpusID: 1343358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7)

Fields: Economics, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s15) Dominican Republic
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) In the Dominican Republic 12,171 dengue patients were reported during the outbreak in 2011, of which 292 were outpatients, 11,864 were general-ward patients and 15 were intensive-care patients. In the general ward 68% of patients were adults, and 32% were children (<15 years). The exchange rate used for the analysis was 39.03 DOP/ US$ on June 17th, 2012. For the Dominican Republic, hospital records of 5 outpatients, 9 adult general-ward patients, 28 child general-ward patients, and 15 ICU patients were analysed in terms of resource identification, quantification and valuation. The average direct cost per case without personal costs amounted to 117 US$ in 2012. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtain a ratio of indirect to direct cost of 96% for the Dominican Republic. The corresponding indirect cost estimation based on our direct cost estimate is 112 US$. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtained a weighted average estimation of total costs of 430 US$ per dengue case based on their economic model. The cost we obtained for government spending on vector control was a total of 9,165 US$ per year on average over the years 2009 to 2012. Cost for collecting, storing, analysing and communicating surveillance data amounted to 2,550 US$. Our total cost estimate was around 2.8 million US$ (Figure 4). The comparability of the reviewed studies was restricted due to variations in the perspective taken to collect costs, the definition and reporting of costs, and the inclusion or  exclusion of certain cost items within a micro-costing approach. Finally, precise details on the year of cost accounting (year of prices), the exchange rate used and the transformations conducted to calculate costs (discounting, inflation adjustment) were missing. The Asian countries had been neglected in terms of methodologically comparable cost of illness studies as produced by Shepard et al. [3] for the Americas. Sensitivity analyses would increase the validity of produced cost figures.
