# Facial Feature Point Detection: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 16010181 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fcecaa3eed9574028bb3887a0eaa6a8b5a30bd9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fcecaa3eed9574028bb3887a0eaa6a8b5a30bd9d)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Facial feature points, also known as facial landmarks or facial fiducial points, have semantic meaning. Facial feature points are mainly located around facial components such as eyes, mouth, nose and chin (see Fig.  1). Facial feature point detection (FFPD) refers to a supervised or semi-supervised process using abundant manually labeled images. FFPD usually starts from a rectangular bounding box returned by face detectors (Viola and Jones, 2004;Yang et al, 2002) which implies the location of a face. This bounding box can be employed to initialize the positions of facial feature points. Facial feature points are different from keypoints for image registration (Ozuysal et al, 2010) and keypoint detection is usually an unsupervised procedure.
## (s12) Graphical Model-based Methods
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) Graphical model-based FFPD methods mainly refer to tree-structure-based methods and Markov random field (MRF)-based methods. Tree-structure-based methods take each facial feature point as a node and all points as a tree. The locations of facial feature points can be optimally solved by dynamic programming. Unlike the tree-structure which has no loop, MRF-based methods model the location of all points with loops. Coughlan and Ferreira (2002) developed a generative Bayesian graphical model that deployed separate models to describe shape variability (shape prior) and appearance variations (appearance likelihood) to find deformable shapes. The shape prior takes the location of each facial feature point and these points' normal orientation as a node in MRF. An edge map and an orientation map are calculated to model the appearance likelihood. A variant of the belief propagation method is utilized to optimize the problem. MRF has been also explored to constrain the relative position of all facial feature points obtained from the regression procedure in ; Martinez et al (2013). Gu et al (2007) learned a sparse Gaussian MRF structure to regularize the spatial configuration of face parts by lasso regression.
