# The clinicopathological significance of FHIT hypermethylation in non-small cell lung cancer, a meta-analysis and literature review OPEN

CorpusID: 17774912 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18af8411290440945739e8c5854e1effaf32b1d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18af8411290440945739e8c5854e1effaf32b1d9)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s4) Strengths and limitations of evidence.
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) In the comparison cancer and normal lung tissue, the heterogeneity is very high (I 2 = 84%), thus we deleted one study (Verri 2009) 16 , re-calculated the pooled OR from remaining 7 studies and shown in Fig. 2B. I 2 dramatically reduced to 14%, indicating that the heterogeneity is very low. The reason of their results were total different from other studies is not clear, they could have used inappropriate primers and methylation specific PCR (MSP) condition in detection of FHIT hypermethylation.
## (s5) Research and Clinical implications.
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) The results from the current study demonstrate that the hypermethylation rate of FHIT gene promoter in NSCLC is significantly higher than that in the normal lung tissues, indicating that FHIT promoter hypermethylation is common in NSCLC. Since changes in FHIT promoter hypermethylation are reversible, drug treatment through demethylation may be useful to delay carcinogenesis and progression and to improve prognosis. Lung cancer cell clones carrying conditional FHIT transgenes showed significant suppression of xenograft tumor growth, suggesting that treatments to restore endogenous FHIT expression in lung cancers would result in decreased tumorigenicity 17 . In addition, injection of 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (AZA) and trichostatin A (TSA) in nude mice with established H1299 tumors showed suppressed growth of small tumors without apparent toxicity, and responding tumors showed restoration of FHIT 17 . These preclinical studies show the therapeutic potential of restoration of tumor suppressor expression through epigenetic modulation. This approach may bring new direction and hope for cancer treatment through gene-targeted therapy.
## (s7) Risk of bias.
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Publication bias was assessed by using a method reported by Egger et al. 53 . We also explored reasons for statistical heterogeneity using meta-regression, subgroup analysis, and sensitivity analysis. The analysis of meta-regression and publication bias was performed by using STATA version 10.0. Cohen's kappa statistic was used to measure the agreement among the most important step for selecting eligible studies between two researchers. The kappa values were interpreted as follows: < 0.2, poor observer agreement; 0.2-0.4, fair observer agreement; 0.4-0.6, moderate observer agreement; 0.6-0.8, substantial observer agreement; and 0.8-1.0, good observer agreement 54 .
