# Online Fair Division: A Survey

CorpusID: 208202112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154fdde98065cc84c3e99edac4767bc7a11c5418)

Fields: Economics, Computer Science

## (s5) Formal background
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) We suppose there are n agents being allocated m items. Allocations may be whole (e.g. in the case of indivisible items), fractional (e.g. in the case of divisible items), or randomized (e.g. in the case of indivisible items, this represents a probability distribution over whole allocations). Often, as in many other areas, we will assume additive utilities. Additive utilities offer a compromise between simplicity and expressivity. However, some work in this area has considered more general utilities (e.g. (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019a) studies the more general class of monotone utilities). We consider a number of classical normative properties such as Pareto efficiency and envy-freeness. An allocation is Pareto efficient iff there is no other allocation where all agents have as much utility, and at least one agent has strictly more. An allocation is envy-free iff no agent has strictly greater utility for the items allocated to another agent than the utility for their own items. Envy-freeness is a desirable but often unachievable fairness property (consider two agents and one indivisible item that they both like). Therefore, we also consider a relaxation that can be always achieved: envy-free up to one item (EF1). An allocation is EF1 iff no agent has envy for another agent's bundle, supposing we can remove one item from this bundle. EF1 can be achieved with a simple roundrobin mechanism that allocates the most desired item left to the next agent in a round-robin fashion. We say that a mechanism is Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1 iff it only returns allocations that are Pareto efficient / envy-free / EF1. See (Aleksandrov and Walsh 2019b) for more details.
## (s13) Reallocating items
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) A final technique to deal with the online nature of fair division is to consider allocations that can be adjusted once subsequent items are revealed. By re-allocating items allocated in the past when new items arrive, we can perhaps restore desirable normative properties. For example, with two agents, additive valuations and m online items, (He et al. 2019) prove that any uninformed algorithm requires Θ(m) items to be re-allocated to ensure an EF1 allocation. Unsurprisingly, an informed algorithm requires no re-allocations to ensure EF1. For the case of three or more agents, (He et al. 2019) prove that even informed algorithms require Ω(m) items to be reallocated to ensure an EF1 allocation, and design an uninformed algorithm that makes do with O(m 3/2 ).
