# An Umbrella Review of Systematic Reviews on Food Choice and Nutrition Published between 2017 and-2019

CorpusID: 203923530 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a6eb46d51fba3d898f4198b26f31ebcc1d1d787](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a6eb46d51fba3d898f4198b26f31ebcc1d1d787)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Methods
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) A systematic review of reviews was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines [17] in the two major English language databases Scopus and ISI Web of Science ( The inclusion criteria were defined using the following PICOS-tool (Population, Intervention, Comparison, Outcome, Study design): Population to be considered-all age groups. Interventions could be behavioural (e.g., nudges, social media), provision of information (e.g., nutrition education, labels), nutritional (counselling, cooking skills). Outcomes should incorporate nutritional status, food choices, food consumption or purchase, food or nutrient intake, or consumer relevant data (e.g., knowledge, attitudes). Comparison between exposed vs. non-exposed or when participants were their own controls. Study design: Inclusion of Systematic Reviews on food choice and nutrition conducted following the PRISMA guidelines [17,18] or the Joanna Briggs Manual if stated as Scoping Review [19]. Reviews that did not report themselves as systematic were checked thoroughly as some "scoping reviews" or "umbrella reviews" apply systematic review methodology, and thus, were eligible. Narrative reviews were omitted. Data were extracted with a predetermined grid (Table 1) including the name of the first author, the year of publication, the country where the review was performed, the population group, the explanatory constructs (determinants, intervention) and the reported outcomes.
## (s5) Reviews on Studies about Food Choice and Nutrition in Children (Infants and or School Age Children)
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) The two studies by Hosseini-Esfahani [40,41] supported the principle of promoting plant-based diets through different life stages, and that DASH [48] is an adequate quality index for diet quality evaluation. Adherence to DASH was associated with a reduced chance of chronic disease both in adults and children. Strategies for coping with healthy recommendations towards reduced salt consumption comprised exercising self-control at the family's meal table, replacement of salt with spices, and reduction or avoidance of highly processed foods [39].
