# Wilms tumor: a review of current surgical controversies

CorpusID: 214752918 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/116f6e6189c05c8dfefa7b928d3fefec20f7a5fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/116f6e6189c05c8dfefa7b928d3fefec20f7a5fd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Outcomes
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Data on NSS in children with WT remains scarce, and most studies are retrospective cohorts and case series (22). From the SIOP WT 2001 study, 91/2,800 (3%) of patients underwent NSS for unilateral WT. Compared to the patients in the same study who underwent RN, there was no difference in the reported number of tumor capsule ruptures or lymph node ruptures. In the subgroup amongst these patients with a Stage III tumor, 87% of these were Stage III due to a positive margin. A quarter of these patients underwent conversion to RN, and another quarter had radiotherapy only. The 5-year OS and EFS were 100% and 94.9% respectively, which was not statistically different from the survival outcomes in the RN group when looking at the localized disease population only. There was a trend towards a higher number of surgical complications in the NSS group, but this did not achieve statistical significance (8).
## (s11) Pulmonary metastasectomy
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) Approximately 10% of patients with WT present with pulmonary metastases (PM), but they still have good OS rates (53). Traditionally, lung nodules are treated with whole-lung radiation with good disease outcomes, but this is associated with a significant increase in the incidence of pulmonary disease in the long-term (54).
