# Graph-based Ontology Summarization: A Survey

CorpusID: 21693765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d66d9b9b8d5f1f7e396aef1e67d19da383f6e275)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.
## (s16) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) An ontology provides an explicit specification of a vocabulary for a shared domain [7]. Terms in that vocabulary are mainly classes and properties denoting concepts and their relationships in the domain, respectively, forming a conceptualization of the world that we wish to represent for some purpose. In an ontology, the interpretation and use of terms are constrained by formal axioms. As ontologies can help people and organizations reach consensus on conceptualizations, they have found wide application in knowledge management, information integration, data access, etc. In particular, they play an important role in the recent explosive growth of Semantic Web deployment, where an ontology is frequently used as the schema of a knowledge base.
