# A Survey on The Expressive Power of Graph Neural Networks

CorpusID: 212634030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fb8b967dad742eb390a3090f094a12f2d909538](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fb8b967dad742eb390a3090f094a12f2d909538)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s11) Connection between GNNs And The WL Algorithm
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) In this section, we introduce the connection between GNNs and the WL algorithm, found by Xu et al. (2019) and Morris et al. (2019). First, the following theorem is easy to see.  2019)). For any message passing GNN and for any graphs G and H, if the 1-WL algorithm outputs that G and H are "possibly isomorphic", the embeddings h G and h H computed by the GNN are the same.
## (s13) Relational Pooling
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) In this section, we introduce another approach to build powerful GNNs proposed by Murphy et al. (2019b). The idea is very simple. The relational pooling layer takes an average of all permutations, as Jannosy pooling (Murphy et al., 2019a). Namely, let f be a message passing GNN, A be the adjacency matrix of G = (V, E, X), I n ∈ R n×n be the identity matrix, and S n be the symmetric group over V . Then, relational pooling GNNs (RP-GNNs) are defined as follows.
## (s16) Connection with Local Algorithms
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) In this section, we introduce the connection between GNNs and distributed local algorithms, found by Sato et al. (2019a). First, Sato et al. (2019a) classified GNN models based on the computational models of distributed local algorithms.
## (s23) XS Correspondence
Number of References: 5

(p23.0) As we saw in Section 3 and 4, GNNs are closely related to the WL algorithm and distributed local algorithms. In this section, we summarize the results of the expressive power of GNNs in the light of relations among GNNs, the WL algorithm, and distributed local algorithms. We call their relations the XS correspondence, named after Xu et al. (2019) and Sato et al. (2019a). The observations of Xu et al. (2019) and Sato et al. (2019a) provide concrete correspondences between elements of GNNs, the WL algorithm, and distributed local algorithms. Table 3 summarizes these correspondences. For example, the number of communication round needed to solve combinatorial problems are studied in the distributed algorithm field. Åstrand et al. (2009) showed that (∆ + 1) 2
