# A review of systems biology research of anxiety disorders 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 Dennis van der Meer, 2,3,4 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 Ole A. Andreassen, 2,3 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 Raj Ramesar, 1 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 Dan J. Stein, 5 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 Shareefa Dalvie 5 0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0 -0 0 0 0

CorpusID: 222421395 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c2bbb81c307b069c88f9c4983a54ebaac6d9270](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c2bbb81c307b069c88f9c4983a54ebaac6d9270)

Fields: Psychology, Biology, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s6) TWAS
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Analysis of transcription patterns have the potential to identify genes and pathways that either are affected by, or increase the risk of a pathology, lending insight into its pathophysiology. At this stage, TWAS among individuals with anxiety disorders are scarce, have small sample sizes, and mostly represent pilot studies. Most gene expression studies have opted for a candidate gene approach in animal models, using expression patterns to explore the functionality of findings from GWASs and EWASs (e.g., Emeny et al. 27 ). TWAS tend to be more common in animal studies, with replication attempts of the identified candidates conducted in humans. For example, a TWAS of stress-exposed mice using tissue from the amygdala and prefrontal medial cortex revealed altered expression of Ppm1f, a protein phosphatase belonging to a family of phosphatases that negatively regulate stress response pathways. 29 Downregulated expression of Ppm1f was also subsequently observed in 151 human cases with anxiety symptoms compared to 165 control subjects. Few studies have investigated global expression patterns associated with anxiety. One such study investigated 336 participants (157 cases and 179 controls) and revealed differential expression of 631 genes among male participants only. 30 These genes were enriched for immune-related pathways. However, a smaller study of 102 participants with panic disorder and specific phobia was unable to identify significant differences in global expression patterns based on treatment outcomes of cognitive behavioral therapy. 31 It is evident that largescale collaborative efforts are needed to improve the power of these analyses to identify genes and pathways with differential transcription in individuals with pathological anxiety.

(p6.1) the hippocampus, and their connections to cortical regions, such as the dorsal medial and lateral prefrontal/ cingulate cortex and insula. These regions appear to be involved across the range of anxiety disorders. 14 Slight differences can, however, be observed across anxiety disorder subtypes. A recent meta-analysis of structural and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of generalized anxiety disorder revealed that the hippocampus, anterior cingulate cortex, and amygdala have reduced volume, and the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex have reduced functional connectivity with the amygdala. 32 The sensorimotor network is also altered with greater pre-and postcentral volume, reduced supplementary motor area volume, and reduced functional connectivity in anterior and increased functional connectivity in the posterior cerebellum. 32 The neural differences in subjects with generalized anxiety disorder, compared to controls, appear to be widely distributed. Panic disorder has been associated with reduced bilateral dorsomedial prefrontal cortex, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, right insula, right superior temporal gyrus right middle temporal gyrus and right superior orbital frontal cortex volumes in a meta-analysis. 33 This emphasizes the role of frontal areas and an altered topdown control system in panic disorder. A structural MRI meta-analysis of social anxiety disorder indicated greater precuneus, right middle occipital gyrus, and supplementary motor area volumes, as well as lower volume in the left putamen, compared to controls. 34 This suggests that social anxiety is associated with various networks across the brain, extending beyond the fear network. A metaanalysis of fMRI revealed that subjects with specific phobia had increased activation in response to phobic stimuli in the left amygdala/globus pallidus, left insula, right thalamus, and cerebellum than controls. 35 Specific phobia is, therefore, mostly associated with alterations in the fear network.
## (s7) Experimental models
Number of References: 4

(p7.0) Animal models are a means of studying the biological components that underlie behavior. Animal models have aided in the identification of candidate genes and molecular pathways pertinent to anxiety disorder pathophysiology. 12 For example, such models have implicated dysfunctional immune pathways in the pathophysiology of anxiety. 36,37 Animal models have also supported the role of early adversity as a risk factor for anxiety disorders, demonstrating that this affects the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal axis and leads to impaired brain maturation and function. 38 These effects may be associated with epigenetic modifications, which can be inherited across multiple generations.
## (s9) Discussion
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Early work on the pathophysiology of anxiety disorders focused on specific mechanisms and particular candidate genes; this seems like an overly simplistic approach given the complex nature of these conditions. Convergent models that incorporate a range of omics-derived associations across multiple datasets (including animals and humans) and at various stages of life, offer an alternative approach. 76 Such work can potentially combine phenotype, genotype, and environome data. Systems biological approaches borrow principles from, and may contribute to the Research Domain Criteria approach, which aims to classify mental illness according to its relevant neurobiology and which focuses on continuous biological dimensions. 77 Currently, there are gaps in our knowledge and methodologies that should be refined.
