# fishes The Application of Single-Cell Ingredients in Aquaculture Feeds-A Review

CorpusID: 222129854 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bdeb514e000c252739deae93e280b4f5afb9650f)

Fields: Biology, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s22) Marine Species
Number of References: 5

(p22.0) There have been relatively few studies on the application of bacterial protein resources in the diets of marine species. In addition to the suite of studies undertaken with rainbow trout and Atlantic salmon on the Methyolocuccus SCP, Aas et al. [201] also evaluated the same SCP resource in Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus). Performance of the halibut was examined at either of three inclusion levels (0, 90 and 180 g/kg). A negative impact was observed on growth and feed intake at the 180 g/kg inclusion level, but not at the 90 g/kg inclusion level. Of the other studies with marine fish that were identified, both examined the use of a purple phototrophic bacterial biomass when included in diets for Asian seabass, but each comprised a different bacterial species [202,203]. The earlier study by Shapawi et al. [202] examined the use of a Rhodovulum SCP at very low inclusion levels of 3, 6 and 9 g/kg and found no impact on growth or feed intake over the 12-week duration of the study. The later study, by Delamare-Deboutteville et al. [203], examined the use of a mixed culture of purple phototrophic bacterial (PPB) biomass based on Rhodopseudomonas sp. and Rhodobacter sp. In the second study, fishmeal was progressively replaced by the PPB at 0, 100, 200 and 300 g/kg in the diet. After 7 weeks of feeding on the diets there were clear, significant effects on growth and FCR of PPB inclusion at every inclusion level based on a regression analysis of the data. The effects were not linked to palatability effects, with no significant differences in feed intake among the treatments.
