# A Comprehensive Overview of the COVID-19 Literature: Machine Learning-Based Bibliometric Analysis

CorpusID: 229535897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s15) Topic 4: Epidemic Models for COVID-19 Spread
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) A total of 10.25% (2964/28,904) of the included publications were related to this topic (eg, [39][40][41][42][43]). The 5 most prominent authors in this cluster were Gerardo Chowell (n=22), Benjamin J Cowling (n=18), Kenji Mizumoto (n=14), Shi Zhao (n=13), and Rosalind M Eggo (n=13). The most common journals and preprint servers where the articles related to this topic were published included Chaos, Solitons & Fractals (n=73), medRxiv (n=66), the International Journal of Infectious Diseases (n=36), Zhonghua liuxingbingxue zazhi (n=30), and bioRxiv (n=26). The first paper related to this topic was published on the January 19, 2020. Although there was a sharp increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 12 and 15, the trend was almost stable from week 15 to week 22. Then, a rapid decline in the number of weekly publications was noticed (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 101.6 (SD 68.2).
## (s17) Topic 6: Host Immune Response to 19-nCoV
Number of References: 5

(p17.0) This topic was discussed in about 6.36% (1837/28,904) of the publications (eg, [48][49][50][51][52]). Authors who had the highest number of publications related to this topic were Alessandro Sette (n=7), Stanley Perlman (n=6), Nima Rezaei (n=6), Irfan Rahman (n=5), and Akiko Iwasaki (n=6). The top 5 journals and preprint servers in terms of publishing articles related to this topic were bioRxiv (n=199), Medical Hypotheses (n=50), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=49), Frontiers in Immunology (n=22), and the British Journal of Haematology (n=19). The earliest article related to this topic was published on January 2, 2020. From that date until week 14, there was a slight increase in the number of weekly publications before it increased markedly, peaking in week 25 (n=155) (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 62.8 (SD 54.6).
## (s26) Topic 15: Detection of 2019-nCoV Antibodies
Number of References: 5

(p26.0) Detection of antibodies against 2019-nCoV using serological assays was a topic discussed in 1.42% (411/28,904) of all publications (eg, [92][93][94][95][96]). The top 5 authors writing about this topic were Florian Krammer (n=6), Jing Wang (n=6), Yong Zhang (n=5), Juan Chen (n=5), and Viviana Simon (n=5). The top 5 journals and preprint servers that published the highest number of studies in this cluster were bioRxiv (n=30), medRxiv (n=20), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=18), the Journal of Clinical Virology (n=14), and the Journal of Clinical Microbiology (n=7). Only 1 study in this cluster was published in the first 6 weeks. There was a dramatic increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 16 and 21. Although the number of weekly publications slightly decreased from week 22 until week 26, it increased rapidly until reaching the peak in weeks 28 and 29 (n=36) (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 14.1 (SD 12.8).
## (s35) Limitations
Number of References: 4

(p35.0) All the publications were collected from only one specific database (CORD-19), so we may have missed some studies or preprints that were not considered in this database. Given the substantial number of publications included in our analysis, we are confident that a large part of the COVID-19 literature was covered. Further, we did not conduct a detailed manual analysis of studies published in journals such as Journal of Medical Internet Research and the International Journal of Medical Informatics to evaluate the use of eHealth technologies for COVID-19, which we believe is beyond the scope of our work and requires other study methodologies such as systematic or scoping review. However, readers are referred to several studies and reviews, which have been conducted to explore eHealth technologies used in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic [118][119][120][121].
