# Sequence variation, common tissue expression patterns and learning models: a genome-wide survey of vertebrate ribosomal proteins

CorpusID: 228187823 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3bbb556a9bf5139809b80d616eda1ed32c105d83)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) Harvesting and curation of vertebrate RP sequences
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) RP gene symbols of both the previous and the new nomenclature (9) were used to perform manual queries to the NCBI RefSeq Database in order to retrieve the respective RP reference sequences for each of the eleven vertebrate species, namely Homo sapiens (human), Pan troglodytes (chimpanzee), Pongo abelii (Sumatran orangutan), Macaca mulatta (rhesus macaque), Mus musculus (house mouse), Monodelphis domestica (gray short-tailed opossum), Ornithorhynchus anatinus (platypus), Gallus gallus (chicken), Anolis carolinensis (arboreal anole lizard), Xenopus tropicalis (western clawed frog) and Danio rerio (zebrafish) (51). For one or more vertebrate species, 23 RPs failed to return ortholog sequences by either annotation queries or alignments using BLASTP and the respective 90 RP H. sapiens protein sequence, as queries (52). For these missing RPs, H. sapiens orthologs were used again to perform queries using TBLASTN to identify DNA sequences with statistically significant similarity (e-value < 0.05), subsequently translated and added to complete our RP protein sequence collection. The RP collection was manually curated and annotated by setting unique IDs specifying gene name, NCBI RefSeq ID and vertebrate species. The RP protein sequence of the largest size was marked by the term 'ref ' (as reference) and in case of additional sequences, they were marked and enumerated using the term 'iso ' (isoforms). In total, 1083 RP sequences were assimilated into our sequence data collection. Confirming the validity of our approach, we noted that several O. anatinus translated RPs we had marked, were also incorporated into a more recent release (NCBI Ornithorhynchus anatinus Annotation Release 104). Heatmaps for phylogenetic profiling (also expression, see below) were created with ComplexHeatmap (53).
## (s11) Vertebrate RPs are >80% identical between zebrafish and human, with six exceptions
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) To provide an accurate estimation of protein sequence conservation across vertebrate species and map it to the three-dimensional structure of the ribosome, H. sapiens (human) and D. rerio (zebrafish) RP protein sequences from each cluster were selected and compared (Figure 2). Human and zebrafish represent the most distant vertebrate species in our set and both have a record of curated protein sequences (51,71). For each cluster, the pair of human and zebrafish RPs with the highest identity score was selected and was used as metric of estimation of sequence conservation within the vertebrate lineage. We observed distinct differences between the estimated RP sequence conservation levels, range from ∼60 to 100% identity score ( Figure 2A). As expected, most RPs exhibit high sequence identity scores (>80%), except for RPL7L1, RPL14/eL14, RPL6/eL6, RPL36/eL36, FAU/RPS30-precursor/eS30 and RPL7/uL30. Also, comparison of within-cluster identity score ranks between SSU and LSU RPs, after removing the cluster of RPS27a/eS31 and UBA52/RPL40-precursor/eL40, that contains RPs from both ribosomal subunits, shows a small (∼4%) but significant increase in identity score for SSU RPs (P-value < 0.05; non-parametric, two-sided Wilcoxon test). This observation could be related to the slightly higher proportion of universal RPs in SSU both in prokaryotes and eukaryotes, due to the higher conservation of the SSU rRNA (7) ( Figure  2B).
## (s14) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) Eukaryotic ribosomes, beyond the structurally and functionally universal ribosome core, exhibit additional complexity over their distant bacterial and affine archaeal counterparts in both rRNA and protein content. Specific RPs and other elements, some uniquely shared between archaea and eukarya, contribute interactions within the ribosome or with translation factors in domain-specific translation regulation. These features are well established and illustrate the unique evolutionary trajectories at the phylogenetic domain level (10,75). Here we present a comprehensive analysis of RP sequence conservation across eleven representative vertebrate species, the. most studied animal lineage. Detailed curation of RP protein sequences for those species has resulted in a full complement, via the identification at the nucleotide level of missing RP instances in protein sequence databases ( Figure 1). Moreover, potentially systematic errors from gene prediction in Ensembl vertebrate proteomes (release 100) (54) are also complemented in our RP collection across 78 families (see 'Results' section). Given the universal role of RPs, these missing instances available through this work may be considered for inclusion into the above resources.
