# A review of codebook design methods for sparse code multiple access

CorpusID: 237251889 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) SCMA is a non-orthogonal technique primarily based on the MD codebook. The architecture of SCMA consists of encoder and decoder stages using codebook mapping. The basic block diagram of the SCMA system is shown in Figure 1 [12]. Consider an SCMA system with number of users multiplexed at orthogonal resources, where < . Each user's data is sent through number of RBs where << . In the SCMA system, initially, the user data bitstream is passed to the error correction encoder, which reduces noise and interference effect on the transmitted data and minimises the bit errors [22]- [24]. The encrypted data enters the SCMA encoder block consisting of mapper and spreading sub-blocks. Mapping allows the spreading of user data in the complex domain by adding phase and amplitude of constellation points to different data values from the same or different users. SCMA mapper maps each symbol to the dimensional constellation point producing codeword of length . In point signal constellation of each user each = 2 bits are represented by one constellation point. Also, Codewords from the channel encoder are divided into = ⁄ where, represent the number of channels required to transmit one codeword. Encoder outputs ( , ) symbol as binary numbers ( ∈ (1,2, … , ) and ∈ (1,2, … , ) where is the digital symbol of user . SCMA mapper maps the incoming data to dimensional constellation points to produce. , = ( 1, , , 2, , , … , , , ). For mapping, the constellation point is selected from a complex constellation of = { , } where ∈ (1,2, … , ). Apart from mapping, the SCMA also spreads the data for sparsity. Each constellation point , is coded into a sparse of -dimensional complex Codeword k,I through user to RE spreading matrix S k . , are sparse vector and a member of the sparse codebook V k is given by (1).
## (s7) OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) The main challenge in codebook designing is user data segregation in signal space, optimising easy decoding and a simple decoder at the receiver [46]. In designing mother constellations, more power-efficient and simple models need to be developed, focusing on IoT [47]. There is a need to explore better-fit mathematical models to extract the required codebooks. Some theories are discussed in this study, but there is a need to explore mathematical models for codebook designing.

(p7.1) Further research should explore machine-learning techniques for SCMA data processing used in similar domains [48]. Prominent of these are regression, decision tree, and neural networks. Learning techniques can extract codebooks best suited for the required channel conditions. Machine learning can be enhanced by mixing with adaptive processing algorithms. Such a method exists in the 5G domain as presented in [48], and they can be used for the SCMA domain. According to channel or data, adaptive nature can be explored, leading to a new codebook domain for 5G communication. The author utilised an adaptive approach in designing better SCMA architectures according to user features [49]. Another research domain is resource planning organisation [50], including adaptively allocating resources and developing optimised algorithms.
