# Towards Clean and Safe Water: A Review on the Emerging Role of Imprinted Polymer-Based Electrochemical Sensors

CorpusID: 235351899 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5321928c7cf9207bf2111d01c07bdb790557fc0a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Chemistry, Materials Science, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p0.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p0.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
## (s33) Whole Cell Imprinting
Number of References: 4

(p33.0) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 

(p33.1) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 
## (s35) Bacterial Protein A Surface Imprinting
Number of References: 4

(p35.0) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.

(p35.1) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.
## (s89) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p89.0) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.1) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly

(p89.2) Human activities revolve around water, be it in industry, chemistry, agriculture or even for living. Therefore, it is quasi unavoidable that water ends up polluted [1]. Water pollution refers to all substances that human activity introduces into water, be it toxic or benign pollutants.

(p89.3) Water depollution is a major issue nowadays; however, in order to eliminate harmful substances, one needs to first characterize and quantify them in order to design appropriate pollutant removal methods, e.g., by adsorption, filtration or degradation. In this sense, the detection of species needs to be accurate and selective. Several methods meet these requirements, but they often require expensive materials and instruments; moreover, the measurement time is a significant criterion. Towards this end, electrochemistry is an excellent means of sensing pollutants because of its high sensitivity (it goes down to the femtomolar regime), selectivity and low cost [2]. Furthermore, the measurements are easy to set up and above all miniaturization is possible so that electrosensing could be directly
## (s122) Whole Cell Imprinting
Number of References: 4

(p122.0) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 

(p122.1) Escherichia coli (E. coli) is a rod shaped bacterium; it is normally harmless to humans and can generally be found in their intestines. However, a few varieties can cause diseases such as abdominal cramps, bloody diarrhea and vomiting. These can be found in contaminated water or food. Jafari et al. [137] proposed an electrochemical sensor in which the sensing layer is a polymer layer synthetized by sol-gel method; bacteria are added to the fresh sol solution at the end of the process. Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) has been used as the monomer for the polymerization; it also serves as a crosslinker. EIS measurements were done with the following parameters: amplitude of 10 mV at open circuit potential with a frequency range of 100 kHz-0.1 Hz. Results showed good selectivity when the recognition of E. coli and S. aureus (a spherical bacteria) was compared: when the sensor captures the corresponding bacteria, the charge transfer resistance increases; in the case of S. aureus, the change of signal is greatly reduced. The same is true for Pseudomonas aeruginosa, another rod shaped bacterium. The performance of impedimetric sensor for E.coli is lower than other impedimetric sensor using anti-E. coli antibodies, but it has a low cost and low LOD. The authors have chosen the whole cell imprinting technique. This raises the issue of bacteria extraction from the in situ synthesized MIP film; as one can see in Figure 21, the washing of imprinted bacteria seems to seriously damage the imprinted sites. 
## (s124) Bacterial Protein A Surface Imprinting
Number of References: 4

(p124.0) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.

(p124.1) Imprinting a part of the surface of a pathogen is more efficient than imprinting a whole cell; however, the target analyte is still too massive to enable recognition by functional groups. This disadvantage can be bypassed if the target analyte is not the whole bacterium, but its corresponding molecules and proteins-for example, a specific surface protein. In this regard, Khan et al. [138] employed protein A as a template protein for making an imprinted polymer for the recognition of Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). 3-aminophenol was electropolymerized by CV on a film of single walled carbon nanotubes (SWNCTs) on which a solution of protein A has been deposited. Removal of a protein A (PA) template was done using proteinase K, an enzyme that naturally degrades the former. The fabricated sensor shows good sensitivity when an EIS test with PA and bovine serum albumin (BSA) has been done; however, testing with the surface protein from other bacteria would have given more credit to this work and the efficacy of the sensor in selectively recognizing S. aureus.
