# catalysts Clostridium thermocellum as a Promising Source of Genetic Material for Designer Cellulosomes: An Overview Clostridium thermocellum as a Promising Source of Genetic Material for Designer Cellulosomes

CorpusID: 238690924 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b9c37e571d123df87a112bfb3ead5c97a2e84fd2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b9c37e571d123df87a112bfb3ead5c97a2e84fd2)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Chemistry, Materials Science, Biology

## (s2) Impact of Processive Endoglucanase Component in Designer Cellulosome on Biomass Decomposition
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) In nature, an efficient decomposition of cellulosic biomass strongly depends on a fast adaptation of C. thermocellum to enable the regulation of its cellulosomal enzymes for a specific substrate composition. The prompt response of C. thermocellum is due to an elegant alternative sigma-anti sigma system [12] that quickly and flexibly regulates the expression of cellulosomal genes in its genome. As there are numerous cellulases with diverse functions, a comparative study on the hydrolytic activity profiles and product formation of 24 C. thermocellum cellulosomal cellulases was performed by Leis et al. (2017) [13]. The cellulases can be distinguished from each other based on the hydrolysis modes on Avicel and soluble sugars release. The first group comprising non-processive endoglucanases (EG), such as Cel8A, Cel5E, Cel5H, Cel9-44J, and Cel9T, released longchain polysaccharides with degree of polymerization (DP) ≥ 5. This group was found to show the highest activity on CMC and barley β-glucan. The second group consists of exomode cellobiohydrolases (CBHs) (i.e., Cel48S, Cel9K, Cbh9A) with cellobiose as the only end-product during Avicel hydrolysis. The third group is comprised of all cellotetraosetype processive EGs (pEG4) family 9, namely Cel9F, Cel9N, Cel9P, Cel9Q, Cel9R, Cel9U, Cel9V, Cel9W, Lec9A, and Lec9B. All processive enzymes in this group, except for Cel9P that does not have a CBM3c, possess a GH9 catalytic module associated with a CBM3c. The last group includes processive cellobiose-type EGs (pEG2) such as Cel5B, Cel5G, Cel5L, Cel5O, and Cel9D. The Cel5O is the unique EG that has a CBM3b module in this group, while the other members only possess catalytic modules. The next step of this study was to form artificial mini-cellulosomes to determine synergistic effects between cellulase components. By doing so, the selected cellulases were allowed to bind to the recombinant scaffoldin protein CipA8 carrying 8 CohI subunits on its backbone structure. Regarding enzymatic assays in this study, all the enzyme assays were performed in a total volume of 0.5 mL at 60 • C. The reaction buffer consisted of 0.1 M MOPS, pH 6.5, 50 mM NaCl, 10 mM CaCl 2 , and 2 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) functioning as a reducing agent. For the single cellulase assay, the barley β-glucan, CMC, PASC (0.5%, w/v), or Avicel (1%, w/v) were used. Avicel (0.25%, w/v) was used for the determination of the complex cellulases activity with the standard enzyme load of 2 µg/mL, while the 10-fold greater of Avicel concentration (2.5%, w/v) was employed for enzyme kinetics assay. To eliminate the potential inhibition of cellobiose against the complexed cellulases, 6 µg/mL of β-glucosidase from Thermus thermophilus was used. Reducing sugars released from the substrates were measured using the 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) method and one enzymatic unit was defined as 1 µmol of glucose equivalent released per minute. After 48 h of incubation on Avicel (0.25%, w/v) at 60 • C, all divalent complexes, namely Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K, Cip8A:Cel9K/Cbh9A, and Cip8A:Cel48S/Cbh9A, with only CBH components bound to Cip8A, exhibited less hydrolysis efficiency. The combination of Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K/Cel5L (SKL) with Cel5L is a processive pEG2 enzyme, which yielded the maximum reducing sugars released (737 µM/reaction) among all trivalent minicellulosomal complexes. Interestingly, without pEG2 enzyme in its complex, the tetravalent cellulosome Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K/Cel8A/Cel9R (SKAR) showed lower activity compared to the SKL, which indicates the key role of the processive pEG2 enzyme in substrate decomposition. The nonavalent DC Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K/Cbh9A/Cel8A/Cel9Q/Cel9T/Cel5G/ Cel9R/Cel9-44J, which carried 9 enzymes of all 4 types of cellulases on its construct, reached approximately 52.6% of activity of the native Ct cellulosome (Figure 1). mM CaCl2, and 2 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) functioning as a re agent. For the single cellulase assay, the barley β-glucan, CMC, PASC (0.5%, w/v) icel (1%, w/v) were used. Avicel (0.25%, w/v) was used for the determination of th plex cellulases activity with the standard enzyme load of 2 μg/mL, while the greater of Avicel concentration (2.5%, w/v) was employed for enzyme kinetics as eliminate the potential inhibition of cellobiose against the complexed cellulases, 6 of β-glucosidase from Thermus thermophilus was used. Reducing sugars released fr substrates were measured using the 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) method and on matic unit was defined as 1 μmol of glucose equivalent released per minute. After incubation on Avicel (0.25%, w/v) at 60 °C, all divalent complexes, Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K, Cip8A:Cel9K/Cbh9A, and Cip8A:Cel48S/Cbh9A, with onl components bound to Cip8A, exhibited less hydrolysis efficiency. The combina Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K/Cel5L (SKL) with Cel5L is a processive pEG2 enzyme, which the maximum reducing sugars released (737 μM/reaction) among all trivalent min losomal complexes. Interestingly, without pEG2 enzyme in its complex, the tetr cellulosome Cip8A:Cel48S/Cel9K/Cel8A/Cel9R (SKAR) showed lower activity com to the SKL, which indicates the key role of the processive pEG2 enzyme in subst composition.
## (s10) Incorporation of Lytic Polysaccharide Monooxygenases (LPMOs) into Designer Cellulosomes
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) LPMOs, relatively new enzymes discovered one decade ago, are copper-dependent and play pivotal roles in the depolymerization of sugar-based biopolymers [35]. The low-molecular-weight lignin-derived compounds (LMWLDCs) released from biomass solubilization was found to be able to donate electrons to LPMOs for the oxidation of cell-wall polysaccharides [36]. The activities of LPMOs are copper-dependent and can only be induced in the presence of oxygen molecules and an electron donor, which can be delivered from enzyme GMC oxidoreductases, from lignin, phenolic compounds and from light-activated photosynthetic pigments. Insoluble high-molecular-weight lignin functions as a source of electrons, while the LMWLDCs transfer electrons to LPMOs and being oxidized. The LMWLDCs will be reverted to reduced state by receiving electrons from the bulk lignin, thus enabling a new electron delivery [37]. In the study by Arfi et al. [33], the two free LPMOs, such as TfLPMO10A (hereafter termed E7) and TfLPMO10B (hereafter termed E8) from T. fusca, were converted to the cellulosomal mode by fusing to a DocA (a) from A. cellulotyticus ( Figure 3). Two versions of E7 were constructed: the first version E7-a was formed with the DocA fused directly at the C-terminus of the catalytic domain AA10, and the second version E7-sk-a was generated with a 12-aa short linker (sk) between AA10 and C-terminal. Three versions of E8 included E8-a with the DocA placed at its C-terminus, E8∆-a where the native CBM domain was altered by the DocA and E8∆∆-a with the FnIII and the CBM were replaced by the DocA. The cellulolytic activity of E8-a was similar to that of the WT counterpart, while the two versions E8∆-a, and E8∆∆-a were negatively affected due to the removal of CBM domain. The activity of E7-sk-a was even a bit higher than that of WT E7, whereas E7-a without linker exhibited a dramatically reduced activity. A trivalent ScafABT was constructed with three CohI(s) from A. cellulolyticus, B. cellulosolvens, and C. thermocellum, and one CBM3a from C. thermocellum. Additionally, the endoglucanase TfCel5A and exoglucanase TfCel48A were converted to the cellulosomal mode t-Cel5A and b-Cel48A by replacing their CBMs with Doc(s) from C. thermocellum and B. cellulosolvens, respectively. Cellulase assays were performed by incubating the enzyme with 1% (w/v) Avicel at 50 • C for 72 h in 50 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.9) and 2 mM ascorbic acid. Enzyme concentrations were 1 µM for the WT and chimeric LPMOs enzymes or 0.5 µM for the DCs. The three LPMO(s)-bearing DC(s), namely ScafABT:E8∆-a/b-Cel48A/t-Cel5A, ScafABT:E8∆∆-a/b-Cel48A/t-Cel5A, and ScafABT:E7-sk-a/b-Cel48A/t-Cel5A showed the highest activity towards Avicel, suggesting the superiority of cellulosomal architecture over the free enzymes (i.e., enzymes proximity synergy, robust substrate targeting, and enzyme-enzyme synergistic effects). Based on the hydrolysis capability of DCs, it should be noted that the LPMOs function as a booster when incorporated with other cellulases in increasing saccharolytic efficiency rather than being the main cellulose-degrading enzymes. 
## (s14) Impacts of Catalytic Enzyme Positions on Enzymatic Activity of Designer Cellulosomes
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) The position of catalytic subunits in the Scaf structure may govern the catalytic activity of DCs. In a study by Stern and coworkers [31], three recombinant T. fusca enzymes such as the processive EG Cel9A, EG Cel5A, and exoglucanase Cel48A were recombinantly generated and converted into the cellulosomal mode for DC constructions. Besides, ten chimeric Scaf(s), namely Scaf4, Scaf5, Scaf6, Scaf9, Scaf18, Scaf19, Scaf20, Scaf21, Scaf22, and Scaf23, with different designated orders of enzymes and CBMs were also produced. The enzymatic assay was carried out in 50 mM acetate buffer (pH 5.0), 12 mM CaCl 2 , 2 mM EDTA, 10% (w/v) Avicel, incubated at 50 • C for 24-72 h with shaking. The two optimal trivalent Scaf configurations Scaf20 (i.e., ScafABT:a-Cel9A/b-Cel48A/Cel5A-t) with the T. fusca processive EG Cel9A and the C. thermocellum carbohydrate-binding module (CBM3a) located at the left side of Scaf20 structure, and Scaf9 (i.e., ScafTBA:Cel5A-t/b-Cel48A/a-Cel9A) with the T. fusca Cel9A and the C. thermocellum CBM3a positioned at the right side of its structure demonstrated the maximum catalytic activity on Avicel ( Figure 5A). Similar results were observed when the T. fusca Cel9A, Cel5A, and Cel48A were substituted with their orthologues C. thermocellum Cel9R, Cel5G, and Cel48S, respectively ( Figure 5B). Based on their hydrolytic efficiencies, the suggestion for future artificial cellulosomes design is that the processive EG should not be placed in the middle of the trivalent chimeric Scaf because the processive EG functions by cutting β-1,4-glycosidic bonds in the interior of the cellulose chain, followed by a processive cleavage of the even-numbered short oligosaccharides [48], its middle position within the trivalent Scaf likely restricted its movement along the substrate. In contrast, the processive EG should be located close to a CBM in the Scaf to properly fulfill its catalytic function. The third conclusion that can be drawn is that two enzymes with parallel characteristics (i.e., processive Cel9A and Cel5A from T. fusca or processive Cel9R and Cel5G from C. thermocellum) should not be placed in proximity with each other since this might lead to an unnecessary functional competition between them.
## (s15) Impact of Mechanical Stability of CohI on Hydrolytic Activity of Designer Cellulosomes
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) The mechanical stability of CohI within a Scaf is an important parameter since it impacts the catalytic activity of cellulosomes. Although the nine CohI(s) display a high level of sequence identity [49], their robustness against mechanical stress appears to be dramatically different [50]. On the CipA protein, the region between the CBM3a and the DocII was called the connecting region, while the region that consists of CohI-1, and CohI-2 was called the external region. Previous studies revealed that Coh(s), which were located in the connecting region, demonstrated higher mechanical stability in comparison to those positioned in the external region [50,51]. In a recent study of Galera-Prat et al. [52] the low mechanical stability CohI-1, with unfolding force (FU) = 124 ± 25 pN at 400 nm/s of pulling velocity, was used to produce C1 and E1, and the high mechanical stability CohI-7, with FU = 480 ± 77 pN at 400 nm/s of pulling velocity, was employed to generate C7 and E7 ( Figure 6). The resulting C1, E1, C7, and E7 were anchored on an artificial monovalent Scaf at predesignated positions, and then the monovalent Scaf was allowed to concurrently bind to a polystyrene microparticle, which mimicked bacterial cell surface, via a CohII of the anchoring protein SdbA. Two artificial monovalent ScafC1 and ScafC7 were designed to have one C1 and C7, respectively, placed between the CBMs and the X module/DocII (XDocII). The other ScafE1 and ScafE7 carrying one E1 and E7, respectively, positioned in the external region. Cel5A, a free EG from the thermophilic bacterium T. fusca, which was transformed to cellulosomal mode by fusing a DocI of the Xyn10Z from C. thermocellum, was employed as a DocI-bearing enzyme. The complexation of ScafC1:Cel5A, ScafC7:Cel5A, ScafE1:Cel5A, and ScafE7:Cel5A was confirmed by SDS-PAGE and these monovalent cellulosomes also showed similar hydrolytic activity when compared each other, but higher than that of the free Cel5A, maybe due to the targeting effect of the CBM3a in the monovalent cellulosomes. The monovalent cellulosomes were 
## (s18) Effects of Glycosylation on Enzyme Activity
Number of References: 5

(p18.0) The lack of a proper glycosylation system in E. coli seems to prevent C. bescii enzymes from fully expressing their capability [17]. Therefore, to improve the cellulolytic activity of the DCs through glycosylation, in a recently published paper, Kahn and coworkers [61]  After 72 h of incubation at optimal temperature 60 • C for C. thermocellum enzymes, with the synergy of Cel48S and Cel9R [60], the C. thermocellum-based DC (i.e., ScafTBA:Cel5G-t/b-Cel48S/a-Cel9R) [31] produced higher reducing sugar release than the ScafGTV:Cel5Dg/Cel48A-lk-t/Cel9A-lk-v, indicating a predominant efficiency of the C. thermocellum enzymes at mild thermophilic conditions. However, after 72 h of incubation at 75 • C, an opposite situation was observed as the complexation of ScafGTV:Cel5D-g/Cel48A-lkt/Cel9A-lk-v showed a far higher saccharolytic activity than that of the C. thermocellumbased DC and even higher than that of the native C. thermocellum cellulosome whose cellulose-degrading capacity dramatically lost at such a higher temperature ( Figure 7C,D). Synergy between enzymes, however, was not observed in the C. bescii-based DCs. In fact, the catalytic efficiencies of the individual bound Cel48A-lk-t and Cel48A-sk-t and their unbound forms were dramatically low on Avicel due to the lack of an appropriate glycosylation system in the E. coli XL1 cells [61].
## (s19) Effects of Glycosylation on Enzyme Activity
Number of References: 9

(p19.0) The lack of a proper glycosylation system in E. coli seems to prevent C. bescii enzymes from fully expressing their capability [17]. Therefore, to improve the cellulolytic activity of the DCs through glycosylation, in a recently published paper, Kahn and coworkers [61] used C. bescii as an expression host to produce glycosylated CbCel9A-lk-v, CbCel48A-lk-t, and chimeric CbScaf-GTV. The DocI-bearing Cel5D failed to express in C. bescii and the CbCel48A-lk-t could not bind to Scaf-T, thus the non-glycosylated DocI-bearing versions of Cel48A and Cel5D, with short linker, were expressed in E. coli to produce EcCel48Ask-t and EcCel5D-g, respectively ( Figure 8A). Additionally, the other DC components from their previous study [17] such as EcScaf-GTV and EcCel9A-lk-v were used to form E. coli-based DC ( Figure 8A). As a result, the C. bescii-based DC (CbScafGTV:EcCel5Dg/EcCel48A-sk-t/CbCel9A-lk-v) showed the highest activity, followed by the mixture of unbound individual enzymes EcCel5D-g + EcCel48A-sk-t + CbCel9A-lk-v, E. coli-based DC (EcScafGTV:EcCel5D-g/EcCel48A-sk-t/EcCel9A-lk-v), and the cocktail of unbound individual enzymes EcCel5D-g + EcCel48A-sk-t + EcCel9A-lk-v ( Figure 8B,C). The result revealed that glycosylated enzymes, even in their unbound form, can express a comparable activity relative to the unglycosylated DCs. Moreover, the attachment of O-linked α-1,2-galactose-containing oligosaccharides on the linker of catalytic modules likely has more impact on the overall DC activity than the attachment of oligosaccharides on the Scaf protein. Notably, glycosylation also improves thermostability of the DC, suggesting that a posttranslational modification is an important part in DC engineering ( Figure 8D). The findings from Kahn and coworkers [17,61] indicate that the hyper-thermotolerant cellulolytic enzymes from C. bescii, with a marvelous thermotolerant property, are potential catalysts for biomass decomposition. A better thermotolerance enzyme also makes enzyme recycling more feasible and cellulosic substrates-based biofuels more cost-effective relative to the fossil-derived fuels. However, the discrepancy in released reducing sugar data from these two reports remains to be explained because the authors used the same protocol for enzyme assay. For instance, with the same enzyme assay protocol with 4% (w/v) Avicel, 72 h of incubation at 75 • C, in their previous paper [17], the authors found approximately 18.5 mM sugar released when using E. coli-based DC (EcScafGTV:EcCel5D-g/EcCel48A-lkt/EcCel9A-lk-v), whereas in their second paper [62], they only recorded about 7.3-7.8 mM reducing sugar released from the EcScafGTV:EcCel5D-g/EcCel48A-sk-t/EcCel9A-lk-v. Note that no statistically significant difference was found in the catalytic efficiency of the EcCel48A-lk-t and EcCel48A-sk-t [17]. The inconsistency makes their conclusion less pronounced because the glycosylated C. bescii-based DC (CbScafGTV:EcCel5D-g/EcCel48Ask-t/CbCel9A-lk-v), which was stated as the best DC in this study, only produced roughly 11-12 mM reducing sugar [61]. 
## (s26) CBP-Enabling Pichia pastoris
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Pichia pastoris has been widely used for the expression of diverse recombinant proteins. The limited production of endogenous secretory proteins in P. pastoris makes the purification of recombinant proteins easy [67]. Additionally, an appropriate posttranslational modification is an advantage in producing proteins with correct folding and proper biological activity. Recently, an indirect P. pastoris surface-display method was developed to create a CBP cell factory [68]. Instead of using the usual non-covalent interactions between CohI and DocI from C. thermocellum, the colicin E7 DNase (CE7) and its matching immunity protein 7 (Im7) was used as a CE7-Im7 protein pair. The CE7 was mutated to inactivate DNase activity but retained its full binding affinity to generate CL7 tag, and the Im7, a cognate inhibitor of CE7, was employed to form an ultra-high-affinity IM7-CL7 protein pair (KD~10 −14 -10 −17 M) [69]. The IM7-CL7 protein pair was used as an alternative to the conventional Coh-Doc pair for cellulosome assembly (Figure 11). A CBH from Yarrowia lipolytica, an EG Cel9D from C. thermocellum DSM1237, a BGL from Thermoanaerobacterium thermosaccharolyticum, and a CBM from T. fusca were fused with N-terminal CL7 tags and recombinantly expressed in E. coli. The surface anchoring protein SED from S. cerevisiae was fused to the IM7 scaffoldin protein to mediate the attachment of the enzyme complex onto cell surface. In turn, the IM7 proteins were engineered to display for two or three times to carry two to three catalytic modules, thus generating Y-IM2 and Y-IM3 yeasts, respectively. Subsequently, the engineered P. pastoris yeasts were incubated with the E. coli lysates containing cellulosomal-mode-cellulases and CBMs to promote the assembly of minicellulosomes on cell surface via IM7-CL7 interaction. On Avicel and PASC, the engineered Y-IM2 performed better than Y-IM3 with 2.5 g/L and 1.2 g/L ethanol, respectively, whereas the Y-IM3 surpassed Y-IM2 on CMC substrate with up to 5.1 g/L ethanol. Moreover, a synergistic effect on CMC hydrolysis was also observed in Y-IM3, indicating a positive relationship between the number of Scaf IM7 and the catalytic efficiency. Figure 10. The attachment of trivalent Scaf on S. cerevisiae cell surface via covalent disulfide bonds of tAga1p-Aga2. This approach helps to improve surface display efficiency relative to the common CohII-DocII binding.
## (s27) CBP-Enabling Pichia pastoris
Number of References: 3

(p27.0) Pichia pastoris has been widely used for the expression of diverse recombinant proteins. The limited production of endogenous secretory proteins in P. pastoris makes the purification of recombinant proteins easy [67]. Additionally, an appropriate posttranslational modification is an advantage in producing proteins with correct folding and proper biological activity. Recently, an indirect P. pastoris surface-display method was developed to create a CBP cell factory [68]. Instead of using the usual non-covalent interactions between CohI and DocI from C. thermocellum, the colicin E7 DNase (CE7) and its matching immunity protein 7 (Im7) was used as a CE7-Im7 protein pair. The CE7 was mutated to inactivate DNase activity but retained its full binding affinity to generate CL7 tag, and the Im7, a cognate inhibitor of CE7, was employed to form an ultra-high-affinity IM7-CL7 protein pair (K D~1 0 −14 -10 −17 M) [69]. The IM7-CL7 protein pair was used as an alternative to the conventional Coh-Doc pair for cellulosome assembly (Figure 11). A CBH from Yarrowia lipolytica, an EG Cel9D from C. thermocellum DSM1237, a BGL from Thermoanaerobacterium thermosaccharolyticum, and a CBM from T. fusca were fused with N-terminal CL7 tags and recombinantly expressed in E. coli. The surface anchoring protein SED from S. cerevisiae was fused to the IM7 scaffoldin protein to mediate the attachment of the enzyme complex onto cell surface. In turn, the IM7 proteins were engineered to display for two or three times to carry two to three catalytic modules, thus generating Y-IM2 and Y-IM3 yeasts, respectively. Subsequently, the engineered P. pastoris yeasts were incubated with the E. coli lysates containing cellulosomal-mode-cellulases and CBMs to promote the assembly of minicellulosomes on cell surface via IM7-CL7 interaction. On Avicel and PASC, the engineered Y-IM2 performed better than Y-IM3 with 2.5 g/L and 1.2 g/L ethanol, respectively, whereas the Y-IM3 surpassed Y-IM2 on CMC substrate with up to 5.1 g/L ethanol. Moreover, a synergistic effect on CMC hydrolysis was also observed in Y-IM3, indicating a positive relationship between the number of Scaf IM7 and the catalytic efficiency. Figure 11. The novel ultra-high-affinity IM7-CL7 protein pair (KD~10 −14 -10 −17 M) was used for cellulase assembly onto P. pastoris cell surface. (A) The engineered P. pastoris with one BGL and one EG enzyme on its surface. (B) The engineered P. pastoris with one CBH and one CBM on its surface. (C) The engineered P. pastoris with one CBH, one EG, one CBH, and one CBM on its surface.
