# A Review on Deep Learning in UAV Remote Sensing

CorpusID: 231709807 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s2) Convolutional and Recurrent Neural Networks
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) A DNN can be formed by different architectures, and the complexity of the model is related to how each layer and additional computational method is implemented. Different DL architectures are proposed regularly, Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), and Deep Belief Networks (DBN) [12], and, more recently yet, Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [69]. However, the most common DNNs in the supervised networks categories are usually classified as CNNs (Fig. 3) and RNNs [105].
## (s20) Open-Set
Number of References: 3

(p20.0) The main idea of an open-set is to deal with unknown or unseen classes during the inference in the testing set [17]. As the authors mention, recognition in real-world scenarios is "open-set", different from neural networks' nature, which is in a "close-set". Consequently, the testing set is classified considering only the classes used during the training. Therefore, unknown or unseen classes are not rejected during the test. There are few studies regarding open-set in the context of remote sensing. Regarding semantic segmentation of aerial imagery, a study by [173] presented an approach considering the open-set context. There, an adaptation of a close-set semantic segmentation method, adding a probability threshold after the softmax, was conducted. Later, a post-processing step based on morphological filters was applied to the pixels classified as unknown to verify if they are inside pixels or from borders. Another interesting approach is to combine open-set and domain adaptation methods, as proposed by [2] in the remote sensing context.
