# Molecular Sciences Inherited Platelet Disorders: An Updated Overview

CorpusID: 233461385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) GNAS GNAQ GNAZ GNAI1
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Normal platelet count and morphology. Gs hyperfunction may be associated with discrete macrothrombocytopenia and neurological disorders. Reduced LTA and secretion in response to multiple soluble agonists. Moderate hemorrhagic symptoms; mainly associated with hemostatic challenges. [8,111,112] CalDAG-GEF1 defect (615888) AR RASGRP2

(p3.1) Normal platelet count and morphology. LTA and secretion defects with weak agonists. αIIbβ3 integrin activation defects with weak agonists (fibrinogen binding deficit, PAC-1). Normal or moderately reduced response to PMA. [113][114][115] LAD-III Syndrome (Kindlin-3 deficiency) (612840) AR FERMT3
## (s4) Inherited Platelet Disorder Diagnosis
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) The diagnosis of IPD has traditionally been limited by their considerable clinical and laboratory heterogeneity, as well as by the scant reproducibility and specificity of platelet function tests [129,130]. This has led to many patients reaching adulthood undiagnosed or misdiagnosed, thereby exposing themselves to a high risk of suboptimal clinical management or even harmful and unnecessarily invasive treatment. One clear example of this is the misdiagnosis of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) in many individuals with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS) and improper treatment with steroids or even splenectomy [119].
