# Genetic Identification: A Review on Autosomal Single Nucleotide Polymorphism's as Diagnostic Tool for Identifying Human

CorpusID: 234039669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) PREDICTION OF EYE COLOR
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) Another limitation with the applicability of DNA for the prediction of various traits that particularly includes the color of eye is dependent on the conceptual understanding of the individuals. For example, there could be assigning of same eye to the categories of different eye color. This could mislead the investigators during the investigation as they could begin searching for the wrong person based on this misleading categorization of the eye color. In order to overcome this issue a study has investigated the quantitative variations in the color of eye that are based on genetics. This study has observed that the there are three eye color genes which are new and the quantitative variation in about 50% of the genes can also be demonstrated through the use data provide by the SNPs [11]. The development of color charts from these data can be of significant value for avoiding the uncertainties that are caused in the prediction of eye color [12].
## (s6) PREDICTION OF HAIR COLOR
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Single Nucleotide polymorphism have also been used for the prediction of hair color with particular emphasis on the prediction of red hair color. This hair color is strongly determined by a single gene which provides significant information regarding red hair color when determined through SNPs. The studies that investigated the application of these types of the predictions in forensics have been performed several years ago. In the investigation of 45 SNPs which were obtained from 12 genes has observed an accuracy of 0.87, 0.93, 0.81, and 0.82 for the prediction of black, red, blond, and brown hairs respectively. It has also enabled to distinguish between the categories of the same hair colors. The dependency of age related to the hair color change might be responsible for the lowest accuracy of prediction of the SNPs for blond hair color [13]. The complete variation in the melanin of hair has been observed to be governed by three SNPs. These SNPs were responsible for 76% of these variations. Recently, two of these SNPs have been confirmed to be highly predictive of the hair color. The third gene, among these observed genes, has been recently examined to be related with the biogeoraphical ancestry instead to be responsible for the prediction of hair color [13].
