# Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review

CorpusID: 236369926 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Physics

## (s3) Nanomechanics using MD
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) As mentioned in the introduction, nanoindentation and nanocompression are the two main experimental tests developed to probe NP mechanical properties. Both make use of an indenter tip (made out of diamond, sapphire or tungsten carbide), that can either indent the flat top surface of a faceted NP directly (see e.g., the work of Kovalenko et al. [48]), or after etching leading to the so-called "flat punch" shape used for nanocompression [15,32]. Both tests were modeled by MD using mainly two approaches for the design of indenter and substrate: (i) the "frozen atoms" approach and (ii) the "virtual force field" approach. While both approaches rely on the application of a force field on surface and subsurface NP atoms, they are slightly different in terms of applied mechanical constraints. On the one hand, in the "frozen atoms" approach, the user simply designs a flat punch, a spherical or a Berkovitch indenter, made out of an infinitely tough, frozen, group of atoms. This last feature is easily achieved in whatever MD code cancelling the forces acting on these atoms or not accounting for them during time integration. Thus, the rigid block of atoms yields a repulsive force field (at short distance) that will be used to compress the NP. In this case, the compression force can be retrieved from the atomic interactions between the NP and the frozen block atoms. On the other hand, the "virtual force field" approach makes use of an explicit analytical formulation of a directional force field. For example, in the popular LAMMPS code [49], one can set a virtual indenter using a force defined by F (r ) = −K (r − R) 2 , Figure 2. Nanosphere with rough surfaces designed for atomistic simulations using spherical harmonics.
## (s21) Challenges and future trends
Number of References: 2

(p21.0) Simulations of NP mechanical properties are unfortunately impeded by several issues, and finding ways to improve or circumvent each of those constitute challenges that should be overcome in the future. The first ones are related to size and time limitations of atomistic simulations. Thanks to the continuous growth of computational power and the development of efficiently parallelized simulation codes, at the time of writing of this paper it is possible to compute the dynamical compression of NPs with diameters of several tens of nanometers, containing millions of atoms, using empirical interatomic potentials. These sizes overlap with the smallest NP samples reported in experiments, allowing for a direct comparison. However, it would be interesting to model systems with sizes of a few hundreds of nanometers, which are common in these studies. Hopefully, such sizes will be accessible in the near future in atomistic simulations. Aside from the computation power increase, multiscale modeling techniques could also be interesting options. In that way, coarse-grained dynamics have already been used to model relatively small polymer particles [161]. Coupling atomistic calculations with DDD [173] could also have a great potential. Moreover, the development of DDD-based hybrid approaches (as coupled to FEM) could provide a valuable upgrade about the modeling of NPs mechanics, especially about the dislocation dynamics after yielding and the possible formation of dislocation microstructures inside the nanocrystal.
