# ASSESSING OF SOIL EROSION RISK THROUGH GEOINFORMATION SCIENCES AND REMOTE SENSING -A REVIEW

CorpusID: 238924506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d1f341c8d795c488bc6b12ddcde9ef59f4da11da)

Fields: Geography, Physics, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s19) G2 Model
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) G2 is a soil erosion model for developing monthly erosion maps at regional scale was introduced by a team from Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and DG JRC within GEOLAND 2 project is included in JRC (G2, 2020). The G2 model proposes innovative techniques for the estimation of vegetation and protection factors. It is a complete, an empirical model for soil erosion rates and has evolved with time into a quantitative model mapping soil loss and sediment yield on month-time intervals, designed to run in a GIS environment. A detailed description in (Karydas and Panagos, 2018) is presented where the model adopts fundamental equations from RUSLE and the Erosion Potential Method (EPM). It aimed at developing an equation to estimate the water erosion and to put up a service for regional soil erosion monitoring across Europe (Karydas et al. 2012;Panagos et al., 2015). The G2 model clearly shows the critical seasons, hotspots and land uses which are more susceptible to erosion as the model is described by the following formula :
## (s42) RF (Random Forest) Model
Number of References: 3

(p42.0) Random Forest (RF) (Breiman, 2001) is obtained by an ensemble of uncorrelated, simple regression trees (Breiman et al., 1984) as the classifier (Quiroz et al., 2018) is machine learning-based. The algorithm is a tree type classifier combines the bagging ensemble learning and random subspace. It is an effective decision tree ensemble used for large-scale and multivariate pattern recognition. The core function includes:
