# An Overview on the Histogenesis and Morphogenesis of Salivary Gland Neoplasms and Evolving Diagnostic Approaches

CorpusID: 236943744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Classification of SGN
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The classification of SGN is an ever-evolving process, given their varied histomorphological appearances, lack of uniformity, overlapping features, and diverse nature of individual entities. The transitional nature of SGN thus contributes to this diagnostic dilemma. The most recent and widely accepted classification of SGN is featured in the fourth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of head and neck tumors, as elaborated in Table 1 [15]. The current classification has a modified list, with inclusion and exclusion of several histopathological entities, as compared to the third WHO edition [16,17]. As the understanding of the biological behavior of lesions progresses both on a genetic and molecular level, newer variants of pre-existing neoplasms continue to emerge. Evolving immunohistochemical markers and innovative diagnostic approaches may result in a more accurate identification, thus offering effective treatments of SGN. 
## (s9) Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB)
Number of References: 7

(p9.0) FNAB is one of the first line procedures used to diagnose SGN on account of its easy, inexpensive, highly accurate, quick, and minimally invasive nature [27]. This technique entails using a fine gauge needle to collect cells. After alcohol fixation and drying, the cellular aspirate is stained with Papanicolaou stain and can be immediately evaluated and diagnosed [27]. FNAB results are universally reported using the Milan's system, as seen in Table 2 [28]. Edizer et al. (2016), evaluated the ability of FNAB to differentially diagnose salivary gland masses by comparing the preoperative FNAB results with the postoperative definitive histopathological results of 285 patients. Their FNAB results were 92.6% accurate compared to the definitive histopathological results. This demonstrated that FNAB is useful in benign and malignant tumor differentiation. However, they do have some limitations, which involve relatively high non-diagnostic results, possibly due to bleeding, low cellularity, necrosis, or erroneous technique [27]. In addition, some potential outcomes in the final histopathological examination include squamous metaplasia and fibrosis. However, these do not interfere with the definitive diagnosis [27]. Table 2. Milan's system of FNAB reporting for SGN [28]. 
## (s15) Biopsy and Histopathological Diagnosis
Number of References: 5

(p15.0) Following the procurement of cells through biopsy, histopathological diagnosis assesses the SGN morphologically [44]. Different types of SGN can be identified based on their location and cell composition. For instance, acinic cell carcinoma is usually present in the parotid gland with its cells composed of acinar and intercalated types [44]. Meanwhile, mucoepidermoid carcinoma is found in major or minor salivary glands. These tumors are composed of squamoid, mucous, and intermediate cells, and may also contain solid or cystic regions [44]. Salivary duct carcinoma is mainly found de novo, or derived malignantly from carcinoma-ex-pleomorphic adenoma in the parotid gland. These neoplasms are characterized by locoregional metastasis [44]. Moreover, the most common benign and malignant SGN found at the parotid and submandibular glands were pleomorphic adenoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma, respectively [45]. Thus, accounting for these histopathological features can assist in the diagnosis of SGN.
## (s18) Mucoepidermoid Carcinoma
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) Mucoepidermoid carcinoma (MEC) is the most common malignancy of the salivary glands and can occur in both children and adults. It is characterized by the increased proliferation of the excretory cells [9]. While the etiology remains controversial, some studies have shown the implications of viruses [9]. The diagnostic and prognostic markers involve fusion proteins derived from chromosomal rearrangements [57].
