# COVID-19 and novel mRNA vaccines in pregnancy: an updated literature review

CorpusID: 238991518 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Vertical transmission likelihood
Number of References: 11

(p5.0) Despite the potential adverse effects to symptomatic women during pregnancy, there is limited evidence of vertical transmission of COVID-19 or of its presence in breastmilk. As of 2 September 2020, 19 neonates were documented found to be COVID-19-positive based on rtPCR nasopharyngeal swabs. Three of these were febrile, 15 were asymptomatic and one was born at 31 +2 weeks; he developed disseminated intravascular coagulopathy but was recovering at the time of publication. Thus far, there have been no reported deaths of COVID-19-positive neonates. 25 Angiotensin converting enzyme 2, a target of SARS-CoV-2 cell entry, and the spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV2 have been found on the syncytiotrophoblast cells of the placental villi that form the interface between mother and fetus in the placenta. 29 Therefore, vertical transmission may be possible, unlike with SARS, where no evidence of vertical transmission exists, but it is unclear whether these 19 cases were infected in utero, intrapartum or postpartum. 25 This study by Pettirosso et al. also states that the risk of vertical transmission was assessed with rtPCR of nasopharyngeal secretions, placenta, cord blood, amniotic fluid and breastmilk. They found that 19 of 655 nasopharyngeal swabs were COVID-19-positive by rtPCR as discussed and four placenta samples and one cord blood sample were positive, but the neonatal nasopharyngeal swabs were negative. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibodies were elevated in the serum of three neonates, suggesting some hope for antibodies of COVID-19 vaccinated mother's, passing to the neonate. 25 In terms of impacts on the fetus, there is limited data about in utero infection, risk of vertical transmission and early positive neonatal testing.

(p5.1) Some studies have shown a linkage of fetal vertical transmission with maternal disease severity, including Penfield et al. 30 This study performed rtPCR assays of placental and amniotic membrane samples within 30 minutes of delivery in a series of 11 women who were diagnosed COVID-19positive during pregnancy and delivered between 1 March 2020 and 20 April 2020. The infants were also tested using rtPCR of nasopharyngeal swabs between day 1 and day 5 of life to assess for COVID-19. 30 Three of 11 placental or amniotic membranes swabs of SARS CoV-2-positive mothers, after caesarean section delivery were positive. 16 The three positive placental cases were from mothers in severe stage of the disease, whereas seven of the other eight placentas were negative with mild disease and delivered vaginally. All 11 newborns tested negative for COVID-19 and did not have COVID-19 symptoms such as fever, cough and nasal congestion at the day 1 or day 5 of life. This raises concern that swabs from the placenta and membranes might have been mixed with maternal tissue, amniotic fluid and/or maternal blood. 16 Although this was one of the first few studies to demonstrate evidence of SARS-CoV-2 in placental tissue, there was no supported clinical data for vertical transmission. 31 Trostle et al. 32 studied 36 pregnant women who had at least one dose of either Pfizer/BioNTech or Moderna since June 2021 and obtained umbilical cord blood at time of delivery. Using the Abbott SARS-CoV-2 assay, 36 neonates (100%) were positive for antibodies to the spike protein (anti-S IgG) at high titers. All but one of the subjects received both doses of their mRNA vaccines prior to delivery. The neonate born to the woman who received only one dose was still positive for anti-S IgG. 32 This study provides support for transplacental antibody transfer following mRNA COVID-19 vaccination during pregnancy with the high levels of anti-S antibodies demonstrated. Given the combination of positive anti-S IgG and negative anti-N IgG (antibodies to the nucleocapsid protein that is only present following natural infection), the neonatal antibodies were secondary to vertical transfer of antibodies from maternal vaccination rather than natural infection. 32
## (s6) Unique T-helper 2 bias
Number of References: 5

(p6.0) During the first trimester of pregnancy, there is a bias toward T-helper 2 system dominance which protects the fetus by suppressing cell mediated immunity, but leaves the mother vulnerable to viral infections, which are more effectively contained by the Th1 system. 33 Data from German and US trials of the Pfizer-BioNtech mRNA vaccine (BNT162b2) indicate a broad immune response to the vaccine with induction of neutralising antibody responses as well as helper T-cell type 1 CD4 + cells and expansion of effector memory CD8 + T-cells in both men and nonpregnant women participants. 31 Currently, there is not enough data to confirm whether pregnant women have the same immunophenotypical response. If so, there are concerns that neonates born to mothers with altered CD4 + T-cell responses may have long-term sequelae. 31 Disruption of the balance of CD4 + T-cell responses by overstimulation of Th1 immunity may be harmful during pregnancy and is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes; including preeclampsia, preterm birth and fetal loss. 31,34 Impacts on breastfeeding
## (s7) Conclusion
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) Data collected in the V-safe registry so far include over 50 000 pregnant women with no serious vaccine-related adverse events. 7 The UK has also created a similar registry for its citizens that shows similar results with no safety concerns related to COVID-19 vaccination. 7 Data from Pfizer/BioN-Tech, Moderna and Janssen vaccines' animal DART studies have found no safety concerns with no adverse effect on female reproduction, fertility, fetal or embryonal, or postnatal development, miscarriage. 7 It will be essential to continue critically reviewing observational studies, clinical trials and available data for approval of vaccine use in pregnancy.
