# Computational modelling of the scoliotic spine: A literature review

CorpusID: 235404190 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/033f72bdcc0ae6329db76748e06920c0be015c4c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/033f72bdcc0ae6329db76748e06920c0be015c4c)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s16) | MBM of the scoliotic spine
Number of References: 5

(p16.0) Geometry Spinal curvature and occasionally the muscles have been included, however the individual component of the IVJ (disc, ligaments and facet joints) are rarely included (Table 3). Bassani et al. created whole, personalised, scoliotic, spine models. Compared to a healthy spine model they predicted differences in the muscle force distribution. Unexpectedly, there were no substantial lateral loads, however this was attributed to modelling mild scoliosis. Larger forces were seen in the sagittal plane and concave side of the curve for larger degrees of kyphosis and axial rotation, respectively. 130 Schmid et al. created and validated subject-specific AIS models. With the introduction of the scoliotic curvature the IVJ compressive load increased. Although, no correlation was observed between curve severity and compressive force, this could be because the curves in the model were mild or moderate. 142 Bassani  capture the spinal curvature, especially as the curvature becomes more severe as it affects both the load magnitude within the discs and the muscle forces. Schmid et al. also observed muscle geometry and activity asymmetry. 142 They reported the predicted muscle volume was generally in line with the literature; the majority of the models had larger erector spinae volumes on the convex side of the curve, and one third had larger volumes on the concave side. However, for the multifidi muscles Schmid et al. reported larger volumes on the concave side for about 90% of the models. Asymmetric muscle activity partially agreed with the literature, however differences could be attributed to differences between the curvature of the models and the subjects in the literature. 142 Previous studies have also found that the scoliotic spine experienced greater muscle force asymmetry than a healthy spine. 119 F I G U R E 2 Trends of the components included in numerical models of the scoliotic spine with a specific element Some MBM unlike FEM of the scoliotic spine incorporated the muscles; however often the IVJs were simplified by lumping the contribution of the facet joints, intervertebral ligaments, and the IVD together (Figure 2.).
