# COVID-19 Associated Pancreatitis: A Review of 66 Cases

CorpusID: 236725228 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9224c9d55dedd1a5a75f6ae3ea9472154cc67f5b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9224c9d55dedd1a5a75f6ae3ea9472154cc67f5b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Results
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) We identi ed 73, 117, 51, 17 records in Pub Med, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar, respectively. After removing duplicates and screening, we found 29 publications (Figure 1), including 27 case reports and 2 cohort studies. Taken together, 66 patients with COVID-19 associated pancreatitis were reported. Table 2 represents the key characteristics of the cases. In terms of geographical location, nine studies (33.3 %) were from Asia, eight studies (29.6%) were from Europe, seven studies (25.9%) were from North America, two studies (7.4%) were from South America, and one study (3.7%) was from Africa. In total, the female to male ratio was 1.06 (33 to 31); gender was not mentioned in two cases (14,15). The mean age of patients (n=66) was 49.94 ± 16.96. Reviewed records indicated that in 44% of patients, acute pancreatitis presented as the initial manifestation of COVID-19. No signi cant past medical or surgical history was reported for 35% of cases. Among underlying disease reported in 65% of patients, hypertension was the most common. In a cohort study conducted by Inamdar et al., thirty-two COVID-19 positive patients with pancreatitis were reported. Idiopathic pancreatitis accounts for the majority of these cases. Gallstone, alcohol, and drugs were responsible for 16%, 6%, and 3% of pancreatitis in these patients, respectively (16). The mortality rate was 9% among all patients reported in the studies.
