# Data-Driven Decision Making in COVID-19 Response: A Survey

CorpusID: 236521932 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) Tracing Close Contacts
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) Close contact tracing is a common intervention to control outbreaks of infectious diseases [39]. In the early stages of the epidemic, traditional door-to-door surveys and paper form filling were still adopted in most areas, which was organized and implemented step by step [53]. If the execution was not strong enough or the provided information was wrong, it would affect the judgement and prevention of the epidemic.
## (s7) PSYCHOLOGICAL COUNSELLING
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The outbreak of COVID-19 has made people face many changes in lifestyle and environment [45]. Many places have adopted mandatory isolation measures to prevent the further spread of the virus. Isolation increases the possibility of depression and even makes people "desperate" [42]. Moreover, the negative reports about COVID-19 illnesses are constantly updated every day. The number of dead cases is increasing, and the number of confirmed cases is increasing daily, resulting in incalculable loss. These series of problems increase people's mental stress and negative psychological states. The large-scale pandemic disease causes panic in people, worrying about the possibility of becoming sick, and meanwhile increasing the fear of death, helplessness, irrespective of being a patient [69]. These cases involve the pain of treatment, the risk of relapse of mental diseases, and several uncontrollable behaviours.
## (s9) Enterprise Policies
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Significantly, most psychological intervention guiding measures have been taken up by hospitals and psychological counselling agencies. The decreed isolation policies also prevent enterprises from resuming work. Whether it is a private enterprise or a state-owned enterprise, employees are also isolated to their homes like most people. Due to the isolation policies, face-to-face communication is not possible, so hospitals and consulting agencies have jointly built many online consultation platforms [59]. Zhang et al. [99] proposed a mental health intervention model, which uses an Internet technology platform to provide timely psychological counselling to patients and their families. Doctors need the courage to overcome disease meanwhile, they need to deal with certain extreme emotions of patients due to illness, who can be physically and mentally exhausted. Therefore, their psychological guidance is also a top priority. Chen et al. [25] detailed the psychological guide measures for medical staff, including the establishment of a psychological intervention medical team, the establishment of a psychological assistance hotline team and psychological skills training.
## (s10) Education Policies
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) To cope with the disease, some countries has explicitly closed schools. However, long-term suspension of classes at home will certainly have a serious of negative impacts on students' psychologies [18]. Children are more likely to feel pressure after isolation, which is four times higher than those who are not isolated [77]. Research shows that people with higher education are more likely to feel uncomfortable because of their higher awareness of health [78]. Cao et al. [20] analysed the psychological status of college students during the new outbreak by questionnaires and found that they all had different degrees of anxiety.
