# Organoids as host models for infection biology -a review of methods

CorpusID: 239025417 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9027ac32be7bfa611f75f8cd333f732f13a4b1f)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Infection during splitting
Number of References: 2

(p5.0) One of the simplest methods to infect organoids is to do so during passaging. After release from the ECM, organoids are disrupted mechanically or enzymatically, shredded into fragments, incubated with the pathogen, and re-embedded in the ECM until the end of the infection time point (Fig. 3a). As with normal passaging, the individual organoid fragments will generate new organoids. This method has been used to infect fallopian tube organoids with Chlamydia trachomatis (C. trachomatis), an intracellular pathogen. Interestingly, the bacteria did not infect all cells within the organoids but instead established a chronic infection of only a few cells per organoid. The infection could be maintained in vitro for up to 2 months, sustained only by repeated pathogen life cycles within the organoids themselves. This mimics the natural process very closely and enabled the observation that epithelial cells organized into an intact layer can maintain the integrity of this layer by expelling infected cells into the lumen before they are lysed. These observations highlight the advantages of organoids compared to cancer cell lines, in which C. trachomatis infection leads to the death of all cells by the end of the first C. trachomatis life cycle. Such long-term infections may also be instrumental to study the contribution of this pathogen to cancer development 54 . The same approach was also applied to analyze the correlation between S. Typhimurium infection and gallbladder cancer. Infected single cells derived from gallbladder organoids displayed a higher level of organoid formation and cell transformation, which correlates with the known carcinogenic potential of this pathogen 55 .
## (s6) Organoid-derived monolayers
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) Organoid-derived monolayers are established by the enzymatic dissociation of 3D organoids into organoid fragments or single cells that are then seeded on a flat plastic surface or transwells (Fig. 3b). Cell attachment to the surface often requires coating with ECM-like proteins, such as complex matrices (e.g., Matrigel or Basement Membrane Extract), gelatin, collagen, or fibronectin. Complex matrices provide a suitable coating surface but have several disadvantages, such as xenogeneic origin, the presence of growth factors and other components such as gentamicin, and batch-to-batch variability. Collagen is often a good alternative to support the attachment and growth of several types of organoids (e.g., stomach and intestinal organoids) 35,[56][57][58] . To obtain a confluent, stable monolayer of cells attached to the well surface, several experimental aspects must be considered. For example, the number of cells seeded will determine the time required to reach confluence. The medium composition can also be modified to induce or inhibit cell differentiation, depending on the experimental approach. 2D monolayers have been used to model a range of infections, including H. pylori 56,59,60 , pathogenic E. coli 61 , norovirus 57,62 and, recently, Epstein Barr virus (EBV) infections 33 . In the case of EBV, infected B cells, the primary target cell of the virus, were added to the epithelial culture and transferred the virus to cells 33 , an infection method termed "transfer infection" that has been previously described for cell lines 63 .
## (s10) Bioprinting with cells
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Hydrogels are highly tunable, and their biofunctionality can be improved through modification of their polymeric network. Moreover, their versatility allows combination with several TE techniques for scaffold production, such as micropatterning, 3D printing, and microfluidic techniques. By micropatterning, it is possible to stamp ECM proteins (e.g., fibronectin and collagen) onto culture substrates (e.g., polystyrene), creating small cell adhesion sites that can mimic the natural scaffold of the tissue. Using cells from organoids in this way has allowed the generation of an in vitro self-renewing human intestinal epithelium with crypt-villus structures and proper cell lineage compartmentalization 81 . Another recent work has described a human intestinal model created using 3D printing and a cell-laden collagen bioink 82 . Similar approaches have also been implemented for other organs, such as the liver 83 . Although conventional cell lines were used in these models, similar tissue-like structures are likely to develop using organoid-derived cells.
## (s11) Organs-on-a-chip and microdevices
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) In this approach, cells are seeded into a chamber and subjected to continuous flow, with additional mechanical forces that mimic physiological organ conditions (Fig. 3c). These forces provide further complexity to the cultures and mimic the hydrostatic forces to which tissues are normally subjected. Some of these devices include multiple chambers separated by a porous membrane, which can be seeded with different cell types on each side. The chambers can also be seeded with cells from different organs (multiorgan devices) in an attempt to mimic an entire or partial body system (body-on-a-chip) 84,85 . A broad range of organ-on-a-chip models have been developed over recent years, including those models of the skin, lung, gastrointestinal tract, kidney, and liver 86 . Prime examples of organ-on-a-chip models for infection research are those of the lung and intestine.
