# Software Engineering for Blockchain Based Software Systems: Foundations, Survey, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 233739792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Surveys on Engineering Internet-Based Computing Systems
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) Broadly-related surveys focus on intersections and synergies between Internet-based computing technologies such as blockchain, service computing, cloud computing, and IoTs. They are theoretically grounded on distributed architecture engineering that provides a backbone and virtually unlimited computational resources on-demand services to develop and deploy software systems. Surveys of Fahmideh et al., [9], [10], Lane et al., [28], and Razavian and Lago [29] are categorized under the broadly-related surveys. For example, cloud computing empowers the scalability and performance of blockchain platforms by providing service delivery models such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), or Platform as a Service (PaaS). Fahmideh et al. in their initial work [30] that is later elaborated in [9] compare the characteristics of 43 reengineering approaches, published between 2007 and 2015, to make legacy software systems as cloud-enabled. Their survey synopsizes the status quo and presents a rich set of development tasks and recommendations commonly incorporated into typical migration processes to cloud platforms upon service delivery models such as IaaS, SaaS, or PaaS. Blockchain is used as an enabling technology for IoT-based applications as it provides a secured decentralized network for data management and communication of sensors and devices. Fahmideh and Zowghi [10] present a generic development process lifecycle for IoT-based applications by mapping 63 approaches, published between 2008 and 2019. They conclude that development roles, requirements analysis, modelling, testing, and tailorability of development processes are not addressed in the existing approaches to engineer IoT-based applications.
## (s11) 5.1.1Agile-based BBS development
Number of References: 6

(p11.0) The common perception of agile-based software development is distilled in the Agile Manifesto [50] and used in wellknown agile software development methodologies such as SCRUM, XP, and Lean Kanban. They emphasize practices such as active user involvement, lightweight modeling, short cycles, iterative releases with frequent customer review, and priority of working software over documentation. . BBS Agile prototyping, a.k.a. Spike Solution in XP, has been found to be a useful technique at the early stage of BBS development for the purpose of (i) requirements elicitation, specification, and thus far from target blockchain platform, (ii) forming a base target BBS architecture without dependency to a specific platform, and (iii) identifying uncertainties in system quality factors such as transaction execution performance, security, as well as the trade-off between them [S1],[S4],[S28]. Marchesi et al., [S23] discuss the usefulness of user stories, i.e. defining target BBS features as seen from stakeholders' point of view, to get early feedback from stakeholders to validate required smart contracts. Being open to users' change requests and continuous integration, as promised by core Agile development technologies like DevOps [51], nevertheless, is not consistent with the intrinsic characteristics of blockchain harness. For example, smart contracts are immutable after their deployment on distributed ledgers and access to them by external users is strictly forbidden. This limitation is mainly due to the security model defined by blockchain architecture that only allows calling smart contract functions through a public interface sending/receiving requests between operating smart contracts on blockchain and other components operating on off-blockchain [12], [13], [16], [17]. As will be discussed in Section 5.2.1, a conclusion from this matter is that Agile practices are thus useful at the early stage of BBS engineering to identify potential BBS requirements and smart contracts. They may not be always suitable for developing ever-changing business services. Rather, software teams should implement smart contracts for business services with minimum later upgrade needs at runtime and ensure the verification of smart contracts before their deployments on blockchain platforms. In this regard, [S23] suggests separating the system development lifecycle into two individual concurrent development endeavors, i.e., (i) smart contracts development and (ii) typical software development. Complementing this, developers should implement proxy/mediator components to enable interactions between (i) and (ii) and to inform on-blockchain components of changes in off-blockchain components.
