# A Review of Per-and Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substance Impairment of Reproduction

CorpusID: 244501492 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s10) Short-Chain Reproductive Effects in Animal Models
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) Three recent studies examined reproductive effects of GenX in mice (Blake et al., 2020) and rats (Conley et al., 2019;Conley et al., 2021). Mice treated with GenX had a greater incidence of placental abnormalities while rats showed a greater incidence of reduced maternal thyroid hormone levels and elevated levels of PPAR-regulated gene expression in both maternal and fetal livers (as with PFOA described above). GenX is a developmental toxicant in the rat; those dosed from gestational day 8 through post-natal day 2 (from 1 to 125 mg/kg/day), had increased neonatal mortality and reduced birth weight (Conley et al., 2021).
## (s13) Long-Chain PFAS
Number of References: 3

(p13.0) Multiple epidemiological studies have been conducted to determine the associated effects of PFAS on humans. Johnson et al. (2014) found an association between lower birth weights and exposure to PFOA, noting an 18.9 g decrease in birth weight for every ng/mL increase in serum PFOA level. As described in rat models above (Jensen and Leffers, 2008), Leydig cell hyperplasia is connected with lower testosterone levels in men, indicating a possible mode of action for PFOA to induce testicular cancer (Tarapore and Ouyang, 2021).
## (s14) Short-Chain PFAS
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) Data for short-chain PFAS effects on human reproductive parameters are scarce and these data are inconsistent (Nian et al., 2020;Brase et al., 2021). Indeed, the threat that these long-chain replacements pose on human populations, pathophysiology and health effects are not completely understood (Sunderland et al., 2019). Effects in humans are difficult to extrapolate from laboratory dose-response results. However, existing data indicates that concentrations in humans are lower than dose-response effects found in the laboratory. For example, So et al. (2007) found a maximum human PFAS concentration of 360 ng/L (breast milk), orders of magnitude below laboratory animal model exposures which induced toxicity.

(p14.1) Because of the likelihood of co-occurrence, short-and longchain PFAS have been studied together. A three year study of 752 women in China found prenatal exposure to one short-chain and one long-chain PFAS (perfluorobutanesulfonate, PFBS and perfluoroheptanoic acid, PFHpA, respectively) was associated with alterations of fetal gonadotropins as well as free androgen levels (Nian et al., 2020). A recent review of endocrine disruption effects associated with both long-and short-chain PFAS exposure found that effects varied similarly according to gender and age of development; in some cases, short-chain effects were greater than long-chain PFAS (Mokra, 2021). While much more is needed pertaining to human reproductive effects, the implications of these studies warrant further epidemiological studies on shortchain PFAS.
