# A REVIEW OF EXACT RESULTS FOR FLUCTUATION FORMULAS IN RANDOM MATRIX THEORY

CorpusID: 248006435 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1513c9beb7b02275258f00b2c58057e7e6c608f2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1513c9beb7b02275258f00b2c58057e7e6c608f2)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s0) Formalism and simple examples
Number of References: 20

(p0.0) 2.1. Covariance, variance and correlation functions. We take the viewpoint of the eigenvalues for a random matrix ensemble as an example of a continuous point or particle process. For notational convenience we regard the points as confined to an interval I of the real line, although this in not necessary -the domain may as well be in higher dimensions. For N particles we let p N (x 1 , . . . , x N ) denote their joint probability density function. Integrating out all but one, respectively two, particles gives the corresponding one and two point correlations ρ (1),N (x 1 ) = N I dx 2 · · · I dx N p N (x 1 , . . . , x N ) ρ (2),N (x 1 , x 2 ) = N(N − 1) I dx 3 · · · I dx N p N (x 1 , . . . , x N ). For large separation we expect ρ (2),N (x 1 , x 2 ) ≈ ρ (1),N (x 1 )ρ (1),N (x 2 ) which motives introducing the truncated (or connected) two point correlation (2.3) ρ T (2),N (x 1 , x 2 ) = ρ (2),N (x 1 , x 2 ) − ρ (1),N (x 1 )ρ (1),N (x 1 ). A simple but fundamental result is that these correlations relate to the covariance between two linear statistics, defined by (2.4) Cov

(p0.1) g(x l ) .  2),N (x, x ) + ρ (1),N (x)δ(x − x ) (2.5) = − 1 2 I dx I dx ( f (x) − f (x ))(g(x) − g(x ))ρ T (2),N (x, x ). (2.6) Proof. In relation to the first term on the RHS of (2.4) we have (2),N (x, x ) + δ(x − x )ρ (1),N (x) , (2.7)

(p0.2) while the second term allows the simple rewrite (2.8) (1),N (x)ρ (1),N (x ).
## (s7) Forming the self dual quaternion unitary matrices
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) In terms of these quantities the corresponding two-point correlation functions read [62,155] 
## (s9) 2.10.2.
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Consistency with log-gas predictions. The log-gas analogy for the eigenvalue PDF for the circular β ensemble (2.90) leads to predictions for both the smoothed bulk and global scaled forms of the quantity C (2),N (x, x ), as required for the determination of the corresponding fluctuation formulas [20,102,70]. The fluctuation formulas obtained using this heuristic are consistent with the exact results obtained in the case of the circular β ensemble and moreover the working can be extended to apply to other random matrix ensembles. This is possible because of log-gas analogies for those random matrix ensembles too.
## (s16) 2.
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) A loop equation analysis has been applied to various discretisation of the classical βensembles [31,54]. In the so-called one cut regime, the universal form of W 2,0 as given by the RHS of (3.36) is recovered.
