# Latent Variable Modelling Using Variational Autoencoders: A Survey

CorpusID: 249889169 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cd09476afab33bbefff5703c493a8404c909b6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6cd09476afab33bbefff5703c493a8404c909b6a)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s10) Hierarchical inference
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Learning the complex distribution over the data was largely simplified by the addition of latent variables as discussed in 2.1, we use the same idea to learn a complex approximate posterior by adding latent variables to the approximate posterior. This method was introduced by [33] in the context of variational inference, this section discusses the method in the context of variational autoencoders.
## (s22) Unbiased estimates of gradients
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) Relaxing the objective allows training however the training is biased towards the continuous latent states. In this section, we discuss REBAR [48] a method that allows us to construct control variates using the biased gradient estimator and the score function gradient estimator. This control variate is added to the objective to obtain unbiased estimates of the gradients.
## (s46) Hierarchical inference
Number of References: 2

(p46.0) Learning the complex distribution over the data was largely simplified by the addition of latent variables as discussed in 2.1, we use the same idea to learn a complex approximate posterior by adding latent variables to the approximate posterior. This method was introduced by [33] in the context of variational inference, this section discusses the method in the context of variational autoencoders.
## (s58) Unbiased estimates of gradients
Number of References: 2

(p58.0) Relaxing the objective allows training however the training is biased towards the continuous latent states. In this section, we discuss REBAR [48] a method that allows us to construct control variates using the biased gradient estimator and the score function gradient estimator. This control variate is added to the objective to obtain unbiased estimates of the gradients.
