# materials A Review of Irradiation Damage and Effects in α-Uranium

CorpusID: 249633229 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65bf7ccf4955dacc038f6714a932487bc9ac01c3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Physics, Medicine

## (s3) Electronic Properties
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].
## (s4) Electronic Properties
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The electronic structure of uranium is dominated by 5f electron states that form narrow bands that tend to bond the atoms in complex and distorted ways. DFT results reveal that 5f orbitals are active in the chemical bonding for uranium [11]. The behavior of 5f electrons of uranium is observed to be similar to that of the d orbital electrons in the transition elements [12]. Compared with the bulk atoms, the deficit of atoms near the uranium surface breaks the balance between the delocalization and localization of 5f electrons, leading to the electrons changing from delocalized to localized. As the electrons change from delocalized to localized, the arrangement of the surface atoms is interrupted and the total energy of the surface increases. This principally leads to a high surface energy, in turn leading to a high affinity for hydrogen, oxygen and carbon [11,13].
## (s12) Irradiation Effects on Thermal and Electrical Properties
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Neutron irradiation increases the electrical resistivity and thermal conductivity of α-U, but the specific relationship is not well understood. A direct correlation was observed between the irradiation-increased resistivity and single crystal irradiation growth in all the available studies, albeit with limitations on the burnup range investigated. The effect of thermal neutron irradiation on the electrical resistivity of lineage single crystals (<600 ppm impurities) was studied by [42] in the CP-5 reactor up to 550 K. For a constant irradiation temperature, electrical resistivity increased with irradiation dose and was also proportional to the increase in irradiation growth strain. However, the increase in resistivity with irradiation dose is reported to saturate [42], contrary to the dimensional changes induced by irradiation growth.
