# Continuous remote monitoring of COPD patients-justification and explanation of the requirements and a survey of the available technologies

CorpusID: 255314963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s7) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.
## (s8) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p8.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s17) Monitoring PaCO 2
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.
## (s26) Detection of provoking and predictive factors
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:
## (s46) Cardiac electrical activity (ECG) remote monitoring
Number of References: 6

(p46.0) Holter monitors are traditionally used for ECG acquisitions in remote settings, but they are being superseded by wireless bipotential patch devices [78][79][80], whose development has been intensive in recent years (a representative example, a Savvy patch ECG sensor, is shown in Fig. 2). The patch ECG (PECG) sensors are already established as patient friendly, well tolerated, unobtrusive, wire free, and with recording capabilities that span from weeks to months (much longer than standard Holter monitors), which is beneficial for detecting potentially malignant arrhythmias that take a longer time to detect. They provide good adhesion to the skin, and some of them even claim to be waterproof.
## (s47) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p47.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p47.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s56) Monitoring PaCO 2
Number of References: 4

(p56.0) Since oxygen therapy can increase PaCO 2 , as explained in Sect. 2.1, it is beneficial to monitor PaCO 2 not only during acute oxygenation therapy but also possibly during LTOT (especially during sleep [23]) (see Sect. 2.1). Mortality in acute exacerbations of COPD was reported to be associated even with an increase in chronic stable levels of PaCO 2 [51], which shows that it is also beneficial to regularly monitor stable (baseline) CO 2 levels.
## (s65) Detection of provoking and predictive factors
Number of References: 2

(p65.0) It is not clear which factors determine the development and severity of an exacerbation [7]:
