# The Link between Different Types of Prebiotics in Infant Formula and Infection Rates: A Review

CorpusID: 258227879 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4eff27713006af4b4881c02d0be017867876661)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Galactooligosaccharides (GOSs)/Fructooligosaccharides (FOSs)
Number of References: 20

(p3.0) We found six publications reporting on four trials with short-chain (sc) GOSs and longchain (lc) FOSs, as listed in Table 2 [26,27,[30][31][32][33]. All patients were healthy term infants born in Europe. Two trials reported short-and long-term observations (six months [30] to two years [26] and one year [32] to five years [33]). A total of 2206 participants were included, of whom 946 participants received scGOSs/lcFOSs in a range of 4 to 8 g/L. A total of 960 participants were included in the control group and received unsupplemented infant formula. In the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. [32,33], a third group with breastfeeding was included as a reference group. One study was not blinded [27]. In one study, only patients with a parental history of atopy were included [26,30], whereas parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion in two other studies [31][32][33].

(p3.1) In the trial reported by Arslanoglu et al., the effect of 8 g/L GOSs/FOSs was evaluated in infants with a parental atopic history. During the six months of intervention, a difference was noted in the prevalence of infections (p = 0.01), recurrent infections (p < 0.05), and recurrent upper respiratory tract infections (p < 0.05) [30]. Antibiotic intake tended to be lower, but this was not statistically significant (p = 0.1). After an observation of two years, the number of infections was still lower (p < 0.01), and a statistically significant difference in antibiotic use was observed (p < 0.05) [26]. There were also less upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) (p < 0.01). Furthermore, this trial showed a trend of a lower incidence of urinary tract infections (p = 0.06).
## (s4) Human Milk Oligosaccharides
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) We retained six publications on human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) ( Table 3) [28,[34][35][36][37][38] involving a total of 1571 infants, conducted in America, Europe, and Asia. Five studies included only healthy term infants, and one study examined the effects of HMOs on infants with cow's milk allergy (CMA). HMOs were added in a range of 0.25 g/L to 5.8 g/L, using 2 -FL, LNnT, 3 -FL, LNT, 3 -SL, and 6 -SL.
## (s8) Upper Respiratory Tract Infections
Number of References: 10

(p8.0) Out of four studies, one showed that supplementation with GOSs/FOSs resulted in a reduction in the incidence of URTIs in a short-and long-term observation [26,30]. Another trial did not show a reduction [27]. The other manuscript discussing GOSs/FOSs did not present data on URTIs.

(p8.1) Two studies with HMOs showed no reduction in the total number of episodes of URTIs [28,37], although a reduction in the annual frequency was reported in the second study [37]. The effect on URTIs was not reported in the other trials concerning HMO supplementation.

(p8.2) GOS/PDX supplementation during the first 48 weeks of life was reported to reduce URTIs during this period, but this effect could not be confirmed after 96 weeks [40]. GOSs [39], GOSs with high amounts β-palmitic acid [41], and MOSs [42] did not have an impact on this type of infection.
## (s9) Lower Respiratory Tract Infection
Number of References: 5

(p9.0) In all of the trials, the incidence of LRTIs was low or not examined. Focusing on GOSs/FOSs, no reduction in LRTIs was proven in two studies [26,27]. HMOs were associated with a reduction in the incidence of LRTIs in one study [28]. A second trial showed a relative risk reduction of 33.7% after adding HMOs [37]. MOSs had no influence on LRTIs [42]. Other prebiotic studies did not examine LRTIs.
## (s10) Gastrointestinal Infections
Number of References: 10

(p10.0) According to data from four studies, GOSs/FOSs do not reduce the rate of gastrointestinal infections [26,30,31,33]. However, in the study of van Stuijvenberg et al. in 2015, a reduction in the duration of infection was reported [33]. In only one study a reduction in GI infections was reported for GOSs/FOSs [27]. Gastrointestinal infections were reported to be statistically insignificantly reduced (p = 0.2), with a relative risk reduction of 40% in one HMO study [37]. Supplementation with GOSs [39], GOSs/PDX [40], or βPA/GOSs [41] did not influence this type of infection.
## (s15) Breastfeeding
Number of References: 9

(p15.0) The literature shows that breastfeeding during the first four to six months has a significant influence on the infection rate during infancy [44,45]. However, some studies already show an advantage after breastfeeding the first two weeks [46]. It is interesting to reflect on the possible (positive) effects of breastfeeding in the included trials. In most of the studies, the influence of breastfeeding could be considered to be low, as the infants were included before the age of 2-4 weeks. In contrast, in the study of Bruzzese et al., it was impossible to exclude a possible effect of breastfeeding; hence, exclusive breastfeeding during the first two weeks of life was an inclusion criterion [27]. Moreover, inclusion was allowed until the age of four months; thus, breastfeeding was possible during this period. The same influence of breastfeeding can be discussed in the other studies. Furthermore, in some studies, breastfeeding was allowed in the intervention group, along with the infant formula containing the prebiotic, without specifying how much breastfeeding was given [26,27,30,32,33].
## (s18) Low Infection Rates
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) The mean annual infection rate in children under three years is three to five [17,18]. In the studies investigated in this review, the incidence of infection in infants and young children varied widely but was lower than expected overall. The low infection rates in the different trials could have led to minimising the observed effect.
## (s19) Atopy/Allergy
Number of References: 7

(p19.0) In some studies, parental atopic history was an exclusion criterion, focusing the research on healthy infants-for example, in the trials of Van Stuijvenberg et al. and Bocquet et al. [31][32][33]. In contrast, parental history of atopy was an inclusion criterion in other studies [26,30]. Given the fact that parental history of atopy enhances the risk of atopy for the child, and that atopy is relied to more infections [48,49], it might be possible that those children would receive a greater advantage from the prebiotic effect. This assumption has not yet been investigated.
