# Academic Editors: Codrina Ancuta medicina Review Depression in Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Narrative Review-Diagnostic Challenges, Pathogenic Mechanisms and Effects

CorpusID: 253538941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02698c0526d927c8289e4ccabd81d3a98418e4df)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s12) Effects of Depression in RA Patients
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Depression in patients with RA is associated with poor long-term outcomes. Multiple studies have shown that depression in RA is associated with increased pain, fatigue, and physical disability. This alters treatment compliance, causes more comorbidities, and leads to higher mortality, partly through increased suicide risk. Depression in RA increases health service utilization and healthcare costs directly through hospitalization, but also indirectly through loss of work productivity. It also considerably decreases quality of life (QoL) for RA patients, a fact that is reflected in all domains of QoL questionnaires [41]. Additionally, psychological distress may impact health outcomes by influencing other health behaviors alongside medication adherence, such as smoking and physical activity. Reduced levels of physical activity can result in deconditioning, loss of natural endorphins, and increased pain [13].
## (s13) Depression and Altered Pain Perception
Number of References: 2

(p13.0) Mood disorders, like depression and anxiety, have been incriminated as potential factors for relapse periods in RA patients [42], and they significantly alter the way patients perceive their current health. Patients' perception of their overall health (global health) is independently and negatively associated with depression. Patients with RA who perceive their health to be poor or who see themselves as disabled, be it related or not to their RA diagnosis, tend to experience high levels of depression [43].
## (s18) Discussion
Number of References: 2

(p18.0) Depression is highly prevalent in RA, and the toll it takes on the quality of life of patients suggests that in routine clinical practice and corresponding follow-up procedures, patients should be screened for the presence of depressive symptoms [5]. Diagnosing and treating depression in this category of patients should be part of standard patient care, but that implies using validated screening questionnaires against the gold standard for detecting depression. A full diagnostic assessment should be made after positive screening results [59] in order to confirm the diagnosis and to minimize the risk of attributing depression to RA in the presence of concomitant etiological disease (such as iatrogenic effects or other psychiatric and non-psychiatric disorders associated with depression).
