# Paget's disease: a review of the epidemiology, etiology, genetics, and treatment OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY

CorpusID: 258313825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09db12eff7f07a0c542808497d1d3b50b7b18d3d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09db12eff7f07a0c542808497d1d3b50b7b18d3d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Radiological presentations in PDB
Number of References: 12

(p4.0) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).

(p4.1) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).
## (s28) Radiological presentations in PDB
Number of References: 12

(p28.0) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).

(p28.1) Radiographic changes can help diagnose Paget's disease of bone (PDB). Indicators of increased bone resorption include a decrease in bone density, wedge-shaped bone resorption in long bones, and significant osteolytic regions in the skull. Early-stage PDB may show primarily lytic lesions, while older lesions tend to have a mixed sclerotic and lytic appearance. Late-stage PDB is characterized by sclerotic lesions, enlarged and distorted bones, and distinct radiographic patterns . The damaged bone enlargement in diameter is a distinguishing feature of PDB. A set of plain X-rays and bone scintigraphy are used to evaluate PDB, but bone scintigraphy may be negative in some cases. The presence of aberrant trabeculae, irregular cementation lines, increased vascularity, and an increase in the number and size of osteoclasts are the most distinctive findings (Alonso et al., 2017). Since genetic or bone biomarkers alone may lack sensitivity, combining many diagnostic markers is preferable to detect PDB at early stages and in asymptomatic cases. The PDB phenotype may be detected more accurately by integrating a screen for SQSTM1 gene mutations, followed by either a gene panel or a combination of genetic and biochemical tests (Guay-Bélanger et al., 2016). Approximately 70% of PDB patients have no symptoms, making early diagnosis challenging (Merchant et al., 2009).
