# Applications and prospects of functional oligosaccharides in pig nutrition: A review

CorpusID: 257017070 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd4208c9e53e9b3bafbd3c1c8097975cd846d639](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd4208c9e53e9b3bafbd3c1c8097975cd846d639)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 3

(p0.0) Antibiotics have antibacterial, antiviral, and growth-promoting effects. Since the 1940s, antibiotics have been widely used in livestock and poultry production. Their effects of medical treatment, health care, and growth promotion have had a very beneficial impact on the development of animal husbandry (Yin et al., 2021;Murugaiyan et al., 2022). With the improvement of people's living standards, the demand for meat products increases greatly, which also prompts abuse antibiotics in the breeding process, resulting in antibiotic residues, and causing great harm to human health Yang et al., 2019; Lalou ckov a and Sk rivanov a, 2019). With the progress of science and technology and the improvement of people's safety awareness, the damage of antibiotics to human beings has become increasingly apparent. There are more and more calls to ban antibiotics. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs of the People's Republic of China issued Notice 194 prohibiting the addition of antibiotics to feed from January 2020. Therefore, the development and utilization of new green residue-free feed additives have been paid more and more attention, and implementing a comprehensive antibiotic prohibition policy has been implemented.
## (s2) Fructo-oligosaccharides
Number of References: 5

(p2.0) The molecular formula of FOS, also known as fructo-oligose, glucose-trisaccharide, is GFn (n 4, G for glucose, F for fructose). It is a general term for a group of oligosaccharides formed by binding several D-fructose on the basis of sucrose molecules through b-1,2 glycosidic bonds (Rastall et al., 2010;Rahim et al., 2021). Solid fructo-oligosaccharides are white powdery, easily soluble in water, low in sweetness that only 0.3 to 0.6 of sucrose, and low in energy, which also the only functional oligosaccharide with the dual physiological characteristics of super bifidogenic factors and water-soluble dietary fiber, which widely exists in bananas, potatoes, wheat, barley, onion, garlic, and other plants. Among them, the content of Jerusalem artichoke tuber is the most abundant (Yıldız, 2010;Micciche et al., 2018). It is difficult to extract natural FOS. Commercial production methods of FOS are generally divided into 2 categories, one is the sucrose enzymatic method, and the other is the extraction method (Cano et al., 2020). Relevant studies have shown that FOS can promote the abundance of many beneficial bacteria in the intestinal tract of livestock and poultry, inhibit the growth and reproduction of harmful bacteria, and improve the digestion and absorption of nutrients, and consequently to improve the microecological environment, and improve their immunity and production performance in livestock and poultry.
