# Special Interest Articles A Thematic Survey on the Reporting Quality of Randomized Controlled Trials in Rehabilitation: The Case of Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 257231260 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f79bb45c54d2f6ed925c93a0f4012d1f24741ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7f79bb45c54d2f6ed925c93a0f4012d1f24741ff)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) R esearchers are increasingly called to enhance not only the quality of their research but also completeness and transparency of the reports they attempt to publish. Optimal reporting permits higher replicability and allows readers to fully understand how a study was conceived, designed, and executed. If data collection and presentation are adequately reported, readers may be able to critically appraise and interpret the study findings. During the last 2 decades, several initiatives have been launched to increase the awareness of authors, active in the biomedical and clinical areas, about the importance of preparing adequate research reports. Among these, the EQUATOR (Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research, https://www.equator-network.org/) Network is the international reference for scientists from all research fields when using evidence-based reporting guidelines. EQUATOR maintains checklists for observational and experimental designs. Pertinent to the present communication, the CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) statement, which is part of the EQUATOR, was devised to alleviate problems arising from inadequate reporting of randomized controlled trials (RCTs). 1 At its core, the CONSORT consists of a minimum set of recommendations that help authors preparing their reports. Introduced in 1996, 2 it was developed and expanded in 2001 3 and further revised in its current 2010 version. 1 The CONSORT now stands as the reference checklist for RCTs. Several analyses have evidenced the positive impact of adhering to reporting checklist like, but not limited to, the CONSORT. Overall, they expand the reliability, utility, and impact of health research. 4,5 A recent methodological survey 6 critically assessed the reporting quality of 571 neurophysiological/transcranial magnetic stimulation articles dealing with the assessment of motor dysfunction in neurological populations. Weaknesses in reporting and data presentation included issues relating to methodology, statistics, reproducibility, consistency, accuracy, and responsiveness of the relevant measurements affecting most of the studies surveyed.
## (s2) Study Selection
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Three electronic databases (PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, Web of Science) were searched for all available articles written in English. The search was restricted to the 20 years following the publication date of the seminal works that prompted evidence-based checklists to enhance the quality of scientific reports. 3,12 The initial search was undertaken by 3 authors (L.V., A.M., G.M.). The search included Medical Subject Headings, key words, and matching synonyms relevant to the topic. The search strategies employed in the databases are presented in Supplemental Digital Content 2, available at: http://links.lww. com/JNPT/A417.
