# The versatile role of Serpina3c in physiological and pathological processes: a review of recent studies

CorpusID: 258835180 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s10) Myocardial infarction
Number of References: 9

(p10.0) The chronic phase of myocardial infarction is characterized by cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and fibrosis remodeling (96). After moderate to severe myocardial infarction, glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation of cardiomyocytes were accelerated, and oxidative phosphorylation of glucose was inhibited (97). Due to myocardial ischemia, insufficient oxygen supply leads to an increase in the proportion of glycolysis, which will lead to excessive lactic acid production in the heart (98). Excessive lactic acid induces the proliferation and differentiation of myofibroblasts through pH-and TGF-b1 pathway, which leads to the aggravation of myocardial fibrosis (99, 100). In clinical practice, elevated circulating human SerpinA3 levels were significantly associated with adverse cardiovascular events after acute myocardial infarction (AMI), suggesting that human SerpinA3 may be a potential predictive marker for clinical manifestations of AMI (101). But the role of SerpinA3 upregulation in AMI needs further exploration. The researchers used a mouse model of myocardial infarction to A B FIGURE 6 The protective effects of Serpina3c against atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction. (A) Serpina3c deficiency leads to the failure to inhibit the cleavage and activation of protease-activated receptor-1 (PAR-1) by thrombin. PAR-1 subsequently increases the phosphorylation of ERK and JNK, which promotes the excessive proliferation of arterial smooth muscle cells and leads to atherosclerosis. VSMCs, vascular smooth muscle cells. (B) In fibroblasts, Serpina3c enters the nuclei of mouse cardiac fibroblasts and interacts with Nr4a1 to promote Nr4a1 acetylation, which inhibits ENO1 transcription to prevent excessive activation of glycolysis. These will inhibit fibroblasts proliferation and differentiation, thus alleviating fibrosis after myocardial infarction. However, as a secretory protein, how serpina3c enters the nuclei and how it leads to acetylation of Nr4a1 remains to be studied further. (Glc, glucose; 2PG, 2phosphoglycerate; PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; Pyr, enolpyruvic acid.) (Created with BioRender.com). explore the mechanism of Serpina3c in myocardial fibrosis after myocardial infarction (23). It was shown that the expression of Serpina3c protein was down-regulated in cardiac fibroblasts treated with TGF-b1/hypoxia. After the knockout of Serpina3c, the TGF-b1induced proliferation ability of cardiac fibroblasts was significantly enhanced, which was reversed by the addition of Serpina3c recombinant protein. The myocardium of mice with Serpina3c knockout showed more severe myocardial fibrosis after myocardial infarction. These results indicate that Serpina3c plays an important role in curbing fibrosis after myocardial infarction.

(p10.1) Some studies have shown that the over-activation of glycolysis mediates the proliferation and differentiation of cardiac fibroblasts and participates in the process of fibrosis after myocardial infarction (102, 103). Enolase1 (ENO1) is a key enzyme in the glycolysis pathway, which catalyzes the reversible conversion of 2phosphoglyceric acid to phosphoenolpyruvate during glycolysis. In addition, the expression of ENO1 in primary fibroblasts upregulated the expression of pro-fibrotic genes, down-regulated the expression of MMP-1 and MMP-3 (104), and promoted the fibrosis phenotype in vivo and in vitro. After Serpina3c knockout, the ability of glycolysis and the expression of ENO1 increased in the myocardium of mice. After inhibition of ENO1, the enhancement of glycolysis caused by Serpina3c deletion was weakened and the myocardial glucose absorption decreased. Further study showed that Serpina3c can bind with Nr4a1 (also known as Nur77) in nucleus, which leads to activation of Nr4a1 and subsequent inhibition of ENO1 expression. In fibrotic disease, Nr4a1 deficiency leads to persistent activation of TGF-b signaling (105). It was shown that Serpina3c could bind to Nr4a1 in cardiac fibroblasts (CFs). The interaction of Nr4a1 and Serpina3c may inhibit the proliferation and differentiation of CFs. The regulation of Nr4a1 activity by Serpina3c may be through the regulation of its acetylation level. When it is acetylated, the protein stability of Nr4a1 is improved (106). This study confirmed that when Serpina3c was knocked out, the expression of histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) increased, meanwhile the acetylation level of Nr4a1 in CFs decreased. It was found that Serpina3c could promote the expression level and acetylation level of Nr4a1 in TGF-b1-treated CFs (23). In summary, Serpina3c inhibits the transcription of ENO1 in fibroblasts through Nr4a1 acetylation, inhibits the excessive activation of glycolysis and the proliferation and differentiation of fibroblasts, which improves cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction ( Figure 6B). A study showed that intravenous injection of recombinant human SerpinA3 before myocardial ischemiareperfusion could reduce myocardial injury caused by myocardial ischemia-reperfusion in mice. It was pointed out that this protective effect was achieved by inhibiting the aggregation of neutrophils in the injured site (107). This study above, together with its mouse homologue Serpina3c studies, suggest that human SerpinA3 may have beneficial role in the protection against myocardial and injury, which is worthy of further investigation.
