# REVIEW Open Access Climate-relevant properties of black carbon aerosols revealed by in situ measurements: a review

CorpusID: 257354858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s10) Anthropogenic iron oxide
Number of References: 8

(p10.0) The in situ aerosol measurements using single-particle LII and laboratory analyses of collected aerosol samples using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) revealed that anthropogenic light-absorbing iron oxides (FeOx) consisting of an aggregate of magnetite nanoparticles are ubiquitous in the urban plumes and the East Asian and Arctic troposphere (Moteki et al. 2017;Yoshida et al. 2018). The mass mixing ratio of anthropogenic FeOx in these regions was ~ 20-60% of BC . The anthropogenic FeOx aerosol is likely ubiquitous in the global troposphere (Lamb et al. 2021) and will be one of the contributors to regionalto-global-scale aerosol's shortwave absorption (Moteki et al. 2017;Matsui et al. 2018;Ito et al. 2018). These new observation data provided further evidence to constrain the magnitude and spatial distribution of anthropogenic Fe emission Liu et al. 2022), which is an essential factor for investigating the effects of Fe-bearing aerosols on ocean fertilization Ito et al. 2021).
## (s13) BC measurement techniques
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) The most important open issue of the current singleparticle LII technique is the uncertainty or difficulty of measuring BC particles much larger than the visible wavelengths. Current commercial single-particle LII instruments (e.g., SP2 from Droplet Measurement Technologies, Inc.) are designed to detect BC core within ~ 70-500 nm volume-equivalent diameter. The NOAA SP2 instruments used for global-scale aircraft observations were intended to measure ~ 70-550 nm BC core Katich et al. 2018). Aircraft and ground observations using the single-particle LII instrument of The University of Tokyo (a modified version of SP2; Moteki and Kondo 2010), which detects 70-850 nm BC core, indicated a non-negligible contribution of BC with > ~ 500 nm diameter to size-integrated BC mass mixing ratio Yoshida et al. 2020). This implies the significance of extending the upper limit of the BC core size range observable by single-particle LII instruments at least up to ~ 1000 nm. The importance of extending the LII-detectable particle-size range is even more evident for FeOx (Moteki et al. 2017;Lamb et al. 2021). The author therefore suggests fundamental investigations for extending the upper limit of the observable particle-size range in the single-particle LII.
