# Uterine Sarcomas: An Updated Overview. Part 2: Endometrial Stromal Tumors Uterine Sarcomas: An Updated Overview Part 2: Endometrial Stromal Tumors

CorpusID: 260428493 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f85348e37ab9dc678015439c9787d0a712603d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6f85348e37ab9dc678015439c9787d0a712603d0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Therapeutic approaches
Number of References: 20

(p15.0) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p15.1) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].

(p15.2) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p15.3) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].
## (s25) Molecular features
Number of References: 12

(p25.0) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].

(p25.1) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].
## (s75) Therapeutic approaches
Number of References: 20

(p75.0) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p75.1) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].

(p75.2) Patients with LGESS are usually treated with hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, the latest to avoid the secondary stimulation of the tumor by ovarian hormones. Younger patients desiring to preserve fertility can be treated with hormonal therapy or aromatase inhibitors. The adjunct of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) may reduce ovarian synthesis of estrogens [25]. Since low-grade ESSs show low response rates to conventional CT, there is no evidences supporting its use ex adiuvantibus. On the other hand, the presence of estrogens and progesterone receptors in about 80% of the LGESS would give the opportunity to reduce the recurrence rate and risk of relapse using adjuvant endocrine therapy. Hormone therapy with progestin, aromatase inhibitors, and analogues of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone has become an effective post-surgical treatment in patients with low-grade ESS [26].

(p75.3) Particularly, aromatase inhibitors are becoming the treatment of choice, since progestin is poorly tolerated due to side effects. The duration of hormonal therapy should be protracted for 3-5 years after surgery [26]. Tumors with t(10;17) translocation, typically not responding to conventional treatment, should be treated with a more aggressive therapy such as RT and CT combination [23]. Finally, in LGESS showing immunohistochemical positivity for PDGFR-α and PDGFR-β, the PDGF signaling pathway may be considered as a useful therapeutic target for imatinib [26].
## (s85) Molecular features
Number of References: 12

(p85.0) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].

(p85.1) As previously shown, genetic fusion YWHAE-FAM22 is characteristic of ESS with highgrade histological features. FISH analysis demonstrated the absolute specificity of YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement in HGESS, since fusion gene has been detected neither in other uterine sarcomas nor in extra-uterine mesenchymal tumors [34]. FISH demonstrated higher sensitivity than RT-PCR in detecting YWHAE-FAM22A/B rearrangement. Croce et al. established that the cut-off of rearranged cells to consider FISH as positive should be 30%; they also recommended to add RT-PCR in borderline cases [35]. Such molecular evidences surely will have diagnostic and therapeutic implications [35].
