# OncoTargets and Therapy Dovepress Clinical response to sunitinib as a multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKi) in solid cancers: a review of clinical trials

CorpusID: 264630056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Sunitinib combined with radiotherapy
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) In chondrosarcoma, sunitinib is beneficial, and may be safely combined with proton-beam radiation therapy. 67 Sunitinib concurrent with stereotactic radiation resulted CR and PR of 42% and 17%, respectively, and 28% patients had SD. A Phase I/II trial was conducted by Kao et al, 68 in which 46 patients with oligometastases, defined as five or fewer clinical detectable metastases from any primary site, were treated with 37.5 mg sunitinib (days 1-28) and stereotactic body-radiation therapy of 50 Gy (days 8-12 and 15-19). Local control and distant control were 75% and 40%, and PFS and OS 34% and 29%, respectively. This study supported the belief that patients with kidney and prostate primary tumors are associated with significantly improved OS.
## (s8) Resistance of sunitinib
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) The development of sunitinib resistance is accompanied by evasion of antiangiogenic effects and by increased expression of tumor-derived interleukin (IL)-8. 73 IL-8 expression was elevated in human RCC tumors with intrinsic resistance to sunitinib therapy, indicating that IL-8 levels may serve as a predictive biomarker for clinical response to sunitinib. 74 Obviously, IL-8 plays an important role in the resistance of RCC to sunitinib, and suggests that IL-8 may potentially serve as both a therapeutic target for the treatment of sunitinib-resistant RCC and as a clinical biomarker for both acquired and intrinsic sunitinib resistance. The best marker gene, AMFR, is highly downregulated in sunitinib-sensitive patients. The AMFR gene is associated with angiogenesis and tumor cell motility, and its identification may improve outcome prediction and improve our understanding of the mechanisms of submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
