# Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS 2YHUVHDV 2I¿FHV Contributors CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS Chander Grover MD DNB MNAMS Keshavmurthy A Adya MD Comprehensive Approach to Infections in Dermatology Sunil Dogra MD DNB FRCP Vinay Gopalani MBBS DVD DNB Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Mumbai Minty Jambhore MD DDV Consultant Dermatologist DISHA Skin and Laser Institute Resident Physician Dermatology and Venereology National Skin Centre Singapore Hemanta K Kar MD MNAMS Contributors ix Sacchidanand A Sarvajana Murthy MD DVD Sidharth Sonthalia MD DNB MNAMS Consultant Dermatologist and Dermatosurgeon Skinnocence-The Skin Clinic Contents Section 1: Normal Flora 1. Normal Flora of Skin 3 Section 2: Bacterial Infections 2. Gram Positive Bacterial Infections 15 Section 3: Fungal Infections 4. Superficial Fungal Infections 85 5. Subcutaneous Mycoses 116 Vikram K Mahajan 6. Deep Fungal Infections 158 Section 4: Viral Infections 7. Overview of Dermatologic Viral Infections 187 10. Poxviruses, Rubella, Coxsackie, and Other Viruses 260 Section 5: Mycobacterial Infections 11. Leprosy 281 12. Cutaneos Tuberculosis 310 13. Nontuberculous Mycobacterial Infections 341 Section 6: Parasitic and Protozoal Diseases 14. Human Helminthic Infections (Nematodes, Cestodes, and Trematodes) 355 15. Protozoal Diseases 395 Section 7: Infestations, Bites, and Stings 16. Infestations 421 17. Bites and Stings 448 Section 8: Sexually Transmitted Infections 18. Sexually Transmitted Diseases 469

CorpusID: 31568002 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3b8dccd026140fc6ec36294537ed3d4fbab145)

Fields: Medicine

## (s22) ENVIRONMENTAL SOURCE OF NTM
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) Nontuberculous mycobacteria are ubiquitous in the environment and are frequently isolated from soil or water. Isolates have also been recovered from samples of animals, plant material, and birds. A few species that are known to cause disease, such as M. hemophilum and M. ulcerans, have rarely been recovered from the environment.  Although an association with an environmental source may be present, a direct link to the environment has not been proven except for healthcare-associated disease and pseudo-outbreak, and no evidence of person-to-person spread has been reported, presumably due to the lower virulence of environmental species. Tap water is considered the major reservoir for most common human NTM pathogens and as such is of increasing public health interest. Species from tap water include M. gordonae, M. kansasii, M. xenopi, M. simiae, MAC, and RGM, especially M. mucogenicus. 10 Biofilms, which are the filmy layers at the solid and liquid interface, are recognized as a source of growth and possibly a mode of transmission for mycobacteria. 11 Moreover, biofilms may serve to render mycobacteria less susceptible to disinfectants and antimicrobial therapy. Biofilms appear to be present in almost all collection and piping systems, so mycobacteria may often be recovered from these sites. The persistence of pathogenic NTM in water and biofilms has important implications in the epidemiology of infections related to water.
