# ''Beet-ing'' the Mountain: A Review of the Physiological and Performance Effects of Dietary Nitrate Supplementation at Simulated and Terrestrial Altitude

CorpusID: 37420835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/910ffb4825d1ee84ae688cefdcf9cbaa6948e96c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/910ffb4825d1ee84ae688cefdcf9cbaa6948e96c)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s8) Hypoxic Exercise Performance
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Several studies have examined the effects of NO 3 ingestion on exercise capacity/performance in acute normobaric hypoxia ( Table 1). The effects of NO 3 supplementation on exercise capacity/performance in simulated altitude via hypobaric hypoxia and at terrestrial altitude have yet to be investigated. Vanhatalo et al. [11] were the first to study the effects of NO 3 supplementation during exercise in normobaric hypoxia (F I O 2 14.5%, *2800 m) and observed a 21.4% increase in leg-extension TTE with NO 3 supplementation. This improvement effectively restored exercise duration to normoxia values. Whilst exhaustive leg-extension exercise is not directly representative of athletic performance, these data suggest that NO 3 supplementation might offer a means of ameliorating the ergolytic effects of hypoxia on exercise performance.
## (s12) NO 3
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) supplementation is emerging as a promising nutritional aid, with potentially beneficial applications for the wide variety of individuals ascending to altitude each year. In this review, NO 3 supplementation has been demonstrated to reduce pulmonary _ VO 2 and, in some cases, elevate S a O 2 in normobaric hypoxia-effects that may be attributable to improvements in the efficiency of muscle contraction and/or mitochondrial respiration, and are of functional relevance for individuals exercising in a low-O 2 environment. Current evidence also suggests that NO 3 supplementation can improve muscle energetics during exercise in normobaric hypoxia via effects on tissue O 2 delivery and consumption and might alter cardiovascular responses to normobaric and hypobaric hypoxia. In contrast, whilst NO 3 supplementation might influence some of the physiological responses to hypoxic training, current evidence suggests that this does not translate into improved exercise performance in normoxia. Given that the majority of published investigations have explored the effects of NO 3 supplementation in simulated altitude, which is often regarded as an incomplete surrogate of ''true'' altitude, future studies at terrestrial altitude are necessary. Researchers are encouraged to further probe the myriad potentially beneficial effects of NO 3 supplementation as a potential aid to ''beet-ing'' the mountain.
