# Open Access A genome-wide transcriptional activity survey of rice transposable element-related genes

CorpusID: 52828534 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f87c08ae8201b616738180c26569496701fbd5a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f87c08ae8201b616738180c26569496701fbd5a3)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s6) Transcription of type II TE-related genes
Number of References: 12

(p6.0) Type II TE-related genes are in general more actively transcribed than type I TE-related genes. Different from type I, Degrees of lineage-specific transcription in the LINE superfamily Figure 3 Degrees of lineage-specific transcription in the LINE superfamily. The phylogenetic tree was generated from a multiple alignment of conceptually translated sequences by using neighbor-joining methods and rooted with human L1. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000 replicates. Sample numbers are identical to those in Table 2. Shades of gray indicate the magnitude of transcription signals, which are based on microarray hybridization signals without units. Names of previously reported members are shown. *Previously reported members with transcription or transposition. † Previously reported inactivate members. LINE, long interspersed element.  Os07g04110   SS  TS  TR  FL  HP  FP  SC  CR  CS  TSD  TSS  FLD  FLS  HPD  Mutator-like superfamily (MULE) is one of the first groups of identified transposases with a few reported transcriptionally active members in rice [27]. There are 607 autonomous members of this superfamily (Table 1), which has one of the strongest transcription levels, at 35% to 40% in each sample ( Figure 4). The MULEs can be further divided into three branches: MuDR-like, Jittery-like, and TRAP-like [27]. The TRAP-like branch may have recently been amplified, and high similarity among family members has resulted in lack of unique oligo probes with which to examine their expression profiles. Interestingly, we have found at least three clades with clear active transcription in MuDR-like and Jittery-like branches ( Figure 4). The one highly transcribed clade in the MuDR-like branch included MUG1, an evolutionarily conserved MULE sequence found in diverse angiosperms and a candidate for categorization as a domesticated transposaserelated gene [36]. The larger, highly transcribed clade in the Jittery-like branch includes homologs to Arabidopsis genes FAR1 and FHY3, both of which are transposon-derived genes with demonstrated host function as transcription factors downstream of phytochrome A [32,51,52]. There are no reports on any members of the other highly transcribed clade in the Jittery-like branch, which has rampant transcription ( Figure 4, middle).
## (s14) Transcription profiles of TE-related genes in rice
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) TEs account for an overwhelming proportion of plant genomes. To ensure the viability of their host and hence their own survival, the transposition of TEs should be tightly controlled [17]. Transcribed autonomous TEs among TE-related genes have the potential to self-activate or activate transcrip-tion of related nonautonomous TEs. Transcriptional regulation is therefore one major control step used by plants, but it remains insufficiently understood. The recently available rice genome sequence has enabled us to characterize TErelated gene transcription on a genome-wide scale.

(p14.1) Using 70-mer oligonucleotide microarrays covering more than 2,000 rice TE-related genes, we surveyed the transcription profiles under a wide range of organ samples under various conditions. Considering that TE-derived cellular genes are relatively rare, autonomous TEs probably contribute to most of these TE-related genes. Genome profiling revealed that 25% to 30% of the TE-related genes were transcribed in one sample, which was much lower than the corresponding percentage of non-TE-related genes (Figures 1 and  2). Moreover, TE-related genes differed from their non-TErelated counterparts in two additional aspects. First, TErelated genes tended to be transcribed in only a subset of organs or developmental stages, whereas non-TE-related genes had transcription in more samples on average ( Figure 1 and Figure 2). Second, transcribed TE-related genes exhibited weaker transcription overall compared with non-TErelated genes in all of the samples we profiled (Figure 2). It worth noting that our estimation of TE-related gene transcription was biased toward low-copy elements, because it was difficult to distinguish transcripts among recently duplicated high-copy TE-related genes, which share high sequence similarity within clades. It has been reported in Arabidopsis and Drosophila that the activity of TE elements may reduce as the copy number increases [77,78]. Therefore, we expect the transcriptional activity of those high-copy TE-related genes will be lower than for low-copy ones.
## (s21) Sequence analysis
Number of References: 4

(p21.0) TE family classification was according to TIGR annotation [3]. Hand analysis led to the identification of another 208 TErelated genes according to published sequences and BLAST search. Multiple sequence alignments were conducted using Clustal W [92]. The weighing matrix used was Gonnet Pam
## (s22) Cluster analysis
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) Cluster analysis was applied to all TE-related genes and 1,353 randomly selected non-TE-related genes showing expression in at least one sample. Average normalized log-transformed expression intensities were subjected to cluster analysis. For hierarchical clustering, Pearson correlation was used to compute similarities, and a complete linkage clustering algorithm was used. Cluster analysis was performed using the software Cluster [94] and visualized using custom scripts.

(p22.1) Cluster analysis was applied to all TE-related genes and 1,353 randomly selected non-TE-related genes showing expression in at least one sample. Average normalized log-transformed expression intensities were subjected to cluster analysis. For hierarchical clustering, Pearson correlation was used to compute similarities, and a complete linkage clustering algorithm was used. Cluster analysis was performed using the software Cluster [94] and visualized using custom scripts.
## (s39) Transcription of type II TE-related genes
Number of References: 12

(p39.0) Type II TE-related genes are in general more actively transcribed than type I TE-related genes. Different from type I, Degrees of lineage-specific transcription in the LINE superfamily Figure 3 Degrees of lineage-specific transcription in the LINE superfamily. The phylogenetic tree was generated from a multiple alignment of conceptually translated sequences by using neighbor-joining methods and rooted with human L1. Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000 replicates. Sample numbers are identical to those in Table 2. Shades of gray indicate the magnitude of transcription signals, which are based on microarray hybridization signals without units. Names of previously reported members are shown. *Previously reported members with transcription or transposition. † Previously reported inactivate members. LINE, long interspersed element.  Os07g04110   SS  TS  TR  FL  HP  FP  SC  CR  CS  TSD  TSS  FLD  FLS  HPD  Mutator-like superfamily (MULE) is one of the first groups of identified transposases with a few reported transcriptionally active members in rice [27]. There are 607 autonomous members of this superfamily (Table 1), which has one of the strongest transcription levels, at 35% to 40% in each sample ( Figure 4). The MULEs can be further divided into three branches: MuDR-like, Jittery-like, and TRAP-like [27]. The TRAP-like branch may have recently been amplified, and high similarity among family members has resulted in lack of unique oligo probes with which to examine their expression profiles. Interestingly, we have found at least three clades with clear active transcription in MuDR-like and Jittery-like branches ( Figure 4). The one highly transcribed clade in the MuDR-like branch included MUG1, an evolutionarily conserved MULE sequence found in diverse angiosperms and a candidate for categorization as a domesticated transposaserelated gene [36]. The larger, highly transcribed clade in the Jittery-like branch includes homologs to Arabidopsis genes FAR1 and FHY3, both of which are transposon-derived genes with demonstrated host function as transcription factors downstream of phytochrome A [32,51,52]. There are no reports on any members of the other highly transcribed clade in the Jittery-like branch, which has rampant transcription ( Figure 4, middle).
## (s47) Transcription profiles of TE-related genes in rice
Number of References: 6

(p47.0) TEs account for an overwhelming proportion of plant genomes. To ensure the viability of their host and hence their own survival, the transposition of TEs should be tightly controlled [17]. Transcribed autonomous TEs among TE-related genes have the potential to self-activate or activate transcrip-tion of related nonautonomous TEs. Transcriptional regulation is therefore one major control step used by plants, but it remains insufficiently understood. The recently available rice genome sequence has enabled us to characterize TErelated gene transcription on a genome-wide scale.

(p47.1) Using 70-mer oligonucleotide microarrays covering more than 2,000 rice TE-related genes, we surveyed the transcription profiles under a wide range of organ samples under various conditions. Considering that TE-derived cellular genes are relatively rare, autonomous TEs probably contribute to most of these TE-related genes. Genome profiling revealed that 25% to 30% of the TE-related genes were transcribed in one sample, which was much lower than the corresponding percentage of non-TE-related genes (Figures 1 and  2). Moreover, TE-related genes differed from their non-TErelated counterparts in two additional aspects. First, TErelated genes tended to be transcribed in only a subset of organs or developmental stages, whereas non-TE-related genes had transcription in more samples on average ( Figure 1 and Figure 2). Second, transcribed TE-related genes exhibited weaker transcription overall compared with non-TErelated genes in all of the samples we profiled (Figure 2). It worth noting that our estimation of TE-related gene transcription was biased toward low-copy elements, because it was difficult to distinguish transcripts among recently duplicated high-copy TE-related genes, which share high sequence similarity within clades. It has been reported in Arabidopsis and Drosophila that the activity of TE elements may reduce as the copy number increases [77,78]. Therefore, we expect the transcriptional activity of those high-copy TE-related genes will be lower than for low-copy ones.
## (s54) Sequence analysis
Number of References: 4

(p54.0) TE family classification was according to TIGR annotation [3]. Hand analysis led to the identification of another 208 TErelated genes according to published sequences and BLAST search. Multiple sequence alignments were conducted using Clustal W [92]. The weighing matrix used was Gonnet Pam
## (s55) Cluster analysis
Number of References: 4

(p55.0) Cluster analysis was applied to all TE-related genes and 1,353 randomly selected non-TE-related genes showing expression in at least one sample. Average normalized log-transformed expression intensities were subjected to cluster analysis. For hierarchical clustering, Pearson correlation was used to compute similarities, and a complete linkage clustering algorithm was used. Cluster analysis was performed using the software Cluster [94] and visualized using custom scripts.

(p55.1) Cluster analysis was applied to all TE-related genes and 1,353 randomly selected non-TE-related genes showing expression in at least one sample. Average normalized log-transformed expression intensities were subjected to cluster analysis. For hierarchical clustering, Pearson correlation was used to compute similarities, and a complete linkage clustering algorithm was used. Cluster analysis was performed using the software Cluster [94] and visualized using custom scripts.
