# Analysis Methods in Neural Language Processing: A Survey

CorpusID: 56657817 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/668f42a4d4094f0a66d402a16087e14269b31a1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/668f42a4d4094f0a66d402a16087e14269b31a1f)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s6) Visualization
Number of References: 21

(p6.0) Visualization is a valuable tool for analyzing neural networks in the language domain and beyond. Early work visualized hidden unit activations in RNNs trained on an artificial language modeling task, and observed how they correspond to certain grammatical relations such as agreement (Elman, 1991). Much recent work has focused on visualizing activations on specific examples in modern neural networks for language (Karpathy et al., 2015;Kádár et al., 2017;Qian et al., 2016a;Liu et al., 2018) and speech (Wu and King, 2016;Nagamine et al., 2015;Wang et al., 2017b). Figure 1 shows an example visualization of a neuron that captures position of words in a sentence. The heatmap uses blue and red colors for negative and positive activation values, respectively, enabling the user to quickly grasp the function of this neuron.

(p6.1) The attention mechanism that originated in work on NMT (Bahdanau et al., 2014) also lends itself to a natural visualization. The alignments obtained via different attention mechanisms have produced visualizations ranging from tasks like NLI (Rocktäschel et al., 2016;Yin et al., 2016), summarization (Rush et al., 2015), MT post-editing (Jauregi Unanue et al., 2018), and morphological inflection (Aharoni and Goldberg, 2017) to matching users on social media (Tay et al., 2018). Figure 2 reproduces a visualization of attention alignments from the original work by Bahdanau et al. Here grayscale values correspond to the weight of the attention between words in an English source sentence (columns) and its French translation (rows). As Bahdanau et al. explain, this visualization demonstrates that the NMT model learned a soft alignment between source and target words. Some aspects of word order may also be  Godin et al., 2018). Saliency can also be computed with respect to intermediate values, rather than input features (Ghaeini et al., 2018). 7 An instructive visualization technique is to cluster neural network activations and compare them to some linguistic property. Early work clustered RNN activations, showing that they organize in lexical categories (Elman, 1989(Elman, , 1990. Similar techniques have been followed by others. Recent examples include clustering of sentence embeddings in an RNN encoder trained in a multitask learning scenario (Brunner et al., 2017), and phoneme clusters in a joint audio-visual RNN model (Alishahi et al., 2017).
## (s11) Scale
Number of References: 2

(p11.0) The size of proposed challenge sets varies greatly (Table SM2). As expected, datasets constructed by hand are smaller, with typical sizes in the hundreds. Automatically built datasets are much larger, ranging from several thousands to close to a hundred thousand (Sennrich, 2017), or even more than one million examples (Linzen et al., 2016). In the latter case, the authors argue that such a large test set is needed for obtaining a sufficient representation of rare cases. A few manually constructed datasets contain a fairly large number of examples, up to 10 thousand (Burchardt et al., 2017).
## (s12) Construction Method
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) Challenge sets are usually created either programmatically or manually, by handcrafting specific examples. Often, semi-automatic methods are used to compile an initial list of examples that is manually verified by annotators. The specific method also affects the kind of language use and how natural or artificial/synthetic the examples are. We describe here some trends in dataset construction methods in the hope that they may be useful for researchers contemplating new datasets. Several datasets were constructed by modifying or extracting examples from existing datasets. For instance, Sanchez et al. (2018) and Glockner et al. (2018) extracted examples from SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and replaced specific words such as hypernyms, synonyms, and antonyms, followed by manual verification. Linzen et al. (2016), on the other hand, extracted examples of subject-verb agreement from raw texts using heuristics, resulting in a large-scale dataset. Gulordava et al. (2018) extended this to other agreement phenomena, but they relied on syntactic information available in treebanks, resulting in a smaller dataset.
## (s14) Adversarial Examples
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Understanding a model also requires an understanding of its failures. Despite their success in many tasks, machine learning systems can also be very sensitive to malicious attacks or adversarial examples (Szegedy et al., 2014;Goodfellow et al., 2015). In the vision domain, small changes to the input image can lead to misclassification, even if such changes are indistinguishable by humans.
