# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Two faces of p53: aging and tumor suppression

CorpusID: 7278576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Mouse models affected by p53
Number of References: 3

(p5.0) Ku80 null mice. Ku80 is a DNA repair protein that associates with Ku70 to comprise the DNA-binding component of DNA-PK (65). Ku80 null mice exhibit accelerated aging phenotypes, including skin atrophy, osteopenia, hepatocellular degeneration and shortened life span (61). The authors speculated that a lack of NHEJ and therefore increased DNA damage load could account for the accelerated aging phenotype. In support of this hypothesis, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Ku80 À/À mice clearly underwent p53-dependent premature replicative senescence. A requirement for p53 was illustrated by the limited proliferative capacity of Ku80 À/À cells compared to Ku80 À/À p53 +/À fibroblasts (66). Thus, p53 deficiency rescues the premature replicative senescence of Ku80 À/À MEFs. If, as suggested, increased DNA damage and increased p53 activity is responsible for the accelerated aging phenotype of Ku80 À/À mice, crossing these animals with p53-deficient mice might rescue the accelerated aging. Interestingly, mice deficient in both Ku80 and p53 were much more cancer-prone than mice that were deficient only in p53 (66). The increase in cancer incidence was large enough to obscure any beneficial effect that loss of p53 might have conferred on the accelerated aging observed in Ku80deficient mice. Clearly, loss of p53 cannot rescue accelerated aging phenotypes if cancer incidence is dramatically increased.
