# A review of culturally tailored interventions to reduce cardiovascular disease in South Asians

CorpusID: 81716334 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s4) Single intervention: Physical activity
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) To measure the impact of physical activity, a pilot study was conducted by Gany et al. [17] of otherwise sedentary SA taxi drivers over a 12-week span. Seventy-four participants with elevated CVD risk factors were issued pedometers to increase their daily step counts and to measure the potential impact of intervention on this high-risk population. Comprehensive intake and exit health questionnaires and health screenings (BP, BMI, cholesterol, glucose) were administered. Baseline daily step counts were recorded starting four days after the initial screening. At the 4, 8, and 12-week points, step counts were recorded. Overall, the step count intervention resulted in a small (nonsignificant) increase in daily step count of among the 29 participants that completed the program. However, when data was stratified for mediating variables, Gany et al. [17] found significant increases in physical activity in men who were married, suggesting that partner support may be relevant mediator for increased physical activity in this cohort.
## (s6) Interventions using Technology
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Two studies reported the use of novel approaches using technology-based approaches to reducing CVD risk factors in SAs. Shah et al. [29] reported the effectiveness of using multimedia health education on participants' knowledge on 112 SAs across different language, education, and acculturation levels. The authors measured participants' CVD risk factors knowledge using pre, post questionnaire and concluded that post-test score of study participants significantly improved, including those with limited English proficiency. To integrate digital health interventions into the lives of SAs, Anand et al. [30] aimed to educate the target SA population, free of CVD, in regard to their personal genetic risk of developing CVD, as well as attempting to encourage the individual to modify physical activity and dietary intake. This was accomplished by sending bi-weekly emails or weekly text messages based on the participants preferred a mode of communication. Researchers focused on BP, waist to hip ratio, HbA1c, and apolipoprotein A/B ratios. The researcher reported that neither the digital interventions nor the knowledge of the participant's MI risk factor showed significant positive change to prevent CVD. Some of the reasons for non-significant findings could be that the authors have recruited participants who were free of CVD, reported already physically active and were involved in dietary modification. It might be helpful to follow these participants longer than 1 year to measure the impact of digital health interventions in this ethnic group.
## (s7) Discussion
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) The SA populations' propensity to develop CVD at an earlier age [2] and at anthropometric values (weight/BMI, WC) that are considered 'healthy' by many experts is but one challenge in dealing with this ethnic group [11]. The SA community is very diverse with over 7 countries represented with each having multiple cultural and religious subgroups [3]. However, a common thread connecting all SAs is the atherogenic diet, sedentary lifestyle, and premature morbidity and mortality related to CVD risk factors.
