# A Review of OpenStreetMap Data

CorpusID: 135382379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f650bcb5a45d0553dc6a5a9bc8871a719b230dcf)

Fields: Computer Science, Geography

## (s1) How Does One Contribute to OSM?
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) The OSM data model is very straightforward to understand. There are three primitive data types or objects: nodes, ways (polygons and polylines) and relations (logical collections of ways and nodes). A way is made up of at least two nodes (for polylines) or three nodes (for closed polygons). A node represents a geographic point feature and its coordinate is usually expressed as latitude and longitude. Within OSM, every object must have at least one attribute or tag (a key/value pair) assigned to it to describe its characteristics. There are many guides and tutorial documents on how one begins to map with OSM; recently the company Mapbox provided an updated set of documentation for this 1 . The OSM Map Features pages on the OSM wiki (OpenStreetMap, 2016) represent the reference document describing the officially adopted OSM tags. These tags have been agreed upon over the years and there are wiki pages written to describe the likely usage and use case scenarios of each tag. OSM follows a folksonomy approach to tagging, and, in theory, any tag can be associated with any object (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015). Contributors are free to create their own tags. As several authors have shown (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015;Ballatore and Zipf, 2015), this can lead to disagreements amongst contributors or confusion on how to use specific tags in certain geographic scenarios (for example tagging an object representing an unpaved pedestrian footpath). Services such as taginfo 2 allow exploration and visualisation of the most frequently used tags and their keys for the entire OSM database. The taginfo service is particularly useful for understanding the style or structure of tags used on specific object types, conceptualising the very wide range of values some keys are assigned in tags and the spatial distribution of tags. Taginfo is constantly updated in near real-time and stores the tags from every object in the global OSM database. There is no theoretical limit on the number of tags that can be assigned to any object. Nodes that have a tag with a key name are usually called Points of Interest (POI) and usually represent the position of some object or structure of general interest. Keys in OSM can be internationalised to accommodate languages other than English, which, due to OSM's origins, has established itself as the lingua franca of the project (Ballatore and Mooney, 2015).
## (s4) Education and Research Use of OSM
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) The ability to access the entire OSM spatial database on an hourly basis or even more frequently has proved a great attraction for the research community over the past number of years (Jokar Arsanjani et al., 2015). There has been a steady increase year-on-year of the number of papers being produced by the academic community in the domain of VGI, and OSM forms a major component of this work. In 2015, one of the first edited volumes on OSM as a research topic was published (Jokar Arsanjani et al., 2015); the volume considered OSM's role in GIScience and contained a very wide range of research topics, from navigation and routing to data quality and visualisation. Similarly, two EU COST Actions focused on VGI that ran from 2012 to 2016, TD1202 'Mapping and the Citizen Sensor' (from where this volume comes) 21 and IC1203 'ENERGIC' 22 , have produced some excellent research around OSM. In other educational settings, a repository such as TeachOSM 23 provides a set of community-contributed resources for teachers, trainers, educators and instructors who want to bring OSM into their classrooms. The classroom can be a very important setting for educating the next generation of OSM mappers or contributors. There are many examples, including 'a world-record humanitarian mapathon that took place at the Politecnico di Milano in northern Italy in March 2016' 24 : This mapathon event involved over two hundred children from six elementary schools in the Milan province. This mapathon resulted in the mapping of over 5000 buildings in Swaziland (Ebrahim et al., 2016). More information can also be found in Chapter 5 of this book, by Fritz et al. (2017).
