# polymers Recent Trends of Foaming in Polymer Processing: A Review

CorpusID: 174808689 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0721fce96b4ba44b0a66e38c80d09b7926490a73](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0721fce96b4ba44b0a66e38c80d09b7926490a73)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine

## (s4) Cell Growth
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) After the formation of cells, the pressure of the gas inside the cell is inversely proportional to the radius of the cell. Thus, the smaller the cell, the greater the pressure inside the cell. When two cells of different sizes are close to each other, the gas will spread from small cell to a large cell, and the two cells merge together. As a result of nucleation, the number of cells increases, and the diameter of the cell hole expands. Thus, the cell can grow [62,63].
## (s6) Foaming Methods
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) Foaming methods have various classification methods. In this review, foaming methods are categorized as mechanical foaming, physical foaming, and chemical foaming. Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of mechanical foaming. Air is added in polymer resins by mechanical stirring, and then, the resin is foamed. After the formation of cells, the pressure of the gas inside the cell is inversely proportional to the radius of the cell. Thus, the smaller the cell, the greater the pressure inside the cell. When two cells of different sizes are close to each other, the gas will spread from small cell to a large cell, and the two cells merge together. As a result of nucleation, the number of cells increases, and the diameter of the cell hole expands. Thus, the cell can grow [62,63].
