# A Review of Low-Frequency Active Vibration Control of Seat Suspension Systems

CorpusID: 202098672 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a038a513cb7613d15988d4317c0ad31606535d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a038a513cb7613d15988d4317c0ad31606535d4)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s7) Simulation
Number of References: 2

(p7.0) In the study of active seat suspension of vehicles, in addition to using a prototype to verify the control algorithm, conducting simulations with professional software is also a common method to verify the feasibility of the controller design. Du et al. (2013) [65] proposed a model combining automotive chassis suspension, active seat suspension, and the driver's body to analyze and achieve integrated vibration control. A static output feedback controller considering driver weight changes and actuator saturation was designed for an active seating system. The simulation results showed that this integrated control strategy for an active seat suspension system could improve comfort and robustness.
## (s8) Simulation
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) In the study of active seat suspension of vehicles, in addition to using a prototype to verify the control algorithm, conducting simulations with professional software is also a common method to verify the feasibility of the controller design. Du et al. (2013) [65] proposed a model combining automotive chassis suspension, active seat suspension, and the driver's body to analyze and achieve integrated vibration control. A static output feedback controller considering driver weight changes and actuator saturation was designed for an active seating system. The simulation results showed that this integrated control strategy for an active seat suspension system could improve comfort and robustness.
