# Pulmonary Hypertension Associated with Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia: A Review

CorpusID: 209284473 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/127b75b8b039c10f097ca1b16cc2eac7a1f9bb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/127b75b8b039c10f097ca1b16cc2eac7a1f9bb98)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Pathophysiology and Symptoms
Number of References: 2

(p1.0) Lung development occurs in 5 stages: embryonic, pseudoglandular, canalicular, saccular, and alveolar. 23 Alveolar capillary development is largely immature until later stages of lung development, around 26 weeks' gestation. Perturbations to development in utero, such as maternal hypertensive diseases of pregnancy, poor fetal growth, and genetic abnormalities, can have negative consequences on prenatal lung development. Premature birth, coupled with acquired injury to the developing lung, contributes to markedly abnormal alveologenesis and associated vasculogenesis. 20 Injury may result from the effects of hyperoxia, mechanical ventilation (volutrauma, barotrauma, atelectotrauma), hypercarbia, infection, tissue hypoxia, heart dysfunction, and intracardiac shunts.
## (s12) VARGHESE AND RIOS
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) PH. Patients should be assessed for structural airway abnormalities when suspected; this may require flexible and/or rigid bronchoscopy and/or dynamic assessment of airway caliber by CT scan. Both tracheomalacia and bronchomalacia have been reported commonly in this patient population. Acute and/or chronic respiratory failure must be addressed in a timely fashion to minimize further injury to an abnormal pulmonary vascular bed. Experts recommend using ventilator techniques which minimize hyperinflation because of the negative effects on PVR associated with high lung volumes, but which will also minimize alveolar derecruitment. Ventilatory strategies for PH-BPD build on BPD expert consensus recommendations, to minimize air trapping and avoid acidosis: respiratory rates 12-15 breaths per minute, tidal volumes 10-12 mm/kg of body weight, and positive end-expiratory pressures <10 cm of water. 16 In some instances, long-term mechanical ventilation may be necessary. 20 The use of corticosteroids for prevention of BPD has been studied extensively, yet the exact regimen remains controversial. Their role in PH-BPD has not been evaluated. 46 Additional morbidities, such as chronic dysphagia with aspiration, also require management to prevent further injury to fragile BPD lungs. 16,47 Measures to minimize respiratory exacerbations due to respiratory viral illnesses are crucial to preserving prognosis. Local infection control policies should be enforced, along with good hand washing. Vaccinations should be routinely administered for the patient and recommended for parents, family members, the health care team, and visitors. If eligible, prophylaxis for respiratory syncytial virus should be given.
## (s13) Nutrition
Number of References: 8

(p13.0) Optimized nutrition may be difficult in the infant with PH-BPD due to fluid restriction. However, strategies, such as caloric fortification and volume condensation, may be reasonable options to continue delivery of high-quality nutrition. 47 Specific nutritional strategies that focus on somatic and lung growth are beyond the scope of this review, but there is a recognized need for targeted nutritional support with supervised titration to promote optimal nutritional success. 47 Oxygen Oxygen in high concentrations may serve as a vasodilator and oxygen supplementation is typically used in BPD and PH-BPD. The goal of oxygen supplementation is to reduce or eliminate hypoxemic episodes. Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2 ) is generally measured by oximetry and is used in PH patients as a surrogate for alveolar oxygenation. Target SaO 2 varies based on the etiology of the PH and coexistence of additional morbidities, such as congenital heart disease and ophthalmologic disease. In severe PVS, a slightly lower oxygen target may be desirable to control oxygen-mediated precapillary vasodilation. Hyperoxia should be minimized to reduce additional oxygen toxicity and pulmonary inflammation. Recently released guidelines recommend a target SaO 2 of 92%-94% as sufficient to prevent hypoxemia, while not incurring additional inflammation from hyperoxia and oxygen toxicity. 16 In some cases, there may be poor or absent clinical response to oxygen supplementation. An intracardiac shunt lesion or pulmonary arteriovenous malformation should be considered. Intrapulmonary bronchopulmonary anastomoses in severe BPD may also contribute to recorded hypoxemia. However, these lesions are presently undetectable by standard investigation, therefore making them a difficult clinical target. In older infants or toddlers with persistent PH by echocardiography, a formal polysomnogram may be required to evaluate for sleep disordered breathing. 16 Diuretics may be clinically effective in the setting of right ventricular dilation and congestion. 25 Therapy is titrated to effect, which may be especially important in the setting of shunt lesions. Care must be taken to maintain cardiac preload. 13 Inhaled nitric oxide is generally used only in selected patients in a dose range of 1-20 parts per million; methemoglobin levels should be monitored. Inhaled nitric oxide is indicated if the partial pressure of oxygen in an arterial sample is <100 mmHg (while receiving 100% oxygen) or if oxygenation index is >25. 16,45 Targeted Specific PH Pharmacotherapy
