# biomimetics Biomimetic Nanomembranes: An Overview

CorpusID: 219284372 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science, Chemistry, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s37) Functionalization
Number of References: 2

(p37.0) Similarly to their biological counterparts, the role of synthetic nanomembranes would be more or less purely mechanical and protective if there were no additional functionalities. Most of the roles performed by biological nanomembranes are due to built-in protein structures that ensure additional functions. A very similar situation is encountered in synthetic structures. The difference is that structures enabling biological functionalities are much more sophisticated than the artificial ones, but for the price that they resort to a much smaller toolbox, in the sense of chemical composition and the available choice of materials, operating temperature and humidity ranges and available functionalities. With artificial structures the methods are much more crude and imperfect, but the number of possible ways to perform functionalization is much larger, and the material choice is wider, as is the pure range of functionalities. The latter include many options and paths not encountered in nature. One is free to avoid the limitations of protein chemistry and reach for a much larger toolbox to incorporate in a biomimetic way many novel non-biological properties, including plasmonic, magnetic, electric and optical ones. In 2010, the authors published a review of possible approaches to multifunctionalization of nanomembranes [117]. Here we give just a brief overview of the methods and approaches, concentrating to the more recent findings published in the meantime and to the methods that were skipped in [117].
## (s85) "Living" Plasmonics and Metamaterials
Number of References: 2

(p85.0) One promising direction of research is the integration of plasmonics with functionalized biomimetic membranes. The use of nanomembranes for plasmonics and metamaterials was considered in [27]. A further logical direction would be research into biomimetic plasmonics. Publications in this promising area are almost nonexistent. One of the rare papers in the field investigates sensors of tumor cells using surface plasmon resonance functionalized by artificial lipid bilayer membranes [238]. Even more scarce are publications on biomimetic metamaterials.
