# molecules An Overview of the Potential Antineoplastic Effects of Casticin

CorpusID: 212738428 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0303a9699d1626f45ccd2fedf3745417cd883691)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Casticin and Breast Cancer
Number of References: 10

(p7.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits selfrenewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
## (s9) Casticin and Breast Cancer
Number of References: 10

(p9.0) Breast cancer is the most prevalent type of cancer in women and is a major cause of mortality worldwide due to its poor prognosis and diagnostic procedures [49][50][51][52]. Pretreatment of casticin on MDA-MB-231 and 4T1 cells resulted in downregulation of MMP-9 mRNA protein expression but has no significant effect on MMP-2, suggesting that casticin can suppress both migration and invasion abilities in breast cancer cells. Although both proteins have similar properties, MMP-9 is directly involved in response to invasion, whereas MMP-2 is found only in malignant tumors, so it is not involved in initial invasive events. Within the AP-1 pathway, casticin suppressed c-Jun and c-Fos expression, leading to an increase in proliferative properties. Casticin also decreased the levels of phosphorylated Akt in the Akt signaling pathway. The reduction in MMP-9 protein levels reserved the invasion abilities of the breast cancer cell lines. The findings in this particular research paper suggest that casticin has properties to inhibit the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway, preventing cell invasion and migration in various tumor cells, including breast cancer [48]. The Akt signaling pathway is crucial for regulating both tumorigenesis (the formation of a tumor) and the cell cycle. The pathway is activated by a large number of receptor tyrosine kinases-for example, epidermal cell growth factor receptor (EGFR) and insulin-like growth factors (IFGRs)-with protein kinase B (PKB) being the central node that can be stimulated [48,53,54]. Casticin significantly inhibits cell viability by suppressing Akt activation in a concentration-dependent manner and also inhibits self-renewal and invasionary behaviors of cancer cells. Besides opioid receptors, casticin may also directly bind to several proteins, including estrogen receptors, threonine-protein kinase Pim-1 and reticuline oxidase, as revealed by docking studies [48,53]. As a result, casticin could be utilized as an antineoplastic drug for human breast cancers.
## (s25) Other Important Pharmacological Actions
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) For years, casticin has been used in Chinese folk medicine to alleviate premenstrual symptoms in women. A study conducted by Webster et al. investigated compounds extracted from V. agnuscastus, such as casticin, and their opioidergic mechanisms for premenstrual syndrome treatment. Casticin can bind to and activate µ-and δ-opioid receptor subtypes in a dose-dependent manner, reducing premenstrual syndrome effects. Casticin was reported to have therapeutic effects through the upregulation of these receptors [125]. Additionally, it is established that casticin displays antiinflammatory properties. In an in vivo study conducted on female BALB/c mice, casticin reduced oxidative stress in the lungs of mice with asthma, alongside reduced activity by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and goblet cell hyperplasia. Moreover, casticin downregulated the levels of proinflammatory Th2 cytokine and eotaxin, resulting in reduced lung inflammation. It was reported that casticin is also a powerful immunomodulatory therapeutic drug and could be used in asthma treatment [126].
## (s27) Other Important Pharmacological Actions
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) For years, casticin has been used in Chinese folk medicine to alleviate premenstrual symptoms in women. A study conducted by Webster et al. investigated compounds extracted from V. agnus-castus, such as casticin, and their opioidergic mechanisms for premenstrual syndrome treatment. Casticin can bind to and activate µand δ-opioid receptor subtypes in a dose-dependent manner, reducing premenstrual syndrome effects. Casticin was reported to have therapeutic effects through the upregulation of these receptors [125]. Additionally, it is established that casticin displays anti-inflammatory properties. In an in vivo study conducted on female BALB/c mice, casticin reduced oxidative stress in the lungs of mice with asthma, alongside reduced activity by the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and goblet cell hyperplasia. Moreover, casticin downregulated the levels of proinflammatory Th2 cytokine and eotaxin, resulting in reduced lung inflammation. It was reported that casticin is also a powerful immunomodulatory therapeutic drug and could be used in asthma treatment [126].
