# LITERATURE REVIEW Immune development of children born from Caesarean section

CorpusID: 222454319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8d7e90a20232b5b7ea824fbbf5d53698941f5b9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b8d7e90a20232b5b7ea824fbbf5d53698941f5b9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s12) Nutrition intervention to reduce risk of developing allergy
Number of References: 8

(p12.0) Nutritional measures are key to early-life immune functioning by impacting the gut barrier through strengthening the intestinal microbiota and immune tolerance. 39 Breast milk promotes the colonization and maturation of the infant gut microbiome, as it contains beneficial bacteria such as Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Serratia, Pseudomonas, Corynebacterium, Ralstonia, Propionibacterium, Sphingomonas and Bradyrhizobiaceae. Breast milk definitely contributes to stimulate the growth of the microbiota strain specific to the gut Bifidobacterium found in the intestines of nursing infants along with Bacteroides and it can have an important effect on the development of immune tolerance and genomic capacity for metabolizing the human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs). 24,40 As a prebiotic, HMOs have effects and benefits in the alteration of the intestinal microbiota, pathogens' counteradhesive effects, epithelial cell response modulation and immune system growth. HMOs are therefore beneficial in the treatment of dysbiosis in breastfeeding children. Moreover, some studies have shown that the role of nutrition intervention could also play in gut microbiota production for unbreastfed babies. 41,42 Some clinical and preclinical studies demonstrate that synbiotics can prevent certain allergic diseases. This contributed to the use of synbiotic to compensate for early microbial bowel disruptions. 43 World Allergy Organization (WAO) recommended using probiotics to avoid food allergy in pregnant women at high risk of having an allergic infant, women who breastfeed infants with high risk of developing allergy and infants with high risk of developing allergy. 44 Prebiotic supplementation also recommended by WAO panel to prevent allergy in not-exclusively breastfed infants regardless of their allergic risk. However for the prebiotic recommendation is conditional and need a further strong certainty of evidences. 45 In the JULIUS study conducted by Chua et al, 46 the effect synbiotics on the gut microbiota has been determined in infants born by C-section.The result has shown that supplementation with specific synbiotic mixture (a mixture of short-chain galactooligosaccharides (scGOS) and long-chain fructooligosaccharides (lcFOS) and B.Breve M16-V in Csection-born infants allows rapid colonization of Bifidobacteria from the first days of life and offers promising nutritional intervention in dysbiosis. Furthermore, safety follow-up showed a significantly lower incidence of reported skinrelated disorders and atopic dermatitis among those treated with this synbiotic compared to the control group.
