# Roads to objectivity: Quantum Darwinism, Spectrum Broadcast Structures, and Strong quantum Darwinism -a review

CorpusID: 220403353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Philosophy

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 7

(p0.0) The fact that classical limit of quantum theory should not only reproduce the correct kinematics and dynamics of classical theory, but on a deeper level also its objective character, has been noted fairly late, at least to the author's knowledge, by W. H. Zurek and collaborators (see e.g. [1][2][3] and the references therein). Quantum measurements inevitably perturb measured system, unless the state of the system is specially tailored for a given measurement, thus precluding in general any objective character of the measured quantity as different observations will yield different results. This is in a stark contrast to classical mechanics, where system's characteristics, e.g. positions or momenta, have an objective, observer-independent character. This problem of objectivity, unlike the well studied problems of uncertainty and contextuality, arises already at the level of a single observable. In recent years several objectivization mechanism have been proposed, in particular quantum Darwinism [3], Spectrum Broadcast Structures (SBS) [4,5], and strong quantum Darwinism [6]. The aim of this work is to analyze these ideas from a foundational point of view and study their mutual interrelations in an attempt to bring more clarity to the growing field.
## (s4) V. SPECTRUM BROADCAST STRUCTURES (SBS)
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) In [4,5] another approach to the objectivity problem was taken. Instead of using somewhat classically motivated conditions for redundant information proliferation, the authors formalized Def. 1 and surprisingly were able to derive a unique state structure compatible with it. I will repat the process below, generalizing it compared to the original derivation [5] Let us look at the phrase 'finding out of the state of S by many independent observers' of Def. 1. First of all, the 'state of the system' is understood as one of the eigenstates |i of the reduced density matrix of the system:
## (s6) VI. STRONG QUANTUM DARWINISM
Number of References: 10

(p6.0) That SBS states imply quantum Darwinism condition (1) is a simple calculation, however the opposite implication turned out to be a difficult mathematical problem. As was shown in Section IV, condition (1) it too weak to impose SBS structure. The question how to properly supplement it was solved by Le and Olaya-Castro in [6], based on an intuition that the presence of discord is the obstacle (see also [35,36]). This can inferred from Secs. III and IV, but historically the works [6,35,36] where the first to explicitly name the problem. The original critique from [5] was admittedly vague and heuristic, which I tried to overcome in the previous Sections. Le and Olaya-Castro establish the following, highly non-trivial and technically difficult equivalence [6] (I present below a slightly improved formulation due to [38]) : Theorem 6 (Strong quantum Darwinism). Let H E = H E 1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ H E N . Then a state S:E is of SBS form (49) if and only if the following conditions hold simultaneously:
## (s7) VII. CASE STUDY: SPIN-SPIN MODEL
Number of References: 5

(p7.0) As an example of how objectivization process happens, I will analyze the spin-spin model of decoherence, where a central spin interacts pair-wise with environmental spins. This is one of the canonical model of quantum open systems [7], with a series of practical implications. I will analyze both the SBS formation and the condition (1), skipping the strong quantum Darwinism as the calculation of the accessible information and the Holevo quantity is in general a very complicated task, beyond the scope of the present work. Spin-spin model has been extensively studied from the objectivity point of view in [13,37,39,53]. The Hamiltonian in the simplest case of the quantum measurement limit is just the interaction Hamiltonian:
