# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Mechanisms of replication and repair in mitochondrial DNA deletion formation

CorpusID: 222143646 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a53655478f3782017b65cfdfa772b5786d841f7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a53655478f3782017b65cfdfa772b5786d841f7b)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s4) DELETION MECHANISMS ASSOCIATED WITH ER-RONEOUS MITOCHONDRIAL DNA REPLICATION
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The striking observation that most mtDNA deletions occur within the major arc, between OriH and OriL (Figure 1), could indicate that similar mechanisms are involved in forming these deletions. The first mechanism describing deletion formation was for the CD observed in KSS patients (16). In the CD, two 13-bp direct repeats flank the deletion breakpoint with only one of the repeats retained in the deletion construct, thereby suggesting a replicationslippage mechanism. The 13 bp 3 repeat (13447-13459) and the strand displacement model (SDM) for mtDNA replication, which starts from two origins of replication, OriH and OriL, dedicated respectively to the replication of the H-and L-strand. In the SDM, mtDNA replication initiates from OriH. The mitochondrial RNA polymerase POLRMT synthesizes a short RNA sequences that primes the subsequent replication catalyzed by DNA Pol␥ . The Twinkle helicase progresses in front of DNA Pol␥ , unwinding DNA in an ATP-dependent manner. The exposed single-stranded H-strand is bound by mtSSB to prevent spurious replication events. Once the replisome reaches OriL, a single-stranded stem-loop structure is formed, blocking mtSSB binding and promoting the initiation of replication of the L strand. The stem-loop is recognized by POLRMT, which synthesizes a short RNA primer in the OriL region. DNA Pol␥ replaces POLRMT, and replication of the two strands proceeds unidirectionally and continuously to form two full double-stranded mtDNA daughter molecules. (B) Replication fork stalling is suggested to promote the mis-annealing of single-stranded mtDNA regions containing direct repeats. The loop generated during replication-slippage is extruded from the mtDNA molecule, resulting in deletions. (C) Deletion formation from copy-choice recombination involves replication starting from OriL. During replication, secondary structures and loops could be formed by the exposed single-stranded regions containing direct repeats. If those structures persist, the sequences comprised in this aberrant mtDNA conformation is deleted during the second round of replication. 5 repeat (8470-8482) are hypothesized to mis-anneal during the displacement of the H-strand during replication. In the event of a break occurring on the parental strand downstream of the 3 repeat, an intact 3 -hydroxyl would support continued mtDNA replication ( Figure 2B). Subsequent degradation of the H-strand and ligation would result in the deletion. In support of this model, a recent study reporting a single-molecule fiber assay observed that singlestrand breaks generated by mitoTALENS on the H-strand closest to the 5 repeat lead to the formation of the CD. Conversely, nicks at both the 3 repeat region and on the Lstrand at the 5 repeat region did not generate the mtDNA CD (38).
## (s5) MITOCHONDRIAL DNA REPAIR AND DELETION FORMATION
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) In comparison to the mechanisms regulating mtDNA replication, mtDNA repair pathways are less characterized. In addition, DNA repair mechanisms in the mitochondria are poorly resolved in comparison to nuclear DNA repair. Yet, it is becoming clearer that mitochondria display DNA repair activities, albeit with key differences compared to nuclear pathways ( Figure 3A). While nuclear DNA is safeguarded by a repair-oriented maintenance, mtDNA molecules are either repaired or degraded. The selective depletion of damaged mtDNA lowers the overall population of mutated and/or deleted mtDNA molecules. For example, mtDNA molecules harboring abasic sites (77,78) or DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) (72,73) could be directly degraded rather than repaired. As mtDNA is under a strict copy-number control, selective depletion of damaged mtDNA molecules triggers replication of the undamaged mtDNA copies, reconstituting the mtDNA pool (reviewed in (79)). Besides selective depletion, damaged mtDNA can also be repaired.
