# R E V I E W An Overview of the Efficacy and Safety of Ozanimod for the Treatment of Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 234767136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Fingolimod
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) The first oral drug developed and approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting MS in 2010 was fingolimod, a small lipophilic agent that is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase to become an S1P analogue. It binds to S1PR and induces its internalization; after fingolimod phosphate dissociation, the receptor returns to the surface. 12 Fingolimod is a non-selective modulator of all S1PR subtypes, except for subtype 2. Clinical trials showed a 60% decrease in the annualized relapse rate (ARR) in fingolimod 1.25 mg/d-treated patients versus placebo and a reduction in new T2 lesions and gadolinium-enhancing (GdE) lesions on MRI scans over 24 months of treatment. 8 The good efficacy, tolerability, and convenient route of administration have been key to the success of fingolimod. Nevertheless, its non-selectivity leads to interactions with S1PR 3-4-5, which are likely responsible for several of fingolimod's adverse events, including QT interval prolongation, hypertension, macular oedema, pulmonary toxicity, and possibly hepatotoxicity. 13 Moreover, the effects of fingolimod are reversible but are affected by its prolonged half-life of 7 d.
## (s6) Clinical Trials Phase I Trials
Number of References: 3

(p6.0) The safety of ozanimod was first tested in two Phase I, randomized, double-blind trials. The data showed a dosedependent reduction in heart rate after the first ozanimod administration; therefore, a dose-escalation protocol was used in all subsequent clinical trials. 25 These studies also determined that ozanimod did not prolong the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic doses and did not raise any new safety concerns. 32 Furthermore, the effect of ozanimod on circulating leukocyte subsets was evaluated using flow cytometry and epigenetic cell counting in an open label pharmacodynamic study in which MS patients were randomized to oral ozanimod (0.5 or 1 mg/d) for 12 weeks. Dose-dependent decreases in circulating B-and T-cell counts and differential impacts on naive and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD19+ B cells were observed. 34 
