# Complex Systems, Emergence, and Multiscale Analysis: A Tutorial and Brief Survey

CorpusID: 237818779 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d4042157062331449b86e426785b14f911e6874a)

Fields: Computer Science, Physics, Mathematics

## (s27) Adaptive Detrending, Denoising, and Multiscale Decomposition
Number of References: 4

(p27.0) The method is based on adaptive filtering [149,155,156,186]. It works this way: first we partition a time series into many segments. Let the length of each segment be w = 2n + 1 points, and neighboring segments overlap by n + 1 points. As we will see later, using segments with length containing odd number of sample points ensures symmetry. This operation also introduces a time scale w+1 2 τ = (n + 1)τ, where τ is the sampling time. For each segment, whose sample points represent a small portion of the curve we are studying, we assume the curve can be approximated by its Taylor series expansion very well. This suggests us to fit the segment by a polynomial of order M. Minimizing the error, the obtained polynomial fitting becomes the best local fitting. Here, an important parameter is the polynomial order M. When M = 0, the fitting is piece-wise constant. When M = 1, the fitting is locally linear (not necessarily also globally linear). Let y (i) (l 1 ), y (i+1) (l 2 ), l 1 , l 2 = 1, · · · , 2n + 1 be the fitted polynomial for the i-th and (i + 1)-th segments. The fitting for the overlapped part of the two adjacent segments can be obtained by properly combining these two polynomials:
