# A Survey on Common Threats in npm and PyPi Registries

CorpusID: 237266468 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b56f25674afe1140497a8126ab44ddca0059ff86](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b56f25674afe1140497a8126ab44ddca0059ff86)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Software Supply-Chain Attacks
Number of References: 2

(p4.0) The goal of supply-chain attacks is to inject malicious code into software or library externally. These attacks modify the targeted program so that it is still validly signed by its owner. The attacker simply injects his code into one of the software's dependencies [21]. Theoretically, an attacker can do this injection in any given node in the software's dependency tree. The ultimate goal is to alter the behavior of the root or a specific node, which is the targeted software product, using a child node, which in this case is a dependency node in the tree [21].
## (s13) Maintainers and Collaborators
Number of References: 7

(p13.0) There is a distinction between maintainers and collaborators in OS environments. Maintainers review and approve contributions while contributors propose code changes [21]. Both of these accounts are critical for a secure project. An attacker's goal is to inject malicious code into the dependency tree to affect the targeted software. An attacker can reach that goal by either creating a new package via squatting or using the existing packages that already have users [21]. If a maintainer account is compromised, an attacker can easily inject his code. Another possible scenario is that an attacker can pose as a benign contributor and make pull requests with a seemingly useful feature, such as the incident of the unmaintained "event-stream" package that will be mentioned in the following sections [21,33]. Embedded inside the feature can be malicious content that may be hard to notice, and considering that a human is reviewing the request, human error can allow the request to be approved. Alternatively, a maintainer account with weak credentials can always be compromised to approve malicious pull requests, or attackers can use social engineering strategies to perform the injection.

(p13.1) The trend presented in the transitive dependency structure is not the only alarming graph. The rise of npm would be from new developers joining the system mainly; however, the package per maintainer has also increased as current members publish new projects [41]. Each account is becoming responsible for more packages, making it more critical to secure accounts. The average package count per maintainer account seems to be 2.5 in 2012, ascending to 3.5 in 2013 and almost 4.5 in 2018 [41]. This increase happened for both average and espe-cially for influential maintainers in npm, as the case for some selected popular maintainer usernames can be observed in figure 6 [41]. 
