# Finding Critical Scenarios for Automated Driving Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 239016131 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s22) Literature search and selection
Number of References: 2

(p22.0) The primary studies for this literature review are collected through an iterative process with automatic search and snowballing as shown in Fig. 8. This section describes the details of how we conducted each stage. Stage 1: A comprehensive initial search string can reduce the number of iterations to determine the final search string as described in Stage 3. To better define the initial search strings, an initial set of relevant studies was gathered from two sources. The first source was publications from recent relevant research projects including AutoDrive, Prystine, Pegasus, Enable-S3 and AdaptIVe. The second source are the relevant papers included in the two relevant survey papers  Fig. 8. The stages to collect the primary studies. The numbers on the arrows indicate the numbers of studies given to the next stage [32], [33] introduced in Section 2.6. The initial set contains 151 potentially relevant studies. After being filtered by the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 49 studies remained.
## (s55) System of Interest (SoI)
Number of References: 5

(p55.0) Env. Adversarial Agents action observation disturbance state Scenario Fig. 21. Relation between the SoI, the environment and the adversarial agents [139] ters of a predefined motion model (e.g., the velocity of a constant velocity model). In this way, possible behaviors of other actors are restricted, especially their reactions to the behaviors of the ego vehicle. A more arbitrary way to determine the behavior of another actor is to model it as a motion trajectory (position trajectory or acceleration trajectory). This can also be extended to any parameters whose development over time is of interest (e.g., the angle of the sun). In general, the variable over time parameters, also called parameter trajectories, are the values of the scenario that change during the simulation. Methods to explore a logical scenario including such parameter trajectories are discussed in this section. Such problems are also called stress testing in [58], [60], [93] or adversarial testing in [102].
## (s61) Required information
Number of References: 3

(p61.0) All the studies analyzed in the section require a simulator. Some studies require access to the internal state of the simulator, as in [58], while others treat them as a blackbox as in [60]. In [46], as mentioned before, a backward search is performed, where their method tries to get to a safe state from a future unsafe state. Due to the impossibility of computing the inverse of the ACC control law, the authors generate random inputs for the ACC vehicle to try to get the vehicle in the previous state. Then they simulate forward to ensure getting into an unsafe state again.
