# A Brief Overview of Results about Uniqueness of the Quantization in Cosmology

CorpusID: 237142194 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e67494490371c63e077d65b91314898884e61548](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e67494490371c63e077d65b91314898884e61548)

Fields: Physics

## (s1) III. LOOP QUANTUM COSMOLOGY
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Let us now consider the representation of the Weyl relations used in LQC, sometimes referred to as the polymer representation. We will restrict our attention to its simplest version, namely the one associated with the homogeneous and isotropic flat FLRW model 3 . For convenience, we set the speed of light and Newton constant multiplied by 4π equal to the unit, and we make the Immirzi parameter [18] equal to 3/2 in order to simplify our equations, without loss of generality. At the classical level, the system is described by a pair of canonically conjugate variables, usually denoted by c and p, with Poisson bracket {c, p} = 1. The variables c and p parametrize, respectively, the (homogeneous) Ashtekar connection and the densitized triad (see Ref. [10] for details in the context of the current uniqueness discussion, and Refs. [19,20] for more general introductions to LQC). In particular, p is proportional to the square scale factor of the FLRW spacetime.
## (s2) IV. FOCK QUANTIZATION IN NON-STATIONARY COSMOLOGICAL SETTINGS
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) As we have already mentioned, the Stone-von Neumann uniqueness result fails for infinite number of DoF, and no general result on the uniqueness of the quantization is available for non-stationary situations. This includes, of course, cases of interest in QC. In some of those cases, the underlying theory can be recast in the form of a linear scalar field with a timedependent mass, propagating in an auxiliary background spacetime which is both static and spatially compact. One such situation is the linearly polarized Gowdy model with the spatial topology of a three-torus, where the gravitational degrees of freedom are encoded by a scalar field on S 1 , evolving in time precisely as a linear field with a time-dependent mass of the type m(t) = 1/(4t 2 ) [31,32]. Other situations of interest include free scalar fields in cosmological scenarios, e.g. propagating in (compact) FLRW or the Sitter spacetimes. In those cases, the non-stationarity is transfered from the background to the field efective mass, by means of a simple transformation.
