# Overview of the advantages and limitations of maize-soybean intercropping in sustainable agriculture and future prospects: A review

CorpusID: 247457505 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4b3590ca630131ed8709bf14c587a3c8059679b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4b3590ca630131ed8709bf14c587a3c8059679b)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Environmental Science

## (s16) Effect on soil
Number of References: 7

(p16.0) Intercropping is a successful and attractive method to promote soil health and quality, yield, fertilizer use efficiency, and long-term agricultural production (Fu et al., 2019;Zaeem et al., 2019). The soil nutrient balance and active microbial communities can be used to analyze data concerning soil health. An experiment conducted in the cool environment of the boreal ecosystem (Zaeem et al., 2019) discovered that silage maize planted with forage soybean were suitable to increase forage cultivation. When cultivated on Podzols in a cool temperature boreal habitat, this is accomplished through enhancing active biological processes, rhizosphere soil acid phosphatase activity, and accessible P. Zaeem et al. (2019) found that rhizosphere soil acid phosphatase activity was significantly (p < 0.05) higher, especially in the intercropping treatment compared with monocropping; this implies that intercropped maize planted on Podzols can use organic P more efficiently than monocropped maize. Fu et al. (2019) revealed that the N uptake of maize grain was superior in MSI than in maize monocropping. Moreover, Chen et al. (2017) stated that a maximum maize yield can be achieved even with limited soil N treatment with MSI. This is because maize is less competitive for soil N, allowing it to use more soil N for growth, whereas soybean relies on atmospheric nitrification (Fan et al., 2018).
