# biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents

CorpusID: 245213230 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s6) Non-Ribosomal Synthesized Peptides (NRPs) and Polyketides (PKs)
Number of References: 7

(p6.0) NRPs and PKs include a range of cyclic, linear, and branched compounds, synthesized by composite enzymes viz. non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), polyketide synthetases (PKS), and hybrid of NRPS/PKS, respectively [22,54]. Lipopeptides (LPs) are NRPs produced by Bacillales; LPs have significant antimicrobial activity [55]. LAB is considered the primary producer of ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides, as reviewed by Alvarez-Sieiro et al. [53] and Pircalabioru et al. [30]. However, the classification scheme for antimicrobial compounds produced by Bacillus is not explored in comparison to LAB. Caulier et al. [22] reviewed and updated the antimicrobial metabolites classification from the B. subtilis group based on biosynthetic pathway and chemical nature. Zhao et al. [21] acknowledged 31 types of PKs, NRPs, and NRPS/PKS hybrid synthesized antimicrobials using antiSMASH.
## (s17) Fungi
Number of References: 6

(p17.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s19) Fungi
Number of References: 6

(p19.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s21) Fungi
Number of References: 6

(p21.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s23) Marine-Derived Fungi
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s24) Marine-Derived Fungi
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s25) Marine-Derived Fungi
Number of References: 2

(p25.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s26) Marine-Derived Fungi
Number of References: 2

(p26.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s27) Marine-Derived Fungi
Number of References: 2

(p27.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity.   
