# A survey of dental services in England providing targeted care for people experiencing social exclusion: mapping and dimensions of access

CorpusID: 249885435 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b31e3e82684a9f0d2e77b64afd6615b51306d2c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b31e3e82684a9f0d2e77b64afd6615b51306d2c1)

Fields: Medicine, Sociology

## (s17) Implications for policy and practice
Number of References: 4

(p17.0) Consistency, flexibility, transparent costs or no charges, familiarity, adaptation to complex needs and outreach and collaborations with other medical, social and charitable organisations are essential considerations for designing services to meet the needs of socially excluded groups. Opportunities to address financial issues may be found in the use of flexible commissioning or other innovative commissioning arrangements. Furthermore, the models of remuneration being trialled as part of the dental contract reform programme may offer opportunities to reduce health inequalities and address issues of access. 22 Other important considerations for running an appropriate service included well-trained dental teams who have time, patience and provide care which respects the patient and maintains their dignity. Studies have suggested that encouraging philosophies of social responsibility can begin even at undergraduate level. 23 This study identifies that teams running dental services would benefit from bespoke training, both in clinical and nonclinical aspects of providing services for people experiencing social exclusion. In the absence of adequate support and training, not only are staff at risk of poorly managing challenging patients or themselves (ie experiencing burnout), but there is also a risk that there will be a lack of workforce competency in the future and a resultant void in appropriately trained dental professionals to deliver inclusive dental services. Ultimately, services would benefit from understanding that people may only decide to engage when they feel they are ready. In the interim, services must be non-judgemental in supporting people experiencing social exclusion to engage when they feel prepared to do so and cultivate environments that foster trust and maintain an open invitation to engage. 19,20 Strengths
