# Medical Image Segmentation on MRI Images with Missing Modalities: A Review

CorpusID: 247446697 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0528bfb852be916a18962db033bb9ff84bc8b97f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0528bfb852be916a18962db033bb9ff84bc8b97f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s4) Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR):
Number of References: 7

(p4.0) The appearance of human body tissue in FLAIR scans is similar to that of T2-weighted scans, with the exception that cerebrospinal fluid is depicted dark rather than bright [9]. Magnetization Prepared -RApid Gradient Echo (MP-RAGE): MP-RAGE scans provide good contrast between white and gray tissues at a relatively short scan time. It is used by a large number of multicenter trials like the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) [81]. Proton density (PD-weighted): Proton-density weighted sequence or PD-weighted sequence  is directly related to the amount of hydrogen nuclei existing in the body region being images. Since fat and fluids contain many protons, tissues appear bright on PD images [94]. Figure 2 depicts a comparison between different types of MRI modalities in two datasets, the Longitudinal multiple sclerosis lesion dataset [22] and the BraTS dataset [63].  [22]: MP-RAGE, T2-w, PD-w and FLAIR are shown from left to right. Second row [63]: T1, T2, T1c, and FLAIR are shown from left to right. Each MRI modality reveals different characteristics of the soft tissue of the human brain, therefore combining them would provide the clinical professionals with comprehensive information.
## (s23) BraTS
Number of References: 2

(p23.0) The Multimodal Brain Tumor Image Segmentation Benchmark (BraTS) [66,63] is a freely accessible dataset that comprises manually segmented images provided by clinical specialists from various institutes. It was initially released in 2012 and has since then been extensively used to improve automatic segmentation methods. The BraTS dataset concentrates on gliomas, a heterogeneous group of tumors that are one of the most frequent kinds of primary brain tumors. T1-weighted, contrast enhanced T1 weighted also known as T1c-weighted, T2-weighted, and Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) sequences are the four MRI sequences, which are included in the BraTS dataset, each of which reveals distinct characteristics of the brain tumor. For the evaluation process different version of BraTS dataset has been used by the literature work. Each verion of this dataset includes MRIs of a several patients with four modalities (T1, T1c, T2, FLAIR). Each image's ground truth segmentation in the BraTS dataset includes labeling for four tissue classes: necrosis, edema, non-enhancing tumor, and enhancing tumor. Despite the fact that four 
## (s35) Metrics For Evaluating the Performance
Number of References: 2

(p35.0) Most articles in recent years have focused only on the issue of quantitative accuracy of the model and compare and report the performance of their model in terms of quantitative accuracy. They lack to includes other important aspects such as speed (inference time) and the amount of memory required (which we will discuss in section 6). In this section, we briefly introduce some popular metrics used for evaluating the accuracy of missing modality compensating networks. The results will compare the most promising method for the popular datasets. Dice score In semantic segmentation, the Dice loss which is based on dice coefficient similarity is well-known. In the segmentation of medical images, most of the time the region of interest (ROI) is a small part of the image. Therefore, the model is prone to be trapped in the local minimum in the training process of the model. Accordingly, the model will bias to the background, the object of interest will not be detected appropriately and so many of them will miss. Thus, the Dice loss was proposed to alleviate this problem [64,5]. The Dice loss is formulated for a 3D MRI image as written in Equation 1:
