# A Review of Causality for Learning Algorithms in Medical Image Analysis

CorpusID: 249626188 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b732f91b7b0a317d8ee9d5c7b6efe9801442a106](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b732f91b7b0a317d8ee9d5c7b6efe9801442a106)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s8) Domain Generalization
Number of References: 5

(p8.0) One of the most promising areas where causal reasoning can be applied in the field of medical imaging is Domain Adaptation and Out-of-Distribution detection, directly associated with TRL 6.4. If we model the generative process that results in a medical image and include factors like the medical history, the disease, imaging domain, etc. we can then go on and interpret domain generalization and adaptation as a model that is able to perform well under different treatments in the imaging domain parameter, as argued by (Huang et al., 2020). In their paper Huang et al model domain adaptation as a non stationary change in the underlying causal graph and propose methods to identify and resolve these changes.  analyze the domain shifts experienced in clinical deployment of AIML algorithms from a causal perspective and then proceed to investigate and benchmark eight popular methods of domain generalization. They find that domain generalization methods fail to provide any improvement in performance over empirical risk minimization in situations where we find sampling bias. Similarly (Fehr et al., 2022) model the causal relationships leading to the medical images and create synthetic datasets in order to evaluate the transportability of methods to external settings where interventions on factors like ages, sex and medical metrics have been performed. (Ouyang et al., 2021) apply a causal analysis on the problem of domain generalization in segmentation of medical images. They first simulate shifted domain images via a randomly weighted shallow network; then they intervene upon the images such that spurious correlations are removed and finally train their segmentation model while enforcing a domain invariance condition. (Valvano et al., 2021) develop a method to reuse adversarial mask discriminators for test-time training to combat distribution shifts in medical image segmentation tasks. In their discussion of their method they explain the good performance of their method under a causal lens. Finally (Kouw et al., 2019) build a causal Bayesian prior to aide MRI tissue segmentation to generalize across different medical centers.
