# Nanomaterials-Based Sensors for Respiratory Viral Detection: A Review

CorpusID: 250144980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e)

Fields: Materials Science, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s1) A. Nanomaterials-Based Sensors
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) Rapid viral diagnostics is essential to overcome the current pandemic and prevent future ones. Functionalization of nanomaterials using nucleic acids or proteins like antibodies is the standard method used for viral detection. These detections are carried out using colorimetric assays, thermal photo platforms, and antigen-binding assays, among others. The commonly available testing kits for viral infections operate on enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays or PCRs [41]. These testing kits have been shown to have false-negative results, low sensitivity, and usually take long durations to give results [16]. Nanomaterials, on the contrary, are known to lower these drawbacks. Having a high surface-to-volume ratio allows nanoparticles to have better surface interactions between the sensor and the biomolecule to be analyzed. This makes nanomaterial-based sensors a better candidate for rapid and dependable detection of viral particles [26]. Many nanomaterials with transducing functions have been studied in recent decades, and several matrices for different sensors have been developed [42]. Nanomaterials like graphene, quantum dots, gold and silver nanoparticles have been explored to create sensors to detect viral particles. There have been several nanosensors developed and reported in the literature over the last decade -each of them employing a unique nanomaterial to increase its sensitivity and selectivity to give a rapid response rate during viral detection (Fig. 2).
## (s4) D. Piezoelectric Sensors
Number of References: 6

(p4.0) Piezoelectric sensors function in the presence of an applied alternating electric field. The transducers in such sensors resonate under such conditions. They measure the difference in the resonating frequency, which occurs because of crystal mass and the attached target analyte. When the target analyte binds to the sensor's surface, a change in the mass occurs, which is recorded. These sensors are widely used to detect various target molecules within biological systems [55], [98], [99]. The use of this sensor for the detection of the H5N3 virus is seen in the work done by Erofeev et al. [100]. The duo developed a piezoelectric sensor using a lead zirconate titanate piezoelectric disk and successfully performed a label-free detection of the influenza virus. In another study, it was observed that a piezoelectric sensor coated with aptamer could detect the SCV helicase protein derived from the SARS CoV [101]. The sensor could perform the detection in a minute and showed a LOD of 3.5 ng/mL. Piezoelectric nanosensors also monitor the changes in viscoelasticity by noting the frequency, which affects the quartz crystal resonator [102]. During the sensing activity by such sensors, isolation equipments are used to avoid any hindrance caused by the external environment. Table I 
## (s9) VII. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION As discussed previously, many studies support the superiority of nanomaterial-based sensors over the others due to their unmatched physicochemical properties like the prominent surface to volume ratio, high adsorption, the changes in their quantum aspects and their capacity to react. Hence, a lower quantity of analytes is more than sufficient for their successful analysis. Furthermore, rapid processing of the analyte within a lower budget is possible using such sensors [121]. Even carbon-based nanomaterials like graphene and its derivatives are an excellent choice to develop sensors that can detect respiratory viruses because of their ability to attach to ligands and other nanoparticles [26]. Other nanomaterials like silica nanoparticles are also advantageous in creating sensors to detect viruses because they are biocompatible with other elements in biological conditions. Moreover, nanoporous materials have an even better surface to volume ratio which is gives them an upper hand over the other nanoparticles that are currently available [26].
## (s11) IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) Highly sensitive sensors can be successfully developed using nanomaterials, such that they give rapid results which are highly reproducible. In addition to being highly sensitive, nanomaterial-based FET sensors are also highly selective and can detect the analyte in low concentrations. Nanomaterials like graphene and In2O3 have been incorporated in the open gated areas of FET to detect respiratory viruses [124]. Elements like gold nanoparticles and their nanoislands have also been successfully included in immunosensors to detect viruses like MERS and COVID-19 under pico and femto concentration ranges [95], [125]. Furthermore, using nanomaterials in sensor development allows for their miniaturization and reduces their overall production cost. Affinity sensors can be easily created using multiple nanomaterials within the same sensor. Such sensors usually have many electrodes within the same system, which allows for simultaneous detection.
