# Protective Role and Functional Engineering of Neuropeptides in Depression and Anxiety: An Overview

CorpusID: 256966763 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f0f9bfeb735cd1acde90df16e938f4b8e1c206cb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f0f9bfeb735cd1acde90df16e938f4b8e1c206cb)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s2) Depression
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) It has previously been shown that people with depression experience significant alterations in their neuroanatomy. The main change observed in depressed patients was a reduction in overall brain size, specifically in the ventromedial prefrontal cortex, and notably in the left anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal cortex. The lateral prefrontal cortex, hippocampus, and striatum also showed moderate volume reductions [9]. Moreover, abnormal activity was noted in lateral, frontal, and temporal cortices, as well as the insula and the cerebellum. These brain regions showed a lack of activation during negative emotions induction [10]. Additionally, numerous studies have discovered that different neuropeptides play important roles in depression, with these roles varying depending on the region where they are operating.
## (s15) Gut-Brain Peptides
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) The term "gut-brain" refers to the bidirectional axis connection between the gut and the brain (Figure 1). By way of neuroendocrine substances originating from the adrenal cortex and medulla, this axis plays a part in the continuing communication between the gut and the brain [50]. Neuropeptides such as neuropeptide Y, substance P, neurotensin, and galanin are expressed at all levels of the gut-brain axis. Figure 1. Gut-brain axis. This is a bidirectional axis between the brain and the gut, connected by blood circulation (shown in red) and the vagus nerve (shown in yellow). Through the gut-tobrain axis (shown in blue), the vagus nerve gets activated, the barrier's integrity gets altered, and neuropeptides and immune signaling molecules are secrete, with an effect on stress and anxiety. Through the brain-to-gut axis (shown in green), the main functions are microbial balance, nutrient delivery, gastrointestinal mobility, mucin secretion, and the stress response system. These neuropeptides are essential for the bidirectional transmission between the gut and the brain. In theory, certain microorganisms can make compounds such as neuropeptides, and the gut microbiota reacts to these molecules and to gut hormones if the appropriate receptors are expressed [50]. In recent years, increasing evidence has suggested that the microbiota-gut-brain axis plays a key role in regulating brain functions, particularly emotional processing and behavior. Numerous studies, covered in this review, have demonstrated that behavioral disorders, notably anxiety and depression, are significantly influenced by neuropeptides of the gut-brain axis.
## (s36) Melanin-Concentrating Hormone (MCH)
Number of References: 2

(p36.0) MCH is a cyclic neuropeptide made up of 19 amino acids [28]. MCH-synthesizing neurons are primarily localized in the lateral hypothalamus and incerto-hypothalamic region. MCH acts through the activation of two receptors MCH receptor 1 (MCHR1) and MCH-R2 that are coupled to a G-protein. The first type of receptor is the only one found in rodents and is highly expressed in limbic brain regions such as the prefrontal cortex, nucleus accumbens, amygdala, and hippocampus [104]. MCH is thought to play a role in the pathophysiology of depression and anxiety.
## (s46) Endorphins
Number of References: 2

(p46.0) Endorphins, also known as the body's natural painkillers, were the first endogenous opioid peptides to be discovered. They are released by the pituitary gland and hypothalamus in response to stress or pain. Endorphins are also strongly linked to states of pleasure, such as those induced by love, laughter, and sex. There are three types of endorphins, with beta-endorphins being the most studied and prevalent. They are best known for their painrelieving effect and for being associated with exercise-induced euphoria [119]. Endorphins are also known for their functional duality, as they act as hormones in the pituitary gland and as neuromodulators or neurotransmitters in the central nervous system [120].
