# Continuous remote monitoring of COPD patients-justification and explanation of the requirements and a survey of the available technologies

CorpusID: 255314963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/985586da6209d170ccfa02eb43e41a37bbae3540)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s8) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p8.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
## (s47) Respiratory rate
Number of References: 6

(p47.0) One of the signs of COPD exacerbation is a respiratory rate (RR) over 25/min (see Sect. 4.7). Furthermore, there is evidence that a change in RR has a strong predictive power for exacerbation [83,84].

(p47.1) The respiratory effort can be captured by an impedance pneumograph, stretch sensors, and flow thermography, which captures breathing from the temperature difference between the inhaled and exhaled air. The impedance pneumogram is the most common method used in hospitals [85]. Its basic principle is to inject current into the tissue by employing two drive electrodes placed on the chest and to measure the potential difference between the two points. The potential difference is related to the impedance of the tissue, which varies with respiration.
