# Asiatic acid: a review on its polypharmacological properties and therapeutic potential against various Maladies

CorpusID: 258652819 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f2f8ebececfc779b7ba7c1139473ef72af92248](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1f2f8ebececfc779b7ba7c1139473ef72af92248)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Cancer incergence
Number of References: 4

(p4.0) Depending on dosage and time, asiatic acid substantially decreased cell viability, cell proliferation, and cell progression in U87-MG cells by causing cell apoptotic death and improving antiapoptotic proteins. [26] In different human glioblastoma cancer cells lines i.e. U87MG, LN18, and U118MG, AA supplementation (10-100 μM) lowered the cell viability whereas orally supplemented asiatic acid (10-100 μM) to mice markedly decreased tumor volume, orthotopic U87MG xenografts growth, induced apoptotic death by modulating the protein expression of several apoptosis regulators (Bcl2 family members, caspases, and survivin), induced ER stress (decreased Calnexin and IRE1α expression and increased GRP78 and Calpain), damaged cellular organization and increased free intracellular calcium. [27] Transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1) promote tumor growth via a pathway correlated with hyperactive Smad3 and suppressed Smad7 signaling in the tumor microenvironment. The equilibrium between Smad3 and Smad7 AA (AA, a Smad7 inducer) and naringenin (NG, a Smad3 inhibitor) signaling has been documented to effectively inhibit tumor progression in mouse models of invasive melanoma (B16F10) and lung carcinoma (LLC) by encouraging the formation and cytotoxicity of natural killer (NK) cells against cancer. Mechanistically, we find that Smad3 physically binds Id2 and IRF2 to inhibit the development of NK cells and cytotoxicity against cancer induced by NK cells. Treatment with asiatic acid substantially inhibited Smad3 translation and phosphorylation while restoring Smad7 expression and, thus, via Id2/IRF2-associated pathways, largely promoted NK cell differentiation, maturation, and cytotoxicity toward cancer. In comparison, the beneficial effects of AA and NG on NK cell-dependent anticancer behaviors were blunted by silencing Id2 or IRF2. Thus, treatment with AA and NG developed an additive impact on the inactivation of TGF-β1/Smad3 signaling and thus suppressed the development of melanoma and lung carcinoma by fostering NK cell cancer tolerance via an Id2 and IRF2-associated process. [28] In another recently described by Guo and their fellows, [29] they investigated the anticancer role of AA against MDA-MB-231 cells of a xenografted tumor in nude mice. They found that supplementation of AA at the rate of (50 mg/kg) showed the following changes such as inhibition of cell viability, p-AKT, p53, p-PI3K, and other proteins levels induction of apoptotic cell death, and enhancement of WAVE3 expressions in the tissue of ductal carcinoma in situ.
