# A comprehensive overview of metaplastic breast cancer: clinical features and molecular aberrations

CorpusID: 255986670 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce33462b7025e7927a692311729520c7f13666b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
Number of References: 28

(p5.0) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p5.1) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p5.2) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].

(p5.3) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p5.4) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p5.5) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].
## (s6) Taube et al. [20] 244
Number of References: 20

(p6.0) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p6.1) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p6.2) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p6.3) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.

(p6.4) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p6.5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p6.6) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p6.7) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.
## (s8) Wnt/β-catenin pathway
Number of References: 24

(p8.0) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.

(p8.1) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.
## (s9) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
Number of References: 12

(p9.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p9.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s12) Radiation therapy
Number of References: 12

(p12.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p12.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
## (s25) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
Number of References: 28

(p25.0) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p25.1) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p25.2) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].

(p25.3) MpBC consistently overexpresses EGFR, but usually lacks HER2 overexpression and amplification [23]. Reis-Filho and colleagues found that 34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification and this gene amplification is associated with gene overexpression [24]. This study found no activating mutations in EGFR, suggesting that point mutations within the receptor are unlikely to influence the overexpression of EGFR. Another study assessed 77 MpBC samples and found that the majority of the samples were positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), EGFR overexpression (66%), and KIT (24%) [25]. This study also found no activating mutations in EGFR and KIT. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was performed to show high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%). To compare the differences in EGFR amplification among MpBC and mesenchymal and basal TNBC tumors, we performed droplet digital PCR analysis (ddPCR) to assess EGFR DNA copy number values. We used DNA isolated from well-established MpBC and TNBC patient-derived xenograft (PDX) tumors. The details of the experiment are included in the supplementary information. We found that in comparison to mesenchymal TNBC and MpBC, basal TNBC had the highest EGFR copy number values ( Fig. 1). PDX BCM-4013 (basal-like 2 subtype, BL2) exhibited the most EGFR amplification among all PDXs. BL2 TNBC tumors have been shown to exhibit enhanced EGFR gene expression [42]. Fifty percent of the MpBC PDX tumors exhibited EGFR copy number values greater than two. These findings shed light on the differential expression of EGFR between TNBC and MpBC as Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) -EMT core genetic signature shares similarity to core genetic signatures of claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancers [20].

(p25.4) -MpBC tumors have more stem-like features, express high levels of EMT markers, and share a similar genetic signature to tumor-initiating cell (TIC) genetic signature [21].

(p25.5) -TICs are prominent following endocrine/chemotherapy, more chemoresistant, exhibit EMT, and can undergo self-renewal [22].
## (s26) Taube et al. [20] 244
Number of References: 20

(p26.0) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p26.1) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p26.2) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p26.3) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.

(p26.4) Hennessy et al. [21] 28

(p26.5) Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling pathway -34% of MpBC cases exhibit EGFR gene amplification associated with gene overexpression and no EGFR activating mutations [23,24].

(p26.6) -Fluorescent in situ hybridization showed high EGFR copy number secondary to aneusomy (22%) and amplification (4%) [25].

(p26.7) -Majority of MpBC is positive for p63 (59%), cytokeratin 5/6 (58%), KIT (24%), and EGFR (66%) overexpression [25]. well as warrant further investigation on using EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors as therapeutics against MpBC.
## (s28) Wnt/β-catenin pathway
Number of References: 24

(p28.0) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.

(p28.1) The Wnt/β-catenin pathway plays a vital role in embryonic development, EMT, and carcinogenesis [32]. In a 2008 study, 36 MpBC samples were analyzed for alterations in the Wnt signaling pathway, by examining immunohistochemical (IHC) stains and mutation analysis of key proteins in the pathway [31]. IHC showed aberrant β-catenin expression in 33/36 cases (92%). Mutational analysis demonstrated that 25.9% of samples had CTNNB1 missense mutations, in the region coding for the NH2-terminal domain of β-catenin, likely impairing its ability to undergo degradation. APC and WISP3 mutations were seen in 7.4% and 18.5% of samples respectively. A subsequent study found a lack of CTNNB1 mutations in MpBC samples, but more enhanced and focal nuclear localization of β-catenin in MpBC samples via IHC [32]. A more recent study conducted wholeexome sequencing of 35 MpBC samples and compared the MpBC genomic landscape to that of TNBC from The Cancer Genome Atlas [27]. The study found that MpBC more commonly harbored mutations in the Wnt signaling and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathway than TNBC. These mutations rendered both pathways to be more hyperactive in MpBC. These correlative studies that suggest the Wnt pathway plays a role in MpBC disease pathogenesis have been translated into preclinical studies, particularly with the development of a mouse model of mammary epithelium-specific Ccn6 protein deletion (MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl ) [33]. CCN6, also known as WISP3, is a matricellular protein involved in development during chondrogenesis, skeletogenesis, and cell attachment to the extracellular matrix. In aggressive cancers such as MpBC, levels of CCN6 are low, which leads to enhanced EMT, invasion, metastasis, insulin-growth factor-1, and bone morphogenic-4 signaling [8]. Studies using the MMTV-cre;Ccn6 fl/fl model have yielded promising results to suggest that Wnt and IGF-signaling may work synergistically to regulate MpBC tumorigenesis.
## (s29) Programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1)
Number of References: 12

(p29.0) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).

(p29.1) A study examined 290 tumor tissues of HR+ and HER2+ breast cancers, TNBC, and MpBC for immunohistochemical staining of PD-1 on tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and PD-L1 in breast cancer cells [34]. The study found a substantially enhanced expression of PD-L1 on MpBC tumor tissues (46%) relative to all other tumor tissues (6% in HR+ and HER2+, 9% in TNBC). There was enhanced variability in the expression of PD-1 on TILs in MpBC. Coinciding with this study, a case report published on a patient with metastatic MpBC, from an ongoing clinical trial (NCT02752685), showed a dramatic response to pembrolizumab (anti-PD1) in combination with nab-paclitaxel [35]. PD-L1 staining of the tumor biopsy at baseline showed 100% of tumor cells were positive for PD-L1, and another staining showed increased TIL infiltration after pembrolizumab treatment. The case report described how the PI3K/Akt and Ras-MAPK pathways play a role in regulating immune evasion and that the patient's tumor harbored a hyperactivating PIK3CA mutation (H1047R), which may have influenced tumoral PD-L1 expression. Furthermore, EMT, which is a common phenomenon in MpBC, may also influence PD-L1 expression. Another study performed PD-L1 immunohistochemical staining of 21 MpBC tumor samples and found that PD-L1 expression was associated with a worse RFS and OS (HR 1.08, 95% CI 1.01-1.16 and 1.05, 95% CI 1.00-1.11, respectively) [28]. Overall, these findings describe the strong potential of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the treatment arsenal for MpBC. Some of the clinical trials described in Table 2 are taking advantage of immunotherapy as a promising therapeutic for MpBC (NCT02834013, NCT02752685).
## (s32) Radiation therapy
Number of References: 12

(p32.0) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.

(p32.1) There have been limited studies and guidelines regarding the use of radiation therapy (RT) in the adjuvant setting for MpBC, and unfortunately, the published studies have patient cohorts that are generally small. Tseng and Martinez conducted a retrospective study in which they investigated a cohort of MpBC patients treated from 1998 to 2006 (SEER database) and found that RT improved the OS of MpBC patients following lumpectomy or mastectomy [54]. A case series studying 18 patients with MpBC showed that patients who underwent postoperative RT had longer overall survival than patients who did not receive RT [55]. A retrospective cohort study by Li and colleagues in 2019 investigated 2267 patients diagnosed with MpBC between 1998 and 2015 from the SEER database and found that MpBC patients who received RT had a better OS and breast cancer-specific survival compared to those not treated with RT, and this effect was seen particularly in large tumors and elderly patients [56]. However, these studies must be analyzed with caution as either these are retrospective studies, or the studies have a small sample size. To obtain a deeper understanding of how RT can truly benefit MpBC patients in the adjuvant setting, it would be valuable to conduct prospective studies with sufficient sample sizes and develop standardized RT guidelines.
