# Microsatellite Instability: A Review of Molecular Epidemiology and Implications for Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapy

CorpusID: 258167616 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a26071a9c2733c17ebfa14257d7f7e5de3288aca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a26071a9c2733c17ebfa14257d7f7e5de3288aca)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Pembrolizumab
Number of References: 6

(p8.0) The first observation of a MSI CRC patient having a three-year complete response to pembrolizumab therapy was published in 2013 [194]. More data on pembrolizumab efficacy in MSI CRC were collected in the KEYNOTE-016 trial. There were no objective responses in the cohort of 18 patients with MMR-proficient tumors [195]. Final analysis revealed that 21 of 40 (52%) MSI CRC patients responded to the therapy and 12% of patients achieved a complete response. No statistically significant difference in major endpoints was observed among patients with or without Lynch syndrome-associated tumors: ORR was 46% vs. 59% (p = 0.27), respectively, and hazard ratios for PFS and OS were 1.2 (p = 0.61) and 1.71 (p = 0.24), respectively. All patients were pretreated and had a progressive disease before entering the trial [105].

(p8.1) Results of the phase III randomized KEYNOTE-177 trial evaluating pembrolizumab efficacy in the first-line settings showed an ORR of 45% (n = 69) in patients receiving pembrolizumab and an ORR of 33% (n = 51) in patients receiving chemotherapy. Complete response rates were 13% and 4%, respectively. Median PFS was 16.5 months in pembrolizumab and 8.2 months in chemotherapy groups (HR 0.59). No statistically significant differences in OS were demonstrated, presumably due to the high crossover frequency between chemotherapy and pembrolizumab groups. Subgroup analysis did not reach sufficient statistical power to show the difference between BRAF or RAS mutant and wildtype tumors [196]. However, in an earlier publication of the results of this study, RAS mutant patients were shown to derive no benefit in terms of PFS. There was also a higher incidence of progressive disease in the pembrolizumab group compared to the control group (29% vs. 12%) [197]. Based on the interim results of this trial, pembrolizumab was approved by the FDA for the first-line treatment of patients with MSI CRC in 2020 [198].
## (s12) Tumor Types other Than Colorectal
Number of References: 3

(p12.0) The second most common cancer with high prevalence of the MSI phenotype is endometrial carcinoma (EC). The efficacy of pembrolizumab for the treatment of metastatic MSI EC was established in the KEYNOTE-158 trial. In the pretreated patients (n = 79), the ORR was 48%, median PFS was 13.1 months, and median OS was not reached [220]. Pembrolizumab in combination with lenvatinib showed a numerically lower ORR in the KEYNOTE-775 trial. The study evaluated the efficacy of this combination in patients with pretreated EC with or without dMMR. In the dMMR cohort (n = 65), the ORR was 40%, compared to 12% in the chemotherapy cohort (n = 65) [221]. In the pMMR cohort (n = 346), the ORR was 30% in the experimental group and 15% in the chemotherapy group (n = 351) [221].
