# Plant Disease Diagnosing Based on Deep Learning Techniques: A Survey and Research Challenges

CorpusID: 256602521 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s7) F. Dataset
Number of References: 6

(p7.0) In the previous studies, various datasets have been used for plant disease classification and detection tasks. Some of those datasets are PlantVillage dataset, which contains healthy and diseased images of five crops, namely, apple (Liu, et al., 2017), corn, grape, potato, andtomato (FatihahSahidan, et al., 2019;Ramcharan, et al., 2017). In addition, the authors of (Ramcharan, et al., 2017) used cassava disease dataset, whereas the authors of (Saleem, et al., 2020) used ImageNet dataset. The authors of (Amara, Bouaziz and Algergawy, 2017) used a real banana disease dataset, in which they derived from the PlantVillage dataset. Several steps are required for the implementation of deep learning algorithms, as shown in Fig. 5 (Saleem, et al., 2020) that start from data collection to visualization mappings.
## (s13) E. Challenges of Plant Diseases
Number of References: 4

(p13.0) Plant disease management and pathology are faced with ever-growing challenges. On the one hand, agricultural productivity has reduced due to depleting natural resources and diminishing arable lands. On the other hand, due to increasing global population, requests for high quality and varied food have increased. In addition, the evolution and epidemics of plant diseases have globally increased due to intensification, resources such as water, fertilizer, and pesticides (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016). Plant diseases and pests are the major reason that lead to substantial economic losses and reduced plant yields. In technological advancements, the theories of plant diseases and pest diagnoses such as detection and classification have been developed from symptoms and signs of the diseases (Balodi, et al., 2017).

(p13.1) In the future, plant disease management plans, such as an accurate plant disease recognition, are important and must be emphasized more for societal development, food security globalization, climate change, and disease prevention. In the field of plant pathology advancements, some new avenues for specific and sensitive plant diagnosis procedures have been developed that are coupled with molecular biology, bioinformatics, and biotechnology (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016;Balodi, et al., 2017).
