# Pathogenic viruses of the respiratory tract -A review Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Disease

CorpusID: 2678576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515cd2abd2ee20487987dc6caf02342f4ee15f33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/515cd2abd2ee20487987dc6caf02342f4ee15f33)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Environmental Science

## (s9) Enterovirus and Parechovirus
Number of References: 3

(p9.0) Enterovirus and Parechovirus are single-stranded positive-sense RNA viruses of the Picornaviridae family. The genus Enterovirus and Parechovirus have been shown to have 63 and 4 distinct members, respectively. Enteroviruses are prevalent worldwide infecting an estimated 1 billion people each year. These infections are common in infants and young children especially under the age of 1 year [56]. Enterovirus infections can cause a range of disease conditions starting from mild respiratory symptoms [57] to serious forms such as poliomyelitis and aseptic meningitis. Although Parechoviruses mainly cause respiratory tract and gastrointestinal infections [56] human parechoviruses can cause acute flaccid paralysis and severe encephalitis.
## (s12) Human bocavirus (hBoV)
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) Human bocavirus is a single-stranded DNA virus of the Parvoviridae family. Human bocavirus was discovered by Allander et al. using a large-scale molecular viral screening and DNase Sequence Independent Single Primer Amplification (SISPA) technique [8]. Based on several studies it was found that about 2%-19% of respiratory tract infections were caused by hBoV. Bocavirus infections are detected mainly by molecular techniques [63] as it is not yet possible to grow isolates in cell culture.
