# The Effectiveness of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices in Biomedical Sciences on Students' Learning Experience: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 260027043 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc01ab0e5d5dbbff4c15d4a8d2ef22d5dd077659](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc01ab0e5d5dbbff4c15d4a8d2ef22d5dd077659)

Fields: Medicine, Education

## (s13) Students' Performance
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) The EBTPs implemented in the studies had significant effects on students' performance, which was determined by evaluating either pass and fail rates or grades for the enrolled units. Postintervention, statistically significant results were noted in the mean test scores denoting significant improvement in performance. One study, that implemented a pre-lecture screencast with a multiple-choice question (MCQ) quiz, showed improvement in average grades for MCQ quizzes from the first attempt to last attempt (Kinsella, Mahon, & Lillis, 2017). However, there was no noticeable impact on academic achievement when compared to the previous year. Possible reasons suggested by the authors are the learners' varied levels of prior knowledge, and pre-lecture screencasts not being a part of continual assessment. These factors may have deterred students from engaging with the screencast resources. Two studies revealed a significant increase in knowledge retention (Kulak & Newton, 2015;Raupach et al., 2016). Of equal importance was the difference in the academic achievement noted in strongly-performing and poorly-performing students that was found in a study conducted by Carrasco, Behling, and Lopez (2019). The strongly-performing students benefitted from group work, while poorlyperforming students benefitted from individual work when preparing for Readiness Assurance Test exercises (Carrasco et al., 2019).
