# Predicting risk and outcomes for frail older adults: an umbrella review of frailty screening tools Methodological quality

CorpusID: 32235281 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Methodological quality
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Two independent reviewers assessed methodological quality of 10 reviews. The authors of eight of them were contacted to obtain more details in relation to missing or unclear data. Three authors replied. The answer obtained from one of the authors did not satisfy the mandatory criteria for inclusion in this umbrella review. Besides this review, four other reviews were excluded. Appendix II lists the reviews that were excluded based on critical appraisal and the reasons for the exclusion. There was general agreement among the reviewers to include the five reviews. All included reviews stated clearly and explicitly the review question (Q1), performed the search process in adequate sources of studies (Q4), used appropriate criteria for appraising studies (Q5), delivered recommendations for policy and/or practice that were supported by the reported data (Q10) and indicated appropriate specific directives for new research (Q11). In one review, 37 the inclusion criteria were not sufficiently detailed to decide whether they were appropriate or not for the review question, being evaluated as unclear (Q2). One unclear answer was also obtained in relation to the question addressing the issue of appropriateness of search strategy (Q3). 36 One review 36 provided insufficient information in relation to the critical appraisal process, and unclear whether this process was conducted by two or more independent reviewers or not (Q6). The lack of sufficient information was also observed with respect to the data extraction process in three reviews 36,37,39 that did not specify their method for minimizing errors in data extraction (Q7). One review 36 provided unclear information on the reasons why the method to combine the studies was chosen (Q8). None of the included reviews evaluated likelihood of publication bias (Q9). Table 1 shows the results of the methodological quality assessment of included reviews.
## (s34) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
Number of References: 11

(p34.0) Mortality Risk Index was evaluated in terms of its capacity to predict two-year mortality after presentation to the emergency department, with two thresholds (!3 or 5) used to define ''abnormality'' (the review authors 38 did not specify the concept of abnormality). This measure lacked prognostic accuracy to predict the risk of adverse outcome. 38 Donini Index of Frailty, Winograd Index of Frailty and Schoevaerdts Index of Frailty were analyzed for institutionalization or mortality at 12 months after admission to emergency department and were revealed not to be sufficiently accurate to predict increased risk of any of these adverse outcomes. 38 Rowland and Runciman instruments were examined for returns to the emergency department, hospital readmission, mortality or different combinations of these adverse outcomes at six months after admission to the emergency department. Both instruments were shown to have insufficient ability to predict the indicated outcomes of interest. 38 The CSHA Clinical Frailty Scale was assessed as a predictor of hospital readmission at 30 or 90 days, and was shown to be an inaccurate predictor of this adverse health outcome. The measure of self-rated health stratified as bad (fair/poor) or non-bad (good/excellent) was screened in terms of its predictive ability for return to emergency department at 30 and 90 days after admission. It was shown not to be associated with an increased risk of adverse outcome. 38 The predictive ability of Silver Code was examined in two different studies. 38 One of these studies defined as outcomes of interest returns to emergency department, hospital re-admission, mortality or different combinations of these, and considered results obtained six months after admission to an emergency department. Another study focused on risk of mortality at 12 months after the episode in an emergency department. In both studies, thresholds of !4 and !11 were used to define ''abnormality''. Regardless of threshold and follow-up interval, Silver Code was revealed to have insufficient prognostic accuracy to predict increased risk of adverse outcomes.

(p34.1) Four studies assessed predictive ability of Variables Indicative of Placement Risk. 38 Three studies focused on outcome of hospital re-admission at 30 days using ''abnormality'' thresholds of !1, !2 and !3. Inter-study heterogeneity was evaluated based on data reported in only two of these studies. For the purpose of meta-analysis, threshold of !1 was considered. Pooled estimates of sensitivity (79; 95% CI 69-86) and specificity (18; 95% CI 15-21) demonstrated variable statistical heterogeneity with I 2 ranging from 0 to 99.5%. Based on pooled estimates of LRþ (0.98; 95% CI 0.83-1.17) and LRÀ (1.11; 95% CI 0.59-2.09), the measure Variables Indicative of Placement Risk was considered not sufficiently accurate to predict increased risk of hospital re-admission at 30 days after presentation to the emergency department. The results of the study not considered in meta-analysis pointed in the same direction. 38 Moreover, two studies examined Variables Indicative of Placement Risk for functional decline at 30 days using ''abnormality'' thresholds of !1 and !2. Data reported in these studies were meta-analyzed. I 2 ranging from 0 to 99.5% (sensitivity: 82; 95% CI 77-86; specificity: 37; 95% CI 33-42) indicated significant statistical heterogeneity. Pooled estimates of LRþ (1.92; 95% CI 0.58-6.41) and LRÀ (0.63; 95% CI 0.50-0.78) demonstrated that predictive ability of Variables Indicative of Placement Risk for outcome of interest was not sufficient to be clinically useful. 38 Several studies assessed predictive ability of Triage Risk Screening Tool. 38 Outcomes of interest considered in these studies included returns to the emergency department, functional decline, hospital re-admission and different combinations of these adverse outcomes. The follow-up intervals varied from 30 to 180 days. The thresholds for ''abnormality'' were defined based on one, two or three affirmative responses; however, for the purpose of metaanalysis, only threshold of !2 was used. The pooled estimates of sensitivity and specificity for all outcomes at all follow-up intervals demonstrated statistically significant heterogeneity (I 2 often >50%).  38 Because of different thresholds for ''abnormality'', data from the few studies addressing Triage Risk Screening Tool were not considered in metaanalysis. 38 These studies assessed predictive ability for hospital re-admission, functional decline and any adverse outcomes at 30 days after admission to the emergency department. In no case was the Triage Risk Screening Tool revealed to have sufficient accuracy to be clinically useful.
## (s36) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
Number of References: 3

(p36.0) years for chair stands. Predictive ability of 3608 turn, bending over, foot taps and hand signature was analyzed at 12 months after evaluation. 39 Regarding muscle strength or hand grip strength, the reported findings were inconsistent. 39 Three studies with follow-up periods of three, four and eight years concluded that grip strength was not a significant predictor of disability in activities of daily living. In seven studies with follow-up periods from three to nine years, grip strength was found to be associated with higher risk of developing disability in activities of daily living. Exhaustion was analyzed in a single study, with follow-up of eight years, which was the only frailty indicator that was shown not to be a significant predictor of disability in activities on daily living. 39 Findings related to predictive ability of frailty indicators are summarized in Table 11.
