# Chapter 10 CHAPTER OVERVIEW SURVEILLANCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES USING SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CLUSTERING METHODS

CorpusID: 61192667 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c97ba82b410e28129ff51fa614f49ce03fd4cfcc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c97ba82b410e28129ff51fa614f49ce03fd4cfcc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s12) Local Clustering Test
Number of References: 2

(p12.0) This method can provide definitive information on the specific location of clusters derived from local autocorrelation indices to evaluate clustering trends of an interested variable or factor, particularly under the condition with unidentified source of the infection, by determining whether the data values equal to 1 represent spatial independence for each point, values less used as the screening tool for clusters in global testing. It is generally used to are spatially similar or different at that specific area/site [16]. Practically, public health personnel can use this method to define the risk areas of a of dengue in 2002 in Taiwan was fast spreading. First, we investigated whether clustering occurred using the "global cluster" test. Then, the boundary between Kaohsiung City and Kaohsiung County was identified by "local cluster" test, and prevention and control efforts were immediately implemented. In infectious disease epidemiology, the local clustering test is very useful in investigating not only the source of the infection but also potentially unidentified risk areas that might facilitate subsequent diffusion and further spread of cases.
## (s19) Space-Time Scan Statistic
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Space-Time Scan Statistic [16], an improved version of the purely spatial scan method, is defined by a cylindrical window with a circular geographic base and with height corresponding to time. The base will vary the radius continuously. The height reflects any possible time interval of less than or equal to half the total study period. The likelihood in each cylinder will be A d value greater than 1.96 indicates that there is a statistically significant cluster at p-value 0.05. calculated. Using the cylinder with the maximum likelihood, and then selecting the tempo-spatial one with more than its expected number of cases, Comparing the Knox and space-time distance methods, the Knox method categorizes the individual case's space-time distance into several groups and The space-time scan statistic, a purely spatial scan, uses the cylinder as the scanning window and the height is time. It scans over the study area by the different radii of the base to calculate the observed values in different areas. The expected value can be calculated by Monte Carlo simulation. Finally, the question on tempo-spatial clusters can be tested to determine whether the observed value exceeds the expected value. For example, if point data of individual cases from outbreaks of infectious diseases such as dengue or enterovirus-related cases are available, the Knox method is very suitable to apply. Alternatively, when an overall incidence or prevalence rate from different geographical regions rather than individual case data is available, the space-time scan method is more appropriate to use.

(p19.1) Space-Time Scan Statistic [16], an improved version of the purely spatial scan method, is defined by a cylindrical window with a circular geographic base and with height corresponding to time. The base will vary the radius continuously. The height reflects any possible time interval of less than or equal to half the total study period. The likelihood in each cylinder will be A d value greater than 1.96 indicates that there is a statistically significant cluster at p-value 0.05. calculated. Using the cylinder with the maximum likelihood, and then selecting the tempo-spatial one with more than its expected number of cases, Comparing the Knox and space-time distance methods, the Knox method categorizes the individual case's space-time distance into several groups and The space-time scan statistic, a purely spatial scan, uses the cylinder as the scanning window and the height is time. It scans over the study area by the different radii of the base to calculate the observed values in different areas. The expected value can be calculated by Monte Carlo simulation. Finally, the question on tempo-spatial clusters can be tested to determine whether the observed value exceeds the expected value. For example, if point data of individual cases from outbreaks of infectious diseases such as dengue or enterovirus-related cases are available, the Knox method is very suitable to apply. Alternatively, when an overall incidence or prevalence rate from different geographical regions rather than individual case data is available, the space-time scan method is more appropriate to use.
## (s26) EID: Avian Influenza as an Example
Number of References: 8

(p26.0) Avian influenza has been an increasing public health threat since the cross-country spread during 2003-2004. Between October 2005 and June 2006, 161 outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 occurred in poultry villages of Romania [37]. Using two combined temporal and geostatistical methods, Anselin's local indicator of spatial autocorrelation statistics (LISA) for area-type data and space-time permutation scan statistic for point-type data, the clusters of H5N1 were identified. The former method focuses only on spatial clusters and the latter method simultaneously considers temporal and spatial clusters. The space-time permutation scan statistic method is particularly useful in infectious diseases with shorter incubation period but closely associated with large-scope ecology and also in those situations where the numbers of populations at risk is unknown in syndromic surveillance [18]. The results found that the locations of the clusters were different by using the two different cluster algorithms (Figure 10-7a and b). The origin, evolution and increasing spread of the epidemic can be grasped more clearly. The outbreak first appeared in the region of the Danube River Delta by the introduction of the virus, implying the importance of landscape epidemiology. Then, the movement of poultry might facilitate its further spread to central Romania the next year. Using the spatio-temporal methods, the progression of the outbreak from a confined, local epidemic extended to a large, nationwide epidemic can be fully understood. Such efforts are very helpful to minimize the spread of the next H5N1 epidemic in other countries and the future global spread of HPAI H5N1 viruses. To summarize the analysis of temporal and spatial clusters for infectious diseases with different modes of transmission, both the transmissibility and pathogenicity of the microbial agents are the key factors to determine the best method to be selected. For the diseases with high transmissibility and high pathogenicity, the rapidly cross-geographical spread shown by a crosssectional map with the appearance of cases might indicate an emerging infectious disease which needs to use integrated spatio-temporal clustering methods for further data analysis. For the diseases with low transmissibility indicator of spatial autocorrelation statistic [37]. (b) Three clusters (open circle) of HPAI 2006, were identified by the space-time permutation scan statistic [37]. and high pathogenicity, the spatial clustering method can capture the distribution of the cases. For the diseases with high transmissibility and low pathogenicity, temporal clustering methods would need to be used to obtain warning signals as early as possible.
## (s30) Data Collection and Quality of GIS Data
Number of References: 4

(p30.0) In data collection, timely data and "modifiable area unit problem" (MAUP)similar to ecological fallacies in epidemiology -are the two major barriers. Available timely data are important to fast-spreading infectious diseases such as most respiratory infections. In addition, the high quality of GIS data is another limitation in many developing countries. By contrast, those pointed address data of cases related to privacy are generally inaccessible in developed countries. Most importantly, for infectious diseases involving higher social stigma or patients' private life such as tuberculosis, sexual transmitted disease (STD) or AIDS, the pointed data for spatial cluster analysis will be very difficult to obtain. Then, the problem of spatial precision or polygon data will make it very hard to investigate the evolution of the outbreak by time and place simultaneously or to search for interesting hypotheses. Since most public health systems are governed by local departments, it is very likely those surveillance data are frequently aggregated into administrative units. Unfortunately, different densities and distribution patterns of disease, such as cholera in Figure 10-8, exhibited from different aggregated administration unclear at the initial stage of disease outbreaks [38]. The subsequent cases after the introduction of prevention and/or control measures can also be carefully evaluated to verify the most effective strategy, using time-based integrated surveillance data. The visualized dynamic distributions of cases in various time periods and places at different levels of the public health system, from local, state/provincial to national and international, can be presented to generate hypotheses and to verify the success of containing the outbreak for decision-makers. Most importantly, evidence of spatial clustering along with other epidemiological findings and laboratory tests may indicate a possible infectious etiology for emerging infectious disease, similar to Epstein Barr virus for Hodgkin's disease [39].
## (s59) Local Clustering Test
Number of References: 2

(p59.0) This method can provide definitive information on the specific location of clusters derived from local autocorrelation indices to evaluate clustering trends of an interested variable or factor, particularly under the condition with unidentified source of the infection, by determining whether the data values equal to 1 represent spatial independence for each point, values less used as the screening tool for clusters in global testing. It is generally used to are spatially similar or different at that specific area/site [16]. Practically, public health personnel can use this method to define the risk areas of a of dengue in 2002 in Taiwan was fast spreading. First, we investigated whether clustering occurred using the "global cluster" test. Then, the boundary between Kaohsiung City and Kaohsiung County was identified by "local cluster" test, and prevention and control efforts were immediately implemented. In infectious disease epidemiology, the local clustering test is very useful in investigating not only the source of the infection but also potentially unidentified risk areas that might facilitate subsequent diffusion and further spread of cases.
## (s66) Space-Time Scan Statistic
Number of References: 4

(p66.0) Space-Time Scan Statistic [16], an improved version of the purely spatial scan method, is defined by a cylindrical window with a circular geographic base and with height corresponding to time. The base will vary the radius continuously. The height reflects any possible time interval of less than or equal to half the total study period. The likelihood in each cylinder will be A d value greater than 1.96 indicates that there is a statistically significant cluster at p-value 0.05. calculated. Using the cylinder with the maximum likelihood, and then selecting the tempo-spatial one with more than its expected number of cases, Comparing the Knox and space-time distance methods, the Knox method categorizes the individual case's space-time distance into several groups and The space-time scan statistic, a purely spatial scan, uses the cylinder as the scanning window and the height is time. It scans over the study area by the different radii of the base to calculate the observed values in different areas. The expected value can be calculated by Monte Carlo simulation. Finally, the question on tempo-spatial clusters can be tested to determine whether the observed value exceeds the expected value. For example, if point data of individual cases from outbreaks of infectious diseases such as dengue or enterovirus-related cases are available, the Knox method is very suitable to apply. Alternatively, when an overall incidence or prevalence rate from different geographical regions rather than individual case data is available, the space-time scan method is more appropriate to use.

(p66.1) Space-Time Scan Statistic [16], an improved version of the purely spatial scan method, is defined by a cylindrical window with a circular geographic base and with height corresponding to time. The base will vary the radius continuously. The height reflects any possible time interval of less than or equal to half the total study period. The likelihood in each cylinder will be A d value greater than 1.96 indicates that there is a statistically significant cluster at p-value 0.05. calculated. Using the cylinder with the maximum likelihood, and then selecting the tempo-spatial one with more than its expected number of cases, Comparing the Knox and space-time distance methods, the Knox method categorizes the individual case's space-time distance into several groups and The space-time scan statistic, a purely spatial scan, uses the cylinder as the scanning window and the height is time. It scans over the study area by the different radii of the base to calculate the observed values in different areas. The expected value can be calculated by Monte Carlo simulation. Finally, the question on tempo-spatial clusters can be tested to determine whether the observed value exceeds the expected value. For example, if point data of individual cases from outbreaks of infectious diseases such as dengue or enterovirus-related cases are available, the Knox method is very suitable to apply. Alternatively, when an overall incidence or prevalence rate from different geographical regions rather than individual case data is available, the space-time scan method is more appropriate to use.
## (s73) EID: Avian Influenza as an Example
Number of References: 8

(p73.0) Avian influenza has been an increasing public health threat since the cross-country spread during 2003-2004. Between October 2005 and June 2006, 161 outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) H5N1 occurred in poultry villages of Romania [37]. Using two combined temporal and geostatistical methods, Anselin's local indicator of spatial autocorrelation statistics (LISA) for area-type data and space-time permutation scan statistic for point-type data, the clusters of H5N1 were identified. The former method focuses only on spatial clusters and the latter method simultaneously considers temporal and spatial clusters. The space-time permutation scan statistic method is particularly useful in infectious diseases with shorter incubation period but closely associated with large-scope ecology and also in those situations where the numbers of populations at risk is unknown in syndromic surveillance [18]. The results found that the locations of the clusters were different by using the two different cluster algorithms (Figure 10-7a and b). The origin, evolution and increasing spread of the epidemic can be grasped more clearly. The outbreak first appeared in the region of the Danube River Delta by the introduction of the virus, implying the importance of landscape epidemiology. Then, the movement of poultry might facilitate its further spread to central Romania the next year. Using the spatio-temporal methods, the progression of the outbreak from a confined, local epidemic extended to a large, nationwide epidemic can be fully understood. Such efforts are very helpful to minimize the spread of the next H5N1 epidemic in other countries and the future global spread of HPAI H5N1 viruses. To summarize the analysis of temporal and spatial clusters for infectious diseases with different modes of transmission, both the transmissibility and pathogenicity of the microbial agents are the key factors to determine the best method to be selected. For the diseases with high transmissibility and high pathogenicity, the rapidly cross-geographical spread shown by a crosssectional map with the appearance of cases might indicate an emerging infectious disease which needs to use integrated spatio-temporal clustering methods for further data analysis. For the diseases with low transmissibility indicator of spatial autocorrelation statistic [37]. (b) Three clusters (open circle) of HPAI 2006, were identified by the space-time permutation scan statistic [37]. and high pathogenicity, the spatial clustering method can capture the distribution of the cases. For the diseases with high transmissibility and low pathogenicity, temporal clustering methods would need to be used to obtain warning signals as early as possible.
## (s77) Data Collection and Quality of GIS Data
Number of References: 4

(p77.0) In data collection, timely data and "modifiable area unit problem" (MAUP)similar to ecological fallacies in epidemiology -are the two major barriers. Available timely data are important to fast-spreading infectious diseases such as most respiratory infections. In addition, the high quality of GIS data is another limitation in many developing countries. By contrast, those pointed address data of cases related to privacy are generally inaccessible in developed countries. Most importantly, for infectious diseases involving higher social stigma or patients' private life such as tuberculosis, sexual transmitted disease (STD) or AIDS, the pointed data for spatial cluster analysis will be very difficult to obtain. Then, the problem of spatial precision or polygon data will make it very hard to investigate the evolution of the outbreak by time and place simultaneously or to search for interesting hypotheses. Since most public health systems are governed by local departments, it is very likely those surveillance data are frequently aggregated into administrative units. Unfortunately, different densities and distribution patterns of disease, such as cholera in Figure 10-8, exhibited from different aggregated administration unclear at the initial stage of disease outbreaks [38]. The subsequent cases after the introduction of prevention and/or control measures can also be carefully evaluated to verify the most effective strategy, using time-based integrated surveillance data. The visualized dynamic distributions of cases in various time periods and places at different levels of the public health system, from local, state/provincial to national and international, can be presented to generate hypotheses and to verify the success of containing the outbreak for decision-makers. Most importantly, evidence of spatial clustering along with other epidemiological findings and laboratory tests may indicate a possible infectious etiology for emerging infectious disease, similar to Epstein Barr virus for Hodgkin's disease [39].
