# A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue A review of acoustic imaging methods using phased microphone arrays Part of the "Aircraft Noise Generation and Assessment" Special Issue

CorpusID: 69840714 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3a4345b524efe03d0ae514474e13be0e45ea6ea)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s6) Reynolds number dependence
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.
## (s70) Reynolds number dependence
Number of References: 2

(p70.0) In standard wind-tunnel measurements, a sole discrepancy in Reynolds number at otherwise similar conditions can lead to a difference in results. The effect of a varying Reynolds number on the noise generated was investigated by Ahlefeldt [62]. Here, acoustic measurements were performed on a small-scale aircraft model in high-lift configuration at both a real-flight Reynolds number and a lower Reynolds number corresponding to the standard wind-tunnel conditions. Measurements were performed in the European Transonic Wind tunnel (ETW) which, due to its pressurized and cryogenic environment, enabled a variation of Reynolds number up to real-flight Reynolds numbers. Other parameters were kept unchanged. Thus, Reynolds number effects on aeroacoustic behavior were separated from the effects of model fidelity and Mach number M. Several sources with significant Reynolds number dependence were found and exemplary differences at selected Strouhal numbers are shown in Fig. 2. Several dominant sources can be found at the real-flight Reynolds number, but are not present at standard conditions. Contrary to that, sources are present in the standard measurement but not at the real-flight Reynolds number, as can be seen for example in the slat region. Locally integrated sources from the slat and the flap are shown in Fig. 3. The strong tonal components in the spectrum in the slat region measured at the standard wind-tunnel conditions (lower Reynolds number) disappeared at real-flight Reynolds numbers.
