# A review of total energy-momenta in GR with a positive cosmological constant *

CorpusID: 119533555 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de7d069f62daa26ef249fe4032dddbaf2170f416)

Fields: Physics

## (s11) Fields on de Sitter background
(p11.0) In Yang-Mills theory on the de Sitter background the meaning of the vanishing of the magnetic field strength on I + , i.e. the meaning of the analog of the condition of the intrinsic conformal flatness of I + , is investigated in [21]. It is shown that this condition removes half the degrees of freedom of the Yang-Mills field; and all the ten de Sitter fluxes, built from the energy-momentum tensor and the ten conformal Killing fields of I + , vanish. A systematic investigation of the Maxwell fields on and of the linear gravitational perturbation of the (steady state part of the) de Sitter spacetime are given in [50]. The covariant phase space method is used to obtain a Hamiltonian for them, in which the 'time translation' is a Killing field which is future pointing timelike only in the intersection of the chronological past of the point (0, 0, 0) of I + and the steady state universe, but spacelike on the interior of the rest of the steady state universe. The resulting energy flux through I + can be negative and arbitrarily large. The requirement of the vanishing of the magnetic field strength, and of the magnetic part of the rescaled Weyl curvature on I + , removes half the degrees of freedom of the Maxwell and linear gravitational perturbations, respectively, and yields vanishing energy flux through I + [50]. Here the 'energy' is defined by using the Killing field (2.2). For a single, isolated source located at the origin, and in the absence of incoming gravitational waves through the null boundary of the steady state part of the de Sitter spacetime, which is the physical situation of principal interest in the body of work here referred to, this energy is proven to be positive. Under the same assumptions, and following a tour de force of calculation, in [51] a generalisation of the Einstein quadrupole formula is derived and discussed. The summary of these results is given in [52,53]. For the calculation of the Penrose mass at a cut of I + in the linearized theory, see [47] and subsection 4.1 below.
## (s15) A spinorial expression of Kastor and Traschen
(p15.0) Using the original Dirac spinor form of the Nester-Witten form [26,25], the Witten-type energy positivity proof of [30], originally given for Λ < 0, has been successfully adapted to the Λ > 0 case and yielded a positivity argument by Kastor and Traschen in [49] (see also [57]). Here, the energy-momentum tensor of the matter fields is assumed to satisfy the dominant energy condition, and, as the boundary condition for the (modified) Witten equation, the Dirac spinor constituents Ψ of the conformal Killing vectors of the background de Sitter spacetime are used.

(p15.1) A generalization C a of the conserved currentK b t ba of subsection 3.1, built from t ab , the 'perturbation' γ ab and an arbitrary vector field ξ a , is also given in [49]: this C a is ∇ a -divergence free, and if ξ a is chosen to be a Killing vector of the de Sitter background, then it reduces toK a t ab . Then, it is shown that the flux integral of C b on Σ with the conformal Killing vector ξ a determined by the Dirac spinor Ψ coincides with the spinorial construction above. Therefore, the present spinorial expression of these authors is a nontrivial generalization of the original construction in [35].
## (s16) Asymptotically-Schwarzschild/Kerr-de Sitter data: work of Chruściel and collaborators
(p16.0) Chruściel with a range of collaborators has been investigating definitions of mass in a variety of space-times with Λ positive, negative or zero for many years. The investigations are typically motivated by adherence to a Hamiltonian approach to space-times, following the monograph [59], analysing Cauchy data to arrive at definitions of mass and momentum. In this subsection we review their work on asymptotically-Schwarzschild-de Sitter data and asymptotically-Kerr-de Sitter data. These are discussed in [60] and [61] respectively and these in turn rely on families of initial data for the Einstein equations shown to exist in [62] and [63] respectively. The Schwarzschild-de Sitter metric, sometimes called the Kottler solution, can be defined in space-time dimension n + 1 as
## (s19) Three Suggestions of Penrose
(p19.0) In [46] Penrose considered the problem of defining a cosmological total mass in the presence of a positive cosmological constant. He was motivated, at least in part, by his Conformal Cyclic Cosmology (or CCC) rather than by a consideration of isolated systems, which was the motivation of Ashtekar and colleagues considered above. Thus Penrose sought a definition at I + of one aeon which was suitable for carrying through to the next aeon. Interestingly, Penrose considered but rejected the idea of working in a Poincaré patch and using the Killing vector of the steady-state universe to define energy (section 3 of [46]) because galaxies beyond the cosmological event horizon, where this Killing vector is space-like, would be represented as having super-luminal velocities. This could be a problem in a cosmological setting but one that Ashtekar et. al. avoid by considering only isolated bodies.

(p19.1) Penrose makes three concrete suggestions: (1) To seek an expression motivated by the conserved currents that one constructs from a trace-free energy-momentum tensor and a conformal Killing vector of de Sitter space. In CCC one expects matter to become massless near I + , so that T ab will become trace-free, and in de Sitter space there do exist time-like conformal Killing vectors. This suggestion is not worked out in detail but the insight also underlay the earlier work of [49], [55] and [57].
