# Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review. Molecular Signatures of Natural Selection for Polymorphic Genes of the Human Dopaminergic and Serotonergic Systems: A Review

CorpusID: 11989608 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/366642d57032ebe4bc77bd48b4f93859373238f8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s10) Balancing Selection
(p10.0) Several genome scans studies have focused on detecting signals of balancing selection in human evolution (e.g., Andrés et al., 2009;Leffler et al., 2013;DeGiorgio et al., 2014). Leffler et al. (2013) looked for evidence of very long-term balancing selection through polymorphisms shared in both humans and common chimpanzees. Only two of the polymorphic SNPs they identified were associated with human neurotransmitter genes, both with the upstream (promoter) region of the serotonin receptor HTR2A. However, both of these polymorphisms (rs6311 and rs36213156) are C/T polymorphisms associated with CpG dinucleotides, that is sites with a C and a G nucleotide adjacent in a DNA strand. Such sites are associated with a particularly high rate of mutation, particularly transitions such as a change of the cytosine residue to a thymine (Nachman and Crowell, 2000). This increases the likelihood that the observed polymorphisms are shared between humans and chimpanzees due to recurrent mutation, rather than by balancing selection that has been maintained since prior to speciation (Leffler et al., 2013).
## (s11) Positive Selection
(p11.0) The strongest evidence for positive selection in a human neurotransmitter gene is for the serotonin transporter SLC6A4. Claw et al. (2010) found that the population genetics of one haplotype of this gene, which they termed "S/12/G, " had a set of distinctive features. For a common haplotype (36% in their global sample), there was a significantly low degree of SNP variation compared to other haplotypes of the SLC6A4 gene. The 36% global frequency also appears quite high (in absence of positive selection) for a haplotype with an estimated most recent common ancestor at 19 kya (Claw et al., 2010). Coalescent simulations further suggest that the patterns of SNP diversity, haplotype frequency and geographic variation in haplotype frequencies across populations could not be explained by a combination of neutral and demographic processes (Claw et al., 2010). Crespi et al. (2007) examined 76 genes putatively associated with schizophrenia risk for evidence of positive selection. They queried the Haplotter database, representing analyses using an extended-haplotype based test (iHS) in one sample each representing African, Asian and European populations (Voight et al., 2006). Genes examined included COMT, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, MAOA, SLC6A4, and TPH1. SLC6A4 was in a region with a signal of positive selection for both the European and Asian samples. In all, 14 of the 76 genes examined showed signals of positive selection, but SLC6A4 was the only one of our genes of interest to do so. Murdoch et al. (2013) also identified a signal of selection in the region of SLC6A4 in the Haplotter data, although they argued that selection may have actual been for a nearby, linked gene.
