# Mechanisms of immunosuppression by mesenchymal stromal cells: a review with a focus on molecules MSCs and their immunomodulatory capabilities

CorpusID: 12906655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4)

Fields: Chemistry, Biology, Medicine

## (s10) ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
(p10.0) It is important to understand the adhesion molecules that are responsible for MSC-lymphocyte binding. Ren et al. [120] showed that ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 induction in mouse BM-MSCs, using the supernatant of activated T cells, could be blocked by an anti-IFN-γ antibody. Neither anti-TNF-α nor anti-IL-1α showed this inhibition, but the latter cytokines acted synergistically to induce high expression of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 in MSCs. ICAM-1-deficient MSCs had a significantly reduced immunosuppressive effect in an OVA-challenged mouse model. ICAM-1 is likely to have many uncharacterized roles. Using an immune-complex-mediated vasculitis murine model, Jiang et al. [121] showed that MSCs suppressed neutrophil activation. This suppression was due to ICAM-1-dependent engulfment of neutrophils by MSCs. They further showed that MSCs constitutively release SOD3, a soluble extracellular form of superoxide dismutase, which can detoxify the superoxide anion radical. This data suggests that MSCs mount an adaptive antioxidant SOD3 response to protect themselves from the threat of neutrophil oxidative burst.
## (s13) PD-L1 and PD-L2
(p13.0) Several studies including have drawn an attention to the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) pathway. Augello et al. [138] showed that co-culturing of BM-MSC with allogeneic splenocytes and PHA increased programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and PD-L2, although only a part of BM-MSCs showed expression due to heterogeneity. Antibodies blocking PD-1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 showed restoration of the T cell proliferation in the presence of MSCs. Importance of PD-L1 secreted by mouse MSCs is also highlighted by Sheng et al. [139] in the context of IFN-γ priming effect (see below). Priming with TNF-α alone showed no PD-L1 increase [139].
## (s15) microRNA
(p15.0) An increasing number of studies are focusing on involvement of microRNAs (miRs) in the regulation of several immune responses in both innate and acquired immunity [11]. Association of miRs with developmental stages of MSCs is under intensive investigations, and on the other hand, considerable attentions are directed to extracellular vesicles that can transfer miRs to other cells [145,146]. Levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in placental MSCs from preeclampsia (PE) patients have been shown to be higher than in ones from normal women [148]. Wang et al. [149] and Chen et al. [150] showed miR-16 and miR-494, respectively, could inhibit the proliferation and migration of MSCs from severe PE patients. In Wang et al. [149], for example, increased expression of miR-16 in decidua-derived MSCs from severe PE patients relative to normal patients was observed. In their transfection analysis, over-expressed miR-16 inhibited the proliferation and migration of decidua-derived MSCs and induced cell-cycle arrest by targeting cyclin E1.
