# Molecular Sciences Nutrigenomics and Beef Quality: A Review about Lipogenesis

CorpusID: 14919998 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/783bdeaf3ab3820a4f3c6c222e710bdcfd62b301)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine, Biology

## (s9) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
(p9.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
## (s10) Transcription Factors and Lipid Metabolism in Beef Cattle
(p10.0) Several key events involved in the synthesis of fat in the animal tissues take place at the molecular level. The association of nutritional factors with the modulation of fat metabolism is one of the recent targets of nutrigenomic studies conducted with beef cattle. Within this context, special attention has been given to the study of nuclear receptors related to fatty acid metabolism [108][109][110][111][112][113]. Those receptors form an intracellular protein receptor superfamily included within the transcription factors class. Upon binding to the DNA, those factors allow RNA polymerase binding and transcription initiation. Such factors participate in several physiological functions, including homeostasis, reproduction, growth, differentiation, morphogenesis, apoptosis and metabolism [114].
