# Modulation of Fear Extinction by Stress, Stress Hormones and Estradiol: A Review

CorpusID: 17282833 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7af75741e584736819c73178d7f857fedbc52d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7af75741e584736819c73178d7f857fedbc52d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Psychology

## (s4) Brain Structures and Circuits Involved in Fear Extinction
(p4.0) Extinction, just as fear acquisition, is distributed over a network of structures, mainly covering the BLA, the hippocampus and parts of the mPFC, including the PL and the more ventral infralimbic cortex (IL) in rodents, and the dACC and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) as the corresponding structures in humans. Due to the underlying memory processes (consolidation, retrieval, reconsolidation) the involved neural circuits change over time (Maren and Holmes, 2016). While the same structures are involved in fear acquisition and fear extinction, different sets of neurons are assumed to act through different molecular mechanisms during fear acquisition and extinction (Maren and Holmes, 2016).

(p4.1) Besides fear acquisition, the amygdala is also involved in the acquisition, consolidation and retrieval of extinction . The hippocampus is the relevant site to recall contextual information. This becomes relevant because extinguished responses are often renewed in new contexts, differing from the original extinction context. Moreover, hippocampus and prefrontal cortex have a principal role in the regulation of the retrieval of both, fear acquisition and extinction memories (Fitzgerald et al., 2014). Concretely, the IL (in rodents) and the vmPFC (in humans) are vital structures (Tovote et al., 2015) for extinction recall (or fear suppression, Fitzgerald et al., 2014). The IL mPFC integrates CS-information with contextual information from the hippocampus to determine extinction retrieval. Thus, in the extinction context, the IL/vmPFC inhibits amygdala output to reduce the CR. The role of the IL specifically for extinction retrieval is under recent debate. A recent mice study by Do-Monte et al. (2015) showed that optogenetic silencing of glutamatergic IL neurons during cued extinction retrieval (1 day or 1 week after extinction acquisition) did not abolish retrieval. However, silencing IL neurons already during extinction acquisition impaired extinction retrieval on the following day. This supports the conclusion that-while relevant for the formation of extinction memory-the IL is not necessary for the retrieval of cued fear extinction. The one necessary structure for retrieval of cued extinction appears to be the amygdala. Moreover, these results are one example for recent data challenging the ''canonical view'' that dorsal regions (PL/dACC) of mPFC regulate fear expression and ventral regions (IL/vmPFC) fear suppression (for current reviews, see Likhtik and Paz, 2015;Giustino and Maren, 2015).
## (s12) Mediators of the First-Wave Stress Response Monoamines
(p12.0) Overview. There is increasing evidence that the monoamines, i.e., NA, DA, and 5-HT, which are involved in the (firstwave) stress response (see ''Features and mediators of the stress response'' Section), also have roles in fear extinction: projections from noradrenergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic fibers reach the main structures of the fear extinction network, the amygdala, the hippocampus, and the prefrontal cortex. Accordingly, administering agonists and/or antagonists of the respective monoamine transmitter in a fear extinction setting can elucidate the role of these monoamines. Moreover, experimental trials administering the respective drugs and testing their impact on extinction can serve as an experimental model for examining effects of the combination of drug therapy and behavioral exposure therapy (i.e., extinction learning). We will thus review animal data, preclinical data from healthy humans and clinical evidence from patient studies that address the therapeutic effects of the corresponding pharmacotherapy-also as an adjunct to cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)-in anxiety disorders and/or PTSD (see also the excellent reviews of Fitzgerald et al., 2014;Bowers and Ressler, 2015;Singewald et al., 2015).
## (s14) Opioids
(p14.0) Endogenous opioids (including endorphins, enkephalins, dynorphins and hemorphins; Singewald et al., 2015) are also involved in improving extinction learning ). An increase of endogenous opioids is among the quick (<1 min) changes after stressor exposure (e.g., Sapolsky et al., 2000). Thus, a stress-mediated increase of opioids might participate in stress-mediated improvement of extinction, mainly via stressors affecting the first-wave stress response.

(p14.1) Opioid receptors (µ-, κ-, and δ receptors) are expressed in extinction-relevant brain areas, i.e., in amygdala, prefrontal cortices, and the hippocampus (for a review, see Singewald et al., 2015). Interestingly, ITC show a high expression of µ-opioid receptors (Blaesse et al., 2015), further suggesting that µ-opioid signaling might contribute to an improvement of fear extinction. The ventrolateral PAG (vlPAG) is a main site of the opioid actions during extinction learning, and vlPAG opioids are assumed necessary for extinction learning to occur. A very convincing interpretation for the involvement of opioids in extinction learning is that omission of an expected aversive US is rewarding .
