# Influenza at the animal-human interface: a review of the literature for virological evidence of human infection with swine or avian influenza viruses other than A(H5N1)

CorpusID: 17673926 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24a61f2b0f9c516517bbfa3159dfcb1308e816](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa24a61f2b0f9c516517bbfa3159dfcb1308e816)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Influenza virus type A, a member of the family Orthomyxoviridae, is an enveloped virus with a negative-sense, single-stranded RNA genome organised in eight gene segments, which encode at least eleven proteins. Antigenic and genetic diversity of two surface glycoproteins, haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA), is used to classify type A influenza viruses into subtypes; 18 HA and 11 NA subtypes are known to date [1][2][3][4][5]. Water-and shorebirds were identified as reservoirs harbouring all subtypes, except A(H17N10) and A(H18N11) of which RNA was recently detected in bats from Guatemala and Peru, respectively [2,3]. Reservoir animals typically do not display symptoms. In contrast, the diversity of influenza viruses in mammalian hosts is limited to specific subtypes. Human-adapted seasonal influenza viruses since the beginning of the 20th century have had HA subtypes H1, H2 and H3, combined with NA subtypes N1 and N2.
## (s16) Conclusions
(p16.0) There is evidence of infection of humans with animal influenza viruses belonging to various subtypes. All reported SIV cases have been exclusively associated with subtypes H1 and H3, and most AIV cases were caused by subtypes H5 and H7. Whether this reflects the prevalence of these viruses in birds kept or sold for consumption or a preferential ability to transmit to humans cannot be concluded from the available evidence. Given the often, mild illness associated with non-H5 and non-H7 animal influenza virus infections in humans, such cases likely are underreported [120]. Standardisation of diagnostic methods has significantly improved case ascertainment in recent years, but the monitoring of the evolution of these viruses is less advanced. Recent research pointed out that the majority of Asian and African countries have contributed only few sequences to surveillance networks and do not regularly sequence viruses as part of their surveillance programme [121]. Genetic sequencing is paramount to identifying changes with potential effect on the phenotype of circulating influenza viruses, and could thereby strengthen worldwide epidemic and pandemic preparedness [121]. To be prepared for a potentially emerging influenza virus of animal origin in humans, enhanced global surveillance in animal populations is therefore indicated to monitor evolution and circulation of viruses with yet unknown public health risks.
