# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Archaeal/Eukaryal RNase P: subunits, functions and RNA diversification

CorpusID: 18566669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) NEW FUNCTIONS FOR EUKARYAL RNASE P
(p1.0) Recent discoveries have unveiled an unexpected role for human RNase P in transcription of small non-coding RNA genes (ncRNA) by RNA polymerase III (Pol III) and in efficient transcription of rRNA genes by Pol I (68)(69)(70). NcRNA genes, such as those that code for rRNA, 5S rRNA, tRNA and 7SL RNA, are essential for protein translation and cell growth. Another surprising discovery relates to the observations that long ncRNAs, such as the metastasis associated in lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) and multiple endocrine neoplasia b (MEN-b) transcript, are processed by human and mouse RNase P (71,72). These transcripts are cleaved at pre-tRNA-like structures located upstream of their 3 0 -end cleavage/polyadenylation signals (71,72). The 3 0 -end cleavages of mRNA and snRNA transcripts are typically carried out by specific endoribonucleases that exist in multiprotein complexes, i.e. CPSF/CstF and Integrator, respectively (73,74). These latter complexes associate with chromatin and operate cotranscriptionally through their recruitment by Pol II (73,74). Therefore, it  Figure 1. Conservation and evolution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P. Archaeal RNase P has five proteins: Rpp21, Rpp29, Rpp30, Pop5 and Rpp38 (L7Ae). The association of Alba with archaeal RNase P remains in question (see text). Human nuclear RNase P has ten distinct protein subunits, termed Rpp14, Rpp20, Rpp21, Rpp25, Rpp29, Rpp30, Rpp38, Rpp40, Pop1 and Pop5. Five of these subunits share archaeal homologs. Rpp20 and Rpp25 are homologous to Alba in archaea. In Eukarya, an ancestral RNase P RNA likely gave rise to RNase MRP RNA by a gene duplication mechanism; MRP RNA is part of RNase MRP and MRP-TERT (see text). Except for Rpp21, all the other proteins of human RNase P are shared by RNase MRP, but it remains unknown if these proteins are also associated with MRP-TERT. In S. cerevisiae, nucleolar RNase MRP possesses two additional proteins, termed RMP1 and SNM1 (see ref.
## (s3) FUNCTIONAL H1 RNA AND MRP RNAs IN THE CYTOPLASM?
(p3.0) H1 RNA (human RPR) is present at 50 000 copies per cell, while there are 30 000 copies of MRP RNA (87). These two transcripts can be detected in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm of cells, with the bulk of H1 RNA in the latter (88,89). Although at least one form of human mitochondrial RNase P activity includes an RNP comprising H1 RNA (87,90), the entire cytoplasmic H1 RNA is likely not reflecting the pool en route to mitochondria. It remains unknown if H1 RNA associates with its cognate protein subunits in the cytoplasm to form a RNP complex before being transported to the nucleus, as is the case with the spliceosomal U snRNPs. Therefore, the functional implications for the existence of H1 RNA in the cytoplasm remain unclear. Nevertheless, recent findings reveal that an active form of Pol III exists in the cytoplasm (91,92). Pol III senses foreign DNA in the cytoplasm and uses it as a template to synthesize 5 0 ppp-RNA that activates type I interferon production and mount an innate immune response (91,92). Since H1 RNA is required for Pol III transcription in the nucleus (68,70), it is worth testing if H1 RNA (free or as part of an RNP) is required for the biogenesis of cytoplasmic Pol III products generated using either poly dA-dT or viral DNA as templates.

(p3.1) Computer-aided comparative searches of databases for putative RPRs revealed a camelpox virus gene candidate, which exhibits 98% homology with all other orthopoxviruses and encodes an RNA with some secondary structure similarity to bacterial/archaeal RPRs (93); but this RNase P-like viral RNA did not show any pre-tRNA processing activity when tested in vitro. While this viral transcript is expressed in infected HeLa cells, it reduced by only 20% the pre-tRNA processing activity of endogenous RNase P, thus ruling out its ability to sequester human Rpps in vivo (93). However, it is unclear if such a modest effect on RNase P activity might somehow translate into viral replication gains. Nonetheless, the camelpox virus RNase P-like RNA might be used to interfere with Pol III transcription. If Pol III is employed as a sensor of viral DNA, then it is possible that Pol III is targeted by viral RNase P-like RNA decoys to counter the antiviral response mechanism of the host. Therefore, an experiment to assess if the camelpox virus RNase P-like RNA can inhibit Pol III transcription in extracts or cells merits consideration.
## (s5) PROSPECTS
(p5.0) RNase P is best known for its activity as an RNA enzyme with endoribonucleolytic activity. Recent findings, however, implicate this RNP complex in transcription and processing of short and long ncRNAs. Although one might argue that the scope of these recent assignments remain to be broadly investigated, we decided to emphasize these new facets of RNase P because these functional roles shed a different light on this primordial RNP. The exact contribution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P to each of these latter assignments remains to be determined. Nonetheless, the functions of the RNA moiety have been elaborated in the nucleus (68,(70)(71)(72).
