# Edge Computing Enabled Smart Cities: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 202676686 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s41) IoT based Smart Homes
(p41.0) A smart home architecture is presented in [76], that leverages edge computing and Long-Term Evolution (LTE) network. Different alternatives for placement of edge computing servers are considered that include:(a) placement of edge computing server at Evolved Node B (eNB), (b) placing the edge computing server at femtocells BS in a home, and (c) placing the edge computing server at User Equipment (UE). The positioning of edge computing server at eNB needs to cover a large number of far users and thus, require high computational power. On the other hand, placement of edge computing server near the UEs require less capacity due to its small coverage area. Simulation for two different scenarios, such as device-to-infrastructure (D2I) and D2D communication in IoT was performed using SimuLTE tool [88].
## (s84) Future Prospects
(p84.0) In the future, we expect virtualization to widely be adopted in developing smart cities. Currently, there are millions of devices that are deployed in cities. Further, the addition of billions of smart devices and sensors is expected. All of these devices generate data traffic that require instant analytic services. Edge computing will enable such instant analytics. Apart from edge computing, novel communication technologies with high throughput are required for data transmission. Additionally, the development of the smart cities must be sustainable and reliable. To enable smart cities through novel developments, different players such as telecommunication network operators, edge computing service providers, cloud service providers, and IoT service providers will interplay with each other. One issue is how to effectively enable such interplay to maximize profit and improve QoS? Virtualization-based network slicing is an answer, which can be leveraged to improve the QoS and increase profit. This allows to create multiple logical networks (called slices) on top of a physical infrastructure of different service providers [214]- [217]. SDN and NFV are key enablers of slicing-based smart cities. SDN offers separation of the control plane from the data plane, and NFV allows use of a generic hardware for implementation of different network functions. Network slicing-based smart cities will offer a wide variety of slices for different smart services. Different references, such as [218]- [221] have considered network slicingbased smart city advancements. These slices have diverse requirements and must share the same physical infrastructure resulting in a cost-efficient operation. Allocation of an end-to-end network for a typical slice would be expensive. Therefore, it is necessary for multiple slices to coexist simultaneously. However, resource management of resources between co-existing slices is challenging, thus requiring novel resource management schemes. Different organizations are also attempting to enable smart applications via network slicing. For instance, consider reference [218], which introduces a network slicing-based testbed using edge computing at Hamburg port. Additionally, many organizations are working on the AutoAir project in the UK to produce a testbed based on edge computing and network slicing for testing connected and autonomous vehicles. To sum up, edge computing and network slicing will be the dominant solution for enabling future smart cities. See table 7. 
