# Hydrogen sulfide regulates insulin secretion and insulin resistance in diabetes mellitus, a new promising target for diabetes mellitus treatment? A review

CorpusID: 213032989 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01c639f8aac2c923967c20ea30942e4b2ae31ea9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01c639f8aac2c923967c20ea30942e4b2ae31ea9)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s13) H 2 S and skeletal muscle
(p13.0) Skeletal muscle serves as one of the chief insulin responsive organs and regulates systemic glucose metabolism. CBS and CSE are abundant in human skeletal muscles similar to their expressions in human kidney and liver [61][62][63]. CBS, CSE and 3-MST were detected in rat skeletal muscle, but their expressions were much lower than those in rat kidney and liver tissue [64]. The levels of three H 2 S synthases as well as H 2 S production capacity were also detectable in mouse skeletal muscle [65]. Skeletal muscles in both ovine and bovine expressed very little 3-MST. Therefore, the expression of the H 2 S synthases in skeletal muscle varies between species.

(p13.1) H 2 S might promote glucose uptake in the muscle. Administration of NaHS to L6 myotubes promoted glucose uptake and upregulated phosphorylated insulin receptor (IR), PI3K and AKT levels, which were blocked by the IR inhibitor [45]. Either PI3K inhibitor or IR knockdown attenuated NaHS-induced upregulation of glucose uptake. Moreover, NaHS could directly activate IR. Chronic NaHS administration improved insulin resistance accompanied by elevated phosphorylated PI3K and Akt levels in the muscles from Goto-Kakizaki (GK, a spontaneous type 2 diabetic model) diabetic rats. The same phenomenon was found in Wistar rats [45]. These results indicated that H 2 S might promote glucose uptake in skeletal muscles through sensitizing the IR-PI3K-Akt signaling pathway, thus ameliorating insulin resistance. Moreover, the promotion of glucose uptake by H 2 S was further confirmed in C 2 C 12 mouse myotubes [66]. NaHS administration (10 or 20 lM; 6 h) increased glutathione (GSH) biosynthesis, glucose uptake and utilization, but decreased ROS generation. In contrast, inhibition of endogenous H 2 S in C 2 C 12 myotubes by CSE knockdown reduced GSH biosynthesis, GLUT4 level and glucose uptake, but increased ROS generation [66]. Persistent hyperglycemia is one of the main causes of oxidative stress. NaHS treatment improved diaphragm contractility and ultrastructural damage in diabetic rat, which might be related to the inhibition of oxidative damage and cell apoptosis in diaphragmatic muscle [67]. These results indicated that H 2 S might be crucial for maintaining glucose homeostasis in the muscle. H 2 S regulates circadian clock in the skeletal muscle. Disruption of core clock genes (CCG) contributes to the progression of metabolic disorders [68]. H 2 S synthesis enzymes (CBS, CSE and 3-MST), antioxidant genes, CCG and clock-controlled genes were all decreased in muscle of HFD-induced mice, but markers of oxidative stress and expression of oxidative stress related genes were increased [65]. In cultured mouse myoblast cell line C 2 C 12 , high glucose or palmitate treatment decreased CSE/H 2 S level and CCG expression, but increased oxidative stress. TNF and MCP-1 treatment displayed similar effects. Inhibiting CSE and glutamate cysteine ligase catalytic subunit (GCLC) with siRNA or pharmacological inhibitors decreased H 2 S production, Bmal1 and Clock mRNA expression, and increased oxidative stress. Application of H 2 S donor NaHS or GSH precursor improved expression of CCG [65]. These results suggest that H 2 S may be an important endogenous regulator of the circadian clock and metabolic disorder.
