# The Significance of Biobanking in the Sustainability of Biomedical Research: A Review

CorpusID: 216031727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Political Science, Medicine

## (s10) "Collaboration and standardization"
(p10.0) In a non-collaborative state, access to biospecimens is isolated to an investigator's own institution, and research questions are limited by the scope of the available samples. As a result, collaboration at national or international level is essential. Poor or unknown quality of biospecimens can lead to doubts regarding research findings. The disparity in research findings arises from the lack of standardized procedures for collecting, storing, processing, and annotating biospecimens [7] . One evidence is a report by Moore et al. [9] who showed that only 30 out of 660 commercial tests available for measuring gene alterations, and germline mutations can be used to predict response to a specific treatment. It is also apparent that standardization of practices, procedures, and policies is key to achieve optimal results. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, the International Society of Biological Environmental Repositories was established to take a leading international role in standardizing the preservation and storage of biobanked material. Also, BRN under the supervision of OBBR was established in 2005 to coordinate and support systematic investigation with regards to collection, processing, and storage of human biospecimens. However, standardization processes might be a threat to smaller biobanks, because they might not be able to meet the benchmarks [33,34] .
## (s12) "Seeking sustainability amidst ongoing challenges"
(p12.0) Sustainability is one of the most troublesome issues in the field of biobanking. The financial value, operational efficiency, and social acceptability are some of the metrics in measuring the sustainability of biobanks [38] . As asserted by Professor Hank Greely, biobanking is "staggeringly expensive" [39] , which emphasizes the necessity of developing and maintaining sustainable business practices. The National Biobanking Strategy Committee suggested in their 2013 meeting that without a more stable corefunding stream, the future of biobanks, especially cancer ones, is in doubt. Cost-recovery is one of the suggested solutions to this issue; however, the model's success depends on the number of outgoing samples, providing catalogs, and advertising for marketing research data [34] . Nowadays, it has become obvious that the success of biobanks is linked to establishing and retaining public trust; failure of the Icelandic Health Sector Database, as one of the earliest population biobanks, happened because of lacking this issue [40] . It has also been predicted that the highly-expensive population biobank would not survive for much longer [34] . Therefore, biobanks and society are inseparable. It means that society needs biobanks to support its health, while society can help biobanks by providing financial resources, generalized support, and cooperation and trust of participants to guarantee its sustainability [41] .
## (s15) Networking and , national and international biobanks
(p15.0) Until now, biobanking has enabled research studies and helped progress in the understanding of disease pathogenesis. However, the need for biobank networking to assist in novel discoveries is still unsatisfied. The idea of national and international biobank networking is one of the newest areas in this field and predicted to have an important effect on prevention and treatment of diseases, especially cancer. Such networking enables the investigation of rarer diseases, validating molecular signatures that have multiple parameters, helping pharmaceutical companies to work on data from different ethnicities and also discussing the role of environmental risk factors while focusing on genetic background [4,43] . Key publications related to biobank networking are the Cancer Incidence in Five Continents series and GLOBOCAN, which are coordinated by IARC [44] . At the national level, networks of biobanks began to emerge and proliferate during the 1990s. Up until now, countries with the most large-scale biobanks are the UK with 15 and the USA with 14 corporators [45] . Central Research Infrastructure for molecular Pathology located at the Institute for Biomedical Engineering in Germany is another example of transnational networking between different European tissue banks. Their archives contain about five million Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded and 50,000 frozen tissue samples [4,46] .
## (s16) Living biobanks
(p16.0) Recently, in the field of chronic disease treatment, especially cancer, the inefficiency of the "one-size-fitsall" approach has been proven. Today, with the development of human genetics, pharmacogenomics, and the success of human gene mapping, the "one dose-one patient" approach in the growing field of personalized medicine needs to be replaced. In this field, the major challenge is finding a link between functional genomics and pathological data while focusing on the patient's outcome. Many different personalized tumor models have been proposed to address this challenge. One of the newest models in a three-dimensional culture tumor model named organoid [47] . With the improvements in this field, many tumor organoids derived from tumor specimens from the intestine, stomach, liver, mammary glands, retina, brain, etc.has been developed, which emphasizes the need for living biobanks [47,48] . Sachs et al. [49] have recently built a living biobank with more than 100 primary and metastatic breast cancer organoid lines.
