# A review on the cleavage priming of the spike protein on coronavirus by angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 and furin

CorpusID: 215727717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9d25e5a261654630c4d0405fec04755d0d954ca7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9d25e5a261654630c4d0405fec04755d0d954ca7)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s1) Furin cleavage site
(p1.0) Several kinds of CoV, from various genera, have at their S1/ S2 binding site a furin cleavage site (FCS) (Belouzard et al., 2012). An important phase in the life cycle of the CoV is the human cell entry and fusion derived from proteolytic activity of the relative fusion protein (FP) by respective proteases (Jaimes & Whittaker, 2018). A conventional approach to explore the CoV life cycle is to clone the FP gene into an appropriate vector, transfect the cells, incubate with the related protease, purify the protein and carry out the protein assays (Cong et al., 2019;Li et al., 2019). This approach shows a number of drawbacks: the need of viral genome, expensive synthesizing process, availability of monoclonal antibodies, and time-consuming process. Therefore, Jaimes et al. (2019) reported the fluorogenic peptide cleavage analysis to assay the proteolytic activity of recombinant FP which can be applied in the case of CoV SP in a less labor and time intensive way.

(p1.1) In another study, Xi et al. (2020) isolated one strain of SARS-CoV-2 (ZJ01) in mild COVID-19 patient and reported the presence of more than 30 specific gene mutation. The theoretical analysis of FCS and the case alignment of CoV family determined that FCS may be a crucial site of CoV evolution. ZJ01 showed mutations close to FCS (F1-2), which led to alterations in the conformation and the charge distribution on the surface of the SP. They employed Adaptive Poisson-Boltzmann Solver (APBS) analysis and exhibited that the binding site of furin was covered with a number of negative residues (Figure 4a). The F1 site of SARS-CoV-2, namely ZJ01, Wuhan-Hu-1 and RaTG13 were almost covered with positive moieties while SARS was covered by both mixed negative and positive residues. F1 site of ZJ01 showed more positive charge distribution in its head and more negative residues in its basal site in comparison with Wuhan-Hu-1.   (Basak et al., 2007). (c) CD signals of QSARS-4 peptide after incubation with different concentrations of recombinant furin (Basak et al., 2007). Reprinted with permission from Refs. (Basak et al., 2007;Braun & Sauter, 2019).
