# Indoor positioning and wayfinding systems: a survey

CorpusID: 218081822 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/805c23c160235d2696afd83b75125f6084965e74](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/805c23c160235d2696afd83b75125f6084965e74)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Communication technology based indoor positioning and wayfinding systems
(p1.0) Communication technology-based positioning systems make use of various approaches to measure the signals from respective signal transmitting devices (Wi-Fi access point, BLE beacon etc.) installed in the indoor environments. The commonly used methods are time-based methods, angle-based methods, and RSS-based methods [84]. The timebased measurements include TOA and TDOA. The TOA approach utilizes the time taken for the signal propagation between the transmitter and receiver to find the range of the user, while the TDOA approach uses the difference of transmission time for two signals that have a different velocity. The angle-based method ' AOA' makes use of the angle of arrival at the target node to estimate target direction. The AOA measurement technique is rarely used in an indoor environment due to non-line of sight issues [85]. AOA and TOA based indoor localization approach are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 respectively. TDOA method computes the difference between the TOA of the signals from two distinct RF transmitters to the mobile device. A TDOA value geometrically represents a hyperbola as shown in the figure. When there is more than one TDOA value, the intersection point of hyperbolas is estimated as the position of the mobile device. Figure 6 illustrate the TDOA based indoor localization approach.
