# Revisiting Plant-Microbe Interactions and Microbial Consortia Application for Enhancing Sustainable Agriculture: A Review

CorpusID: 229332952 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29ab3025cc4f91a074f9ed44362a2b7e2783e9b2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29ab3025cc4f91a074f9ed44362a2b7e2783e9b2)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology, Medicine

## (s11) Microbial Defense Mechanisms
(p11.0) Microbes display role in both disease occurrence and biocontrol activity. A few microorganisms can cause infection manifestations through the generation of phytotoxic compounds. One such pathogenic microbe is Pseudomonas syringae, which is very notable for having diverse hosts such as tomato, tobacco, olive, and green bean. Similar pathogenic bacterium is Erwinia amylovora, which is known for causing fire blight disease of fruitbearing trees and ornament plants. Banana and potato crops also face variety of diseases due to the occurrence of Xanthomonas, R. solanacearum, and Xylella fastidiosa (Mansfield et al., 2012). The seriousness of plant disease relies upon several parameters, viz., size of pathogen population, favorable environment, and susceptible nature of host, as well as biotic conditions involved in collective determination of plant-pathogen associations (Brader et al., 2017). The host might acquire resistance against the pathogenic interventions due to the above and belowground bacterial communities by modifying defense responses of plant (de Vrieze et al., 2018).
## (s13) Amplicon Sequencing
(p13.0) These strategies depend on the specific binding of the pair of the universal primers to the regions, which are highly conserved within the particular microbial genome of interest. Amplicon sequencing is applied in microbial ecological studies for exploring the microbial communities. It involves the sequencing of subsequent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products encompassing taxon-specific hypervariable regions (HVRs) (D'Amore et al., 2016). 16S rRNA gene of bacteria are the most widely utilized amplicon targeted for microbiome examination (Kittelmann et al., 2013). Several combinations of primers have been suggested for bacterial 16S rRNA gene for amplifying various HVRs and subsequently generating PCR products varying in their lengths for sequencing platforms (such as Pacific Biosciences vs. Illumina) (D'Amore et al., 2016). The varying sequences of 16S rRNA (for bacteria), 18S rRNA (for fungi) genes, and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) segments (for fungi) along with metagenomic loci possess the information regarding the phylogeny of microorganisms, which can be utilized for inferring and deducing their taxonomy. However, it should be noted that the accuracy of taxonomical identification using marker genes is dependent upon the quality and completeness of the reference databases used. In comparison of 18S rRNA gene, the ITS region was preferred because of the presence of high comprehensive and curated database as well as the higher sequence variability (Schoch et al., 2012). However, it is debatable that the ITS fragments with uneven lengths may enhance preferential PCR amplification of ITS sequences with shorter lengths, which can take to a biased quantification of relative abundances of fungal taxa, and consequently, non-ITS targets can be additionally used in studies of fungi microbiota based on sequencing (De Filippis et al., 2017).
