# Roads to objectivity: Quantum Darwinism, Spectrum Broadcast Structures, and Strong quantum Darwinism -a review

CorpusID: 220403353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703)

Fields: Philosophy, Physics, Computer Science

## (s4) V. SPECTRUM BROADCAST STRUCTURES (SBS)
(p4.0) In [4,5] another approach to the objectivity problem was taken. Instead of using somewhat classically motivated conditions for redundant information proliferation, the authors formalized Def. 1 and surprisingly were able to derive a unique state structure compatible with it. I will repat the process below, generalizing it compared to the original derivation [5] Let us look at the phrase 'finding out of the state of S by many independent observers' of Def. 1. First of all, the 'state of the system' is understood as one of the eigenstates |i of the reduced density matrix of the system:
## (s5) Theorem 5 (SBS).
(p5.0) Definition 1 ⇐⇒ state (34) with property (39), in the sense that (34,39) is the only state structure compatible with Def. (1). The above version of the SBS theorem together with its proof is a substantial generalization of the original result from [5] as nothing is assumed about the structure of the states i apart from (39). In the original SBS derivation [5] an additional assumption of the, so called, strong independence was used: The only correlation between the parts of the environment is common information about the system. This forces a fully product structure (cf. [38]):
## (s6) VI. STRONG QUANTUM DARWINISM
(p6.0) That SBS states imply quantum Darwinism condition (1) is a simple calculation, however the opposite implication turned out to be a difficult mathematical problem. As was shown in Section IV, condition (1) it too weak to impose SBS structure. The question how to properly supplement it was solved by Le and Olaya-Castro in [6], based on an intuition that the presence of discord is the obstacle (see also [35,36]). This can inferred from Secs. III and IV, but historically the works [6,35,36] where the first to explicitly name the problem. The original critique from [5] was admittedly vague and heuristic, which I tried to overcome in the previous Sections. Le and Olaya-Castro establish the following, highly non-trivial and technically difficult equivalence [6] (I present below a slightly improved formulation due to [38]) : Theorem 6 (Strong quantum Darwinism). Let H E = H E 1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ H E N . Then a state S:E is of SBS form (49) if and only if the following conditions hold simultaneously:
