# A Comprehensive Overview of the COVID-19 Literature: Machine Learning-Based Bibliometric Analysis

CorpusID: 229535897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Psychology

## (s14) Topic 3: Clinical Characteristics and Risk Factors of COVID-19
(p14.0) This topic was discussed in 11.46% (3313/28,904) of the publications (eg, [34][35][36][37][38]). The top 5 authors who published the highest number of publications in this cluster were Lei Liu (n=25), Lanjuan Li (n=13), Jifang Sheng (n=10), Giuseppe Lippi (n=9), and Nanshan Zhong (n=9). The top 5 journals and preprint servers publishing articles related to this topic were the Journal of Medical Virology (n=109), medRxiv (n=57), Cureus Journal of Medical Science (n=35), Clinical Infectious Diseases (n=33), and the International Journal of Infectious Diseases (n=32). The first article related to this topic was published on January 17, 2020. The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 113.7 (SD 98.9), and the highest number of weekly publications was 266 in week 20 (Multimedia Appendix 1).
## (s15) Topic 4: Epidemic Models for COVID-19 Spread
(p15.0) A total of 10.25% (2964/28,904) of the included publications were related to this topic (eg, [39][40][41][42][43]). The 5 most prominent authors in this cluster were Gerardo Chowell (n=22), Benjamin J Cowling (n=18), Kenji Mizumoto (n=14), Shi Zhao (n=13), and Rosalind M Eggo (n=13). The most common journals and preprint servers where the articles related to this topic were published included Chaos, Solitons & Fractals (n=73), medRxiv (n=66), the International Journal of Infectious Diseases (n=36), Zhonghua liuxingbingxue zazhi (n=30), and bioRxiv (n=26). The first paper related to this topic was published on the January 19, 2020. Although there was a sharp increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 12 and 15, the trend was almost stable from week 15 to week 22. Then, a rapid decline in the number of weekly publications was noticed (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 101.6 (SD 68.2).
## (s17) Topic 6: Host Immune Response to 19-nCoV
(p17.0) This topic was discussed in about 6.36% (1837/28,904) of the publications (eg, [48][49][50][51][52]). Authors who had the highest number of publications related to this topic were Alessandro Sette (n=7), Stanley Perlman (n=6), Nima Rezaei (n=6), Irfan Rahman (n=5), and Akiko Iwasaki (n=6). The top 5 journals and preprint servers in terms of publishing articles related to this topic were bioRxiv (n=199), Medical Hypotheses (n=50), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=49), Frontiers in Immunology (n=22), and the British Journal of Haematology (n=19). The earliest article related to this topic was published on January 2, 2020. From that date until week 14, there was a slight increase in the number of weekly publications before it increased markedly, peaking in week 25 (n=155) (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 62.8 (SD 54.6).
## (s18) Topic 7: Diagnosis of COVID-19 Using Polymerase Chain Reaction
(p18.0) Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for diagnosing COVID-19 was a key topic discussed in 5.54% (1602/28,904) of the publications (eg, [53][54][55][56][57]). The most common authors writing about this topic were Alexander L Greninger (n=11), Kwok-Yung Yuen (n=10), Jasper Fuk-Woo Chan (n=9), Kelvin Kai-Wang To (n=9), and Cyril Chik-Yan Yip (n=9). The top 5 journals and preprint servers that published the highest number of studies related to this topic were bioRxiv (n=136), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=53), the Journal of Clinical Virology (n=40), medRxiv (n=31), and Clinical Infectious Diseases (n=30). The earliest study in this cluster was published at the beginning of week 3. The highest number of weekly publications was 119 in weeks 22 and 23 (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications related to this topic was 54.8 (SD 45.6).
## (s19) Topic 8: Mental Health and Disorders During the COVID-19 Pandemic
(p19.0) This topic is about COVID-19-related mental health and disorders, which was explored by 3.17% (915/28,904) of the publications (eg, [58][59][60][61][62]). The top 5 authors in terms of number of publications related to this topic were Valerie A Canady (n=15), Mark D Griffiths (n=8), Stephen X Zhang (n=6), Zhilei Shang (n=5), and Modesto Leite Rolim Neto (n=5). The top 5 journals publishing studies related to this topic were Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy (n=101); Psychiatry Research (n=48); the International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health (n=37); the Journal of Affective Disorders (n=23); and Mental Health Weekly (n=23). In this cluster, the first article was published at the beginning of week 8. There was a considerable rise in the number of weekly publications from week 14 until a peak was reached in week 23 (n=94); this was followed by a steep decline (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 31.1 (SD 30.9).
## (s26) Topic 15: Detection of 2019-nCoV Antibodies
(p26.0) Detection of antibodies against 2019-nCoV using serological assays was a topic discussed in 1.42% (411/28,904) of all publications (eg, [92][93][94][95][96]). The top 5 authors writing about this topic were Florian Krammer (n=6), Jing Wang (n=6), Yong Zhang (n=5), Juan Chen (n=5), and Viviana Simon (n=5). The top 5 journals and preprint servers that published the highest number of studies in this cluster were bioRxiv (n=30), medRxiv (n=20), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=18), the Journal of Clinical Virology (n=14), and the Journal of Clinical Microbiology (n=7). Only 1 study in this cluster was published in the first 6 weeks. There was a dramatic increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 16 and 21. Although the number of weekly publications slightly decreased from week 22 until week 26, it increased rapidly until reaching the peak in weeks 28 and 29 (n=36) (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 14.1 (SD 12.8).
