# An Overview of Vitamins and Minerals in the Prevention of COVID-19 Infection COVID-19 Enfeksiyonunun Önlenmesinde Vitamin ve Minerallere Genel Bakış

CorpusID: 226714299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2059a2625da4ce88b84645ff890b2718819f927f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2059a2625da4ce88b84645ff890b2718819f927f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In December 2019, many serious respiratory illness and death were reported in Wuhan, Hubei province, China. After that, the number of cases increased dramatically, and it spread all around the world due to transmit readily among humans. The World Health Organization (WHO) firstly named the disease as "2019-nCoV", or "Wuhan Coronavirus", but then, the disease was officially declared as "coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)". It was revealed that new coronavirus is phylogenetically close to severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) by the genome analysis. Therefore, it was subsequently called as SARS-CoV-2 by the coronavirus Study Group of the International Committee on Virus Taxonomy (1,2).

(p0.1) Infection with SARS-CoV-2 can be asymptomatic or can exhibit mild to severe symptoms (3). COVID-19 has been demonstrated to have an average incubation duration of approximately 5.2 days and a mean period from the initiation of symptoms to death of 14 days (1,4). At the onset of the illness, symptoms seen most common are fever, cough, and fatigue or myalgia, while symptoms seen less common involves headache, sputum production, lymphopenia, haemoptysis, diarrhoea, and dyspnoea (4,5). Particularly, in patients with older age and those with pre-existing illness, infection with SARS-CoV-2 can progress to severe disease with crucial respiratory symptoms and important pulmonary changes visible via imaging techniques. The changes involve interlobular involvement, alveolar exudates, ground glass opacities, patchy consolidation, and finally prognosticating deterioration (6). Infection is transmitted via respiratory droplets formed during coughing and sneezing by patients with symptoms, however, can also occur from asymptomatic people and before onset of symptoms. It can be transmitted via aerial droplets and contact. To date, vaccine or antiviral treatment for human coronavirus could not be found (7). Hand hygiene and the usage of personal preventive materials like surgical masks have been advised in the prevention of COVID-19 (1). Some countries have adopted "stay in home" to prevent spread of COVID-19 (8).

(p0.2) There are different important risk factors including the presence of poor nutritional status and pre-existing non-contagious diseases such as chronic lung diseases, cardiovascular diseases (CVD), diabetes mellitus, obesity, and varied other diseases that render the host immunocompromised for severe COVID-19 (8). In maintaining immunity, balanced nutrition play an essential role for prevention and management of viral infections (9). In this review, while the properties and effects of important micronutrients are evaluated in relation to the current COVID-19 outbreak, an overview of vitamins and minerals is given in the prevention of COVID-19 infection.
## (s4) Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
(p4.0) Vitamin C has effects on immunity, including sustaining epithelial barrier function, both innate and adaptive immune cells growth and function, migration of white blood cell to locations of infection, generation of antibody, and phagocytosis and microbial killing (31). In addition to these pleiotropic roles in the immune system, vitamin C is also well-known for its antioxidant features, and antioxidants are usually accepted as an adjuvant therapy for severely ill patients, whose vitamin C concentrations are substantially reduced (32,33).

(p4.1) In numerous diseases, the balance between oxidants and antioxidants is changed, with severe outcomes. Viral infection causes an increase in the intrapulmonary oxidative load. The pathophysiological mechanisms by which free radicals compose different stress types result in lung inflammation and an altered immune response. Antioxidants may play a major role against lung oxidative stress. Therefore, it was suggested that antioxidants have protective role in lung infection and inflammation (34). It was reported that vitamin C supplementation results in a significantly lower incidence of pneumonia, comending that vitamin C may affect sensibility to lower respiratory tract infections (35). It is believed that the main cause of COVID-19's effect on humans is pulmonary insufficiency (ARDS) (36). Acute respiratory distress syndrome is an important factor of fatality. Significantly enhanced oxidative stress due to the trigger of free radicals and cytokines is the feature of ARDS which causes cellular damage, organ dysfunction and death. An effective treatment for these patients may be early use of high dosage antioxidants, such as vitamin C (36,37). Vitamin C promote the resistance against coronavirus and may affect the sensitivity to lower respiratory tract infections under certain circumstances (38). The use of intravenous vitamin C has shown promising results in the treatment of COVID-19, leading to a marked increase in immune system response, a decrease in cytokine storm or an increase in antiviral activities through other unknown mechanisms (36). However, in a study of sepsis and ARDS patients, it was found that vitamin C infusion did not significantly ameliorate organ function disorders or change indicators of inflammation and vascular damage. Therefore, authors reported that further studies are required to interpret the role of vitamin C for other results in sepsis and ARDS (39).
## (s5) Zinc
(p5.0) Zinc is an essential trace mineral of the diet that is significant for maintenance and development of cells in immune systems (both the innate and adaptive), and also a critical cofactor for many enzymes including antioxidant defense, especially SOD and antiinflammatory proteins, and for zinc-finger transcription factors implicating in DNA and RNA synthesis (8,9,31,40). Zinc deficiency can affect immunity resulting in impaired stimulation, production and maturation of lymphocytes, disruption of the intercellular communication through cytokines, and attenuation of the innate host defense (31). Zinc supplementation in healthful individuals has been demonstrated to lower oxidative stress concerned byproducts, block TNF-α and IL1β induction, protect versus NFκβ (nuclear factorκβ) activation in mononuclear cells and regulate intracellular killing and cytokine generation via macrophages (41). It was suggested that insufficient zinc stores might be a risk factor for pneumonia in the elderly (42). Moreover, a study on children with pneumonia indicated that zinc supplementation improved the clinical status, the respiratory rate, and the oxygen saturation. In the zinc group, it was observed that IFNγ and IL-2 increase after treatment. Authors concluded that zinc supplementation ameliorated some clinical symptoms in children with pneumonia in fewer hours and triggered a cellular immune response (43). Zinc has been demonstrated to be significant for maintenance of skin and integrity of mucosal membrane, and also has antiviral effects such as on rhinovirus replication in vitro. An increased risk of viral infections has been associated with a low zinc status (40). Inhibition of corona-and arterivirus replication by increased Zn2 + levels has been reported in cell culture (44). Furthermore, zinc has antiviral properties versus several viral species such as HIV or HCV, and its deficiency leads to increased risk of acquiring infections.

(p5.1) Despite limited number of mechanistic studies, zinc seems to block virus attachment, infection, uncoating, and also viral protease and polymerase enzymatic processes. Nevertheless, these mechanisms have not been wellelucidated in clinical studies on zinc supplementation against viral infections (45). To date, there are no studies evaluating zinc for COVID-19 management, despite a few trials testing zinc as a part of diet to treat COVID-19 (46).
## (s6) Selenium
(p6.0) Selenium is a trace element that has antioxidant effect via selenoproteins and also antiinflammatory properties (9,47). Low selenium levels have been related to an increased risk of mortality, attenuated immune function, and cognitive reduction, whereas, antiviral effects have been demonstrated in a higher selenium level or selenium supplementation (9). Deficiency of selenium causes enhanced oxidative stress levels in the host can change a viral genome, thereby, an ordinarily benign or mildly pathogenic virus becomes highly virulent. This condition leads to a reduced immune response against viruses and an increased mutation rates of RNA viruses (47,48). In deficiency of selenium, benign species of Coxsackie and influenza viruses can alter to highly pathogenic species, due to mutations (49). An increase of selenium intake by otherwise healthy individuals with relatively low concentrations of plasma selenium levels lead to improve the cellular immunity. Also, selenium supplementation seemed to clear an oral live attenuated poliomyelitis vaccine more quickly and sequence analysis of the viral genome displayed lower numbers of mutations. These findings suggested that insufficient nutrient status in the host population could cause the outbreak of more pathogenic types of viral diseases, thus rising the risks and burdens related to these illnesses (31,40). Sodium selenite, a chemical form of selenium, can be used for increase blood selenium concentrations. It can oxidize thiol groups in the virus protein disulfide isomerase, thus, prevents the virus penetration to the healthy cell membrane. Kieliszek et al. believed that sodium selenite usage in the treatment of anticoagulation, may decrease the blood clots risk forming in COVID-19 patients, particularly, at risk for its severe clinical course. Hence, this chemical compound can potentially be utilized in the combat versus coronavirus epidemic (50).
