# Cell Sources and Influencing Factors of Liver Regeneration: A Review e929129-1

CorpusID: 229173162 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9501c67cb3dd99d063fcb4f42f4115faacf197c1)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Liver regeneration (LR) involves complicated mechanisms and a tremendous amount of detail. Even after more than 100 years of extensive studies, the process of LR is not completely understood. Currently, the main points of LR include the following: (1) LR is a complicated process involving numerous intrahepatic and extrahepatic components and a large number of signal molecules in a specific microenvironment. Owing to the extremely important functions of the liver, the interaction modules constituted by the saturated signaling pathways rigidly regulate the initiation, maintenance, and termination of LR to achieve homeostasis even in cases of severe injury [1]. (2) Surprisingly, the human liver can regrow with no or almost no loss of function and can survive after sustaining huge damage. This is because of the extensive cell sources and the cell plasticity of LR. According to the level of liver injury and different intrahepatic backgrounds, such as liver fibrosis and liver steatosis, LR can occur in different patterns [2]. (3) The human body is a complicated organism that participates in all life activities as a whole. Various extrahepatic factors, such as partial hepatectomy (PH), aging, platelets, nerves, hormones, bile acid (BA), and gut microbiota can affect LR, thereby creating difficulties in basic research.
## (s1) Cell Sources for LR
(p1.0) Plasticity of hepatocytes in hepatocyte-mediated LR Different from epithelial tissues such as those in the intestinal tract and skin, which have high proliferative capacity, mature hepatocytes can re-enter the cell cycle for mitosis to complete self-renewal or maintain liver homeostasis after injury without the involvement of progenitor cells [3]. Wang et al. reported that Axin2+ hepatocytes located around the central vein had stem cell-like characteristics [4]. Pu et al. discovered that the Mfsd2a+ hepatocytes in the portal vein triad region are low in number at the hepatic homeostasis phase. However, they could apparently be activated upon PH or chronic liver injury and could extend toward the central area of the liver lobule to replace the injured cells, where their metabolic features were re-edited by the regional microenvironment [5]. Recently, Schaub et al. discovered that a portion of hepatocytes surrounding the portal vein could directly differentiate into bile duct cells, a process that is related to Notch and transforming growth factor-b (TGF-b) signaling [6]. By investigating the sex-determining region Y-box 9 (Sox9) in green fluorescent protein (GFP) transgene-labeled mice, Li et al. found that a hybrid type of hepatocytes are located near the branches of the portal vein and terminal biliary tract, which have the mixed phenotypes of both the hepatocytes and the biliary epithelial cells (BECs) with positive Sox9 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) expression. These hybrid hepatocytes can become hepatocytes and BECs after liver injury to refill the damaged hepatic lobules without increasing the morbidity of cancer [7,8]. Ang et al. found that Lgr5 expression occurs only in a unique subset of hepatocytes that are most adjacent to the central veins. These pericentral Lgr5+ hepatocytes have a long life and contribute to the homeostasis of the liver. After PH, they could fuel the regeneration of their own lineage during massive and rapid LR [9]. Lin et al. found that hepatocytes marked by telomerase expression are sparsely distributed in different locations of the liver lobules. These cells have been shown to be the main source of hepatocytes in normal liver homeostasis and injury-induced LR [10]. These findings demonstrate that the mature hepatocytes have the characteristics of high replication capacity and plasticity (summarized in Figure 1).
## (s2) Molecules and signals in hepatocyte-mediated LR
(p2.0) In the hepatocyte-mediated LR process, BECs, Kupffer cells, hepatic stellate cells (HSCs), liver sinusoidal endothelial cells, and extrahepatic cells interact. Additionally, blood flow stress signals, immune factors, nerves, hormones, BA, and microbiota are involved (summarized in Figure 2). Under the regulation of various pro-proliferation factors and anti-proliferation factors, the liver initiates and terminates regeneration in a timely way, thus achieving what is called the "hepatostat" [11]. In the classic LR model induced by PH, increased blood flow activates the urokinase plasminogen activator and matrix metalloproteinase to induce the degradation of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Then, the hepatocyte growth factors (HGF) are released from the ECM. Lipopolysaccharides produced by inflammatory response bind with TLR4 receptors on Kupffer cells to release tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6). HSCs and liver sinusoidal endothelial cells can also produce new HGF. Together with the growth factors and cytokines such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) brought by the portal vein flow, liver mitogens reach a high concentration in the designated site [12]. HGF binds with its receptor C-Met, while TGF-a and EGF bind with their common receptor, EGF receptor (EGFR), to initiate multiple transduction pathways in the hepatocytes, including Wnt/b-catenin, STAT3, and NF-kB [13]. IL-6 can form an excited complex with soluble IL-6R and gp130, which can thereby activate the JAK/STAT, MAPK, and PI3K/AKT pathway in the hepatocytes and regulate the apoptosis-inhibiting nitric oxide synthase to regulate LR [14]. The above pro-proliferation substances induce the sequential formation of complexes between cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) in the hepatocyte nucleus and cyclins (including cyclin D1 and cyclin E) to mediate the initiation and maintenance of LR [13]. Additionally, angiogenesis e929129-2 is an important step in LR. Angiogenin-2 is downregulated in the initial stage of LR but is upregulated at the angiogenesis phase, thereby regulating the vascular endothelial growth factor to promote angiogenesis. Data have also shown liver sinusoidal endothelial cells could regulate the proliferation of hepatocytes through controlling the synthesis of angiopoietin-2 [15].
## (s8) e929129-7
(p8.0) animals had diet-induced simple fatty liver degeneration [76]. Matsumoto found that different positions of the autophagosome in the fatty liver of mice were correlated with LR damage [77]. Although whether simple fatty degeneration will damage LR remains controversial, most studies show that severe liver steatosis or fatty liver disease leads to defective LR. At present, the global morbidity of fatty liver disease is increasing, and the damage of LR in patients with steatosis has become a more important clinical problem. Gentric et al. found that there was a defect in EGFR expression in a steatosis rodent model, which suppressed cell cycle progression and delayed the mitosis of hepatocytes [78]. After applying exogenous growth hormone or antioxidant treatment, the normal cell cycle in hepatocytes is restored, revealing that abnormal oxidative stress in the fatty liver may be the important factor hindering LR. Li found that mitochondrial impairment in fatty liver disease led to poor LR and that transplanting apolipoprotein A-1 could accelerate the regeneration of small-for-size fatty liver grafts in mice through enhancing mitochondrial function [79]. Alvarez-Sola et al. developed the fusion molecule fibapo, which includes fibroblast growth factor-19 and apolipoprotein A-1. The application of fibapo before surgery helps regulate metabolism and promote the regeneration of fatty liver [80].
## (s9) Partial hepatectomy
(p9.0) In hepatectomy-induced LR, resected volume is closely correlated with the pattern of regeneration. In 90% hepatectomy models, the limited remained resources first meet the liver metabolic function to maintain the homeostasis of the body, resulting in the delay of LR [81]. For 70% hepatectomy models, traditional opinion suggests that almost all residual hepatocytes re-enter the cell cycle for mitosis. However, this is not the case. The adult human liver is comprised of more than 20% polyploid cells, while the number of polyploid cells is as high as 70% in rodents. After PH, polyploid hepatocytes achieve the increase in liver mass through hypertrophy [82].

(p9.1) Many studies have suggested that the volume of LR is significantly negatively correlated with future remnant liver volume (FRLV). However, the removal of a larger volume of liver may cause an increase in the release of mitogens such as TNF-a and IL-6 [83]. Pagano et al. reported that the imbalance between the remaining liver's function and the body's metabolic requirement became the most important factor in the regulation of LR. After determining the safe boundary of FRLV to avoid "small liver syndrome" and other related complications, a lower FRLV can promote LR [84].
## (s12) Neural regulation and hormones
(p12.0) Previous studies have discovered that there is a direct feedback relationship between the liver and the brain via the autonomic nervous system [101]. Izumi et al. discovered that LR slowed down when the hepatic branches of the vagus nerve were resected in PH rat models [102]. The mechanism functions when the excessive vagus signal activates macrophages by acetylcholine, and activated macrophages could promote LR through the IL-6/STAT3/FoxM1 pathway. Although only sparse vagus can be observed around the portal vein zone in the liver, the precise multistep regulation constituted by neural cells, immunocytes, and hepatocytes allows the amplification and transmission of an emergency regeneration signal in the liver. Therefore, it can rapidly and precisely regulate LR initiation in the case of acute injury and achieve the survival of the organism. Another study discovered that nerve signals contribute to the release of serotonin in the enterochromaffin cells after PH, thereby facilitating LR indirectly. This suggests that the relay ganglions and organs are vital [103]. Ishtiaq et al. discovered that stress-activated sympathetic nerves induce the elevation of adreno-cortico-tropic hormone and glucocorticoid levels, activate the JAK/ATAT3/NF-kB/IL-6 pathway, and promote LR. At the same time, increased norepinephrine in the plasma can activate the HGF/C-Met and EGF/EGFR pathways in the hepatocytes and antagonize TGF-b in the early stage of LR [104]. Triiodothyronine (T3) hormone can promote mitosis through mediating cyclin D1 in LR [105]. Similar to T3, the thyroid hormone receptor-b-selective agonist can activate Wnt/b-catenin/ cyclin D1 signaling to induce hepatocyte proliferation [106].
