# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Mechanisms of replication and repair in mitochondrial DNA deletion formation

CorpusID: 222143646 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a53655478f3782017b65cfdfa772b5786d841f7b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a53655478f3782017b65cfdfa772b5786d841f7b)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) MITOCHONDRIAL DNA REPLICATION AND DELE-TION FORMATION
(p2.0) Replication of mtDNA is distinct from the replication of the nuclear genome. The minimal mitochondrial replisome proteins reconstituted in vitro and found to perform mini-circle replication include DNA polymerase ␥ (Pol␥ ), hexameric Twinkle helicase, and mitochondrial single-stranded binding protein (mtSSB) (45). Additional proteins that assist in mtDNA replication include mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT), transcription and packaging factor (TFAM), transcription elongation factor (TEFM), transcription factor B2 (TFB2M), exonuclease MGME1, DNA ligase III, and RNAse H1. The role of these replication factors in mtDNA synthesis is reviewed elsewhere (46). Of the three models proposed for mtDNA replication, the strand-displacement model (SDM) is the most accepted (46)(47)(48), although alternative mechanisms have been reported (reviewed in (49)). These models include coupled leading and lagging strand synthesis (50) and RNA incorporation throughout the lagging strand, termed RITOLS (51). In the SDM model, mtDNA replication is continuous from two distinct origins ( Figure 2A). Replication starts at OriH and continues around approximately two-thirds of the genome (∼11 kb) until reaching OriL, whereby L-strand synthesis commences in the opposite direction resulting in unidirectional fork progression from each distinct origin. For L-strand initiation, POLRMT functions as a primase at OriL through recognition of a stem-loop structure (52,53). DNA Pol␥ replaces POLRMT, after ∼25 nucleotides, to commence mtDNA replication from OriL.
## (s4) DELETION MECHANISMS ASSOCIATED WITH ER-RONEOUS MITOCHONDRIAL DNA REPLICATION
(p4.0) The striking observation that most mtDNA deletions occur within the major arc, between OriH and OriL (Figure 1), could indicate that similar mechanisms are involved in forming these deletions. The first mechanism describing deletion formation was for the CD observed in KSS patients (16). In the CD, two 13-bp direct repeats flank the deletion breakpoint with only one of the repeats retained in the deletion construct, thereby suggesting a replicationslippage mechanism. The 13 bp 3 repeat (13447-13459) and the strand displacement model (SDM) for mtDNA replication, which starts from two origins of replication, OriH and OriL, dedicated respectively to the replication of the H-and L-strand. In the SDM, mtDNA replication initiates from OriH. The mitochondrial RNA polymerase POLRMT synthesizes a short RNA sequences that primes the subsequent replication catalyzed by DNA Pol␥ . The Twinkle helicase progresses in front of DNA Pol␥ , unwinding DNA in an ATP-dependent manner. The exposed single-stranded H-strand is bound by mtSSB to prevent spurious replication events. Once the replisome reaches OriL, a single-stranded stem-loop structure is formed, blocking mtSSB binding and promoting the initiation of replication of the L strand. The stem-loop is recognized by POLRMT, which synthesizes a short RNA primer in the OriL region. DNA Pol␥ replaces POLRMT, and replication of the two strands proceeds unidirectionally and continuously to form two full double-stranded mtDNA daughter molecules. (B) Replication fork stalling is suggested to promote the mis-annealing of single-stranded mtDNA regions containing direct repeats. The loop generated during replication-slippage is extruded from the mtDNA molecule, resulting in deletions. (C) Deletion formation from copy-choice recombination involves replication starting from OriL. During replication, secondary structures and loops could be formed by the exposed single-stranded regions containing direct repeats. If those structures persist, the sequences comprised in this aberrant mtDNA conformation is deleted during the second round of replication. 5 repeat (8470-8482) are hypothesized to mis-anneal during the displacement of the H-strand during replication. In the event of a break occurring on the parental strand downstream of the 3 repeat, an intact 3 -hydroxyl would support continued mtDNA replication ( Figure 2B). Subsequent degradation of the H-strand and ligation would result in the deletion. In support of this model, a recent study reporting a single-molecule fiber assay observed that singlestrand breaks generated by mitoTALENS on the H-strand closest to the 5 repeat lead to the formation of the CD. Conversely, nicks at both the 3 repeat region and on the Lstrand at the 5 repeat region did not generate the mtDNA CD (38).
## (s5) MITOCHONDRIAL DNA REPAIR AND DELETION FORMATION
(p5.0) In comparison to the mechanisms regulating mtDNA replication, mtDNA repair pathways are less characterized. In addition, DNA repair mechanisms in the mitochondria are poorly resolved in comparison to nuclear DNA repair. Yet, it is becoming clearer that mitochondria display DNA repair activities, albeit with key differences compared to nuclear pathways ( Figure 3A). While nuclear DNA is safeguarded by a repair-oriented maintenance, mtDNA molecules are either repaired or degraded. The selective depletion of damaged mtDNA lowers the overall population of mutated and/or deleted mtDNA molecules. For example, mtDNA molecules harboring abasic sites (77,78) or DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) (72,73) could be directly degraded rather than repaired. As mtDNA is under a strict copy-number control, selective depletion of damaged mtDNA molecules triggers replication of the undamaged mtDNA copies, reconstituting the mtDNA pool (reviewed in (79)). Besides selective depletion, damaged mtDNA can also be repaired.

(p5.1) In mitochondria, base excision repair (BER) is the most characterized mechanism to counteract the prominent generation of oxidized bases within mtDNA. Although mitochondria are considered to be devoid of nucleotide excision repair (NER), proteins involved in nuclear NER localize within the mitochondria (80)(81)(82)(83) and are repurposed to function in BER. It is still debated whether mitochondria display efficient mismatch repair (MMR) and DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair activities and what relevance these pathways could have in mtDNA maintenance. However, proteins involved in these mechanisms have been found to localize in mitochondria ( Figure 3A). Furthermore, dysfunctional repair of damaged bases and DSBs were suggested to be mechanistically connected to the formation of mtDNA deletions (9,39).
