# A Review of Methods Used to Measure Treeline Migration and Their Application

CorpusID: 229232316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/574a3464248bf8eb7e4217072e4dc11c90820734](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/574a3464248bf8eb7e4217072e4dc11c90820734)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s5) Photography and Remote Sensing
(p5.0) A range of different remote sensing methods has been applied to identify treeline positions, as well as an array of various processing techniques. While field surveys can be used to very accurately map local treeline positions (Rundqvist et al., 2011;Kirdyanov et al., 2012), the extent and remote location of many treelines have made remotely sensed data the primary method for monitoring and mapping many treelines (Sitch et al., 2007;Guay et al., 2014;Ameztegui et al., 2016). Remote sensing is used both as a standalone method and in combination with field surveys and models (Epstein et al., 2012;Coops et al., 2013). There is a range of imagery that can be used to capture treeline positions, including historic and recent photographs from hand-held cameras, aerial photographs, satellite-derived data, and images captured from airborn scanners. The methods used to track and monitor treelines depend on variables such as the spatial extent of the study area, level of detail required, the temporal scale desired for mapping changes in treeline positions, and most importantly, data availability.

(p5.1) One of the best forms of remote sensing when it comes to high-resolution measurements is aerial photography. This method has successfully been used to map canopy cover changes, allowing tree cover changes to be traced more than 100-years back in time (Myers-Smith et al., 2011). Repeat aerial photography methods have been applied extensively around the world. For example, it has been used to map changes to treeline positions in the Catalan Pyrenees (Ameztegui et al., 2016), in the Swiss Alps of Europe (Gehrig-Fasel et al., 2007), as well as in Alaska in the US (Wilmking et al., 2006). The issue can often be to find historical aerial photograph of sufficient resolution, as the lack of colour and shades that often appear in these photographs can make identification of vegetation difficult (Luo and Dai, 2013). Most research utilising aerial photography cover areas of relatively small spatial scales, due to the time and cost associated with capturing larger areas using aircraft. The number of photographs required for aerial photography analysis is mostly dependent on the size of the study site. This can range from hundreds of photographs for areas stretching thousand kilometres (Ameztegui et al., 2016) to only one for areas covering a few hundred meters in size (Wilmking et al., 2006).
