# Asian Scientific Research An Overview of Recent Developments in Hetero-Catalytic Conversion of Cellulosic Biomass ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

CorpusID: 225750902 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90f038c4f3286d79f7cb99985f3661a2c941529](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90f038c4f3286d79f7cb99985f3661a2c941529)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) Cellulosic Biomass
(p1.0) Cellulosic biomass, a complex natural material that often exhibits structural heterogeneity, is present in cell walls of most woody and non-woody plants. This structural and componential heterogeneity, in the cellular structure, can be attributed to the presence of carbohydrate biopolymers (cellulose and hemicellulose) and aromatic biopolymer lignin (Y. F. Huang et al., 2016). The carbohydrate biopolymers and lignin are bonded together to form the lignin-carbohydrate matrix, i.e., lignocellulose. Cellulosic biomass can be considered an abundant, inexpensive and renewable resource with an increasing trend in becoming the most promising feedstock essential for many modern industries (Anwar et al., 2014). In general, cellulosic biomass is widely acknowledged as a significant raw material for various applications such as eco-friendly biofuels, chemicals, biomaterials and many other value-added products (Watkins et al., 2015). This biomass is primarily generated as a waste during agricultural activities, or from the forest as forestry residues. Among these, agro-based waste quantities, rice husk (RH), or rice hull, which is produced in large quantities as a by-product of rice (paddy) plantations and processing. Another agro-based cellulosic biomass material is cotton linter, a by-product of the cotton and textile industry (Dhaliwal, 2019).
