# a section of the journal Frontiers in Neurology A Review of Resting-State electroencephalography Analysis in Disorders of Consciousness

CorpusID: 23752730 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/218ace79f1bbf52e15f76cc6114be2167df3274d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/218ace79f1bbf52e15f76cc6114be2167df3274d)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s3) SUMMARY AnD COnCLUSiOn
(p3.0) The characteristics that have been applied in DOC-related studies could be generally classified into five categories: the spectrum, entropy, connectivity, the network, and the sleeping pattern. We summarize the primary features that are frequently used in DOC studies (Figure 1). We found that spectrum power, coherence, and entropy were the most frequently used features in differentiating consciousness levels, predicting follow-up outcome or measuring patients' cortical response to brain intervention. Comparisons of various methods with multiple indices were performed in two studies (18,40). Indices derived from spectrum, non-linear analysis, information theory, and functional connectivity were investigated. A discrimination performance of the measures supports power spectrum and functional connectivity as having the best performance in separating the VS from the MCS and healthy subjects (18). In addition, permutation entropy in the theta frequency also has relatively higher classification accuracy in distinguishing the MCS and VS. Spectral power measures the strength of neuronal oscillations, which depend on the spontaneously activity of underlying oscillators (neurons) (73). Spectral power at some specific frequency can reveal relationships between the activity of groups of neurons and consciousness levels (24,39). Reviewing the studies, increases of low power (delta and theta), and decreases of high power (alpha) were common spectrum characteristics of patients with DOC. In comparing the MCS and VS, the latter has increased delta and decreased alpha power than the former. Therefore, a power ratio index may be first considered to help us qualitatively assess the consciousness state of patients. In predicting the follow-up outcomes, alpha power should always receive attention. In addition, theta and alpha bands are also critical frequency bands in assessing cortical responses to brain interventions.
