# Periodontal Inflammation and Systemic Diseases: An Overview

CorpusID: 239890800 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bf2ee4b8f3c073ea90ea836694617998f0aabe3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s16) The Epigenetics of Periodontal Inflammation
(p16.0) These mechanisms also include epigenetic pathways driven by upstream regulations, as well as other processes that may be traced back to its genetic and epigenetic origins (Ari et al., 2016). Epigenetic modifications, in particular, include chemical modifications of DNA and proteins, changes affecting chromatin remodeling which may result in the activation or inactivation of transcription cascades thus deregulating gene expression (Shaddox et al., 2017). The crucial role of DNA and histone modifications, two of the major epigenetic regulatory processes, have been documented to occur in the development of periodontitis (Diomede et al., 2017). Host-pathogen interactions are often mediated by molecules such as LPS. LPS-associated responses trigger a cascade of chronic inflammatory events and are able to modulate host responses at the cellular and tissular levels (Diomede et al., 2017). These responses produce alterations in DNA methylation patterns, thus modifying the expression programs of immune-related genes leading to inflammatory disease progression (Palioto et al., 2019). DNA methylation and histone acetylation are the major epigenetic modifications induced by diseases and environmental factors. DNA (cytokine-5) methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) and histone deacetylases (HDACs) are the key regulators of DNA methylation and histone acetylation, respectively, and are known to be shaped by the action of pathogens such as P. gingivalis (Diomede et al., 2017).
## (s18) Periodontal Inflammation: Its Relation With Chronic Diseases
(p18.0) In recent years, several research and clinical studies have reported associations between periodontitis and a number of systemic inflammatory conditions, including arthritis, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and atherosclerosis (de Molon et al., 2019). The infectious, molecular and physiological origins of these associations have been discussed in the previous sections. Now, we will proceed to discuss their consequences in the onset and development of a broad range of diseases, including cardiovascular disease, gastrointestinal and colorectal cancer, diabetes and insulin resistance, Alzheimer's disease, as well as respiratory tract infection and adverse pregnancy outcomes among many others (Bui et al., 2019;Khumaedi et al., 2019).

(p18.1) The relationship between CP and other systemic chronic inflammatory diseases will gain relevance since a number of therapeutic interventions such as cytokine-based treatment strategies with the potential to improve both CP and systemic health exists (Cardoso et al., 2018). Immune markers linking CP and diabetes have also been reported in relation to glycation dynamics and TNF-α, which have been argued to constitute reliable biomarkers of inflammation in gingival crevicular fluid and serum (Singhal et al., 2016). Glycemic status has been associated with periodontitis via mechanisms of systemic inflammation (Torrungruang et al., 2018). Bone marrow stem cells co-cultured with macrophages obtained from diabetic periodontitis patients have shown an interplay between local inflammation and innate immune responses  further highlighting the relationship between these two conditions. On the other hand, there is indeed evidence which supports the fact that periodontal treatment alleviates systemic inflammation in type 2 diabetes (Preshaw et al., 2020).
## (s26) Obstetric Complications
(p26.0) Pathogen migration and systemic inflammation associated with CP, has been documented to be also relevant in the context of obstetric complications: Along pregnancy, vascular permeability in the gingival tissues is increased, triggered by hormonal changes (Bartold and Van Dyke, 2019). Enhanced permeability then eases the diffusion of pathogenic microorganisms and their products into the bloodstream, even reaching the placenta. Once these pathogenic agents are there, they may drive immune and inflammatory responses inducing augmented secretion of proinflammatory cytokines potentially affecting the fetal tissues (Zi et al., 2015). Fetal inflammation can in turn lead to the premature rupture of membranes, causing uterine contractions, augmenting the risk of miscarriage or premature delivery (Ye et al., 2020). Complications during pregnancy have also been documented to be associated with CP and inflammation: Mohr et al. (2019) reported on the influence of systemic inflammation and preterm prelabor rupture of membranes in pregnant women with PD. Similar effects have indeed been traced back to periodontal bacterial infections (Ye et al., 2020).

(p26.1) The presence of periodontal pathogenic microorganisms in the amniotic fluid in women with periodontitis has been also associated with the severity of periodontitis related to the risk of preterm birth (Cardoso et al., 2018). Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, E. corrodens, P. gingivalis, and T. denticola have been associated with gestational hypertensive disorders. Likewise, Bergeyella sp., Capnocytophaga spp., E. corrodens, Parvimonas micra, P. gingivalis, T. forsythia, and T. denticola have been detected in certain women with low birth weight ( Table 3; Bobetsis et al., 2020).

(p26.2) In this regard, at least two mechanisms have been proposed relating periodontal health status and adverse pregnancy outcomes. The first one argues that oral periodontal pathogens are able to translocate from infectious oral cavities all the way down to the placenta, potentially reaching the intra-amniotic fluid and fetal circulation. The second hypothesis states that the PD-driven systemic endotoxin or inflammatory mediator dissemination is able to modify fetal development even leading to spontaneous miscarriage. A recent study states that F. nucleatum is the most common among the periodontal pathogens found in placental and fetal tissues (Bobetsis et al., 2020;Ye et al., 2020). This has led to hypothesize that F. nucleatum is able to translocate from the maternal mouth to the uterus, due to immune response weakening of infectious origins (Bui et al., 2019).

(p26.3) Additionally, research in animal models has shown that P. gingivalis can have a negative impact on pregnancy. It was observed that LPS from P. gingivalis leads to placental and fetal growth restriction and resorption in rats. Anti-P. gingivalis antibodies were also able to induce fetal loss when passively administered to mice. There is still scarce evidence regarding the role of innate immune receptors during pregnancy. While it has been reported that the placenta can express TLRs during normal pregnancy. PD or even abundance of periodontal pathogens such as T. denticola and P. gingivalis have been associated with an increase in the expression of TLRs, thus suggesting enhanced innate immune responses (Bui et al., 2019). The role that hormones will be playing in these phenomena is still not understood. However, the significant associations of periodontal inflammation, systemic inflammation and duration of menopausal years in postmenopausal women indicate that hormone regulation and unresolved inflammation in CP may be related (Sharma et al., 2018).
## (s28) COVID-19, Inflammation, and Periodontitis
(p28.0) The recent, still ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has significantly altered many of our notions and perceptions of chronic and inflammatory conditions. This is also the case with periodontal inflammation. As we have discussed extensively, the roots of the pathophysiology of CP lie, to a large proportion, on a disproportionate cytokine response. As it is the case, the so-called cytokine storms also contribute to a large extent in COVID-19 related complications and mortality Hu et al., 2021). COVID-19 and CP share similar cytokine storm profiles, characterized by elevated levels of IL-1β, IL-7, IL-10, IL-17, IL-2, IL-8, IL-9, IFN-γ , TGF-β, as well as some metalloproteinases . As previously presented, CP often involves Th17 inflammatory responses that are, indeed, one of the determinant drivers of cytokine storming (Bunte and Beikler, 2019).
