# Prognostic factors for patients with metastatic breast cancer: a literature review

CorpusID: 234246455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common malignant tumors and the leading cause of cancer death among women (1,2). Metastasis is the main reason causing death in patients with BC (3). Metastasis would occur in approximately 5% to 10% of patients with BC. Besides, about 30% of women will finally develop relapsed BC after the initial diagnosis at early stages (4,5). Despite of medical advances, the 5-year survival rate of patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) is still less than 30% (6).
## (s10) Prognostic factors of MBC with positive HER2
(p10.0) Qin et al. (11) assessed 243 MBC patients with HER2 positive in southern China. They found that anti-HER2 therapy (trastuzumab or lapatinib), endocrine therapy and surgical intervention were favorable independent prognostic factors for OS in these patients, while poor PS and brain metastasis were unfavorable factors. In another study, Bringolf et al. (14) identified 81 patients with HER2 positive, among whom there were 25 receiving HER2targeted therapy in Switzerland. They found that only primary brain metastasis was an unfavorable prognostic factor, while other factors were not significantly associated with the prognosis of these patients. Median OS of patients with primary brain metastasis was 1.9 years (95% CI, 1.7-2.2 years), while median OS of all patients with brain metastasis was 26 months (95% CI, 19.9-32.0 months).
