# A review on role of nitrous oxide nanoparticles, potential vaccine targets, drug, health care and artificial intelligence to combat COVID-19

CorpusID: 235442463 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ac01a702c725997a20f206ebab82a4b5e5b01258)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s1) Nature of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19)
(p1.0) Corona Viruses include a large family of Viruses found in nature. They belong to the Family Coronaviridae and order Nidovirales possessing single stranded, positive sense RNA genome. The technical name of corona virus is SARS-CoV-2. Corona Viruses are named for their crown like spikes protruding from their surfaces. The most common symptoms are fever, dry cough, tiredness, difficulty in breathing and chest pain. Based on the study by UK Kings College London, there is a possibility of six different types of strains cause's different type's symptoms such as Flu (with and without fever), fatigue, and gastrointestinal, abdominal and respiratory issues. The common things between all strains are breathing difficulties. Incubation period refers to the time between being exposed to the disease and when the actual symptoms start to show up. Knowing the incubation period of the disease is really helpful to take the necessary steps such as, active monitoring, surveillance, control and modeling (Wu 2020). This time is critical for the prevention of the diseases and allows the health officials to take decisions regarding quarantine or observation of people who may have been exposed to the virus. The novel coronavirus has an incubation period of 2 to 14 days, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), with symptoms appearing about 5 days after infection in most cases (Ma 2020). Fatality rate refers to the proportion of deaths due to the disease as compared to the people who have been  (Manigandan, 2020;Manigandan et al. 2021). The fatality rate shows the severity of the disease. The WHO estimates the fatality rate of novel corona virus to be about 3%. Figure 1 shows the possible transmission modes of the infection. R-Naught is a mathematical value, which refers to the reproduction rate of the disease. R 0 conveys in average how many persons will get infected because of one infected person, as long as no one has been vaccinated against it or is already immune to the disease (Ceylan 2020).
## (s4) Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against COVID-19
(p4.0) Chloroquine has been in use from 1944 and extensively used to treat malaria and autoimmune disorders. In general, chloroquine has the capability to handle several intracellular micro organisms. Experimental clinical studies predicted that the antimalarial drug has a potential to treat COVID-19 patients. In malarial treatment, it releases the toxic heme, which kills the parasite. Chloroquine has the capacity to reduce the viral infection by increasing the endosomal pH and having contact with glycosylation (Singh et al. 2020). Due to the global emergency, several urgent trials had been conducted worldwide to see the potential of chloroquine. Initially, 100 Chinese patients were involved in the trial and it was observed that the symptoms were reduced without critical side effects during the chloroquine treatment; this was the initial breakthrough of chloroquine on COVID-19 (Gao et al. 2020). Another study was conducted in France (n = 36) to observe the effect of chloroquine with azithromycin. The combination was very effective in virological naso clearance (Gautret 2020). 500 mg Chloroquine can be used for patients of age 18-65 two times a day continuously for 7 days. On contrary, there were no findings available for the effects of Chloroquine on children. The use of Chloroquine was recommended due to its low cost and availability. Furthermore, the recorded side effects due to the consumption of medicine were less (Kapoor and Kapoor 2020). However, a notable study from New York revealed that chloroquine did not offer any advantage in the reduction of the mortality rate after testing 346 critically ill patients (Geleris 2020). In the other end, the Food and Drug Administration has banned the chloroquine on June, 2020 due to the risk of heart problems. Based on the clinical trials the determination has been made, the use of chloroquine can lead to lymph disorder, kidney failures, liver failure and other safety issues.
## (s9) Role of nitrous oxide (NO) nanoparticles to combat against COVID-19
(p9.0) Virus usually constitutes variable size ranges from 10 to 850 nm. NO is known to combat various fungi, bacteria, virus and tumor cells. Nitrous oxide combined with nanoparticles can be used for various applications. NO can act as an antimicrobial agent because of its anti fungal and antibacterial properties. In addition to those properties, it can able to modulate foreign agents. NO had considered to be a vital agent to treat corona virus and other lung-related ailments. NO can be administered with some other medicines can be effectively used to cure MERS-CoV affected patients and showed positive impacts with very less side effects (Pieretti et al. 2021;Akaike and Maeda 2000). Inhalation of NO treatment has been assessed for COVID patients in two nations, United States of America and China. Previously, NO was effectively used to treat lung-related ailments caused by certain virus. The studies found that NO compounds have potential to combat SARS-CoV replication. Nitrous oxide donor S-nitroso-N-acetyl penicillamine was effective in inhibition of SRS-CoV replication mechanism. Several researchers tried to assess the effects of NO against SARS-CoV-2 and NO donors were considered to important medical treatment. NO can be used as an alternative to tackle the current pandemic. Ultraviolet radiation promotes the NO generation and it is stored in skin and releases into blood, thereby reducing the blood pressure. 
