# An Overview on the Histogenesis and Morphogenesis of Salivary Gland Neoplasms and Evolving Diagnostic Approaches

CorpusID: 236943744 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/996443a73600fdb89fcaf5c7590545204fbf28a0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Classification of SGN
(p6.0) The classification of SGN is an ever-evolving process, given their varied histomorphological appearances, lack of uniformity, overlapping features, and diverse nature of individual entities. The transitional nature of SGN thus contributes to this diagnostic dilemma. The most recent and widely accepted classification of SGN is featured in the fourth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of head and neck tumors, as elaborated in Table 1 [15]. The current classification has a modified list, with inclusion and exclusion of several histopathological entities, as compared to the third WHO edition [16,17]. As the understanding of the biological behavior of lesions progresses both on a genetic and molecular level, newer variants of pre-existing neoplasms continue to emerge. Evolving immunohistochemical markers and innovative diagnostic approaches may result in a more accurate identification, thus offering effective treatments of SGN. 
## (s9) Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy (FNAB)
(p9.0) FNAB is one of the first line procedures used to diagnose SGN on account of its easy, inexpensive, highly accurate, quick, and minimally invasive nature [27]. This technique entails using a fine gauge needle to collect cells. After alcohol fixation and drying, the cellular aspirate is stained with Papanicolaou stain and can be immediately evaluated and diagnosed [27]. FNAB results are universally reported using the Milan's system, as seen in Table 2 [28]. Edizer et al. (2016), evaluated the ability of FNAB to differentially diagnose salivary gland masses by comparing the preoperative FNAB results with the postoperative definitive histopathological results of 285 patients. Their FNAB results were 92.6% accurate compared to the definitive histopathological results. This demonstrated that FNAB is useful in benign and malignant tumor differentiation. However, they do have some limitations, which involve relatively high non-diagnostic results, possibly due to bleeding, low cellularity, necrosis, or erroneous technique [27]. In addition, some potential outcomes in the final histopathological examination include squamous metaplasia and fibrosis. However, these do not interfere with the definitive diagnosis [27]. Table 2. Milan's system of FNAB reporting for SGN [28]. 
## (s15) Biopsy and Histopathological Diagnosis
(p15.0) Following the procurement of cells through biopsy, histopathological diagnosis assesses the SGN morphologically [44]. Different types of SGN can be identified based on their location and cell composition. For instance, acinic cell carcinoma is usually present in the parotid gland with its cells composed of acinar and intercalated types [44]. Meanwhile, mucoepidermoid carcinoma is found in major or minor salivary glands. These tumors are composed of squamoid, mucous, and intermediate cells, and may also contain solid or cystic regions [44]. Salivary duct carcinoma is mainly found de novo, or derived malignantly from carcinoma-ex-pleomorphic adenoma in the parotid gland. These neoplasms are characterized by locoregional metastasis [44]. Moreover, the most common benign and malignant SGN found at the parotid and submandibular glands were pleomorphic adenoma and adenoid cystic carcinoma, respectively [45]. Thus, accounting for these histopathological features can assist in the diagnosis of SGN.
## (s19) Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma
(p19.0) Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) is another common malignant tumor of the salivary glands. It is slow-growing and composed of epithelial and myoepithelial cells of different origins [9]. Given its high recurrence, it has a very poor prognosis due to its metastatic capability and associated perineural invasion. Current treatment protocols involve surgery, followed by post-operative radiotherapy (PORT), which have been fairly successful [63]. PORT has shown to be an effective adjuvant to surgery and to minimize the incidence of recurrence [64]. However, studies have shown that it does not really affect the overall survival rates of patients, therefore questioning its effectiveness [65]. For more effective diagnosis and management strategies, it is necessary to understand the underlying genome alterations when studying recurrent ACC tumors [47].

(p19.1) Studies found that recurrent ACC showed alterations in the NOTCH pathway when compared to primary ACC cases. These mutations in the NOTCH pathway are significant as they could lead to potential therapeutic targets [66]. Ferraroto et al. (2017) concluded that the NOTCH mutations were indicative of a more distinct form of ACC, exhibiting metastasis in bone and liver; however, this was minimized by NOTCH inhibitors [67].
## (s29) Chemotherapy
(p29.0) The application of systemic chemotherapy has been occasionally seen in severe stages of tumors with distant metastasis. A wide range of mono and polychemotherapy is used as a palliative treatment among patients for whom local therapy, such as surgery or radiation, is no longer feasible [93]. A study by Hsieh et al. (2016) reported that postoperative chemotherapy improved locoregional tumor control more than radiation [94]. However, other studies have not found any significant differences in local control and overall survival rates of chemotherapy versus radiotherapy [95,96]. Due to the absence of consistent evidence-based data, implementing chemotherapy in the treatment of salivary gland cancers adjunctively or as a palliative agent should be evaluated cautiously on a case-by-case basis.
## (s30) Other Therapeutic Interventions
(p30.0) The profound comprehension of molecular behaviors in salivary gland cancers has led to the invention of other potential therapies, such as targeted therapy and hormone therapy. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors, monoclonal antibodies, and proteasome inhibitors are some of the agents used in targeted therapy [93]. Regarding hormone therapy, it has been reported that some salivary gland cancers responded well with hormonal receptors such as estrogen, progesterone, and androgen. These findings have led hormonal agents to be applied in several trial cases such as AciCC treated with tamoxifen, and both SDC and adenocarcinoma treated with antiandrogen agents [93,97,98]. Several trials in phase II are in progress to examine these new techniques; however, further investigation is needed prior to implementing this technique in cancer patients [93].
