# Protein Source and Muscle Health in Older Adults: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 232102317 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3327c6389619304d64428c86af3d8754cc94a49](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3327c6389619304d64428c86af3d8754cc94a49)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s5) Associations between Whole Food Sources of Protein and Muscle Outcomes in Humans
(p5.0) With studies demonstrating short-term MPS response differs by protein quality, digestibility, and leucine content, there is a need to examine the relation of usual protein intake with muscle health among older adults [43]. In addition, it is important to examine the effects of plant protein sources on muscle within the context of usual dietary patterns as there is increasing interest in plant-based diets due to their known healthful effects on metabolic health [103]. Consuming greater amounts of protein, regardless of source, could compensate for the lower EAA content of plant-sourced proteins. In addition, incomplete proteins can be combined in the diet to form complete EAA profiles. For example, grain proteins are typically lower in lysine and higher in methionine. In contrast, beans are typically lower in methionine, but higher in lysine. When these plant-protein foods are combined together, grain and bean proteins form an EAA profile that resembles animal protein [43]. However, postprandial blood EAA concentration following ingestion of high quality plant protein blends was not the same as whey protein when matched to its leucine content [104]. Therefore, protein quality and digestibility indexes such as PDCAAS and DIAAS do not provide information regarding the true anabolic effect of specific plant protein sources on body tissues compared to animal source counterparts. A systematic literature review by van Vliet, Burd and van Loon [43] highlighted that animal protein is generally, at an isonitrogenous amount, more superior in promoting muscle protein synthesis and leads to greater muscle mass compared to plant-sourced protein (e.g., soy and wheat). The authors show that plant-based protein offers equal benefits compared to animal-sourced protein at greater amounts of ingestion. However, this might not be the case in certain populations. In the past, studies showed that vegetarians tend to consume less daily dietary protein compared to their omnivorous counterparts and result in lower muscle mass [62,105,106]. However, it is difficult to determine whether the differences in muscle mass were due to protein-specific dietary pattern or difference in overall protein intake.

(p5.1) Epidemiological studies on the associations of dietary source of protein with measures of muscle from the past 10 years are shown in Table 2. Data from the Framingham Offspring Cohort demonstrates that total protein intake and animal protein intake, but not plant protein, are associated with muscle mass as measured by DXA in older adult men and women [107]. Specifically, higher leg lean mass was observed among participants in the highest quartile of animal protein intake compared to the lowest quartile. In the same cohort, higher total protein and animal protein intake, but not plant protein, were suggested to be protective against loss of grip strength over 6 years among adults over the age of 60; interestingly, this prospective association was not observed in adults <60 year [108]. When using dietary pattern methodology specific to protein intake, considering all other nutrients and foods consumed in combination with protein intake, no associations between source of protein intake, appendicular lean mass and quadriceps strength were observed, when total protein intake was above the RDA [109]. Chan, et al. [110] showed that quartiles of total protein intake (Q1: 69.2 ± 28.6; Q4 83.3 ± 37.0 total protein g/day) and quartiles of animal protein intake (Q1: 37.1 ± 21.1; Q4: 46.8 ± 29.1 animal protein g/day) were not associated with changes in physical performance nor lean mass over 4 years. In contrast, the authors noted that a diet low in plant-based protein (Q1: 32.1 ± 13.9; Q4: 36.5 ± 19.7 plant protein g/day) was associated with higher muscle loss compared with those in the highest quartile of plant-protein intakes. The different outcomes observed between this study of Chinese adults and studies in cohorts with Western dietary patterns, may be due to differences in type and amount of plant protein consumed, and other intakes of nutrients that may influence muscle such as vitamin D, folic acid, and antioxidants. In addition, there is a need to standardize the protein dosage measurement (e.g., comparing g/kgbodyweight/day of each protein subtype) to further understand the differential impact between animal versus plant-sourced protein on muscle health parameters. Overall, these studies suggest that source of dietary protein may not matter as long as older adults are meeting the RDA for protein, habitually.
