# Computer vision-based wood identification and its expansion and contribution potentials in wood science: A review

CorpusID: 233433541 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s21) Feature-based anatomical approaches
(p21.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p21.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
## (s58) Feature-based anatomical approaches
(p58.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p58.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
