# Molecular Sciences In Vitro and Vivo Identification, Metabolism and Action of Xenoestrogens: An Overview

CorpusID: 233397048 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dfc1561847cbd61164f780ca26ddd411a676107f)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s4) ER-Binding to ERE
(p4.0) Nikov et al. observed differences in affinity of phytoestrogens when combined with ERα or ERβ, respectively. They also mentioned the combinations and interactions of ligand-ER complexes and estrogen response element (ERE) sequences. In their experiments, the FP methods were employed to measure binding affinities of various phytoestrogens, such as genistein, coumestrol, daidzein, glyceollin, and zearalenone to human cells. This article revealed a higher affinity of the phytoestrogens for ERβ than for ERα. The effect of these phytoestrogens on the ability of ERα and ERβ to associate with specific DNA sequences (EREs) was also investigated. In 2000, Boyer et al. performed a similar method on human ERα for probe of its molecular way on functional specificity. The implemented binding assays to study the interaction of the receptor with a palindromic estrogen response element derived from the vitellogenin ERE [38,39].
## (s6) Analysis of Gene Expression
(p6.0) Jorgensen et al. demonstrated that estrogenic activity could be evaluated by assaying induction or repression of endogenous estrogen-regulated "marker genes" in human breast cancer MCF-7 cells. The authors mentioned that a cell-based endogenous gene expression assay is very sensitive to what could be used to assay the estrogenicity of different putative estrogenic chemicals. They performed an assay in human MCF-7 that was estrogen-dependent and used a method of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to observe the changes in gene expression. After differential display using reverse-transcribed (DDRT) PCR technology, the levels of expression could be quantified by phosphor-imaging [43,44].
## (s9) The Fluorescence-Based Multi-Analyte Chip Platform
(p9.0) Using a parallel-proliferation measurement, the fluorescence-based multiplexed protein microarray ( Figure 2) presents the bidirectional estrogenic and anti-estrogenic actions of XEs in human MCF-7 cells [52][53][54][55]. As a new in vitro tool for screening environmental samples, the fluorescence-based chip platform can analyze multiple targets to detect the estrogenic and anti-estrogenic actions of XEs by observing the expression of proteins. It can quantify 10 proteins secreted by MCF-7 cells, which represent different physiological and pathological endpoints of endocrine actions. Its potential is demonstrated by distinct protein secretion patterns of the cancer cell line after exposure to known ER agonists ß-estradiol, BPA, genistein, and nonylphenol as well as antagonists fulvestrant and tamoxifen. In parallel, the proliferating effect of endocrine-disrupting substances in MCF-7 cells can be assessed in a proliferation assay based on resazurin. Unlike the detection tools developed earlier, the chip has two advantages, including high-output screening for the endocrine effects of environmental disruptors on human cells and providing messages of the complicated cellular effects on a molecular level. Compared with single marker detection, this multiplexed protein microarray in the chip is more convenient and arrives at better accuracy [52]. cells, which are exposed to estrogen receptor agonists and antagonists. Using a resazurin assay, the proliferative effect in hormone-sensitive cancer cell line MCF-7 can be measured. Using a multiplexed protein microarray with fluorescence detection, biomarkers can be quantified in the supernatant. By employing immobilized antibodies, the on-chip sandwich immunoassay captures the biomarker and a fluorescently labeled detection antibody for confirmation [52].
## (s26) Discussion
(p26.0) On the molecular level, many XEs are known to be structurally related to the steroid hormones produced by the human body (structural similarity to the natural estrogens). Therefore, they have estrogenicity or antiestroginecity and can be bound with the receptors of the organism, manipulating differentiation and modulation of cell proliferation, apoptosis, cytokine production, and cell cycle progression, which should have been controlled over by the endogenous 17β-estradiol [3,6]. On the other hand, some substances, such as Cd, PCB and dioxin, can function as potential endocrine disruptors despite no structural similarity to the natural estrogens. However, the exact mechanism by which this metal Cd may interfere with the reproductive system has not been fully elucidated. The interruption in the steroidogenic pathway by Cd toxic action may be explained in a few different ways [175]. The changes in E2 and progesterone levels may result from the impairment of steroidogenic enzymatic activities by Cd. Under the actions of Cd, conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone is supposed to be the cause of abnormalities in the metabolism of sex hormones. Thus, endocrine disruptors, including Cd, PCB and dioxin, can exert effects via various pathways other than classical ER-signaling.
