# A REVIEW ON RECENT DEVELOPMENTS FOR THE CURE OF SALMONELLA ENTERICA SEROVAR TYPHI, THE CAUSATIVE AGENT FOR TYPHOID FEVER

CorpusID: 238104458 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6415dfab16b7799a4e144911f6a9af32732be42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6415dfab16b7799a4e144911f6a9af32732be42)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Multiple Drugs Resistant
(p2.0) The antimicrobial arsenal gradually exhausted due to drug resistant strains, making treatment difficult and costly. A new extensive antibiotic resistant strain (XDR) emerged in Hyderabad in 2016, infecting more than 8,000 people in 14 areas and has since been distributed across Sindh. A recent outbreak of XDR typhoid (defined as MDR plus fluoroquinolone resistance) has been reported in Pakistan (Klemm et al., 2018) . These XDR Salmonella isolates are not only resistant to first-line antibiotics (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, chloramphenicol and ampicillin), they are also resistant to ciprofloxacin. They do not respond to cephalosporins (third generation antibiotics) due to the acquisition of the H58 haplotype mutation. In a large-scale outbreak in Hyderabad, Sindh, for the first time, the new S. typhi XDR clone isolated. The chromosomally located resistance region is present in this S. typhi along the IncY plasmid, which contains the blaCTX-M15 extended-spectrum -lactamase, which mediates ceftriaxone resistance, as well as the qnrS fluoroquinolone resistance gene. S. typhi can convert from MDR to XDR in one single phase by acquiring a plasmid which can propagate the XDR clone globally. This problem must also be addressed with diagnostic and therapeutic options. In every clinical setting, these include a quick and accurate diagnosis of typhoid fever. Widal and Typhidot tests, are unreliable and obsolete serological tests that must be phased out. We need 3rd generation cephalosporins and IV ceftriaxone for empirical therapy and for serious cases, respectively (Andualem et al., 2014). Oral cefixime (high dose) should be used in casualty settings in less serious situations, including MDR typhoid. Sensitive strains can be treated safely with oral administration of Amoxicillin or Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole. Treatment must last for at least 10-14 days or until the patient is afebrile for at least 5 days, whichever comes first. With XDR typhoid, the fear of the dreadful "untreatable typhoid" has become a hideous fact.
