# viruses Tree Shrew as an Emerging Small Animal Model for Human Viral Infection: A Recent Overview

CorpusID: 237340059 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb837d0c8c309965abec8eb6826a61b7718acf8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb837d0c8c309965abec8eb6826a61b7718acf8e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
(p3.0) HCV is a major global health problem; it infects approximately 130-170 million people worldwide and causes chronic liver disease, cirrhosis, and HCC [49]. Similar to HBV, HCV also has a narrow host range, with spreading replication reported exclusively in humans and chimpanzees. Lack of small animal models is a significant obstacle in the field of HCV research. However, in vitro and in vivo tree shrew models have been very useful in the investigation of many aspects of the HCV life cycle, including HCV replication, pathogenesis and antiviral interventions [22,[50][51][52][53]. However, HCV-infected tree shrews showed intermittent viral propagation and low viral load [21][22][23]51], which is suggestive of restricted replication in the tree shrew compared to humans. Additionally, liver histopathological changes observed in tree shrews are comparable to human cases [21,22]. Notably, a previous study showed the development of an acute infection that led to chronicity in the tree shrew model which was characterized by the development of liver steatosis, cirrhotic nodules and tumorigenesis [21]. In our previous study we demonstrated the HCV-specific antibody response in the tree shrew, although the titers were found to fluctuate [22], suggesting the tree shrew might be useful in preclinical vaccine efficacy testing. Moreover, the innate immune response, such as toll-like receptors and cytokines, were found to be induced in HCV infection [22], suggesting the tree shrew could serve as a potential model for an immune response and pathogenesis study.
## (s5) Influenza Virus
(p5.0) The use of the tree shrew in influenza research was first introduced in 2013. As demonstrated, the tree shrew supports the replication of human influenza viruses without prior adaptation, producing mild disease symptoms [24]. The entry receptors of both human influenza virus (SAα2,6 Gal) and avian influenza virus (SAα2,3 Gal) were found to be distributed in the tree shrews' respiratory tract [24]. In another study, it has been demonstrated that avian influenza A (H9N2) virus infection in tree shrews and ferrets showed comparable pathogenicity [25]. There was induction of a variable cytokine response in respiratory tissues at different days post-infection (dpi), including TNF-α, IFN-β, IL-4, IL-6, CXCL8 (IL-8), IL-10, IL-13, CXCL10 (IP-10), CCL5 (RANTES), CXCL9 (MIG), and CCL2 (MCP-1) [25]. In our previous study, we observed that multisite inoculation of H5N1 and H7N9 avian influenza virus with 1.0 × 10 6 plaque-forming units (PFU) produced severe diffuse pneumonia and focal pneumonia, respectively [26]. The severity of pneumonia was found to be correlated with proinflammatory cytokine transcript levels. Moreover, H5N1 also induced fever and body weight loss; however, no effect on body weight change by H7N9 was observed. We also observed antibody induction in tree shrews infected with H5N1 and H7N9 [26], suggesting that the tree shrew could be used for evaluating antigen-specific antibody response and for vaccine efficacy studies [54]. A recent study evaluated the infectivity and transmissibility of three unadapted different strains of influenza A virus, including pandemic H1N1 (A/Sichuan/1/2009, pdmH1N1), avian-origin H5N1 (A/Chicken/Gansu/2/2012, H5N1) and early human-origin H7N9 (A/Suzhou/SZ19/2014, H7N9), in tree shrews, and showed efficient replication and subclinical symptoms in tree shrews [27]. A strong humoral immune response was induced in virus-inoculated tree shrews, which was protective in a challenge with a homologous virus [27]. In a recent study, it has been demonstrated that intranasal inoculation of unadapted human influenza B (V0215 and Y12) with 1.0 × 10 6 TCID50 could infect tree shrews and produce milder nasal secretions and weight loss with no significant respiratory symptoms. However, an increase in cytokine levels of IL-6, IL-10, IP-10, TNF-α and TGFβ mRNA in tissues were observed [28]. These results indicated the suitability of tree shrews in studies of influenza viruses, particularly considering their relatively small size, evolutionary status as closer to primates and lower cost compared to ferrets. Findings obtained from different studies with influenza virus infection in tree shrews suggest that the tree shrew is a viable animal model for influenza research.
## (s9) Zika Virus (ZIKV)
(p9.0) Emerging and reemerging pathogens constitute a major public health threat globally [66]. ZIKV is a mosquito-borne flavivirus in the Flaviviridae family containing a positive-sense, single-stranded RNA genome of approximately 10.7 kb in size. ZIKV contains two major geographically different lineages, the Asian and African lineages [67]. Recently, ZIKV has spread worldwide and the WHO declared ZIKV fever as a public health emergency [68]. ZIKV has been associated with fetal microcephaly and serious neurological complications in adults [69]. A proper understanding of ZIKV pathogenesis and host-virus interaction is crucial for antiviral and vaccine development, for which a suitable small animal model is highly essential. There has been much progress in understanding of the ZIKV pathogenesis and host response using several animal models, including mice and non-human primates [70]; however, each model has its limitations. Therefore, an alternative animal model is required. Zhang et al. showed that tree shrews subcutaneously inoculated with ZIKV strain GZ01 (10 6 PFU/animal) produced transient viremia, cutaneous inflammation and notable dermatological manifestations of skin rashes, as commonly observed in human patients [32]. However, there was no induction of fever or other neurological and behavioral abnormalities. Notably, ZIKV infection in adult tree shrews induced an antibody response that prevented reinfection with a homologous virus [32], suggesting the tree shrew model could be used for vaccine candidate screening. During neonatal infection of 1-day-old tree shrews through the intracerebral route with 10 5 PFU of ZIKV, despite the detection of high levels of ZIKV RNA in the brain at 3 and 6 dpi and substantial pathological changes of neuron destruction, no signs of microcephaly in the ZIKV-infected tree shrews was observed [32]. In another study, in vitro tissue tropism of ZIKV infection in the tree shrew has been demonstrated, and the obtained findings indicated the susceptibility of the tree shrew primary cells from the kidney, lung, liver, skin and aorta to ZIKV infection [71]. Moreover, the antiviral innate immune response was induced, as observed by the induction of different cytokines, including IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IFN-β, CXCL9, and MX1 [71]. Although further studies are required, the above findings highlight the potential of the tree shrew for ZIKV infection and pathogenesis studies.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) The development of animal models is essential for studying the pathogenesis of viral infections, as well as for evaluating the efficacy of drugs and vaccines. The use of the tree shrew model for viral infection is increasing due to its susceptibility to several important human viral pathogens. No animal models can be a perfect alternate to the human infection model. However, animal models mimicking human diseases are crucial for properly understanding the host response and pathogenesis, and at the same time, experiments should be conducted in such a way that the results obtained using animal models can be translated to humans. As the ethical and financial concerns limit the use of chimpanzees in hepatitis virus research, the tree shrew model could be developed. However, high genetic variation within this species may hinder a wide use of this animal in biomedical research. So far, no inbred line of tree shrews has been reported, which is required to be developed to reduce the individual variations found in wild tree shrews. Moreover, there is the challenge of the overall low viral titer in tree shrews and the scarcity of the research tools that should be overcome. However, the development of inbred tree shrews is underway [4], and a recent report of transgenic tree shrews has been released [80], which should further enhance the widespread use of tree shrews in biomedical research, including viral infections. 
