# R E V I E W An Overview of the Efficacy and Safety of Ozanimod for the Treatment of Relapsing Multiple Sclerosis

CorpusID: 234767136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c502b5b7087db13b9bb69caf26e26dfbf0d52f27)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Fingolimod
(p1.0) The first oral drug developed and approved for the treatment of relapsing-remitting MS in 2010 was fingolimod, a small lipophilic agent that is phosphorylated by sphingosine kinase to become an S1P analogue. It binds to S1PR and induces its internalization; after fingolimod phosphate dissociation, the receptor returns to the surface. 12 Fingolimod is a non-selective modulator of all S1PR subtypes, except for subtype 2. Clinical trials showed a 60% decrease in the annualized relapse rate (ARR) in fingolimod 1.25 mg/d-treated patients versus placebo and a reduction in new T2 lesions and gadolinium-enhancing (GdE) lesions on MRI scans over 24 months of treatment. 8 The good efficacy, tolerability, and convenient route of administration have been key to the success of fingolimod. Nevertheless, its non-selectivity leads to interactions with S1PR 3-4-5, which are likely responsible for several of fingolimod's adverse events, including QT interval prolongation, hypertension, macular oedema, pulmonary toxicity, and possibly hepatotoxicity. 13 Moreover, the effects of fingolimod are reversible but are affected by its prolonged half-life of 7 d.
## (s4) Pharmacodynamics
(p4.0) Ozanimod is an agonist of S1PR1 and S1PR5 with 27-fold selectivity for S1PR1 over S1PR5. Its interaction with S1PR leads to receptor internalization and subsequent ubiquitin-proteasome-dependent degradation, 24 preventing receptor reinstallation in the cellular membrane. This leads to the inhibition of lymphocyte egress from lymph nodes, causing a decrease in the absolute lymphocyte count (ALC). The reduction of ALC is dose-dependent, with a plateau effect at a dose of 1 mg/d, and displays a preference for lymphocyte subtypes, with increased effects on CD4+ CCR7+ and CD8+ CCR7+ T cells. 25 This lymphocyte subset selectivity has also been shown for other S1P modulators, suggesting a class ability to maintain protective immunity while targeting the immunopathologic pathway of MS. 26 Earlier studies showed that the effect of ozanimod was rapidly reversible, with ALC restored within 48-72 hours after drug discontinuation. 25 However, recently studies reported a longer time to ALC recovery, ie, up to 30 days after ozanimod withdrawal. 7 This is mainly attributable to the long half-life of CC112273, ozanimod's major active metabolite. The slow return of lymphocyte counts to normal ranges may reduce the competitive advantage of ozanimod on the key safety feature of the lymphocyte recovery profile.
## (s6) Clinical Trials Phase I Trials
(p6.0) The safety of ozanimod was first tested in two Phase I, randomized, double-blind trials. The data showed a dosedependent reduction in heart rate after the first ozanimod administration; therefore, a dose-escalation protocol was used in all subsequent clinical trials. 25 These studies also determined that ozanimod did not prolong the QTc interval at therapeutic and supratherapeutic doses and did not raise any new safety concerns. 32 Furthermore, the effect of ozanimod on circulating leukocyte subsets was evaluated using flow cytometry and epigenetic cell counting in an open label pharmacodynamic study in which MS patients were randomized to oral ozanimod (0.5 or 1 mg/d) for 12 weeks. Dose-dependent decreases in circulating B-and T-cell counts and differential impacts on naive and memory CD4+ and CD8+ T cells and CD19+ B cells were observed. 34 
