# Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review Comptes Rendus Physique Modeling the mechanical properties of nanoparticles: a review

CorpusID: 236369926 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12fe362a30bcba67419d4768203fdf2d3bebd812)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s3) Nanomechanics using MD
(p3.0) As mentioned in the introduction, nanoindentation and nanocompression are the two main experimental tests developed to probe NP mechanical properties. Both make use of an indenter tip (made out of diamond, sapphire or tungsten carbide), that can either indent the flat top surface of a faceted NP directly (see e.g., the work of Kovalenko et al. [48]), or after etching leading to the so-called "flat punch" shape used for nanocompression [15,32]. Both tests were modeled by MD using mainly two approaches for the design of indenter and substrate: (i) the "frozen atoms" approach and (ii) the "virtual force field" approach. While both approaches rely on the application of a force field on surface and subsurface NP atoms, they are slightly different in terms of applied mechanical constraints. On the one hand, in the "frozen atoms" approach, the user simply designs a flat punch, a spherical or a Berkovitch indenter, made out of an infinitely tough, frozen, group of atoms. This last feature is easily achieved in whatever MD code cancelling the forces acting on these atoms or not accounting for them during time integration. Thus, the rigid block of atoms yields a repulsive force field (at short distance) that will be used to compress the NP. In this case, the compression force can be retrieved from the atomic interactions between the NP and the frozen block atoms. On the other hand, the "virtual force field" approach makes use of an explicit analytical formulation of a directional force field. For example, in the popular LAMMPS code [49], one can set a virtual indenter using a force defined by F (r ) = −K (r − R) 2 , Figure 2. Nanosphere with rough surfaces designed for atomistic simulations using spherical harmonics.
## (s4) Stress and strain definitions
(p4.0) The force vs. displacement curve is the "fingerprint" of the NP mechanical response. It is the most straightforward outcome to get from a nanocompression experiment and is particularly used in MD or FEM simulations, especially in the case of spherical NPs for which the elastic properties can be fitted with the Hertz model [52,53]. Force vs. displacement experimental data can be transposed into stress and strain assuming some knowledge about sample dimension variations (contact surface and height), affordable using e.g., the digital image correlation (DIC) technique. While engineering and true strains are easily retrieved from nanocompression simulation (either from the instantaneous position of the indenter or height of the NP), the stress definition is more challenging (see discussion in [54], when applied to MD nanocompression tests). Thanks to the cumulative work done on micropillars, we know that the compressive stress i.e., the force recorded by a sensor divided by the contact surface, is the relevant observable for nanocompression tests as the near contact region is where most of plasticity events start from (assuming the lack of subsequent extrinsic stress concentrators). While the contact force is a direct outcome of both experiments and simulations, the contact surface is more complex to measure. In in situ experiments, the initial dimensions of a NP can be measured using a SEM/TEM camera to define the engineering compressive stresses. More recently, the DIC method was used to calculate onthe-fly NP dimensions when compressed inside the TEM (see e.g., [15]). Nevertheless, DIC measures rely on 2D-side projections that only allow for NP edge length measurements, and not for the top surface area that is only approximated in this case. However, several methods exist to determine top surface area in MD nanocompression tests. The most simple ones rely on the initial sample (or simulation cell) shape and dimensions to deduce the engineering stress. To go further and measure the true stress, one can monitor the box dimension changes assuming the use of shrink-wrapped boundary conditions. However, this method remains approximate as it does not rely on the real shape of the NP and neglects the possible surface shape changes induced by localized and heterogeneous plastic events (e.g., nanotwinning). A more precise method consists in computing rigorously the NP top surface area based on the atomic positions. This can be done using the Delaunay triangulation of the atomic positions as shown e.g., in [54,55]. These last approaches can be combined to a probe sphere method to account for irregular contacts [55] as e.g., for nanoporous or rough surfaces. While this last method might be precise, one can argue about its connection to experiments, where such details in the contacts cannot yet be reached.
## (s5) NP design
(p5.0) NPs are characterized by various shapes such as sphere, cube or faceted shapes (polyhedrons), that rely on both the material considered and the fabrication route. In the simulations, simple "cutting" algorithms are commonly used to model basic shapes, including faceted NPs retrieved from e.g., the Wulff theory. While this approach allows for various NP designs, it suffers from several drawbacks such as surface flatness and particularly sharp edges. Hybrid approaches using various theories (roughness, spherical harmonics) as well as a combination of meshing and atomistic simulation tools can also be used (see e.g., Figure 2). The influence of the sample design on the mechanical properties at the nanoscale being more and more discussed in the atomistic simulation community, several authors tried to build more realistic samples including the use of a blunting parameter [54,56] or extruding some of the edge atoms [18], to round NPs edges and corners. Pre-heating up to a significant amount of the melting temperature is also performed to allow NPs surface reorganisation and integrate randomness in MD simulations [57,58]. In the literature, few experimental methods such as X-ray tomography and atom probe allow to gain information about the sample geometry that can be used in the simulation [59][60][61]. However, while the resolution of the X-ray tomography is restricted to larger scale simulations such as FEM, atom probe is very difficult to apply to nano-objects (especially NPs) due to the needlelike processing of the sample. Up to now, Bragg coherent diffraction [62] and TEM (together with DIC) are the only methods able to characterize NPs surface and shape with a resolution close to the nm. From the authors' knowledge, these methods are not yet used for the design of NPs in simulations due to their complexity.
## (s21) Challenges and future trends
(p21.0) Simulations of NP mechanical properties are unfortunately impeded by several issues, and finding ways to improve or circumvent each of those constitute challenges that should be overcome in the future. The first ones are related to size and time limitations of atomistic simulations. Thanks to the continuous growth of computational power and the development of efficiently parallelized simulation codes, at the time of writing of this paper it is possible to compute the dynamical compression of NPs with diameters of several tens of nanometers, containing millions of atoms, using empirical interatomic potentials. These sizes overlap with the smallest NP samples reported in experiments, allowing for a direct comparison. However, it would be interesting to model systems with sizes of a few hundreds of nanometers, which are common in these studies. Hopefully, such sizes will be accessible in the near future in atomistic simulations. Aside from the computation power increase, multiscale modeling techniques could also be interesting options. In that way, coarse-grained dynamics have already been used to model relatively small polymer particles [161]. Coupling atomistic calculations with DDD [173] could also have a great potential. Moreover, the development of DDD-based hybrid approaches (as coupled to FEM) could provide a valuable upgrade about the modeling of NPs mechanics, especially about the dislocation dynamics after yielding and the possible formation of dislocation microstructures inside the nanocrystal.
