# A review of codebook design methods for sparse code multiple access

CorpusID: 237251889 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s7) OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
(p7.0) The main challenge in codebook designing is user data segregation in signal space, optimising easy decoding and a simple decoder at the receiver [46]. In designing mother constellations, more power-efficient and simple models need to be developed, focusing on IoT [47]. There is a need to explore better-fit mathematical models to extract the required codebooks. Some theories are discussed in this study, but there is a need to explore mathematical models for codebook designing.

(p7.1) Further research should explore machine-learning techniques for SCMA data processing used in similar domains [48]. Prominent of these are regression, decision tree, and neural networks. Learning techniques can extract codebooks best suited for the required channel conditions. Machine learning can be enhanced by mixing with adaptive processing algorithms. Such a method exists in the 5G domain as presented in [48], and they can be used for the SCMA domain. According to channel or data, adaptive nature can be explored, leading to a new codebook domain for 5G communication. The author utilised an adaptive approach in designing better SCMA architectures according to user features [49]. Another research domain is resource planning organisation [50], including adaptively allocating resources and developing optimised algorithms.
