# biology Pathogens and Carcinogenesis: A Review

CorpusID: 235642494 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36b87e8fee835dae85f037cff9fff5b7d1b6e5a7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36b87e8fee835dae85f037cff9fff5b7d1b6e5a7)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s9) Opisthorchis viverrini
(p9.0) Opisthorchis viverrini was first discovered in Southeast Asia in 1886 in a fish by the parasitologist Jules Poirier [97]; it is prevalent in Thailand, Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia. It is a monoecious hermaphrodite [98] and requires three different hosts (two intermediate and one definitive) to complete its life cycle. O. viverrini miracidia larvae infect freshwater snails (Bithynia spp.) and grow into sporocysts in snail tissues. These sporocysts become cercaria larvae, escape from snail tissues, and migrate towards fish, their second intermediate host. The flukes will then develop into metacercaria in the flesh of the fish. Ingestion of raw, contaminated fish frees O. viverrini into their final host, where they migrate towards the biliary tree and dominate the bile duct [99,100]. The flukes then cause CCA via three mechanisms: mechanical and chronic injury to biliary epithelial cells, immunologic inflammation via release of reactive oxygen intermediates and nitric oxide, and host cell proliferation via parasite secretion products. In chronic infection, these will cause DNA damage to the host cells and lead to tumorigenesis [101].
## (s12) Fusobacterium nucleatum
(p12.0) Fusobacterium nucleatum are anaerobic Gram-negative bacteria that were first isolated from the oral cavity. With the advent of gut microbiome profiling, it was discovered that the bacteria can also colonize human intestines [119]; nevertheless, the movement of F. nucleatum from the mouth to colon remains unclear. In 2013, Kostic et al. proved that infection by F. nucleatum increases tumor cell multiplicity and recruits tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells in an in vivo model. Accordingly, carcinogenic properties of the bacteria were then reported, where the bacteria were found to enhance the proliferation of normal human colon cells, subsequently triggering the epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway [120].
## (s14) Schistosoma haematobium
(p14.0) Urogenital schistosomiasis is a medical condition caused by S. haematobium infections. This infection leads to chronic inflammation and the presence of blood in the urine-hematuria [131], a condition associated with the development of bladder cancer. S. haematobium was first discovered in the 1850s in Cairo, Egypt, and carcinogenic properties of the parasite were later reported in the late 1880s [132,133]. Compared to other parasites, this trematode lives in pairs (male and female) and undergoes sexual reproduction during their life cycle. The free-swimming parasite could be acquired from freshwater environments, where it enters human hosts via skin penetration. This process is mediated by the secretion of proteolytic enzymes [134]. Following this, the cercaria larvae will migrate to its favorable site of infection (uterus, bladder, and prostate) for reproduction. Eggs of S. haematobium can be traced from urine samples of infected patients; eggs that are deposited in the bladder wall will cause damage and inflammation to the bladder lumen [135], increasing the risk of bladder cancer.
