# COVID-19 and novel mRNA vaccines in pregnancy: an updated literature review

CorpusID: 238991518 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1aa2f9ddd3068c4400e71d93106134d09c838f6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Mechanism for increased risk
(p3.0) Current published data suggests that symptomatic pregnant patients with COVID-19 are at increased risk of more severe illness compared with nonpregnant patients, especially those with comorbidities such as hypertension, diabetes or cholestasis of pregnancy. [17][18][19][20][21] The physiological, metabolic and vascular changes in normal and high-risk pregnancies may exacerbate these risks. In addition, the normal upregulation of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor during pregnancy was reported to play a major role. 22 The upregulation of ACE2 receptor allows SARS-CoV-2 to bind and enter the host's cells, thereby increasing the risk of infection during pregnancy. 22 SARS-CoV-2, once bound to the ACE2 receptor, downregulates the expression of ACE2 receptor which leads to increased risk of vascular, endothelial cell and microcirculatory dysfunction including vasoconstriction. 22 This can further increase risk of miscarriages, premature births and intrauterine growth restrictions.
## (s5) Vertical transmission likelihood
(p5.0) Despite the potential adverse effects to symptomatic women during pregnancy, there is limited evidence of vertical transmission of COVID-19 or of its presence in breastmilk. As of 2 September 2020, 19 neonates were documented found to be COVID-19-positive based on rtPCR nasopharyngeal swabs. Three of these were febrile, 15 were asymptomatic and one was born at 31 +2 weeks; he developed disseminated intravascular coagulopathy but was recovering at the time of publication. Thus far, there have been no reported deaths of COVID-19-positive neonates. 25 Angiotensin converting enzyme 2, a target of SARS-CoV-2 cell entry, and the spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV2 have been found on the syncytiotrophoblast cells of the placental villi that form the interface between mother and fetus in the placenta. 29 Therefore, vertical transmission may be possible, unlike with SARS, where no evidence of vertical transmission exists, but it is unclear whether these 19 cases were infected in utero, intrapartum or postpartum. 25 This study by Pettirosso et al. also states that the risk of vertical transmission was assessed with rtPCR of nasopharyngeal secretions, placenta, cord blood, amniotic fluid and breastmilk. They found that 19 of 655 nasopharyngeal swabs were COVID-19-positive by rtPCR as discussed and four placenta samples and one cord blood sample were positive, but the neonatal nasopharyngeal swabs were negative. Anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM and IgG antibodies were elevated in the serum of three neonates, suggesting some hope for antibodies of COVID-19 vaccinated mother's, passing to the neonate. 25 In terms of impacts on the fetus, there is limited data about in utero infection, risk of vertical transmission and early positive neonatal testing.
## (s6) Unique T-helper 2 bias
(p6.0) During the first trimester of pregnancy, there is a bias toward T-helper 2 system dominance which protects the fetus by suppressing cell mediated immunity, but leaves the mother vulnerable to viral infections, which are more effectively contained by the Th1 system. 33 Data from German and US trials of the Pfizer-BioNtech mRNA vaccine (BNT162b2) indicate a broad immune response to the vaccine with induction of neutralising antibody responses as well as helper T-cell type 1 CD4 + cells and expansion of effector memory CD8 + T-cells in both men and nonpregnant women participants. 31 Currently, there is not enough data to confirm whether pregnant women have the same immunophenotypical response. If so, there are concerns that neonates born to mothers with altered CD4 + T-cell responses may have long-term sequelae. 31 Disruption of the balance of CD4 + T-cell responses by overstimulation of Th1 immunity may be harmful during pregnancy and is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes; including preeclampsia, preterm birth and fetal loss. 31,34 Impacts on breastfeeding
