# Digitalization of learning in Saudi Arabia during the COVID-19 outbreak: A survey

CorpusID: 235441178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8267a4f877d602fd831e5235d7c5616c21f8c0d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8267a4f877d602fd831e5235d7c5616c21f8c0d5)

Fields: Education, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s14) Results and discussion
(p14.0) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.
## (s47) Results and discussion
(p47.0) The COVID-19 outbreaks have forced many countries to shut down their educational institutions, schools, and universities, leading to a paradigm shift in the process of education, whereby face-to-face classrooms were transformed into virtual ones. However, Teras et al. in Ref. [75] have concluded that many institutions failed to determine the correct technology to deliver the learning materials to the students. This study provided a review of the implemented leading technologies in delivering the learning materials, focusing on the country's most initially affected, to assist the affected institutions in digitalizing their learning during this pandemic. Technologies of education implemented in China, Italy, India, the USA, Spain, Germany, and South Korea were accordingly reviewed.
