# Finding Critical Scenarios for Automated Driving Systems: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 239016131 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7eac16f6e5c63fd983155947b18f1721af87beaf)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s22) Literature search and selection
(p22.0) The primary studies for this literature review are collected through an iterative process with automatic search and snowballing as shown in Fig. 8. This section describes the details of how we conducted each stage. Stage 1: A comprehensive initial search string can reduce the number of iterations to determine the final search string as described in Stage 3. To better define the initial search strings, an initial set of relevant studies was gathered from two sources. The first source was publications from recent relevant research projects including AutoDrive, Prystine, Pegasus, Enable-S3 and AdaptIVe. The second source are the relevant papers included in the two relevant survey papers  Fig. 8. The stages to collect the primary studies. The numbers on the arrows indicate the numbers of studies given to the next stage [32], [33] introduced in Section 2.6. The initial set contains 151 potentially relevant studies. After being filtered by the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 49 studies remained.
## (s61) Required information
(p61.0) All the studies analyzed in the section require a simulator. Some studies require access to the internal state of the simulator, as in [58], while others treat them as a blackbox as in [60]. In [46], as mentioned before, a backward search is performed, where their method tries to get to a safe state from a future unsafe state. Due to the impossibility of computing the inverse of the ACC control law, the authors generate random inputs for the ACC vehicle to try to get the vehicle in the previous state. Then they simulate forward to ensure getting into an unsafe state again.
