# electronics Machine Learning in Wireless Sensor Networks for Smart Cities: A Survey

CorpusID: 235850745 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2da9060ac67c4942b19e3c0bcef9fe2b74059e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2da9060ac67c4942b19e3c0bcef9fe2b74059e0)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s11) IoT Node Coverage and Connectivity
(p11.0) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].

(p11.1) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].
## (s12) Routing Layer Issues
(p12.0) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].

(p12.1) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].
## (s13) MAC Layer Issues
(p13.0) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].

(p13.1) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].
## (s14) Sensor Data Aggregation
(p14.0) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].

(p14.1) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].
## (s80) IoT Node Coverage and Connectivity
(p80.0) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].

(p80.1) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].
## (s81) Routing Layer Issues
(p81.0) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].

(p81.1) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].
## (s82) MAC Layer Issues
(p82.0) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].

(p82.1) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].
## (s83) Sensor Data Aggregation
(p83.0) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].

(p83.1) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].
