# Molecular Sciences High Molecular Weight Kininogen: A Review of the Structural Literature

CorpusID: 245211283 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45a2bb2bb59b58215cd41c564a67f2ca26a095dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45a2bb2bb59b58215cd41c564a67f2ca26a095dc)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science, Medicine

## (s2) The Importance of Kininogen in Civilization and Infectious Diseases
(p2.0) HK significance, beyond physiological BK production, is participation in thrombotic disorders as it participates as cofactor for the contact activation system on many negatively charged surfaces (e.g., silica, nucleic acids, polyphosphates of different origins, misfolded proteins, collagen, bacteria, or viruses). Thrombosis and embolism are significant problems connected to civilization diseases related to the circulatory system where the role of HK should not be neglected. Thrombotic complications and coagulation disorders appear frequently secondary to infections with various pathogens where contact activation is triggered. BK released from HK during either contact activation or as part of the KKS contribute to the pathology of many inflammatory diseases like hereditary angioedema. Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 the virus causing COVID-19 pandemic is known to bind Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2). Such binding increases BK release which promotes inflammation in the lungs, causing cough and fever, as well as further activation of the coagulation and the complement system. Emerging thrombotic complications associated with COVID-19 infection and reports of post-vaccination thrombotic reactions indicate the need to investigate the relationship within the hemostatic system, including contact factors [44,45]. Understanding the structure of HK is important for a better understanding of the changes and processes it undergoes not only in physiological state, but pathological situations like thrombotic disorders accompanying various civilization and infectious diseases, with the activation of the immune system, inflammation, and coagulation.
## (s3) Literature Describing the Structure of Kininogen
(p3.0) Although images of huHK were made many years ago by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using various negative staining techniques, they do not shed much light on the actual shape of the kininogen [3,13,14]. In the oldest work by Weisel et al. (1994) [3], where TEM images of human kininogen were taken, the samples were applied to a substrate from mica with tungsten shading and an 80 kV Philips 400 microscope was used to obtain pictures at 60,000× magnification. Using the scale provided by the authors, 3 domains of the kininogen seem to have a total of 130-180 Å, while one domain was 50-90 Å. In this work, together with HK images, IgG antibodies (mass~150 kDa, length 100-150 Å) were visualized in some figures. Based on these data (Supplementary Figure S2), it can be calculated that the length of the antibody is about 150 Å, and the kininogen associated with this antibody is~180 Å long. Perhaps what the authors of this study showed were not individual kininogen molecules, but rather their aggregates, where a single domain is actually one kininogen molecule.

(p3.1) In 2001, Herwald et al. (2001) [44] used 5 µL of sample with a concentration of 5-19 µg per mL in 50 mM Tris. HCl, pH 7.4 buffer plus 150 mM NaCl to carry negative stain imaging on a glow discharged carbon-coated copper grids using JEOL 1200 EX 60 kV transmission electron microscope. In this work, according to the scale given in some figures, the cation-free (EDTA treated) or Mg 2+ treated protein molecules have estimated dimensions of 95 ± 30 Å (width) and 150 ± 30 Å (length) (Supplementary Figure S3A-C) with two larger domains (55 ± 20 Å) and three smaller domains (35 ± 20 Å) of 130-150 Å, and the substructure (subdomain) were visible. In the presence of Zn 2+ ions, the protein was more spherical and compact, with the dimensions reduced to 90 ± 30 Å (width) and 110 ± 30 Å (length) (Supplementary Figure S3D).

(p3.2) In 2009, Oehmcke, Mörgelin, and Herwald reported TEM images of HK [45], and according to the image scale (Supplementary Figure S4), the molecule should have only about 45 Å diameter. The internal structures corresponding to five to six domains were visible in those images. The dimensions of a given domain are only 15-20 Å. The authors did not describe the TEM methodology in the paper but referred to an earlier work by the group [44], and they did not provide numerical dimensions. In this study, the scale appears to underestimate the results and is not in agreement with previous reports.
