# Bell's Palsy: A Review

CorpusID: 241113501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a369f128db62904e902be29dd4912194a64b2b2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a369f128db62904e902be29dd4912194a64b2b2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Background
(p2.0) Bell's palsy is named after Sir Charles Bell (1774-1842). Although he was the first to present the anatomical basis of Bell's palsy, recent research has revealed that other European practitioners contributed earlier clinical descriptions and accounts of the seventh peripheral cranial nerve palsy [7]. The first case report of idiopathic facial paralysis is believed to have been published by an 18th-century medicine professor, Nicolaus Friedrich, in Wurzburg. The case report described three middle-aged men with similar episodes of unilateral facial paralysis, which was subacute or acute in origin and gradually bettered in a few weeks to months. Later, Charles Bell studied facial nerve function in animals. He encountered several unilateral facial nerve paralysis cases during his surgical practice in London. His most well-known and widely cited case of facial palsy was posted in 1828, in which he presented a matter of a man hit by a bull and the resulting injury caused perpetual facial nerve paralysis [8].
## (s4) Etiopathogenesis
(p4.0) Although the precise pathogenesis of Bell's palsy is not known and considered idiopathic, specific immune, ischemic and hereditary factors strongly correlate with its etiology. Based on recent reports, the reactivation of dormant herpes virus in the geniculate ganglion and its migration to the facial nerve has been considered to be vital in causation [8,12]. Herpes zoster virus (HZV) and herpes simplex virus (HSV) are human neurotropic alpha herpes viruses and are most commonly involved [13]. These may remain latent life-long in the ganglia [14]. HZV virus is considered more aggressive as it spreads across the nerve via satellite cells. Usually, herpes simplex is involved in causing cold sores and genital herpes, whereas herpes zoster is causative of chickenpox and shingles. The infection is said to be latent when there is no active viral replication, but in the presence of antibodies or immunodeficient states, nerve damage and inflammation of the facial nerve may occur, resulting in its further compression due to its fact in a narrow bony canal. Other viruses known to be involved in the causation of Bell's palsy are Epstein Barr virus causing infectious mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus, adenovirus, mumps virus, influenza B, etc. [15].
