# materials Hemp and Its Derivatives as a Universal Industrial Raw Material (with Particular Emphasis on the Polymer Industry)-A Review

CorpusID: 247905479 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e32f81165fea3200700275de3d5a0c6253492728](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e32f81165fea3200700275de3d5a0c6253492728)

Fields: Materials Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s16) Construction
(p16.0) Hemp is an extremely efficient and environmentally friendly building material. This is due to the fact that the increase in hemp biomass is two to four times greater than in forests managed on the same acreage. Hemp fiber is used to make furniture and decorations, partition plates are produced, thermal insulation of buildings is also carried out, or research is carried out on concrete blocks containing hemp fibers, characterized by low thermal conductivity and good acoustic barrier. From special varieties of hemp, it is easy to produce ecological bricks up to seven times stronger than concrete. Fiber hemp is also used to produce insulation material, building material for the construction of roofs, walls and floors. It is quite resistant to moisture, does not rot, is not flammable and is almost 100% recyclable. According to research by construction specialists, cellulose concrete made with hemp is resistant to fire and insects, is lighter than conventional building materials and has much better acoustic, thermal and insulating properties [86][87][88][89][90]. Seng et al. in their article, indicate that the thermal conductivity of hemp concrete, depending on the method, ranges from 0.103 to 0.112 W m −1 ·K −1 [88]. The use of hemp concrete reduces the cost of building a residential house thanks to the simplification of the structure and the use of cheaper raw materials. Other plant derivatives, such as hemp oil, can also be an important ingredient used in the manufacture of paints and varnishes, as it dries quickly and leaves a thin, flexible film, and the use of its subsidies in petrochemicals is eliminated.
