# Just breathe: a review of sex and gender in chronic lung disease Number 7 in the Series "Sex and gender in lung disease" Edited by

CorpusID: 245907013 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/174bd51e11e2eaced3f189724bbe8de4c7db3d2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/174bd51e11e2eaced3f189724bbe8de4c7db3d2e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Traditionally, much of our understanding of health and disease was derived through studies conducted on malesanimal and humanwithout consideration for sex and gender [1]. Sex relates to biological characteristics whereas gender refers to socio-cultural and behavioural roles and aspects. Increasingly, evidence supports the impact of sex and gender on disease pathogenesis, risk and diagnosis, prevalence, severity, therapeutics and outcomes [2][3][4][5][6]. The male lung is larger than the female lung in persons of similar height, and males have greater lung capacity and flow volumes and rates [7]. This sets up the structural foundations for the differences in lung health and disease between the sexes. Gender-based factors have added implications on the occurrence, recognition and management across the spectrum of lung diseases. Herein, we review the role of sex and gender on lung health, detail how they impact common chronic lung diseases and delineate how we can better incorporate sex and gender into both the research and clinical realms as it relates to lung health.
## (s6) Research considerations
(p6.0) Despite the increasing awareness and efforts, there remains significant sex and gender disparities in clinical studies leading to an incomplete understanding of disease [218]. In clinical trials, although we may see sex-stratified results, the efforts to consider gender and sex as it may relate to efficacy and safety of therapeutics remains limited. Inclusion of a gender dimension to these clinical studies will contribute to greater understanding of disease manifestations and outcomes in males and females [219]. Sex and gender aspects and their inter-relations need to be considered in all aspects of the research process. When sexand/or gender-specific differences are identified in pilot studies, clinical trials (therapies, devices etc.) should be sufficiently powered to evaluate these endpoints, be it related to safety or efficacy. Conscientious recruitment strategies at an early study or trial stage and in line with the study design can help to have equitable enrolment by sex and gender as well as assist with downstream late-phase trials. Given our movement towards personalised and precision-based medicine, sex and gender equity in studies will go a long way towards reaching this goal. Alongside investigators, similar efforts must be put in by academic institutions, pharmaceutical and bio-engineering companies, publishers, as well as policy makers such that we can innovate our current research paradigm and advance together.
