# Utilization of CRISPR-Mediated Tools for Studying Functional Genomics in Hematological Malignancies: An Overview on the Current Perspectives, Challenges, and Clinical Implications

CorpusID: 246362613 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b260c059f8df1567d8e5025be40910a20703ae9d)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s1) GENE EDITING TECHNIQUES
(p1.0) Gene editing is the ability to make extremely precise changes in the DNA sequence of a living organism and essentially customizing its genetic makeup. Gene editing is achieved by using enzymes, predominantly nucleases, that have been synthesized to target a specific DNA sequence. This is when they introduce cuts into the DNA strands, allowing the removal of existing DNA and the insertion of a replacement DNA. It is a type of genetic engineering tool to insert, delete, or replace a DNA in the genome of an organism using "molecular scissors" (Saha et al., 2019). These nucleases create site-specific double-strand breaks (DSBs) at desired locations in the genome (Vítor et al., 2020). The induced double-strand breaks are then repaired through non-homologous endjoining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR) which results in targeted mutations also known as "edits" (Salsman et al., 2017). There have been three important families of bioengineered nucleases being used such as zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector-based nucleases (TALENs), and CRISPR-Cas systems .
## (s2) Zinc-Finger Nucleases
(p2.0) The discovery of zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) in the 1980s added value to the gene editing approach by being a precision tool in genome editing: it carried a site-specific recognition pattern in editing the desired gene. The ZFNs are composed of two parts, namely, Fokl nuclease that is fused with zinc-finger DNA-binding domains. The zinc-finger DNA-binding domain has a unique characteristic of recognizing a 3-base pair site on DNA, and it can be combined to recognize longer sequences (Wu et al., 2007). Furthermore, the ZFNs act as dimers by upsurging the length of the DNA recognition site and increasing the specificity. Cys 2 -His 2 ZFNs are fusions between a custom-designed Cys 2 -His 2 zincfinger protein and the cleavage domain of the FokI restriction endonuclease. Cys 2 -His 2 ZFPs bind DNA by inserting an α-helix into the major groove of the double helix (Wu et al., 2007) ZFNs function as dimers, with each monomer recognizing a specific "half site" sequence, typically nine to 18 base pairs of DNA, via the zinc-finger DNA-binding domain. One major concern associated with the use of ZFNs for genome editing is offtarget mutations (Chen et al., 2014). As a result, several approaches have been undertaken to enhance their specificity; among the most successful of these has been the creation of obligate heterodimeric ZFN architectures that rely on charge-charge repulsion to prevent unwanted homodimerization of the FokI cleavage domain, thereby minimizing the potential for ZFNs to dimerize at off-target sites. Additionally, protein-engineering methods have been used to enhance the cleavage efficiency of the FokI cleavage domain (Chen et al., 2014). The main hurdle in using ZFNs was the 3-base pair site on DNA requirement that made the design more challenging (Gupta and Musunuru, 2014). The upper hand was the guanine-rich target sites that appeared to be more efficient at editing when compared to the non-guaninerich sites. Furthermore, the ZFN interaction with DNA is modular, and each ZF interacts with DNA independently that hampered the editing efficiency. Therefore, scientists needed to address these issues if they wanted to have more efficiently edited genome. According to a study which adopted the ZFN approach for genome editing in human pluripotent stem cells, the scientists observed multiple off-target genomic sites based on highsequence similarity to the on-target site and found a single off-target mutation in the 184 clones assessed (Hockemeyer et al., 2009). Therefore, scientists should be aware of the likelihood that ZFNs that are designed for a purpose may experience undesired off-target effects at a low rate. There are ways to reduce off-target effects, by using a pair of ZFNs that have different FokI domains that are obligate heterodimers. Through this approach, we will be able to prevent a single ZFN from binding to two adjacent off-target sites and in turn generating a DSB. The second approach would be the introduction of purified ZFN proteins into cells. Although it is efficient at inducing DNA edits, ZFNs are cumbersome and laborious to assemble. Currently, the ZFN approach is still at the early stage and there are some difficulties that need to be addressed and sorted off before it is clinically used to treat human diseases. ZFN-based strategies for gene editing of human cells may provide a viable option to treat human disease in the future.
## (s4) CRISPR
(p4.0) Although recently developed programmable editing tools such as zinc-finger nucleases and transcription activator-like effector nucleases have significantly improved the capacity for precise genome modification, these techniques have limitations. The new kid on the block, CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) technology represents a significant improvement over these, reaching a new level of targeting, efficiency, and ease of use. CRISPR nucleases lead the geneediting platform because they are the most powerful and direct to use gene-editing tools available now. Based on their cas gene content, CRISPR-Cas systems can be classified into six major types (I-VI) (Koonin et al., 2017). The systems are classified into two general parts, namely, clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) arrays and CRISPR-associated (Cas) proteins. The CRISPR immunological signature represents the memory of the previous infections encoded within individual spacers separated by conserved repeats. Cas proteins carry out the adaptive immune functions and are highly diverse, resulting in CRISPR-Cas systems currently being grouped into two classes, six types, and over 30 subtypes (Wimmer and Beisel, 2020). The speedy unearthing and continuous development has led to the availability of choices; hence, choosing the right nuclease for an experiment is a mandatory part of this approach. The CRISPR system allows for site-specific genomic targeting in virtually any organism (Guilinger et al., 2014). It also offers platform that is an efficient way of making precise genetic changes to the human genome. This can be employed for disruption, addition, and correction of genes, thereby enabling a new class of genetic therapies that can be applied to hematological disorders.
## (s6) Cas10 System
(p6.0) Classification of CRISPR-Cas10 variants that would capture their evolutionary relationships to the maximum possible extent is essential for comparative genomic and functional characterization of this theoretically and practically important system of adaptive immunity (Chen et al., 2014). The Cas10 enzyme is classified into Class 1 CRISPR-Cas systems which consist of the three types, type I, III, and IV systems as well as 22 subtypes. Along with Cas10 in Class 1, it also includes Cas3 and Cas8-like (csf1) enzyme which are considered signature genes in types I, III, and IV, respectively (Vangah et al., 2020). Type III systems, which are identified by their signature Cas10 gene, are further divided into subtypes: III-A/D, which encodes the Cas10-Csm complex, and III-B/C, which encodes the Cas10-Cmr complex. Type III effector complexes employ a uniquely elaborate targeting mechanism (Pyenson et al., 2017;Tamulaitis et al., 2017) in which active transcription of the target sequence is required for CRISPR immunity (Deng et al., 2013). The large subunit of type III systems, Cas10, is a protein containing two RNA recognition motif domains, whereby one domain shows a high significant similarity to the palm domain, the catalytic domain of a broad variety of RNA and DNA polymerases and nucleotide cyclases. This palm domain is predicted to be an active enzyme, whereas the second RRM domain is inactivated form (Koonin et al., 2017).
## (s7) Cas13 System
(p7.0) DNA targeting CRISPR enzymes, such as Cas9 and Cas12a, have enabled many new possibilities for manipulating and studying DNA. Recent computational efforts to identify new CRISPR systems uncovered a novel type of RNA targeting enzyme, Cas13. The diverse Cas13 family contains at least four known subtypes, including Cas13a, Cas13b, Cas13c, and Cas13d (Elliott et al., 2021). One of the most straightforward applications of Cas13 in vivo is targeted RNA knockdown using mammalian codon optimized Cas13 and guide expression vectors. Knockdown of RNA relies on cleavage of the targeted transcripts by the endogenous RNase activity of the dual HEPN domains of the protein, the efficiency of which varies between different orthologs and subtypes of Cas13. The Cas13a is an RNA-guided, single-component enzyme that possesses two higher eukaryotes and prokaryotes nucleotide-binding (HEPN) domains that target single-stranded RNA (ssRNA). It encompasses a functionally distinct nuclease that is responsible for catalyzing crRNA maturation to form a Cas13a:crRNA complex that is competent for target RNA binding. The binding of the said complex to a complementary ssRNA is termed as activator-RNA. This binding activates the HEPN-nuclease for both target and general ssRNase activity. The action of the HEPN-nuclease is repressed by fractional occlusion of the HEPN active site until binding to the activator-RNA occurs. This effectively makes the activator-RNA the allosteric switch for RNase activity (Narimani et al., 2019). While the mechanism appears conserved between homologs, Cas13a enzymes can be functionally separated into two distinct subtypes based on their processing activity and HEPN-nuclease nucleotide preference . As a result, guide design and restrictions on targeting depend on the system used . In a study conducted by Cox et al. (2017), they expanded the RNA targeting ability of Cas13 to direct ADAR2 deaminase for RNA base (adenosine to inosine) modifications in human cells to recover functional proteins and halt disease progression. The application of Cas13a for nucleic acid detection and targeting are active Cas13a HEPN nuclease, which will turn over multiple ssRNA substrates, a biochemical behavior that can be leveraged for signal amplification in target detection by coupling Cas13a activation to specific ssRNA reporter cleavage, resulting in liberation of a quenched fluorophore. Expanding on this, the specific high-sensitivity enzymatic reporter unlocking (SHERLOCK) platform was developed as a tool for nucleic acid detection (Narimani et al., 2019). The method starts with RNA sequence amplification via RPA or reverse transcriptase RPA (rt-RPA), before incubating the sample with Cas13a and reporter probes, and fluorescence is then measured. SHERLOCK can detect nucleic acids in patient biofluids down to low atto molar concentrations, allowing the detection of tumor mutation in cell-free DNA (cfDNA). In mock cfDNA samples, SHERLOCK can detect two cancer mutations, EGFR L858R and BRAF V600E, under low allelic fraction with single-base mismatch sensitivity. In addition to in vitro RNA target detection, catalytically inactive Cas13a retains its RNA-binding activity such that it can be coupled to a fluorescent probe to enable live cell RNA tracking. This provides an alternative method to recognize and visualize RNA (Pandolfi, 2001).
