# Systematic review The indirect health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on children and adolescents: A review

CorpusID: 247383794 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97406d5911f9b31bc6c586d80855eea33b50e023](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97406d5911f9b31bc6c586d80855eea33b50e023)

Fields: Medicine

## (s14) Lifestyle behaviour
(p14.0) There is limited understanding of how the social isolation measures have impacted physical activity and nutrition of children and adolescents (Margaritis et al., 2020), and the studies included in this review were limited to specific populations. Research on healthy and obese children, comparing school days with holiday periods, has shown weight gain during holiday periods, for reasons unknown (Franckle et al., 2014;Von Hippel et al., 2007;Wang et al., 2015). Furthermore, it is not clear, if and to what extent isolation measures may interact with other social determinants that are known to be indicators of physical activity and nutrition (Margaritis et al., 2020). It is quite likely that this will disproportionately impact young people growing up in low-income households and poverty, and food insecurity is expected to be exacerbated due to school closure, for those whom received a significant proportion of their healthy daily nutrition at school (Dunn et al., 2020;Kinsey et al., 2020;Van Lancker and Parolin, 2020). Moreover, food insecurity is associated with short-term fatigue and decreased immunity (Dunn et al., 2020), as well as worse academic performance, and poorer physical and mental health in the long-term (Dunn et al., 2020;Van Lancker and Parolin, 2020). There is also an increased risk of obesity (Kinsey et al., 2020). The impact of decreased food access due to the pandemic on paediatric mortality has been modelled for LMICs. This study showed that increased wasting of 10% and 50% over 6 months would lead to 253,500 and 1,157,000 additional child deaths, which would amount to 18-23% increased mortality (Roberton et al., 2020). Further research is needed to assess to what extent (prolonged) school closure has severe consequences, which could then determine if these outweigh the risks of reopening.
