# A Review of Nanotechnology for Treating Dysfunctional Placenta

CorpusID: 247768248 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd503807943af3812c11e80f7d638b3bfa9afa4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dd503807943af3812c11e80f7d638b3bfa9afa4d)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The placenta is a highly specialized transient organ during pregnancy. Placental dysfunction has been shown to be strongly associated with major obstetric diseases, such as fetal growth restriction (FGR), preeclampsia (PE), preterm premature membrane rupture, preterm labor, late spontaneous abortion, and placental abruption (Brosens et al., 2011). Although significant progress has been made in preventing the disease, current obstetric interventions in clinical obstetric practice are limited for management of the disease, after it has set in (Chappell and David, 2016). The interventions in current practice deal mostly with maternal symptoms or terminating pregnancy when maternal condition deteriorates. According to recent studies, the world population is growing by approximately 80 million people each year, most of whom may experience maternal and neonatal disorders. Over 90% of pregnant women take at least one medication during their perinatal period, either over-the-counter or prescribed. Approximately 10% of pregnant women need medical prescriptions due to serious obstetric complications (Mitchell et al., 2011). The embryo is exceptionally sensitive and systemic toxicity of therapeutic agents may endanger the health of the mother and cause side effects to the fetus. This explains why only a limited number of therapeutic agents are applied for obstetric complications. Therefore, it is important to explore effective therapeutic drugs, seeking a balance between minimizing harmful effects on the fetal compartment and maximizing the dose to mothers.
## (s4) POTENTIAL DELIVERY TARGETS
(p4.0) The placenta plays several key roles, including, but not limited to, the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to the fetus and the production of hormones and signals needed to support pregnancy (Lager and Powell, 2012;Napso et al., 2018). The characteristics of placental microvascular endothelial cells are similar to those of trophoblast cells (Troja et al., 2014). This similarity makes cell specificity particularly important, effectively avoiding the off-target effects of nanotherapy or other clinical treatments. Some studies have identified PLAC1 and CyP19a as genes with trophoblast-specific promoters (Rawn and Cross, 2008;Fant et al., 2010). They found that nanoparticles loaded with insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) molecules could effectively target human trophoblast cell lines. Nanoparticles are nanosized materials (diameter between 1 and 100 nm) that can load multiple drugs or agents. Because of their high surface-area-to-volume ratio and other properties, they can achieve high targeted drug or agent densities. Nanoparticles can also carry the drug within and controlled-release to increase the local drug concentration when tied to the targets. Nanoparticles are divided into different types based on structural differences, including polymeric nanocarriers, polymer conjugates, dendrimers, carbon nanotubes, gold nanocarriers, and lipid-based carriers, such as liposomes and micelles ( Figure 4).
