# Opportunities and challenges in machine learning-based newborn screening-A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 247687025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7024b07482d7d1bec34d18ab14f68afc3e7c8f9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7024b07482d7d1bec34d18ab14f68afc3e7c8f9)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s23) | Implementation of pattern recognition techniques in NBS
(p23.0) Pattern recognition techniques are strongly related to feature selection since they aim to recognize patterns within the features' importances. Therefore, the results of the feature selection methods are often compared to established primary markers 7 and analyzed by clinical and biochemical experts. 15 Furthermore, for interpretable methods, built-in decision functions 12,14,15,24 and discriminatory thresholds 14,16 can be used to identify the biomarkers on which the classifier based its classification. For noninterpretable ML methods, model agnostic approaches such as mean decrease accuracy are applied to identify the individual contribution of specific metabolites. 22,25 4 | DISCUSSION Further development and optimization of NBS for inherited metabolic diseases remains an important and challenging task. Based on a systematic review, we identified opportunities and challenges of the whole ML pipeline for NBS, including the application of data preprocessing, classification models and pattern recognition methods.
## (s28) | Conclusion
(p28.0) Through technical advances, ML-based NBS enables new opportunities in reducing false positive rates and identifying so far unknown metabolic patterns by relying on complex feature combinations instead of predefined cutoff values. These mathematical strategies should be regarded as complementary to the combined use of biochemical and genetic tests aiming at improving the diagnostic specificity of NBS programs through second and multiple tier analysis. However, due to the variety of diseases and methods, a general recommendation for a single ML method in NBS is currently not possible. Instead, a thorough analysis of different methods is necessary for all applications. Among the presented, LRA and SVM seem to be valuable candidates for NBS classification since they are often applied, achieve high performance in general and in comparative studies, and handle multidimensional data. Comparing both methods, LRA is interpretable on a modular level, whereas SVM is not and therefore, LRA might be more applicable for NBS. Yet, with the rise of ensemble and deep learning methods, also noninterpretable extensions of these methods such as Ridge-LRA and Bagging-SVM showed promising results. 19,24 In combination with explainable artificial intelligence methods, these noninterpretable methods could be applied more frequently, which will be investigated in comprehensive future studies.
