# Towards More Precise Automatic Analysis: A Comprehensive Survey of Deep Learning-based Multi-organ Segmentation

CorpusID: 257255572 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/564ec33ed2cbfae044e8c770f73e0044d305107f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/564ec33ed2cbfae044e8c770f73e0044d305107f)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s13) VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE TRENDS
(p13.0) In this paper, a systematic review of deep learning methods for multi-organ segmentation is presented from the perspectives of both full annotation and imperfect annotation. The main innovations of the full annotation method focus on the design of network architectures, the combination of network dimensions, the innovation of network modules and the proposal of new loss functions. In terms of the network architecture design, with the development of the transformer [75] architectures, better utilization of these advanced architectures for multi-organ segmentation is a promising direction, as well as the automatic search for the optimal architecture for each organ through neural network architecture search (NAS) [191]. In the network dimension, optimally combining 2D and 3D architectures is a worthwhile research direction. In terms of network module, more dedicated modules need to design to improve the segmentation accuracy according to the multi-organ segmentation task. In terms of the loss functions, targeting the class imbalance, geometric prior or introducing adversarial learning loss will have great potential for designing more comprehensive and diverse loss functions.
## (s17) D. Study of Transfer Learning Models
(p17.0) Existing deep learning models usually trained on one part of the body, which usually tend to obtain poor results when migrated to other datasets or applied to other parts of the body. Therefore, transfer learning models need to be explored in the future. For example, Fu et al. [194] proposed a new method called domain adaptive relational reasoning (DARR). It is used to generalize 3D multi-organ segmentation models to medical data from different domains. In addition, a very significant problem with medical images compared to other natural images is that many private datasets are not publicly available, and many hospitals only release trained models. Therefore, source free domain adaptation problem will be a very important research direction in the future. For example, Hong et al. [195] proposed a source free unsupervised domain adaptive cross-modal approach for abdomen multi-organ segmentation.
