# A Review of Data-Driven Discovery for Dynamic Systems

CorpusID: 252993007 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0fadbb4f48da06d0a8be210e3dd34340906f45a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c0fadbb4f48da06d0a8be210e3dd34340906f45a)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s10) Deep Models with Symbolic Regression
(p10.0) Using symbolic regression with a neural network for data-driven discovery has gained popularity in recent years. In a series of papers, Xu et al. (2019Xu et al. ( , 2020Xu et al. ( , 2021) construct a deep-learning genetic algorithm for the discovery of parametric PDEs (DLGA-PDE) with sparse and noisy data. DLGA-PDE first trains a NN that is used to compute derivatives and generate meta-data (global and local data), thereby producing a complete de-noised reconstruction of the surface (i.e., noisy sparse data are handled through the NN). Using the local metadata produced by the NN, a genetic algorithm learns the general form of the PDE and identifies which parameters vary spatially or temporally. At this step, the coefficients may be incorrect or missrepresent the system because the global structure of the data is not accounted for. To correct the coefficient estimates, a second NN is trained using the discovered structure of the PDE and the global metadata. Last, a genetic algorithm is used to discover the general form of the varying coefficients.

(p10.1) One method of implementing symbolic regression within a deep model is to allow the activation functions to be composed of the function set instead of classic activation functions (e.g., sigmoid or ReLU; Martius and Lampert, 2016;Sahoo et al., 2018;Kim et al., 2021). Motivated by this idea, Long et al. (2019) propose a symbolic regression NN, SymNet. Similar to a typical NN, the th layer of SymNet is
