# THE EUROPEAN PHYSICAL JOURNAL SPECIAL TOPICS Paper based microfluidic devices: a review of fabrication techniques and applications

CorpusID: 254617835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7cc7be9566474a28b7065d86e288b662815d4d32](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7cc7be9566474a28b7065d86e288b662815d4d32)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s9) Plotting
(p9.0) In the earlier days, 2D plotter was used for the fabrication of PADs. It is a charting tool that can print or plot two-dimensional items on a plane. By altering the type of plotter head being used, one can switch between plotting and printing [25]. Fabrication of PADs often involves the employment of a spray nozzle that emits an ink stream. A 2D plotter sprays hydrophobic ink onto the paper that is within the plotter. Computing systems have the ability to predetermine or regulate the spray pattern. Depending on the density of the ink and its ability to penetrates into the paper at different temperatures, heating the paper after plotting may or may not be necessary. Bruzewicz et al. [26] modified the xy plotter to print the solution of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) in hexane over the filter paper. The hydrophobic polymer entered the paper's depths and blocked aqueous solutions from entering the filter paper. This process produces inexpensive, paper-based, physically flexible gadgets. An easier approach to creating paper devices was the use of wax pens [10]. Wax was used to trace the necessary patterns across both faces of a piece of filter paper, which was then baked for a brief length of time. Because of the high temperature, the wax may melt and permeate the paper in the precise pattern of channels needed to create a hydrophobic wall. Laser plotting is another plotting technique to create microchannels by using a laser plotter [27]. In essence, the thermal deterioration action that engraves the surface of the chosen material is the basis for the microstructures produced by this technique. Ink plotting is also a commonly used plotting method in which hydrophobic barriers are created on paper using an X -Y plotter and hydrophobic inks are put into pens [26,28]. The hydrophobic ink is absorbed in the sheet of paper due to the proper selection of ink viscosity and plotter head pressure. Although this method is cheap, the resolution of the pattern is only moderate. The method takes a long time, thus it's better suited for creating small quantities of devices.  
