# medicina Review Potential Application of Pulsed Field Ablation in Ventricular Arrhythmias

CorpusID: 258031593 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95057ad4737448d4e31233e337363ee10e09bf4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95057ad4737448d4e31233e337363ee10e09bf4a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Effect of PFA on Ventricular Myocardium
(p1.0) Both the epicardial and endocardial pathway of PFA application to ventricular ablation have been reported [4][5][6][7]. Early in 2012, Wittkampf FH et al. [4] performed PFA on the ventricular epicardium in the epicardial swine model with a 7F circular ablation catheter. During this procedure, all PFA applications (50, 100 and 200 J) were delivered on the left ventricular epicardium in different sequences. They found that when PFA was delivered with 200 J, successive deep circular lesions (median depth of 5.2 ± 1.2 mm) were created, in spite of the use of separate electrodes. Additionally, no signs of thermal damage were observed in the ablation site and electrodes directly after PFA. Histological results indicated that cardiomyocytes were completely replaced by granulation tissue, which consists of fibroblasts with capillaries and loose collagen fibers. Similar results were shown in the work of Neven K et al. [5]. In their report, PFA was performed with different energy settings (50, 100 and 200 J) using a 12-mm circular catheter, which was introduced after pericardial access through subxiphoid puncture in the porcine model. In the cross sections of 100-and 200-J settings, transmural myocardial lesions have been observed, and the average depths of the 100-and 200-J lesions were 7.0 ± 2.0 and 11.9 ± 1.5 mm, respectively; the average widths were 16.2 ± 4.3 and 19.8 ± 1.8 mm, respectively. Meanwhile, no obvious intimal hyperplasia of the coronary arteries were observed after 3-month follow-up.
## (s2) Two Sides of PFA: Pro-and Anti-Arrhythmic Effects
(p2.0) The key mechanism of PFA is the application of high-energy and short-duration electric fields to induce irreversible electroporation (IRE). However, the effect of PFA on cardiomyocytes may also be transient; pores may be resealable and the cells could preserve the vitality, which is called reversible electroporation (RE). After the delivery of PFA, the magnitude of electric fields around the electrodes decreased from the electrodes outward into the tissue. The nature of these fields is such that immediately near the electrodes there is a region in which they cause IRE. Meanwhile, these regions were surrounded by other regions with lower electric fields, in which RE was induced. In both regions of IRE and RE, the enhanced cell membrane permeability may open a channel for ion transport, which may trigger various arrhythmias [10]. One study has investigated the possibility of developing arrhythmias resulting from the enhanced cell permeability induced by electrical pulses but found no dysrhythmias on the ECG [11].
