# Coal waste management practices in the USA: an overview

CorpusID: 256430476 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e6c0aa9a479f9733f876d062f782a1cbb10efbe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e6c0aa9a479f9733f876d062f782a1cbb10efbe)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s14) Current practices around surface coal mines in Illinois
(p14.0) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).

(p14.1) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).
## (s50) Current practices around surface coal mines in Illinois
(p50.0) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).

(p50.1) Active surface coal mine operations in Illinois adopt approaches similar to underground mines with regard to the management of overburden spoils. The surface mines also use a combination of spoil pits, surface drainage network and sediment ponds to minimize potential of run-off water contamination. Coal processing waste is typically deposited at the bottom of the pit after removal of coal. This is done prior to dumping of overburden spoils. Overburden spoils are dumped into the pit using shovel or dragline, or hauled to the pit that is typically at the backend of the mining front and dumped. Then, spoils are usually graded with light compaction. Similar to underground coal mines, topsoil and subsoil removed and stored previously are used as cover material and vegetated. Sediment/dilution ponds in a surface mine also collect sediments and leachates, and help to minimize pollution potential. Finally, the ponds are also covered with topsoil and subsoil and vegetated (Rich and Hutchinson 1990).
