# GENE-OCCUPATION INTERACTIONS: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE ON BLADDER AND PROSTATE CANCER

CorpusID: 258716006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/531a2dd0c534d7c946c10e7afdbdeba499d2fa6f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/531a2dd0c534d7c946c10e7afdbdeba499d2fa6f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s9) Genes responsible for vitamin D pathway
(p9.0) One of hypotheses advanced that vitamin D as antitumour agent might be responsible for the occurrence of PCa. Researchers observed an association between the PCa risk and 2 factors affecting decreased synthesis of vitamin D -the first increasing age and the second increasing rates in African-American population. Epidemiologic studies suggest that PCa development is influenced by environmental factors, including UV radiation from the sun exposure [59]. Ultraviolet B-rich sunlight stimulates synthesis of vitamin D in the skin and has been hypothesized to reduce the risk of PCa. Vitamin D is involved in a wide range of pharmacological and physiological functions. It modulates numerous genes encoding proteins that regulate cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Therefore, it is now established that vitamin D also influences the processes of cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion and apoptosis potentially leading to cancer [60]. Moreover, several studies investigated if vitamin D supplementation reduced circulating androgens (testosterone and dihydrotestosterone), reduced PSA secretion and inhibited cell growth of the hormone-sensitive PCa cell line [61]. The action of vitamin D is mediated by the vitamin D receptor gene (VDR). Hence, genetic variations in the VDR as a PCarelated gene, may be important in determining disease susceptibility. However, the findings from analytic studies have been inconsistent on the role of vitamin D in the PCa development. Two studies of the relationships between gene polymorphisms and PCa in outdoor workers analysed steroid hormone receptor gene polymorphisms such as VDR. One of the studies was a case-only study and showed a significant relationship between an increased PCa risk of metastases and VDR ff andmelanocortin-1 receptor (MC1R) Val92/Val92 [12]. The case-control study investigating 4 SNPs in VDR regulatory regions such as Cdx-2, FokI, TaqI, BglI showed a significant relationship with a reduced PCa risk, sun exposure and the following genotypes: FokI rs10735810 FF or Ff, TaqI rs731236 tt, BglI BB [62].
