# Vaccinating Children against SARS-CoV-2: A Literature Review and Survey of International Experts to Assess Safety, Efficacy and Perceptions of Vaccine Use in Children

CorpusID: 255321062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96864b13e7ae2c616a2d4bf2768e11cfabb40ea5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96864b13e7ae2c616a2d4bf2768e11cfabb40ea5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s14) Safety Data
(p14.0) We found 13 studies that included children and reported safety data. Four studies provided no age-disaggregated data for safety for children, and instead data were presented within the entire study population. No response from study authors for data in children was received, and so these studies were excluded from the review. Subsequently, a total of nine RCTs were included in the analysis. These can be seen in Table 1. An additional 14 studies evaluated VE in the real-world setting after the emergency use authorization of the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) vaccine and the "China-made" COVID-19 vaccines. These can be seen in Table 2.    In total, over 10,000 children received a vaccine during trials conducted between August 2020 and August 2021. All trials involved children receiving at least two doses of vaccine, between 21 and 56 days apart. Eight of nine studies involved placebo, and all except one were blinded. The age of participants ranged from 6 months to 18 years old. Four RCTs reported evidence from trials with mRNA vaccines [24,26,31], three with inactivated virus particles [25,[28][29][30], one of an adenovirus viral vector [25] and one of a DNA-based vaccine [32]. Studies were conducted in the USA, Canada, China, and India. There were no studies from Africa or South America. The most common local reaction amongst all vaccine types was injection-site pain, which was reported in up to 95% of vaccine participants and was more frequently described after the first dose of vaccine.
