# Characteristics and Management for Colostrum Composition, Characteristics and Management for Buffalo Calves: A Review

CorpusID: 258793316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69edb939743b18512e7eb3ba0fa94021cf0dca00](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69edb939743b18512e7eb3ba0fa94021cf0dca00)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s4) Colostrum Quality
(p4.0) Differences among species influence the quality of colostrum as well as parity, animal health, and farm management. The first 24-48 h after calving are representative of the colostrum quality in terms of IgG concentration [67]. After 24 h, the gut no longer absorbs immunoglobulins, which remain active in the intestinal lumen acting as a local defense mechanism against agents that may have been ingested orally. To determine colostrum quality, several markers have been proposed (i.e., crude protein, total protein, gammaglutamyltransferase), the same parameters can be assayed in calf blood to evaluate the extent of the passive immunity transfer [68]. Comparing the buffalo with cow colostrum showed remarkable differences. El Fattah et al. [36] described that, at calving, the protein concentration does not differ between buffalo and cow colostrum, while total solids, fat, lactose, and ash concentrations were higher in buffalo than in cow colostrum. Also, all components decreased gradually as the transition period advanced except lactose, which conversely increased. Godden et al. [69] and Pempek et al. [70] reported that the survival rate and health of calves were correlated with the improvement of serum IgG in colostrum. In addition, other key factors contributing to this list are the quantity and speed of administration of colostrum, and no less significant, its cleanliness and quality.
