# REVIEW Open Access Climate-relevant properties of black carbon aerosols revealed by in situ measurements: a review

CorpusID: 257354858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s1) Light-absorbing aerosols
(p1.0) Light-absorbing aerosol components exert complex perturbations to the climate system through their shortwave absorption in the atmosphere and snowpack (Stier et al. 2007;Samset et al. 2018). The atmospheric heating by aerosol's shortwave absorption alters the circulation and precipitation from regional-to-global scales (Lau et al. 2006;Samset et al. 2022). Known significant contributors to aerosol's shortwave absorption are light-absorbing constituents of carbonaceous compounds (i.e., black carbon, brown carbon) and iron oxides (i.e., goethite, hematite, magnetite) from both anthropogenic and nonanthropogenic origins (e.g., Moteki et al. 2017).
## (s8) BC in the global atmosphere
(p8.0) BC mass concentration in the atmosphere had been nearly unknown before the single-particle LII (SP2 and its modified versions) became available for field observations. Here, we review the basic knowledge of atmospheric BC revealed from the single-particle LII. BC mass mixing ratio in the midlatitude continental atmosphere shows a steep vertical gradient in the lower troposphere, decreasing from ~ 100 ng (kg air) −1 near the surface to ~ 1 − 10 ng (kg air) −1 in the middle troposphere (Schwarz et al. 2006). BC mass mixing ratio level could be ~ 10 times larger than this profile in the regions around large emission sources (e.g., East Asia) Kondo et al. 2016). BC mass mixing ratio in the remote Pacific ocean was within the range of ~ 0.1 − 10 ng (kg air) −1 with a weak vertical gradient in the lower-toupper troposphere Katich et al. 2018). BC mass mixing ratio over the remote Atlantic Ocean tends to be substantially higher than the Pacific Ocean due to the proximity to continental sources in midlatitudes and the strong influence of African biomass burning in tropical latitudes ). The BC mass fraction was ~ 1-2% or less of the total submicron aerosol mass (Schwarz et al. 2006;Gao et al. 2022). BC mass mixing ratio in the tropical tropopause layer, which is a gateway of injection of tropospheric aerosols into the stratosphere, was found to be ~ 1 ng (kg air) −1 (Gao et al. 2008), which was similar to the average value in the upper troposphere to lower stratosphere over the midlatitude (Schwarz et al. 2006). The global atmospheric BC data from the surface to upper troposphere are essential to evaluate the model assumptions on the emission and transport processes, as the new atmospheric BC dataset had revealed the model bias of a factor of ~ 10 or more in remote regions and higher altitudes (e.g., Koch et al. 2009;Wang et al. 2014;Katich et al. 2018). The observational datasets of BC mass mixing ratio in the global troposphere play critical roles in testing the assumptions of the parameters controlling the BC lifetime (e.g., the timescale of hydrophobic to hygroscopic conversion, in-cloud scavenging efficiency) in global models (Kipling et al. 2013;Hodnebrog et al. 2014;Lund et al. 2018;Liu and Matsui 2021).
## (s10) Anthropogenic iron oxide
(p10.0) The in situ aerosol measurements using single-particle LII and laboratory analyses of collected aerosol samples using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) revealed that anthropogenic light-absorbing iron oxides (FeOx) consisting of an aggregate of magnetite nanoparticles are ubiquitous in the urban plumes and the East Asian and Arctic troposphere (Moteki et al. 2017;Yoshida et al. 2018). The mass mixing ratio of anthropogenic FeOx in these regions was ~ 20-60% of BC . The anthropogenic FeOx aerosol is likely ubiquitous in the global troposphere (Lamb et al. 2021) and will be one of the contributors to regionalto-global-scale aerosol's shortwave absorption (Moteki et al. 2017;Matsui et al. 2018;Ito et al. 2018). These new observation data provided further evidence to constrain the magnitude and spatial distribution of anthropogenic Fe emission Liu et al. 2022), which is an essential factor for investigating the effects of Fe-bearing aerosols on ocean fertilization Ito et al. 2021).
## (s13) BC measurement techniques
(p13.0) The most important open issue of the current singleparticle LII technique is the uncertainty or difficulty of measuring BC particles much larger than the visible wavelengths. Current commercial single-particle LII instruments (e.g., SP2 from Droplet Measurement Technologies, Inc.) are designed to detect BC core within ~ 70-500 nm volume-equivalent diameter. The NOAA SP2 instruments used for global-scale aircraft observations were intended to measure ~ 70-550 nm BC core Katich et al. 2018). Aircraft and ground observations using the single-particle LII instrument of The University of Tokyo (a modified version of SP2; Moteki and Kondo 2010), which detects 70-850 nm BC core, indicated a non-negligible contribution of BC with > ~ 500 nm diameter to size-integrated BC mass mixing ratio Yoshida et al. 2020). This implies the significance of extending the upper limit of the BC core size range observable by single-particle LII instruments at least up to ~ 1000 nm. The importance of extending the LII-detectable particle-size range is even more evident for FeOx (Moteki et al. 2017;Lamb et al. 2021). The author therefore suggests fundamental investigations for extending the upper limit of the observable particle-size range in the single-particle LII.
