# Graphical Abstract A survey of the European Open Science Cloud services for ex- panding the capacity and capabilities of multidisciplinary scientific applications

CorpusID: 253523047 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/885a2eae0359c6f76235dd73b4222a1dbb527e05](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/885a2eae0359c6f76235dd73b4222a1dbb527e05)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s22) Elastic infrastructures
(p22.0) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.

(p22.1) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.
## (s23) EOSC Cloud IaaS
(p23.0) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.

(p23.1) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.
## (s63) Elastic infrastructures
(p63.0) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.

(p63.1) For cloud applications with varying load the static infrastructures might end up with resource waste. In order to adapt to the dynamic demand for computing capacity, the MSWSS service uses Elastic Cloud Computing Cluster (EC3) tool [40] to create an elastic virtual cluster on top of the EOSC computing resources. EC3 CLI tool provides a set of pre-defined templates which can be combined and customised. It also allows to define custom templates with integrated Ansible scripts. This is used to create a template with strengthened security settings and additional configuration commands specific for the MSWSS service.   Figure 7 shows the architecture of the MSWSS service with the interaction of the service operator and users. The users interact with the service using Galaxy portal where they can manage their data and submit jobs to the elastic virtual cluster for processing. The output data are stored in within MSWSS service and can be downloaded for post-processing tasks.
## (s64) EOSC Cloud IaaS
(p64.0) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.

(p64.1) The service operator deploys the service using EC3 tool using the customised template. Once the MSWSS service is deployed the CLUES service monitors SLURM batch system and deploys new virtual worker nodes as needed and automatically re-configures the batch system. The deployment and configuration of worker nodes is performed using the Infrastructure Manager (IM) [51] service. To speed-up the deployment process the worker nodes are instantiated from a snapshot of fully deployed worker node (golden image). This allows to decrease the start-up time from 21 to 5 minutes. It also helps to solve the issue with pending security updates with respect to the vanilla image and potential need to reboot the worker node for the updates to be applied properly. The golden image is maintained by the service operator in up-to-date state. The security is important also for the communication inside the virtual cluster. OpenVPN system is used to create secure connections inside the cluster and protect the data transfers. It also allows to span the virtual cluster over the resources from different Cloud providers.
