# An overview on nanoparticle-based strategies to fight viral infections with a focus on COVID-19 Open Access Journal of Nanobiotechnology

CorpusID: 252760292 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f89aa1e6e2c02d8f9352989269888fd11a3d00f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f89aa1e6e2c02d8f9352989269888fd11a3d00f3)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s8) Dendrimers
(p8.0) Dendrimers are highly branched structures containing dendron monomers. These symmetrical macromolecules have a limited dimension of 10 to 100 nm. Dendrimers have diverse functional groups on their surfaces, and they inhibit virus penetration to cells by their interaction with viral particles and cell protection via their different functional groups [63,64]. Three kinds of polycationic dendrimers comprising primary amine were utilized to evaluate their antiviral function with the MERS-CoV (Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus) plaque suppression test. The hydroxyl polyanionic group demonstrated a 17.36% to 29.75% reduction in MERS-CoV plaque forming. The most effective suppression of MERS-CoV plaque-forming was observed via G (1.5)-16COONa (40.5% repression), followed via G(5)-128SA (39.77% repression). Polyanionic dendrimers can be added to antiviral provisions to increase the transport of antivirals, and also the inherent antiviral action [64]. DanielSepúlveda-Crespo, et al. developed a cell-based method to screen a battery of polyanionic carbosilane dendrimers (PCDs) to recognize complexes with antiviral activity versus HCV and display that they prevent efficient virus infusion of main HCV genotypes. Remarkably, one of the PCDs permanently destroyed infectious virions [65]. In other investigations, produced a treatment method for SARS-CoV-2 infection by using an improved anti-COVID-19 siRNAs encapsulated in a new safe peptide dendrimer KK-46 as a delivery system. The result showed that topical therapy via intranasal injection of the improved siRNA-peptide dendrimer formulation can decrease viral reproduction and improve COVID-19-induced lung inflammation [66]. Orpheris company is evaluating a remedial including N-acetyl-cysteine connected to the inactive dendrimer OP-101 in acute SARS-CoV-2 infected patients. In a stage II clinical trial (NCT04458298), this treatment method was shown to decrease SARS-CoV-2-dependent inflammatory cytokine storms [67].
## (s13) Silver nanoparticles
(p13.0) Silver NPs (AgNPs) are the most efficient in conflict with pathogenic among all metallic NPs [84]. Several investigations have shown that AgNPs could simply enter living cells. The dimensions and form of AgNPs play a very significant role in antiviral action. Numerous researches have displayed that those sizes smaller than 10 nm generate much more reactive surfaces. The shape can also differ-for instance, triangular, bar, or spiral-which strongly influences the mechanism of the viral act; those of the sphere-shaped and cylinder-shaped kinds are more phagocytosed [85]. These NPs bind to the viral genome and as a result inhibiting the action and interaction of several viral and cellular agents responsible for replication leading to the suppression of viral replication and virus release [86]. In other studies, Madin-Darby canine kidney cells infected by AgNP-remedied H3N2 influenza virus displayed higher survival and no apparent cytopathic effects contrasted with an influenza virus healthy group and a group remedied by the solvent utilized for the provision of the AgNPs. These NPs remarkably suppressed the H3N2 replications and decreased cell apoptosis created by the H3N2 influenza virus [87]. In other research, spherical AgNPs with a size of 25 nm can inhibit Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) early infection via per se annihilating virion subunits; it as well successfully prevents colony development and relatively suppresses the growth of KSHV-related primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) tumors in xenograft mouse [88]. In other investigations, AgNPs were evaluated in vitro and demonstrated to have a preventing efficacy on COVID-19 in cultured cells. Therefore, researchers evaluate the effectiveness of mouthwash and nose rinse with ARGOVIT ® AgNPs, in the inhibition of COVID-19 in health personnel. The results showed that the mouth and nasal rinse by AgNPs assist in the inhibition of COVID-19 in health workers who are exposed to patients detected with SARS-CoV-2 infection [89]. In other investigations, researchers developed green synthesized AgNPs by utilizing strawberry and ginger methanolic extracts to suppress COVID-19. The methanolic strawberry extract and the green synthesized AgNPs of ginger demonstrated the most excellent antiviral acting versus COVID-19 [90].
## (s15) SARS-CoV-2 immunopathology (innate and adaptive immune response)
(p15.0) Innate immunity commenced by detecting pathogenassociated molecular patterns (PAMPs) through host pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). The IFN-I pathway is an essential section of the innate immune reaction. PRRs diagnose many viruses, and this detection activates a downstream antiviral cascade such as micro-RNAs antiviral action [94,98,99]. The CoVs ds-RNA could be recognized via the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors (RLRs), comprising the RIG-I and, or melanoma differentiation gene 5 (MDA5) into the cytoplasm, or via TLRs within the endosome. The 2 caspase recruitment domains (CARD) of RIG-I and MDA5 could react to the adapter mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), which consequently induces the 2 IKKassociated kinases, TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), and inducible IκB kinase (IKKi), together of which phosphorylate IFN regulatory factor 3/7 (IRF3/7). Afterward phosphorylation and dimerization, IRF3/7 replaces in the nucleus to trigger the expression of IFN-α/β. Simultaneously, MAVS induces TANK1 via TRAF6 and triggers the NF-κB signaling mechanism, which could increase cytokines generation. On the other hand, PAMPs could be recognized via TLRs, and the downstream adapter proteins TRIF or MyD88 could signal to activate cytokines and chemokines generation [100]. Signaling at these cell receptors stimulates cytosolic translocation of several nuclear transcription agents, including NF-kB and the activating protein-1 (AP-1) to the cell nucleus, the transcription of genes, and expression of critical inflammatory reaction proteins, including CRP, proinflammatory cytokines, and chemokines, also discharge of soluble agents related on the IFN protein stimulator gene (ISGs) that encodes IFNs function in virus regulator, activation anti-virus mode [101]. Afterward viral induction, IFNs are induced via the detection of PAMPs with PRRs, endosomal (TLR3 and TLR7), and cytosolic (RIG-I) receptors, such as triggering and phosphorylation of the JAK/STAT pathway and the creation of the heterotrimer compound STAT1-STAT2-IRF9 (ISGF3) that is involved in the stimulation of the genes accountable for the reactions to IFNs in the promoter section of the ISG.
## (s17) Nanoparticle vaccines against SARS-CoV-2
(p17.0) Nanovaccinology has been used in preventive and remedial methods and can be utilized for each enhancement antigen processing or offering and, or as an immunostimulatory adjuvant [122]. Main NPs platforms contain lipid base NPs (LNPs) and VLPs. LNPs comprising ionizable lipids have been used widely to transport genetic compositions owing to their excellent loading valence, and excellent transfection performance VLPs are noninfected virus-mimicking particles created via the selfassembly of protein monomers combined with viral capsid proteins [123]. Furthermore, the general impression of "nanoimmunity via design" can assist us to create substances for immune regulation, either inducing or inhibiting the immune reaction, which would find usages in the vaccine production for COVID-19 or in neutralizing the cytokine storm, in order [124]. Animal trials helped the technological comprehension of how these novel kinds of nanovaccines work. Furthermore, some of these nanovaccines candidates have entered clinical studies next to the initial assessment in animal models, of which NPs based vaccines are hopeful vaccine candidates. The Moderna and Pfizer SARS-CoV-2 infection vaccines, more than 90% efficient against COVID-19 in humans, apply the mRNA to generate the viral S protein found on the surface of SARS-CoV-2 [125,126].
## (s18) Lipid-based nanoparticles vaccines
(p18.0) Conventionally, mRNA has not been utilized as a remedial factor since it is greatly unconstant and triggers the innate immune responses when administered. In addition, to enter the host cells, mRNA needs a delivery system to pass the cell membrane [127]. Moreover, the average half-life of mRNA vaccines reduces with enhancing temperature, which is a problem for their long time storing. However, chemical alteration by using an external covering of nonionic or an ionic surfactant improves the thermal constancy of mRNA. These chemical modifications alter the sizes of a NP and help in the efficient carrying of mRNA with greater thermal constancy [128]. Consequently, researchers are developing NPs delivery system that contains LNPs that entrap the mRNAs coding for the monoclonal antibody. This RNA-treatment method steadies the mRNA and can be administered recurrently, causing sustained generation of antibodies evading the efficacy of the innate immunity versus exogenous RNA. Additionally, the LNPs increase their mucosal and cellular absorption. Moreover, the positively charged LNP results in electrostatic absorbency to the negative charge of the mucosal membranes, decreasing their release via the mucosal cilia [127]. For example, Moderna's mRNA vaccine is based on an LNP method [129]. This method was newly proceeded via Moderna to generate vaccine methods versus COVID-19 via utilizing mRNA-1273, encoding viral S protein [130]. BNT162b2 is the first vaccine based on the LNP-mRNA method and mRNA encoding the S protein locked in its pre-fusion structure [131]. In other investigations, mRNA (RNActive ® ) based vaccines (CVnCoV), include sequence optimum mRNA coding to a fixed shape of S protein entrapped in LNP.

(p18.1) No vaccine-associated acute side effects were detected. Immune reactions, when evaluated as IgG antibodies versus S protein or its RBD via ELISA, and COVID-19 neutralizing antibodies (NAbs) evaluated via microneutralization, showed dose-affiliate enhancement. Primary outcomes demonstrated that CVnCoV is as well as safe and excellent tolerated in tested individuals, and is capable of enhancing the pre-existing immune reaction even at fewer dosage amounts [132]. Other studies, developed self-amplifying RNA (saRNA) entrapped in LNP as a vaccine. These vaccine immunizations stimulate a Th1 biased reaction in the mouse model, and there is no antibody-related increase detected. In addition, they identified significant cellular responses, as determined via IFN-γ generation, upon re-stimulation by COVID-19 peptides [133]. Uri Elia et al. developed an mRNA vaccine, based on LNPs-entrapped COVID-19 virus human Fc-combined RBD (RBD-hFc). Intramuscular injection of this vaccine induced a strong humoral reaction, a significant amount of NAbs, and a Th1-biased cellular reaction in the BALB/c mouse model [134]. LNP-based vaccines (NVP) co-encapsulated by antigens and monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA, a potent TLR-4 agonist) were easily absorbed via DCs and increased DC maturation and antigen offering. Multilamellar vesicles were formed via hydrating a lipid film combined with DOPC, n-(Succinimidyloxyglutaryl)-L-α-phosphatidylethanolamine, dioleoyl   (DOPE-NHS) and MPLA (50:50:0.5 molar proportion). Mice vaccinated through RBD-NVP triggered strong and persistent antibody reactions versus RBD from COVID-19 [135]. In another investigation, researchers developed quick transformation of recombinant RBD into particulate formation by incorporating with liposomes comprising cobalt-porphyrin-phospholipid (CoPoP) strongly improves the functional antibody reaction. Compared to other vaccine preparations, immunization utilizing CoPoP liposomes incorporated with recombinant RBD induces several orders of magnitude greater rates of antibody titers in mice that inhibit pseudovirus cell entrance, prevent RBD interaction with ACE2, and suppress SARS-CoV-2 replication [136] (Table 3, Fig. 5).
## (s19) Virus-like particles vaccine
(p19.0) VLPs are multiprotein structures that mimic the organization and conformation of authentic native viruses but lack the viral genome, potentially yielding safer and cheaper vaccine candidates Ferritin as a naturally selfassembling protein nanoparticles is a favorite protein particle to develop VLP vaccines. The protein particles can be connected with a maximum of 24 viral antigens for concurrent delivery and offer to APCs. In recent studies, a developed subunit vaccine based on self-assembling ferritin NP showed one of two multimerized S proteins: full-length ectodomain (S-Fer) or a C-terminal 70 aminoacid deletion (SΔC-Fer). Mice vaccinated by one injection of S-Fer demonstrated remarkably more excellent NAbs titers than those immunized by RBD monomers or spike ectodomain trimers, suggesting the significance of multivalent exposure. Ferritin NPs conjugated with RBDs, instead of full-length S proteins, demonstrated a superior preservative immune reaction when contrasted with unconjugated RBDs [137]. In other investigations, researchers generated a VLP vaccine that exhibits 120 copies of SARS-CoV-2 RBD on its surface. This method mimics virus-based vaccines in immunogen present, which increases its effect while maintaining the lack of side effects of protein subunit vaccines. This vaccine elicited great-titer NAbs reactions in mice that continued for more than two months and powerfully suppressed COVID-19, SARS-CoV-1, and their variants [138]. Ma et al. created 2 Ferritin-based NP vaccines via conjugate RBD and heptad repeat (HR) antigens in S protein using the SpyTag/SpyCatcher method, which was obtained from Streptococcus pyogenes, to covalently bind the ferritin NPs instead of direct fusion expression, that the level of expression is significantly reduced. RBD and RBD-HR NPs vaccines induce more powerful NAb reactions and T lymphocyte immune reactions than monomers. HRbased NPs elicit cross-reactive immune reactions versus COVID-19 and other CoVs [139]. Medicago and iBio are utilizing Nicotiana benthamiana to generate VLPs using the S protein, and AdaptVac/ExpreS 2 ion is applying the insect cell expression method to create VLPs from the S2 protein. In addition, producing protein NPs from antigenic subunits, their expression and, or presentation on proteinaceous biomaterial scaffolds, including ferritin, encapsulin, and bacteriophage VLPs, has been used to attain multivalent antigen presentation for increased immunogenicity. The advantage of this method is that scalability and modularity; the peptides can be quickly modified as novel data concerning COVID-19, and its immunogenicity is made accessible; it is as well potential to adapt the method quickly should new or mutated kinds appear [129]. VLPs can be prepared via incubating AuNPs as a nucleus by CoV S proteins, which automatically functionalize the surface (S-AuNPs). S-AuNP-vaccines can improve lymphatic antigen transfer and enhance cellular and humoral reactions contrasted with free antigens. This nano vaccine was capable of eliciting a powerful IgG reaction; however, by a less desired to inhibit CoVs owing to alterations in the construction of S proteins upon connecting to AuNPs, leading to lung eosinophilic immunopathology [130].
## (s20) Other types of nanovaccines
(p20.0) To advance the creation of viral vaccines through mRNA and pDNA, a professional medicine company created a novel silica-based new technology called, Nuvec ® designed for the transfer of vaccines and drugs. These new silica-NPs carrying nucleic acids have asymmetrical surfaces functionalized by polyethyleneimines (PEIs). This surface encapsulates nuclear acids (including mRNA/pDNA), as they cross into cells, and preserves them from nucleus enzymes. The critical benefit of Nuvec ® is that it does not destroy the cell membrane when it attains the cells, contrasted to LNP; and not neither does it generate each inflammatory response at the administration location with no extreme systemic adverse events [140]. Peptide vaccines are known for their less immunogenicity, which could be dominated via combining immunostimulatory adjuvants and NPs, including PLGA or chitosan. The CD4 + and CD8 + T cell epitopes can as well be fused with adjuvant proteins such as TLR ligands which can be entrapped or presented on the surface of NPs such as PLGA to induce continued T-cell reactions and enhance long-range preservation. Smaller PLGA NPs (350 nm) allow improved internalization via DCs and cause a continued cellular immune reaction in mice. PLGA-NP encapsulated peptide antigens are being preserved against enzymatic destruction in vivo until they are absorbed via APCs and caused stimulation of strong B-and T-lymphocyte reactions [141]. In other investigations, SARS-CoV-2 vaccine developers, including GlaxoSmithKline, which owns the ASs and other adjuvant techniques, are employed in numerous companies to implant their adjuvant methods by COVID-19 virus-protein-based vaccines. The capability of approved adjuvants, including AS01 and AS03, to increase adaptive immune response has been related to their capacity to increase STAT1/IRF1 IFN signaling [124]. NVX-CoV2373 is a recombinant (rSARS-CoV-2) NP vaccine combined with trimeric full-length COVID-19 S proteins and Matrix-M1 adjuvant. Adjuvant led to increased immune reactions, was antigen dosage-sparing, and stimulated a Th1 response. The Matrix-M1 adjuvant elicited helper T lymphocytes reactions biased toward a Th1 phenotype. Matrix-M1, a saponin-based adjuvant, was created via Novavax. Both vaccine and adjuvant were maintained at 2-8 °C [142]. 
## (s22) Nanoparticles as antiviral agents against SARS-CoV-2 Infection
(p22.0) In the absence of carrying additional medicine payloads, NPs can use specific mechanisms for direct viral inhibiting. One of these mechanisms is the degradation of viral protein structure. Biocompatible NPs can demonstrate a wide range of antiviral actions. The action of specific NPs, such as AgNPs and AuNPs, can chip in the generally antiviral function [152]. Quantum dots (QD), a kind of crystalline NPs, have great nano-based detecting, and they, can be utilized as antiviral remedies. Various metallic combinations (Pb, Cu, Ga, Zn, Hg) based on QD displayed target particular activities versus viral infection [153]. Moreover, QDs can be employed as ideal options versus pathogenic human CoVs diseases; For example, the antiviral actions of 7 diverse carbon QDs (CQDs) for remedying HCoV-229E infections were assessed [154,155]. Moreover, the available documentation shows that NPs, including graphene, nanodiamonds, carbon nanotubes, and polystyrene particles, possess an inherent capability to trigger the immune system, related to their functionalization. For example, graphene oxide functionalized with amino groups (GO-NH2) stimulates the triggering of STAT1/IRF1 IFN signaling in monocytes and T lymphocytes, leading to the generation of T cell chemoattractant, and macrophage 1/Th1 polarization of the immune reaction, with slight toxicity. Significantly, hypericin graphene is on the list of computationally recognized potential therapy versus SARS-CoV-2. Besides, graphene is a potent immunomodulator, and GO-AgNPs increase the generation of natural antiviral protections (IFN-α and ISGs) [156]. Octadecylamine-functionalized and dexamethasoneincorporated nanodiamonds increase anti-inflammatory and pro-regenerative performance in human macrophages in vitro. A less amount of this NP also decreased macrophage penetration and expression of proinflammatory intermediary's inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and TNF-alpha in mice. Generally, outcomes showed that nanodiamond particles could be beneficial as an intrinsically immunomodulatory system [124]. The usage of nitric oxide NPs (NONPs) can also be an option in the therapy of SARS-CoV-2 disease. An investigation by SARS-CoV-1 detected that NO suppresses viral reproduction via the cytotoxic response from intermediate factors, including peroxynitrite. Since COVID-19 infects endothelial cells, which are an origin of NO, carrying NO from NPs may be an alternative for NO substitution, also a reaction to the viral targeting endothelial cells. Furthermore, suppressing viral prevalence, NO can inhibit the beginning of inflammatory activities based on hypoxia-reoxygenation /ischemia-reperfusion, regulator the cytokine cascade, let the elimination of cell fragments, restrict lipid peroxidation and cell injury, decrease damaging vascular penetrability, and preserve sufficient blood circulation [149]. Carbon nanotubes (CNT) belong to the fullerene family (sized 10-100 nm). Investigators developed a new method against COVID-19 by acidizing, and RALyase modified CNTs in combination with photodynamic thermal efficacy [157]. In another investigation, researchers hypothesized that carbon dots (CDs) derived from Allium sativum (AS-CDs) may have the capability to downregulate the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and return the immunological abnormalities to normal in SARS-CoV-2 infection. CDs have now been investigated in the nanobiomedicine field as a hopeful theranostic candidates for bioimaging and medication/ gene transfer. The antifibrotic and antioxidant properties of AS are explained with accuracy, as confirmed in numerous investigations. It is found that the most active constituent of AS, allicin has an extremely strong antioxidant and reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenging efficacy [158].

(p22.1) ZnNPs have been offered favorable versus the SARS-CoV-2 by preventing the mucosal connecting of the virus, inhibiting the virus reproduction, IFN-γ/α production, triggering the enzymes involved in several cellular actions, and reducing the inflammatory reaction, or increasing the immune system of the host [155]. Other investigations, showed that Iron oxide NPs (IONPs) (Fe2O3 and Fe3O4) interact with the S1-RBD COVID-19. Fe3O4 created a more constant composite with S1-RBD. These interplays of IONPs are anticipated to be related to viral protein structural alterations, and therefore viral inhibition. Consequently, recommend FDA-accepted-IONPs proceed with SARS-CoV-2 therapy clinical trials. Combinations that interact with the S1-RBD are hypothesized to inhibit virus binding to host receptors and prevent viral infection [159]. AuNPs can be excellent alternatives for antiviral factors versus SARS-CoV-2 infection. The capability of AuNPs functionalized via diverse groups, including 3-mercaptoe-ethyl sulfonate (Mes), undecanesulfonic acid (Mus), octanethiol (Ot), and a novel peptide, to suppress COVID-19 was studied. The results showed that functionalized AuNPs have significant influences on the RBD and powerfully interact with the virus protein. In addition, the AuNP functionalized via a novel peptide creates a more constant compound with RBD in contrast with ACE2. AuNP-EG2, AuNP-Ot, and AuNP-Pep coat the entire connection surface of RBD of the COVID-19 [160]. Zhang, et al. developed 2 kinds of cellular nanosponges, which are prepared of the plasma membranes derivative from human lung epithelial kind II cells (Epithelial-NS) or human macrophages (MΦ-NS) for the therapy of SARS-CoV-2. The membranes were then covered onto polymeric NPs cores developed from PLGA by a sonication technique to create Epithelial-NS and MΦ-NS, in order. Cell membrane covering lets nanosponges receive the viral receptors associated with CoVs entrance in the target cells; however, it will be capable of inhibiting the chronic inflammation related to SARS-CoV-2 infection [161]. Cai, et al. developed photothermal NP that includes a semiconducting polymer core, (PCPDTBT), which combines NAbs connected on the surface of a photothermal NP to catch and deactivate SARS-CoV-2 actively. An amphiphilic polymer cover is applied to entrap the PCP-DTBT core. The NP, a biocompatible polyethylene glycol surface, is functionalized by a monoclonal NAb particular to the S protein, which allows targeted and effective catching of virus with great composite affinity (0.07 nM), thus inhibiting the entrance of virus into target cells. As soon as stimulation via a 650-nm light-emitting diode (LED), which has a more favorable harmlessness method than traditional laser stimulation, the photothermal NPs per se deactivate the caught COVID-19 via heat [162]. A metal NP compound TPNT1 (comprising AuNPs, AgNPs, ZnONPs, and Clo2) was able to suppress 6 main sections of SARS-CoV-2 by efficient concentration within the limited area as food additives. TPNT1 was shown to inhibit viral entrance via preventing the connection of S proteins to the ACE2 receptor and interacting with the syncytium form. As TPNT1 is most efficient via previous incubation with viruses, one potential mechanism for the antiviral action of TPNT1 may be ascribable to bindings of virus surface glycoproteins with the metal NPs, and so inhibiting the virions from binding to target cells [163] ( Table 4).
