# molecules Sharpless Asymmetric Dihydroxylation: An Impressive Gadget for the Synthesis of Natural Products: A Review

CorpusID: 257658088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e439ac38ec463c282f57d54a439ffd18fa453a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e439ac38ec463c282f57d54a439ffd18fa453a9)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s35) Isoprenylated Chalcone Skeleton/Flavonoid
(p35.0) Various anti-cancerous drugs are isolated from natural products such as chalcones [99]. Sanjoseolide, a natural product containing an isoprenylated chalcone skeleton, obtained from Dalea frustecens, has wide pharmacological significance, as it has been found to be effective against inflammation, cancer and diabetes [100]. Owing to its huge medicinal importance, Tian et al. [101] in 2020 reported an efficient method for the synthesis of sanjoseolide by carrying out Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, Stille coupling and Claisen-Schmidt condensation. In the first step, 2,4-dihydroxyacetophenone 208 was treated with I2 and KIO3 followed by protection with a methoxymethyl group, leading to the synthesis of compound 209 in 90% yield. Compound 209 was then reacted with Pd(PPh3)4 and 210 followed by Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, giving compound 211 in 44% yield. Compound 211 was then treated with aldehyde in the presence of potassium hydroxide, and deprotection of hydroxyl groups was carried out in the presence of HCl to obtain sanjoseolide 212 in 49% yield (Scheme 29). 
## (s36) Isoprenylated Chalcone Skeleton/Flavonoid
(p36.0) Various anti-cancerous drugs are isolated from natural products such as chalcones [99]. Sanjoseolide, a natural product containing an isoprenylated chalcone skeleton, obtained from Dalea frustecens, has wide pharmacological significance, as it has been found to be effective against inflammation, cancer and diabetes [100]. Owing to its huge medicinal importance, Tian et al. [101] in 2020 reported an efficient method for the synthesis of sanjoseolide by carrying out Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, Stille coupling and Claisen-Schmidt condensation. In the first step, 2,4-dihydroxyacetophenone 208 was treated with I 2 and KIO 3 followed by protection with a methoxymethyl group, leading to the synthesis of compound 209 in 90% yield. Compound 209 was then reacted with Pd(PPh 3 ) 4 and 210 followed by Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, giving compound 211 in 44% yield. Compound 211 was then treated with aldehyde in the presence of potassium hydroxide, and deprotection of hydroxyl groups was carried out in the presence of HCl to obtain sanjoseolide 212 in 49% yield (Scheme 29).
