# Overview of the Role of Spatial Factors in Indoor SARS-CoV-2

CorpusID: 252143778 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1c0a5402491b7f50b2b63f0e01ca24e7637b3997)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s18) (S P -B HO -V S ) Touchless Design for Public Facilities Helps Reduce Exposure to Fomites
(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has brought unprecedented attention to touchless technology and has accelerated its development and use. In daily life and work, people inevitably touch certain private or public surfaces such as banknotes, doorknobs, and elevator buttons. Disinfection is required immediately after each contact, but this is difficult for most people to fully do. Touchless interaction technology is a new solution that can help reduce infection caused by exposure to fomites. Table 7 shows the common touchless technologies and their applications for adjacent people-object interaction. Infrared sensors can use infrared rays for data processing and control the operation of driving devices and are widely used in automatic doors, lights, toilets, faucets, disinfectant dispensers, and hand dryers, which allow public places to be more hygienic. [85]. Biometric systems can identify individuals based on their biological characteristics to allow specific groups of people to interact with computers, which includes facial recognition, iris recognition, voice recognition, and hand recognition [86]. Traditional fingerprint recognition systems with hygiene risks now have a new solution, namely contactless fingerprint recognition technology [85]. Wireless communication technologies (such as RFID [87], NFC [88] and QR code [89]) allow short-range touchless data exchange through personal devices, such as opening doors with access cards, Apple Pay payments and scanning QR codes with mobile phones. At present, the most widely used infrared sensing technology cannot cope with the needs of high precision and complex instructions. Therefore, real-time gesture interaction and eye tracking may be the future exploration direction of touchless interaction technology. 
## (s19) . (S O -E A -V S ) Opening Design Determines Airflow Field Due to Natural Ventilation
(p19.0) Spatial openings generally refer to windows and doors, both of which are related to indoor-airflow organization caused by natural ventilation. The position of the window openings in the horizontal and vertical directions is the main factor affecting the airflow pattern, which is usually studied through field measurements and numerical simulations. Zhou et al. [91] investigated the influence of the position of the window opening on the effective ventilation of the room and found that ventilation rates reached the minimum when the window opening was located at the centre of the windward face. Vertically, the further the window is from the centre of the windward side, the greater the ventilation [91].
## (s20) (S L -E A -V S ) Physical Layout Affects the Distribution of Virus Concentration
(p20.0) Changing the physical layout at room level has been shown to cause changes in indoorairflow fields, which, in turn, induce changes in ventilation effectiveness and distribution of pollutants in the air. Zhuang et al. [96] simulated the airflow fields of three furniture layouts of the office room ( Figure 15) and calculated their ventilation effectiveness under four ventilation modes according to changes in volatile organic compound concentrations ( Table 9). The results show that changing the position of the furniture can significantly improve the air quality in the breathing area under either mixed ventilation or displacement ventilation. Layout B has the best overall ventilation by keeping occupants away from pollution sources and closer to the air inlets [96]. path is established under VP1, providing ample fresh air to every room from inlet to outlet. In VP2, the four rooms are all ventilated on one side, and the indoor-airflow is very weak, which is the most likely to cause uneven air mixing. Under VP3, air flows from R4 to R3 and R2 with inflow rates of 62.2% and 37.8%, respectively. The higher velocity of the VP4 air outlet than VP5 is due to the opening of R1, which, in turn, leads to the difference in the airflow distribution of R3.  
## (s21) (SL-EA-VS) Physical Layout Affects the Distribution of Virus Concentration
(p21.0) Changing the physical layout at room level has been shown to cause changes in indoor-airflow fields, which, in turn, induce changes in ventilation effectiveness and distribution of pollutants in the air. Zhuang et al. [96] simulated the airflow fields of three furniture layouts of the office room ( Figure 15) and calculated their ventilation effectiveness under four ventilation modes according to changes in volatile organic compound concentrations ( Table 9). The results show that changing the position of the furniture can significantly improve the air quality in the breathing area under either mixed ventilation or displacement ventilation. Layout B has the best overall ventilation by keeping occupants away from pollution sources and closer to the air inlets [96].     Although SARS-CoV-2 RNA has been widely detected in the real environment, little has been said about the materials on exposed surfaces of spaces and facilities, which affect the stability of the virus on them. The viability of SARS-CoV-2 on different materials was mostly evaluated under laboratory conditions as shown in Table 10. At room temperature (RT), RH 65%, SARS-CoV-2 is stable on stainless steel and plastic, surviving for 3-7 days, followed by glass, wood and clothing (1-4 days) [97], and quickly inactivated on copper and paper (less than 4 h and 24 h, respectively) [82]. Studies by Harbourt et al. [98] have shown that the virus can survive for more than 8 h on skin samples (exposed at 37 • C). The virus titer decayed exponentially under all experimental conditions. Survival rates of SARS-CoV-2 measured by Riddell et al. [99] using standard ASTM E2197 substrates simulating human secretions were significantly prolonged on all surfaces. Surface roughness also plays a role in the virus transfer between the hand and the surface. Fabric/porous material has a higher transfer rate than nonfabric/nonporous material in general [100]. Note that experiments use very high concentrations of virus out of necessity, which is not encountered in natural conditions. A few studies have examined the effect of antimicrobial coatings on SARS-CoV-2. Behzadinasab et al. [101] found that the virus half-life on cuprous oxide coating was only 3-4 min, and 99.9% could be inactivated within 1 h without being affected by humidity. Hutasoit et al. [102] found that the reduction rate of the virus on cold sprayed-copper coating was more than 90%. Hosseini et al. [103] found that porous CuO coating with 50 µm could reduce infectivity by 99.7% in 1 min. Most of these coatings are based on copper materials, and their fabrication and application are of great significance in reducing the transmission risk of high-frequency touch surfaces.
## (s23) (S O -E L -V V ) Daylighting Introduced by Windows Accelerates Virus Decay
(p23.0) Window orientation, WWR, window type (visual and solar transmittance) and shading devices determine daylighting quality, area, and duration [113], and solar radiation plays an important role in the spread of COVID-19 [114]. An et al. [115] studied the effect of simulated sunlight on the stability of viruses in aerosols, suggesting that the rate of virus decay can be accelerated. In addition, studies have shown that sunlight can also rapidly inactivate viruses on inanimate surfaces [116]. UV consists of UVA (315-400), UVB (280-315), and UVC (100-280). UVC has been found to effectively inactivate viruses including SARS-CoV-2 [117], although UVC in sunlight has difficulty penetrating the ozone layer and reaching the ground. UVB also appears to be able to inactivate viruses present on surfaces and in the air to some extent [118]. Furthermore, studies have shown that in the absence of photosensitizers, the increased susceptibility of the virus to visible light at 405 nm mediates inactivation [119]. Based on the available data, it can be assumed that natural light can disinfect air and surfaces. Thus, increasing the WWR of south-facing windows, or properly reducing unnecessary shading to increase the level and duration of sunlight exposure may help accelerate virus decay and prevent the spread of disease. Further research is needed on the effect of window parameters on virus inactivation through the introduction of sunlight.
## (s24) A Space-Based Framework to Assess the Indoor Infection Risk
(p24.0) Numerous mathematical models have been developed to calculate the human infection risk [120,121]. Wells-Riley and dose-response approaches are widely used to assess infection risk [122]. The Wells-Riley model is based on the concept of quanta (a quantum is defined as the number of virus particles required to infect a person) and can only be used to assess airborne transmission risk [123]. The improved Wells-Riley model can be combined with computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations to improve the spatial resolution of infection risk distributions. Yan et al. [124] developed a 3D predictive model to analyse airborne transmission risks in airliner cabins based on the Wells-Riley framework coupled Lagrange particle simulations. Srivastava et al. [125] developed a Eulerian CFD model to assess the infection risk of COVID-19 in office buildings in combination with the Wells-Riley model. The dose-response model requires dose-response relationships, which are derived from large amounts of infectious dose data [126]. These data are difficult to obtain in the early stages of an outbreak, but can also be inferred from data from other related viruses and animal experiments. The dose-response model is divided into a deterministic model and a stochastic model, the latter of which allows consideration of stochastic characteristics of virus exposure and intake [122]. Buonanno et al. [127] proposed a quantitative approach based on the dose-response model to estimate the risk of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection by dividing the whole process into evaluation of the emission rate, exposure to a dosage concentration, received dosage and infection probability calculations.
