# Anti-leucine-rich glioma inactivated-1 autoimmune encephalitis: A review of diagnosis and treatment

CorpusID: 255214481 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fc25aeb0426eeff05af79625c4553d4b0930ef8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fc25aeb0426eeff05af79625c4553d4b0930ef8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Etiology and pathogenesis
(p2.0) LGI1 is a glycoprotein secreted by the presynaptic membrane. It is mainly expressed in the hippocampus and temporal cortex but is also weakly expressed in the basal ganglia and the inner cerebral cortex [3,4] . It connects presynaptic voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKC) and postsynaptic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) [5,6] . LGI1 antibody inhibits the binding of LGI1 protein to A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 22/23 (ADAM22/23) [7] , a metalloproteinase in the synaptic space, through its epitempin (EPTP) domain, and reduces the AMPAR function of inhibitory interneurons. In the hippocampus, inhibitory interneurons constitute a strong feedback or feed forward inhibition loop; thus, the decreased activity of inhibitory interneurons may lead to over-excitation of the whole network [8] , resulting in the occurrence of FBDS. It has been found [5] that the knockout of LGI1 gene may cause autosomal dominant lateral temporal epilepsy (ADLTE) [9,10] .
## (s6) Cognitive disorders
(p6.0) The majority of patients have rapidly progressive memory impairment, short-term memory loss, and impaired orientation. Other clinical manifestations include language ability deficits, impaired executive function, impaired visuospatial ability, and calculation disturbance [44] . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination shows that the hippocampus, temporal lobe, and basal ganglia are the main lesion sites [37,45,[46][47][48][49] . At present, it is believed that inflammation in the acute phase is associated with atrophy in the recovery stage, which may be the cause of persistent cognitive impairment in patients with anti-LGI1 AE. Studies by Thompson et al. [31] have shown that patients with both cognitive impairment and FBDS have more abnormal examination results than patients with FBDS alone. Abnormal findings of brain MRI and electroencephalogram and hyponatremia were almost exclusively observed in patients with cognitive impairment. There is evidence that cognitive impairment can be prevented by early termination of FBDS [31] .
## (s9) Hyperkinetic movements (HMs)
(p9.0) In contrast to the extensive discussion on FBDS, HMs have been overlooked in the past. HMs are characterized as a group of jerk-like or twisting movements [43] . This type of manifestation has only been described in a few case reports [43,[52][53][54] . HMs may occur when the patient is asleep or awake, and they do not interrupt the patient's autonomous movements. As a result, only a small number of patients would notice such symptoms and inform the doctor at the time of admission. According to Liu et al. [43] , HMs are very common in anti-LGI1 AE and can be promoted by sleep. Therefore, it is inferred that HMs are the result of the imbalance of the motor cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, and substantia nigra/red nucleus. HMs may also be the potential cause of sleep disorders.
