# REVIEW Open Access Challenges of managing hypertension in Pakistan -a review

CorpusID: 259157357 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cef3e0642d59baa606bb85b9f98b261b96d9f8e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cef3e0642d59baa606bb85b9f98b261b96d9f8e0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Hypertension in children and adolescents
(p3.0) Hypertension is not just limited to adults. There is a disproportionately higher blood pressure (BP) burden in South Asian children with relatively unclear reasons [16]. Jafer et al. reported that increased obesity in children was associated with elevated levels of BP in South Asia [17,  18]. These differences persisted even with lower Body Mass Index (BMI) thresholds, and children at or above these thresholds were twice as likely to have an increase in BP than those not centrally obese or overweight [18]. Furthermore, elevated blood pressure during childhood is considered a predictor of hypertension during adulthood [19]. A study comparing blood pressure in South Asian children versus American children, found that 12.2% of Pakistani children between ages 5 and 14 years have high blood pressure; significantly higher than children in the United States (p < 0.001) [20]. This finding was observed despite Pakistani children having lower BMIs. Bilal M et al. conducted a study on one thousand children who visited an outpatient clinic in 2019 in urban Karachi and reported a 25% prevalence of Hypertension (HTN) in children aged between 4 and 7 years, and pre-HTN in 10% [21]. It also showed a strong association between HTN in children and weight, family history, and highfat diet, concluding that large-scale screening of young children is required to report the prevalence of elevated blood pressures.

(p3.1) In summary, the prevalence of hypertension is high in Pakistan, with almost 2/3rds of presenting patients suffering from it. From 2000 to 2010, the prevalence of hypertension decreased by 2.6% in high-income countries but increased by 7.7% in low/middle-income countries [22]. A study reported an increasing prevalence of 46.2% in Pakistan in 2016-2017. Reviews done in other low-middle income countries in 2017 showed a similar increase with time, such as 40.6% in India [23], 40.7% in Bangladesh [24], and 34.0% in Zambia [25]. The main reasons for this rise are disparities in awareness, treatment, and control rates, due to the lack of resources, education, and funds in low-middle income countries [26]. Our study reflects this data and Pakistan is shown to be one of the low-middle income countries continuously struggling with these health disparities.
## (s5) Obesity
(p5.0) The association of BMI with hypertension has been reported in multiple studies, specifically a BMI greater than 23 kg/m 2 [28]. Akram J et al. noted obesity prevalence in Pakistan was 70% and had significant association with hypertension (HTN) (p = 0.0003) [29]. They also found obesity was higher among Pakistani women than men. The childhood obesity epidemic has caused the global prevalence of (HTN) in children to increase from 2 to 4% [21]. However, there is limited data on obese children and HTN in Pakistan.
## (s9) Control rate of hypertension in Pakistan
(p9.0) Hypertension control is poor in most Asian countries [48]. In primary care settings, developed countries like Canada have a higher percentage of patients with controlled hypertension (65%) compared to developing nations like Pakistan, where the control rate is 6% [49]. According to the National Health Survey of Pakistan, 17.9% of adults over 15 years had hypertension, and from those only 3% had hypertension under control [50]. The proportion of patients with controlled hypertension differs among developed and developing countries, specifically between primary and tertiary settings. A cross-sectional study from rural areas of Pakistan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka showed that low adherence to antihypertensive therapy was one of the critical factors independently associated with high odds of uncontrolled BP [51]. Moreover, most individuals in each country were taking only one antihypertensive medication, due to affordability and availability. Rates of control are better in tertiary care settings. A study coordinated in three different tertiary care centers in Karachi reported that 72.3% of non-diabetic hypertensive patients had controlled BP, defined as an average BP of less than 140/90 mmHg [50]. Higher age, male gender, and greater than 10 years of formal education were significant factors leading to more controlled hypertension. A study from 2019 at a singlecenter tertiary center in Karachi reported that 62.5% of patients took antihypertensive medication daily, and more than half of that studied population had their BP controlled [52]. Like other studies, this study discovered that gender, smoking, additional comorbidities, and medication compliance were significant factors associated with uncontrolled hypertension.
