# Narrative Why-Question Answering: A Review of Challenges and Datasets

CorpusID: 256461385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/98f4b43487b8386728c14aba24f848b2eadad1e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/98f4b43487b8386728c14aba24f848b2eadad1e2)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s1) 2 Why-Questions
(p1.0) A why-question is typically asked about a causal relation in the text. Causal questions can be constructed in several ways and they are not limited to why-questions only. Causal questions can be also asked with what (e.g., what is the cause of), which (e.g., which are the consequences of), and how (e.g., how dangerous is) (Girju, 2003). However, whyquestion is the only question type that solely represents causality and can be used to test causal reasoning (Grivaz, 2010;Dunietz et al., 2017;Tan et al., 2022). Furthermore, answering why-questions requires more complex reasoning than answering other types of causal questions because it is more difficult for QA-systems to decide directly from a why-question which type of information needs to be searched for in the text (Girju, 2003). In the following subsections, we start by elaborating on the notion of causality, including how causal relations are expressed in the texts, and then review what ambiguities why-questions hold in relation to causality.
## (s6) Narratives
(p6.0) Narratives are texts in which events are causally or thematically linked and develop within a temporal framework (Brewer, 2017). Narratives are generally agent-oriented and their main scope is centered on characters, their actions, and motivations (Sang et al., 2022). In narrative QA, stories, fairytales, books, and (movie) scripts are commonly utilized as narrative texts. Characteristics of narrative texts, such as causality of events and motivations of agents, make narratives a suitable context for asking why-questions. Additionally, fictional narratives can ensure the test of comprehension because they are self-contained, meaning that all elements needed to understand the narrative, such as events, characters, and settings, are present in the text and QA models need to comprehend the narrative in order to answer questions (Dunietz et al., 2020;Richardson et al., 2013;Kočiský et al., 2018). Implicitness is a key feature of narratives that makes it different from other types of texts. Length is another characteristic dimension of narratives which is also very important for QA systems. In the following subsections, we will review these characteristics in more detail.
