# A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 257913812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s8) B. Better Interoperability between Different Stakeholders
(p8.0) The healthcare Metaverse can collect data from multiple healthcare centres/ hospitals for ensuring greater patient diversity from different demographics [42]. However, data interoperability between different stakeholders is a significant challenge in the Metaverse environment, since the data collected from multiple devices/ Metaverses need to be made accessible to the trusted parties. Such data can be used for finding patient similarity [43], remote patient monitoring [44], and for predicting mortality rates. In order to address these issues, FL can be used for pooling data from every edge node/ hospital, train them on the edge devices itself and send the updates to the server, so that the model can be globally trained in the Metaverse, thereby mitigating localized biases and offering customized and effective solutions for rare diseases or during a pandemic. The problem of data interoperability can thus be addressed using FL mechanisms, thereby providing quality healthcare to the patients.
## (s18) D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic
(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected the economic and social stability of the nations to a great extent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alleviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread of disease.
## (s19) E. Drug Discovery
(p19.0) Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational models. Machine learning models play a major role here in improving the decision making for applications such as hit discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimization [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76]. Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers can collaborate in building the required models. However, conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
