# Food flavor enhancement, preservation, and bio-functionality of ginger (Zingiber officinale): a review

CorpusID: 257851880 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47faf1fcb5342ddbe2eacb2c1e2f868932113276](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47faf1fcb5342ddbe2eacb2c1e2f868932113276)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s13) Benefits in inhibiting coronavirus (COVID-19)
(p13.0) Infectious diseases that can be transmitted from person to person lead to significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. [156]The recent coronavirus pandemic (SARS-CoV2 virus or COVID-19) is associated with a highly infectious viral pathogen and the emergence of new strains that are often resistant to current treatment, and the virus has been associated with a higher fatality rate than previous coronavirus infections. [164]The death rate from respiratory syndrome associated with the 2002 coronavirus epidemic (MERS-CoV) in the Middle East was around 10%.In 2012, the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) emerged, with a mortality rate of 35%. [156]omplications from a COVID-19 infection can cause pneumonia, severe acute respiratory syndrome, kidney failure and even death in severe cases.People with weak immune systems and with certain conditions like diabetes, cardiovascular disease, kidney disease, asthma, lung disease etc. are more susceptible to complications.Therefore, a healthy physical immune system supports the host in treating and defending against some pathogenic diseases associated with COVID-19.Scientific reports mentioned that respiratory syndrome, fever, cough, fatigue, shortness of breath and dyspnea are common symptoms of COVID-19.Therefore, the use of ginger for the treatment of respiratory diseases is compatible with other measures. [40]ifferent varieties of ginger contain different bioactive compounds such as flavonoids, terpenoids, lignans, sulfides, polyphenols, carotenoids, coumarins, saponins, plant sterols, curcumins and phthalides.These phytochemicals may inhibit various viruses (including COVID-19) and prevent disease. [165]Various COVID-19 protection measures have been aligned to promote public health, including regular hand washing, lockdown, social distancing measures and safe food practices. [156]owever, efficient preventive therapeutics against COVID-19 are urgently needed.

(p13.1) Ginger's antiviral properties can be linked to immune-stimulating properties and its biologically active compounds against several health complications such as COVID-19.Recent studies have shown that ginger phenolic compounds such as 8-gingerol and 10-gingerol are significantly active against COVID-19. [166]The potential inhibitory activity of ginger phytochemicals against SARS-Cov-2 have been assessed through their binding affinities.A study by Hemalatha et al. [167] on 8-gingerol and 10gingerol showed high Glidescores (5.88 and 5.72 kcal/mol, respectively) and therefore high binding affinities toward the studied receptor compared to hydroxychloroquine (5.47 kcal/mol) and other ginger components.The inhibitory potential of a methanolic ginger extract also showed antiviral activity against COVID-19 with IC 50 value of 0.034 g/ml. [168]
