# Using Wearable Sensors to Estimate Mechanical Power Output in Cyclical Sports Other than Cycling-A Review

CorpusID: 255044078 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2b967699d808b324e39f9486fe86624d47157d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2b967699d808b324e39f9486fe86624d47157d4e)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s7) Overview
(p7.0) An overview of the literature that estimated mechanical power using wearable devices is provided in Tables 1 and 2. To identify the acting forces on a rigid body, drawing a free body diagram of that rigid body is a useful tool. The column 'rigid body definition' clarifies the boundaries of the rigid body that is used and therefore designating the forces and torques to consider. The studies of interest mainly estimate mechanical power as output (see Table 1). However, some studies in Table 2 estimated only subparts of the power equation, such as the acceleration of the center of mass [10] or push-off force [11,12]. These subparts are useful for future estimation of mechanical power and need to be accurately estimated as a first step towards mechanical power estimation in, respectively, rowing, speed skating, and cross-country skiing. Whichever term is estimated is displayed in the 'estimated term' column. Force or torque from a source acting on an object is displayed as , or , in the column 'force measurement'. The kinematics of an object relative to a reference frame such as the linear velocity or angular velocity is displayed as / or / , respectively, in the column 'kinematic measurement'. If known, the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is given between brackets. If the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is unknown, it is displayed as (-). In Table 1, if a measuring system is commercially available, the name of the system is given.
## (s9) Overview
(p9.0) An overview of the literature that estimated mechanical power using wearable devices is provided in Tables 1 and 2. To identify the acting forces on a rigid body, drawing a free body diagram of that rigid body is a useful tool. The column 'rigid body definition' clarifies the boundaries of the rigid body that is used and therefore designating the forces and torques to consider. The studies of interest mainly estimate mechanical power as output (see Table 1). However, some studies in Table 2 estimated only subparts of the power equation, such as the acceleration of the center of mass [10] or push-off force [11,12]. These subparts are useful for future estimation of mechanical power and need to be accurately estimated as a first step towards mechanical power estimation in, respectively, rowing, speed skating, and cross-country skiing. Whichever term is estimated is displayed in the 'estimated term' column. Force or torque from a source acting on an object is displayed as F source,object or M source,object in the column 'force measurement'. The kinematics of an object relative to a reference frame such as the linear velocity or angular velocity is displayed as v object/re f or ω object/re f , respectively, in the column 'kinematic measurement'. If known, the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is given between brackets. If the type of sensor used to measure the force and/or velocity component is unknown, it is displayed as (-). In Table 1, if a measuring system is commercially available, the name of the system is given.
