# An overview of experimental simulations of microbial activity in early Earth

CorpusID: 255600713 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c26138a3f4d2ee54fff7fb5e0b0cf370fbbbacb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c26138a3f4d2ee54fff7fb5e0b0cf370fbbbacb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Environmental forcings for primary productivity
(p5.0) Primary production is one of the main drivers for global biogeochemical cycles. It is therefore important to understand the forcings for primary productivity in early Earth. Several experimental studies have been conducted to investigate the response of primary productivity to Precambrian conditions, such as high seawater Fe(II), high atmospheric pCO 2 , and unique ecophysiological mechanisms such as competition for nutrients between oxygenic cyanobacteria and Fe(II)-oxidising anoxygenic photosynthesizers (Swanner et al., 2015;Kamennaya et al., 2018;Ozaki et al., 2019;Herrmann et al., 2021;Szeinbaum et al., 2021). Although extant organisms used in the studies described almost certainly cannot be mapped to those present in ecosystems on the early Earth, we can reasonably assume that their core metabolic pathways and ecological activities had equivalents in those early ecosystems (e.g., Falkowski et al., 2008).

(p5.1) As ferruginous seawater conditions were probably widespread in the Precambrian (e.g., Sperling et al., 2015), it is important to understand the influence of Fe(II)-rich seawater on oxygenic photosynthesis, which elucidates the history of oceanic and atmospheric oxygenation. Through cultivation experiments, Swanner et al. (2015) found that both the growth rates and efficiency of oxygenic photosynthesis of planktonic cyanobacterium Synechococcus PCC 7002 decrease under high Fe(II) concentrations (>50 μM). The authors further proposed that Fe(II) toxicity of cyanobacteria under the conditions of Fe(II) upwelling might have decreased the oxygen generation rate in the photo zone in the oceans of early Earth, determining the onset of the GOE.

(p5.2) However, several lines of evidence show that Fe(II) toxicity might have not significantly limited the expansion of cyanobacteria in the early oceans (Ward et al., 2019;Szeinbaum et al., 2021). Firstly, many types of terrestrial cyanobacteria can survive at high Fe(II) concentrations (10-150 μM), which characterised the Archean oceans (Brown et al., 2005;Thompson et al., 2019;Ward et al., 2019). Next, microbial "helpers" such as facultative anaerobic gammaproteobacterial Shewanella using an ROS defence strategy, might have partially relieved the toxicity of Fe(II) on cyanobacteria (Szeinbaum et al., 2021). This is because the Fe(II) toxicity of cyanobacteria could be generated by the hydroxyl radicals from the reaction between Fe(II) and ROS formed during photosynthesis (Swanner et al., 2015;Szeinbaum et al., 2021). Finally, experimental setup and strain selection may have a great influence on the conclusion (Herrmann et al., 2021). Previous experiments examining Fe(II) toxicity were performed in a closed system (Swanner et al., 2015). In the cultivation experiments on cyanobacteria Pseudanabaena sp. PCC7367 and Synechococcus sp. PCC7336, Herrmann et al. (2021) analysed the influence of experimental setup (open vs. closed system) on the observation of Fe(II) toxicity. In their experiments, Fe(II) toxicity was not observed in open-system cultures with continuous gaseous exchange. They further suggested that closed systems are not suitable for simulating the Archean environments, as the varying pCO 2 concentration during the experiment could have a significant impact on the experimental results.
## (s6) Other studies on biogeochemical cycles
(p6.0) Besides studies on microbial mats and primary productivity, other aspects of global biogeochemical cycles of early Earth have been experimentally investigated, such as the nitrogen cycle (Michiels et al., 2017), biological pumps (Kamennaya et al., 2018) and chemical weathering (Zaharescu et al., 2019). Through an incubation experiment in a modern ferruginous basin, an analogue for the Precambrian ocean, Michiels et al. (2017) reveals that a large fraction (40%) of NO 3 − is reduced to NH 4 + rather than lost to the atmosphere as N 2 . The transformation of NO 3 − to NH 4 + would promote the retention of N in seawater, further boosting primary productivity. Using a biogeochemical model, Michiels et al. (2017) further suggested that the global primary productivity in the ferruginous ocean might have been limited by P rather than N. The biological pump is an important process in global C and O cycles, as it influences the final retention of C in marine sediments, further impacting the accumulation of O 2 in the atmosphere. It was suggested that the efficiency of the biological pump was low during the early Earth due to the lack of a ballast with a high sinking rate from a predator (Logan et al., 1995). However, it was recently found that the conditions of high pCO 2 in the early Earth can promote the formation of acidic extracellular polysaccharides (EPS; Kamennaya et al., 2018). These EPS can aggregate the dead cells of planktonic cyanobacteria to a ballast, increasing the efficiency of the biological pump.
