# An Overview of Cefiderocol's Therapeutic Potential and Underlying Resistance Mechanisms

CorpusID: 259242361 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/86b1f5a5691666f36b9eeb955100a894213e1e4f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/86b1f5a5691666f36b9eeb955100a894213e1e4f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s14) [59,65]
(p14.0) Escherichia coli SIDERO-WT study 2014 involving 1529 isolates of E. coli with MICs ranging from ≤0.002 to 4 µg/mL. The MIC 90 value of cefiderocol against E. coli isolates was 0.5 and 1 µg/mL in the second and third study, respectively. [59,65,66] In total, 10 out of 142 E. coli isolates were resistant to cefiderocol. In 26 of 1158 E. coli isolates harboring NDM-5 high levels of cefiderocol resistance was reported, in the second study. In the third study, a multidrug-resistant ST167 Escherichia coli clinical isolate recovered from a patient hospitalized in Switzerland produced NDM-35 showing ca. 10-fold increased hydrolytic activity toward cefiderocol compared to NDM-1. [49,67,68] Enterobacter cloacae Complex

(p14.1) In SIDERO-WT-2014 study and in another study involving 514 and 103 isolates of E. cloacae, respectively, the MIC 90 value was 1 µg/mL. [59,66] In the first study, the authors report 2 cefiderocol-resistant ECC isolates in a collection of 10 isolates collected from diabetic patients. In the second study, the potential role of the VIM-1 carbapenemase in cefiderocol resistance in the ECC was highlighted. This effect is probably enhanced due to combination with additional mechanisms, such as ESBL production and siderophore inactivation. The presence of the NDM β-lactamase facilitates the emergence of resistance via nonsynonymous mutations of the cirA catecholate siderophore receptor in the third study.
## (s20) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(p20.0) In both studies all the collection of 120 and 33 isolates, respectively, were susceptible to cefiderocol. Five consecutive annual SIDERO-WT Studies reports a 99.9% of susceptibility to cefiderocol in a total of 7700 isolates. [54,60,74] Whole genome sequencing of P. aeruginosa non-susceptible to cefiderocol identified mutations in major iron transport pathways. The second study reports in vivo development of cefiderocol resistance among four sequential P. aeruginosa clinical isolates ST244 recovered from a single patient, without exposure to cefiderocol. [75,76] Serratia spp./Serratia marcescens

(p20.1) In SIDERO-WT-2014 study, in 503 isolates of Serratia spp. MIC 90 value was 0.25 µg/mL and in another study involving 103 isolates of S. marcescens the MIC 90 value was ≤0.0063 µg/mL. [59,66] In total, 14 out of 1158 isolates of S. marcescens were classified as cefiderocol-resistant in this study.
