# Methods for determination of biomethane potential of feedstocks: a review

CorpusID: 26425201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5491973efaea54653e95d8503685816d9b7649d0)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry

## (s18) Spectroscopy
(p18.0) Spectroscopic techniques determine the absorbance, transmission, diffusion, or fluorescence of radiation in the ultraviolet (UV), visible (VIS), and infrared (IR) range (Spanjers and van Lier, 2006;Esteves et al., 2012). The basic components of spectroscopic instruments encompass a radiation source, a wavelength selector, sample cell, reagent dosing unit (for VIS spectrometry), detector, as well as data treatment and readout unit, and best suit automated in-line measurements (Spanjers and van Lier, 2006). Spectroscopic techniques include atomic spectroscopy which measures substances in gaseous phase after volatilisation and molecular spectroscopy which measures substances directly in liquids (Spanjers and van Lier, 2006). IR spectroscopy methods rely on bond interactions. These methods contain information on the structure of dissolved compounds and identify components by comparison of a spectrum with reference spectra (Spanjers and van Lier, 2006). Common examples of IR spectroscopic instruments are near-infrared spectroscopy (NIR) and the Fourier transform midinfrared spectroscopy (FTIR). IR spectrum methods can monitor aromatic and aliphatic hydrocarbons, and chlorinated hydrocarbons (Spanjers and van Lier, 2006). The Envital ® kit based on fluorescence redox indicator is a tool in its infant stages for determining BMP (Bellaton et al., 2016). -A sharp rate of temperature rise can diminish CH4 production -There are two ranges of temperature for optimal bacterial activity, defined as mesophilic (25- 
