# R E V I E W A R T I C L E Open Forum Infectious Diseases Coronavirus Disease 2019 Treatment: A Review of Early and Emerging Options

CorpusID: 261234016 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s0) Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine
(p0.0) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p0.1) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p0.2) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].
## (s2) Nitazoxanide
(p2.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p2.1) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.

(p2.2) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p2.3) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.
## (s4) Tocilizumab
(p4.0) Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits both membrane-bound and soluble interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptors. Interleukin-6, which is secreted by monocytes and macrophages, is one of the main drivers of immunologic response and symptoms in patients with cytokine-release syndrome (CRS). Although tocilizumab was first approved by the FDA in 2010 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, it has gained traction in recent years for treatment of patients with CRS following chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR T) therapy as a corticosteroid-sparing agent [42]. Indeed, it received FDA approval for severe or life-threatening CAR T-associated CRS in 2017 due to its efficacy and safety profile. Although criteria for grading CRS severity varies by cancer center, it has been proposed to administer tocilizumab to CRS patients with any of the following: oxygen requirement <40%, hypotension responsive to fluids or a low dose of a single vasoactive agent, or Grade 2 organ toxicity as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [43]. Interleukin-6 antagonism may make a patient more susceptible to bacterial infection and has been associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chronic therapy with tocilizumab for giant cell arteritis or rheumatoid arthritis. In a case series of 53 adult patients with relapsed or refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Grade 3 CRS or higher was associated with increased risk of subsequent infection, but it was unclear whether tocilizumab or corticosteroid use promoted this risk [44]. There were no reported adverse events in the 60 tocilizumab-treated patients submitted to the FDA for the CRS indication, which recommends a maximum of 4 doses for treatment [45].

(p4.1) Hyperinflammatory states and cytokine storming, including elevated IL-6, has been reported in severe COVID-19 and were associated with increased mortality in patients in China [36]. A preprint (nonpeer reviewed) case series of 21 patients treated with tocilizumab between February 5 and 14, 2020 in China reported marked success, including rapid resolution of fever and C-reactive protein, decreased oxygen requirements, and resolution of lung opacities on computerized tomography imaging [46]. The authors state the patients all had "routine treatment for a week" before tocilizumab, which was described as "standard care according to national treatment guidelines" including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and other supportive care. All patients had IL-6 analyzed before tocilizumab administration with a mean value of 132.38 ± 278.54 pg/mL (normal <7 pg/mL). It should be noted that in the United States, IL-6 monitoring is a send-out laboratory for most institutions with a turnaround time of 3-7 days. No adverse events were described in the Chinese cohort; however, long-term assessment was not done.
## (s8) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p8.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p8.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s11) Disulfiram
(p11.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p11.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s18) XueBiJing
(p18.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p18.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
## (s21) Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine
(p21.0) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p21.1) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p21.2) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].
## (s23) Nitazoxanide
(p23.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p23.1) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.

(p23.2) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p23.3) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.
## (s25) Tocilizumab
(p25.0) Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits both membrane-bound and soluble interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptors. Interleukin-6, which is secreted by monocytes and macrophages, is one of the main drivers of immunologic response and symptoms in patients with cytokine-release syndrome (CRS). Although tocilizumab was first approved by the FDA in 2010 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, it has gained traction in recent years for treatment of patients with CRS following chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR T) therapy as a corticosteroid-sparing agent [42]. Indeed, it received FDA approval for severe or life-threatening CAR T-associated CRS in 2017 due to its efficacy and safety profile. Although criteria for grading CRS severity varies by cancer center, it has been proposed to administer tocilizumab to CRS patients with any of the following: oxygen requirement <40%, hypotension responsive to fluids or a low dose of a single vasoactive agent, or Grade 2 organ toxicity as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [43]. Interleukin-6 antagonism may make a patient more susceptible to bacterial infection and has been associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chronic therapy with tocilizumab for giant cell arteritis or rheumatoid arthritis. In a case series of 53 adult patients with relapsed or refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Grade 3 CRS or higher was associated with increased risk of subsequent infection, but it was unclear whether tocilizumab or corticosteroid use promoted this risk [44]. There were no reported adverse events in the 60 tocilizumab-treated patients submitted to the FDA for the CRS indication, which recommends a maximum of 4 doses for treatment [45].

(p25.1) Hyperinflammatory states and cytokine storming, including elevated IL-6, has been reported in severe COVID-19 and were associated with increased mortality in patients in China [36]. A preprint (nonpeer reviewed) case series of 21 patients treated with tocilizumab between February 5 and 14, 2020 in China reported marked success, including rapid resolution of fever and C-reactive protein, decreased oxygen requirements, and resolution of lung opacities on computerized tomography imaging [46]. The authors state the patients all had "routine treatment for a week" before tocilizumab, which was described as "standard care according to national treatment guidelines" including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and other supportive care. All patients had IL-6 analyzed before tocilizumab administration with a mean value of 132.38 ± 278.54 pg/mL (normal <7 pg/mL). It should be noted that in the United States, IL-6 monitoring is a send-out laboratory for most institutions with a turnaround time of 3-7 days. No adverse events were described in the Chinese cohort; however, long-term assessment was not done.
## (s29) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p29.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p29.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s32) Disulfiram
(p32.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p32.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s39) XueBiJing
(p39.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p39.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
