# The Influence of COVID-19 in Endocrine Research: Critical Overview, Methodological Implications and a Guideline for Future Designs

CorpusID: 260322891 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d138d8a870afb94d8ef0608b8df797ed256c23d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d138d8a870afb94d8ef0608b8df797ed256c23d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Coronavirus, an RNA virus from the Coronaviridae family is the responsible agent for the COVID-19 pandemic. 1 An epigenetic change influences the immunological response to infections, including COVID-19. The gender-based influence has been observed in several respiratory and autoimmune disorders. 2 The propensity of mortality rate due to COVID-19 was significantly higher in females than in males. Notably, social norms, financial and non-financial barriers to women's access to healthcare have proposed to negatively impact women's testing for COVID-19 and access to adequate care, resulting in underreporting of female cases and deaths due to COVID-19. 3 It has been suggested that sex differences in immunopathogenesis may be suggestive of mechanisms of COVID-19 based on the available sex-disaggregated epidemiological data from the COVID-19 pandemic. This could help identify points for improved vaccine design and therapeutics to increase the efficacy of the vaccine.
## (s2) Respiratory responses
(p2.0) In numerous circumstances throughout the COVID-19 era, N95 respirators were utilized often. A significant number of studies discussed issues brought on by the prolonged use of respirators, with mixed results. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis (which was based on 13 studies) was able to determine the effects of the N95 respirator. While oxygen saturation did not change during low-to moderate-intensity physical activity, borderline lower oxygen saturation and higher carbon dioxide partial pressure were noted. According to this study, using N95 respirators while performing high-intensity physical exercise may statistically affect, but not necessarily have a clinically meaningful impact on, the physiological changes in oxygen, and carbon dioxide. The emphasis was on the user's susceptibility to clinical signs of hypoxia and hypercarbia for the early diagnosis of negative effects of N95 respirators if they had certain medical conditions, such as respiratory issues. 13 To assess the direct relevance of this subject, additional shreds of evidence are required pertaining to the physiological aspect. Although these connections may appear insignificant at first look, they undoubtedly confound the studies and taint the outcomes. When exposed to acute normobaric hypoxia, the blood glucose level in healthy persons remains constant. 40 Additionally, combined resistance and aerobic training in normoxia or normobaric hypoxia have no effect on metabolic control in men with type 1 diabetes 41 ; however, physical training in hypoxic conditions may partially enhance the favorable effects of exercise alone on myocellular insulin sensitivity in obese men with metabolic syndrome through changes in VEGF levels. 42 It's interesting to note that patients with diabetic foot ulcers (DFU) have an inverse relationship between miR-210 and HIF-1 (hypoxia associated gene) expression, suggesting that miR-210 may control HIF-1 expression. 43 In a recent study, which included 2 groups of tissue samples (control and type 2 diabetes mellitus ie, T2DM with DFU) and three groups of circulation samples (50 in each group of healthy volunteers, T2DM patients, and T2DM patients with DFU), it was discovered that HIF-1 expression decreased in DFU patients while miR-210 expression increased in both tissue biopsies and circulation. In comparison to T2DM patients and healthy controls, the expression of the inflammatory genes TNF-and IL-6 in the blood was higher in DFU. VEGF expression remained unchanged, while anti-apoptotic BCL2 was downregulated and BAX and caspase 3 were elevated in DFU tissues compared to control. 43 We can wonder if the results of the latter study, which was undertaken during the COVID-19 epidemic, would have been the same if it had been done under more typical circumstances, that is, before the pandemic.
## (s4) Neurophysiologic responses
(p4.0) Abnormal EEG waves are very commonly seen in COVID-19 patients and survivors. [68][69][70] Face mask wearing practice could create a substantial influence in neurophysiological studies. It is very important to notice the unrecognized role of face mask wearing practice and their potential confounding effect on such studies. Although controversial, 71,72 face masks may exert influence through other pathways. 73 For instance, they can further induce hypoxia and hypercapnia, 74 which drastically alters brain EEG patterns, 75 to mention a few. Based on it, one can argue that this very issue can create partiality in many neurophysiological studies carried out during or after the COVID-19 pandemic. For a short mechanistic explanation, see Rastmanesh. 73 One might wonder how these issues interact with endocrine research. Based on the literature-based evidence, one can find a connection after a short critical appraisal, in a scenario if the study is/was to be conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic:
