# ''Beet-ing'' the Mountain: A Review of the Physiological and Performance Effects of Dietary Nitrate Supplementation at Simulated and Terrestrial Altitude

CorpusID: 37420835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/910ffb4825d1ee84ae688cefdcf9cbaa6948e96c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/910ffb4825d1ee84ae688cefdcf9cbaa6948e96c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s7) Cardiovascular Response
(p7.0) In normoxia, NO 3 supplementation has been reported to reduce BP [51][52][53] and enhance vascular compliance [101] in humans and improve cardiac contractility in rodents [102]. Dietary NO 3 might also provide a means of altering the complex and multifaceted cardiovascular response to hypoxia.

(p7.1) Some [11,64], but not all [68,103], previous studies have reported BP reductions during acute normobaric hypoxic exposure following NO 3 supplementation. The reduced BP following NO 3 supplementation has been attributed to increased NO 2 and NO generation and subsequent vasodilation [52,53]. Recently, Ingram et al. [104] reported pulmonary and arterial vasodilation after NO 2 infusion in normobaric hypoxia (F I O 2 12%, *4100 m) but not normoxia. The greater activity of NO 2 reductases, including xanthine oxidoreductase, deoxygenated hemoglobin, and myoglobin, and COX in hypoxia [37] may partly explain this effect. Interestingly, Ingram et al. [104] observed pulmonary vasodilation in hypoxia after plasma [NO 2 -] had returned to baseline values. This suggests possible storage and metabolism of NO 2 -, and NO in the extravascular tissue could contribute to hypoxia-induced vasodilation [104]. It is possible, based on the findings of Ingram et al. [104], that the capacity to elicit vasodilation and BP effects with NO 3 supplementation might also be more likely in hypoxia than in normoxia, although direct comparison is required.

(p7.2) In acute normobaric hypoxia (F I O 2 *11.6%, *4600 m), NO 3 supplementation neither influenced the hemodynamic response nor augmented cardiac unloading in healthy men [103]. Similarly, NO 3 had no effect on the hypoxia-induced hyperemic response to handgrip exercise in young adults (mean ± standard deviation [SD] age 25 ± 1 years) exercising in normoxia and acute normobaric hypoxia (F I O 2 titrated to achieve *80% S a O 2 ) [105]. Interestingly, despite similar increases in plasma [NO 2 -], NO 3 supplementation significantly increased the vasodilation and blood flow response to hypoxic exercise in older participants (mean ± SD age 64 ± 2 years). The magnitude of the effect was such that age-related differences in compensatory vasodilation were abolished with NO 3 supplementation, suggesting therapeutic utility of NO 3 in older populations exercising in hypoxia [105] or potentially those afflicted with clinical conditions involving tissue hypoxia [106].
## (s8) Hypoxic Exercise Performance
(p8.0) Several studies have examined the effects of NO 3 ingestion on exercise capacity/performance in acute normobaric hypoxia ( Table 1). The effects of NO 3 supplementation on exercise capacity/performance in simulated altitude via hypobaric hypoxia and at terrestrial altitude have yet to be investigated. Vanhatalo et al. [11] were the first to study the effects of NO 3 supplementation during exercise in normobaric hypoxia (F I O 2 14.5%, *2800 m) and observed a 21.4% increase in leg-extension TTE with NO 3 supplementation. This improvement effectively restored exercise duration to normoxia values. Whilst exhaustive leg-extension exercise is not directly representative of athletic performance, these data suggest that NO 3 supplementation might offer a means of ameliorating the ergolytic effects of hypoxia on exercise performance.
## (s12) NO 3
(p12.0) supplementation is emerging as a promising nutritional aid, with potentially beneficial applications for the wide variety of individuals ascending to altitude each year. In this review, NO 3 supplementation has been demonstrated to reduce pulmonary _ VO 2 and, in some cases, elevate S a O 2 in normobaric hypoxia-effects that may be attributable to improvements in the efficiency of muscle contraction and/or mitochondrial respiration, and are of functional relevance for individuals exercising in a low-O 2 environment. Current evidence also suggests that NO 3 supplementation can improve muscle energetics during exercise in normobaric hypoxia via effects on tissue O 2 delivery and consumption and might alter cardiovascular responses to normobaric and hypobaric hypoxia. In contrast, whilst NO 3 supplementation might influence some of the physiological responses to hypoxic training, current evidence suggests that this does not translate into improved exercise performance in normoxia. Given that the majority of published investigations have explored the effects of NO 3 supplementation in simulated altitude, which is often regarded as an incomplete surrogate of ''true'' altitude, future studies at terrestrial altitude are necessary. Researchers are encouraged to further probe the myriad potentially beneficial effects of NO 3 supplementation as a potential aid to ''beet-ing'' the mountain.
