# Raising awareness of bronchiectasis in primary care: overview of diagnosis and management strategies in adults

CorpusID: 3885741 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eeca8fcdcdafe28bb840be83c87b5414f95d69c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eeca8fcdcdafe28bb840be83c87b5414f95d69c3)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) OVERALL GOALS OF TREATMENT
(p4.0) The main goals of treatment are to reduce exacerbations, preserve lung function and improve the patient's quality of life. A disease management schematic is shown in Fig. 3. Patients with bronchiectasis should be instructed in how to improve airway clearance using physiotherapy techniques at home or at a physiotherapy clinic. Treatments, both pharmacological and nonpharmacological, should focus on reducing inflammation and preventing exacerbations. Because bronchiectasis involves a permanent change in lung structure, the condition is chronic and the patient's quality of life may be severely impacted. Care is best managed by a stepwise multidisciplinary team approach, including respiratory/chest physiotherapy. 5 Primary care management Some management principles are common to all patients with bronchiectasis and include the requirement for good education about the disease, annual vaccination against influenza and vaccination against S. pneumoniae. Patients that are breathless will benefit from pulmonary rehabilitation as is the case with other respiratory disorders, and patients should be encouraged to exercise. Smoking cessation should be strongly advocated for the minority of patients that continue to smoke (up to 18% of patients with bronchiectasis are reported to be current smokers). 40 Specific management strategies for bronchiectasis depend on the underlying severity and cause of disease. Patients with mild or moderate bronchiectasis are often managed and monitored in the primary care setting. Patients with mild bronchiectasis usually will not require prophylactic antibiotic therapy, but those with sputum production should perform daily physiotherapy between and during exacerbations. 5 Patients with moderate bronchiectasis patients will typically have persistent symptoms in spite of standard care and may require prophylactic long-term antibiotic therapy as well as adjunctive treatments and strategies to promote mucus clearance (see sections below on Secondary care management and Chest physiotherapy/respiratory therapy). 5 In the primary care setting, management should focus on monitoring the disease and implementing techniques and procedures to minimise disease progression and maximise equality of life. Regular clinic visits will allow the primary care provider to coordinate care with specialists and refer the patient  to the appropriate specialist, as needed. Key considerations for the primary care provider to assess at each visit are outlined in Table 3. Regular tracking of exacerbations and symptoms allows the patient to learn more about managing his or her disease and helps to keep the care plan up-to-date. Regular monitoring of sputum 56 (ideally twice per year) will identify the emergence of new pathogens or the development of antibiotic resistance. The previous sputum results can be used to guide future antibiotic use for exacerbations.
