# A Comprehensive tRNA Genomic Survey Unravels the Evolutionary History of tRNA Arrays in Prokaryotes

CorpusID: 42007454 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9b81730bb8a4c36928d146605157efcbad35e58](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9b81730bb8a4c36928d146605157efcbad35e58)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) play an essential role in the protein synthesis pathway, linking the genetic code with the corresponding amino acids (Widmann et al. 2010). Beyond their canonical role during protein biosynthesis, tRNAs are also implicated in other cellular functions such as the regulation of gene expression and cell death, cell wall formation, protein labelling for degradation, aminoacylation of cell membrane phospholipids, and antibiotic biosynthesis (for review, see Raina and Ibba [2014]).

(p0.1) Typically, tRNA is a short cloverleaf noncoding RNA of approximately 70-100 bases in length which folds into an L-shaped tertiary structure. tRNAs are highly conserved among Archaea, Bacteria, and Eukarya (Marck and Grosjean 2002;Sprinzl and Vassilenko 2005;Fujishima and Kanai 2014) suggesting that tRNA molecules had already evolved before the emergence of the last universal common ancestor. The tRNA multigene family usually comprises 20 amino acid accepting groups (also called amino acid isotypes), each containing one or more tRNA members that recognize different codons commonly referred as tRNA isoacceptors (Sprinzl and Vassilenko 2005;Goodenbour and Pan 2006). To function as substrate in protein biosynthesis, each tRNA molecule attaches to a single amino acid upon selectively base-pairing its three-base anticodon to a complementary three-base codon sequence of mRNA.
## (s5) Atypical tRNA Array Units Were Found in Two Gram-Negative Bacterial Species
(p5.0) Acidithiobacillus organisms are Gram-negative, acidophilic sulfur-oxidizing bacteria that catalyze the oxidative dissolution of sulfide minerals and play major roles in biomining and acid mine drainage. Compared with other Acidithiobacillus organisms, A. ferrivorans CF27 were recently found to harbor a high number of tRNA genes (71 tRNA genes) (Talla et al. 2014), as previously reported in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T (80 tRNA genes) (Levican et al. 2009). This observation could reflect the physiological importance of protein translation in these proteobacterial organisms. Therefore, the structural organization of the tRNA genes in Acidithiobacillus species was analyzed. An increased number of tRNA genes for each tRNA amino acid (tRNA-AA) isotype ( fig. 1A) except for tRNA-Cys and tRNA-Val genes were found in at least one of the two strains. The additional (or extra) tRNA-AA isotypes (e.g., up to four in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T and A. ferrivorans CF27 for tRNA-Leu and tRNA-Ser, respectively) explain the higher number of tRNA genes in these two organisms.

(p5.1) Analysis of the corresponding tRNA isoacceptors ( fig. 1B) showed that the extra tRNA-AA genes in CF27 or ATCC 23270 T were mainly related to specific tRNA isoacceptors. Indeed, two copies of tRNA-Arg ACG and tRNA-Asn GUU genes were found present in A. ferrivorans CF27 and A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T against only one copy in other Acidithiobacillus strains. Notably, the genes of all extra tRNAs present in both A. ferrivorans CF27 and A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T were found clustered in a specific region (tRNA array units) in each strain ( fig. 1C). The tRNA array unit of A. ferrivorans CF27 encompassed a 6-kb region with 26 tRNA genes (36.6% of the total), whereas that in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T comprised 34 tRNA genes (42.5% of the total) within a 9-kb region. These arrays also harbored gene-encoding proteins of unknown function. The presence of tRNA array units in both species could be advantageous in terms of reducing the number of tRNA transcriptional units, thereby allowing coordinated transcription and processing of the precursors. The absence of such arrays in other Acidithiobacillus strains, combined with the location of the ATCC 23270 T tRNA array within an ICE (of about 300 kb) (Levican et al. 2009;Bustamante et al. 2012), suggests that such tRNA array units were independently acquired through horizontal gene transfer (HGT). Moreover, tRNA gene synteny between the two array units ( fig. 1C) clearly suggests that they have a common ancestor (likely similar to the CF27 array unit) followed by gene rearrangements/insertions/deletions during evolution. Indeed, we found tRNA gene insertions/deletions in A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T /A. ferrivorans CF27 (e.g., tRNA-Ser ACU , tRNA-Pro CGG , and tRNA-Leu CAA ), as well as tRNA gene translocation for both tRNA-codons tRNA-Gly UCC and tRNA-Ala UGC genes between the two arrays. It is noteworthy Evolutionary History of tRNA Arrays that neighboring regions of the two array units showed no gene synteny between the two species. As such tRNA array units have only been described in a few organisms, these findings in the two acidithiobacilli species then prompted investigations into the organization and evolution of tRNA array units in all prokaryotic organisms.
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) In this study, tRNA array units within prokaryotic organisms have been identified and characterized. These genomic structures appeared to be a general feature of Firmicutes genomes, but were highly polymorphic and largely confined to the Bacilli class. The degree of similarity in tRNA array organization reflected phylogenetic relatedness, with high structural similarity between members of the same genus and species but low structural similarities with organisms outside of the genus. As this type of organization is widespread in low GC Grampositive bacteria, it may be important during spore germination and outgrowth, when rapid activation of the translation machinery is required (Green and Vold 1993;Rudner et al. 1993). However, as tRNA array units were found in nonsporulating prokaryotes, such clustered tRNA gene organization does not appear to be an exclusive requirement for sporulation. In E. coli, tRNA arrays significantly influence global tRNA expression at high growth rates (Ardell and Kirsebom 2005). By molecular differential analysis at the population level, tRNA arrays located at the 3 0 -end of rRNA operons were found to be specific to virulent subgroups of Streptococcus agalactiae strains (Rolland et al. 2002). This raises the possibility of a link between these tRNA genes and the virulence of the bacterium. No relationship was found between the presence of the array units and the organism's lifestyle (aerobic or anaerobic, optimal growth temperature, pathogenicity or environmental conditions) (data not shown). Even when A. ferrivorans CF27/A. ferrooxidans ATCC 23270 T were compared with other Acidithiobacillus organisms, no specific physiological features were able to explain the acquisition and maintenance of tRNA array units.

(p9.1) For most tRNA array units (98% of the total), the tRNA genes are transcribed in the same orientation, suggesting that transcription may occur as one (or in a limited number of) operon(s). Hence, this leaves us with an important question: Do these array unit organization convey a selective genetic advantage to their host? One advantage of tRNA gene clustering is that it reduces the number of tRNA transcriptional units, suggesting that the tRNA content in organisms with tRNA array units could be maintained by a simple gene dosage effect. Such adaptations may favor a more efficient translational regulation thus allowing a rapid and coordinated response to environmental stresses. Indeed, it was recently shown that elevation in tRNA levels accelerated translation and protected E. coli against oxidative stress caused by hydrogen peroxide and the antibiotic ciprofloxacin (Zhong et al. 2015). On the contrary, one disadvantage of having a highly clustered tRNA gene organization is the difficulty finely tuning the transcription of each tRNA gene under different growth conditions. One last compelling theory is that controlling the expression of individual and clustered tRNA species enables different levels of translational control, which may be useful for specific gene products or under certain growth conditions. Another important question that remains is: Does the presence of tRNA arrays enhance the efficiency, fidelity or specificity of the translation? For that purpose, the structural organization (same order in amino acids) of the arrays was analyzed as a protein motif or pattern within proteomes of organisms harboring array units compared with nonarrayed organisms. However, there is no difference between the two sets of organisms suggesting that the structural organization of the arrays is not directly linked to the translation efficiency (data not shown). One unique feature of genetic code redundancy allows choosing between alternative codons for the same amino acid. As the efficiency of translation mainly depends on the concentrations of each corresponding tRNA (Fernandez-Vazquez et al. 2013), the increase in redundancy of core tRNA gene sets within organisms harboring array units would be expected to favor translation efficiency.
