# Survey of Game Theory and Future Trends for Applications in Emerging Wireless Data Communication Networks

CorpusID: 43996751 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c994c9da3f0cd4101a00317fe2d4cd2819480085)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s10) Behavioral Facets of Game Theory
(p10.0) The design of wireless networking is challenging due to the highly dynamic environmental condition that makes model parameter optimization a complex task. Due to the dynamic, and often unknown, network status, modern wireless networking proposals increasingly rely on artificial intelligence algorithms. Genetic algorithms (GAs) are well known for their remarkable generality and flexibility and have been applied in a wide diversity of scenarios in wireless networks. A comprehensive survey of the applications of GAs in wireless networks is available in [55]. A GA models how a population of entities with similar characteristics (i.e. species), after several generations, through a process of genetic inheritance constrained by mutation, crossover and natural selection, can evolve to a future generation of that species, which is formed by a majority of entities fully-specialized in solving a specific problem. Applying now the GA methodology to the area of wireless networks, one can conclude that discovering the best solution for a wireless network problem could have a huge impact on the system´s performance; this is related to the necessary time to find out the optimum solution of that problem, as well as the amount of energy depleted on each mobile device's battery to discover the optimum solution in the typical distributed architecture of a wireless networking infrastructure. As a more concrete example, a GA to optimize either routing or localization function in a WSN could not be an efficient proposal to real-time applications due to both high delay and resource consumption (e.g. battery) induced by GA's operation. In this context, other alternative learning techniques, such as Reinforcement Learning (RL) performs better than GA, thus increasing WSN lifespan. RL is an unsupervised learning technique where each entity does not inherit any knowledge from the previous generation and learns only by itself through direct experience and interaction with the environment. In spite of the GA issues that we have just discussed, a GA strong advantage is about its easy deployment in digital signal processors (DSPs) or field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) [55]. Aligned with this, a recent contribution uses GA to enhance the WSN lifespan by employing a new rotated crossover combined with diverse mutation operators [56].
## (s22) Repeated Games
(p22.0) A repeated game (RG) is an effective tool to avoid potential conflicts among wireless nodes. The occurrence of these conflicts leads to selfish behaviors, resulting in poor network performances and detrimental individual payoffs. Contrary to static one-shot games that model interactions among players during a single time interval, in RGs, interactions of players repeat along multiple time intervals. Thus, the players become aware of other players' past behaviors and their future benefits, and they can adapt their strategies accordingly, resulting in better long-term system performance. In addition, the use of RGs with the aid of a convenient incentive mechanism can encourage wireless nodes to adopt more cooperative strategies, thereby improving network performance and increasing players' benefits. Aligned with these goals, the authors of [33] survey a considerable number of RGs in different wireless networks. A very important advantage of using a RG is to enforce learning at cognitive nodes in a NC game with incomplete and imperfect information [149]. With this learning, the game evolves to a state where the interference is tamed and QoS requirements are fulfilled. In addition, [7] revises RGs but within a more specific scope related to security. From the literature in the scope of RGs, we surveyed and divided it in two parts, namely non-cooperative and cooperative, as discussed below.
