# Systematic literature review of IL-6 as a biomarker or treatment target in patients with gastric, bile duct, pancreatic and colorectal cancer

CorpusID: 49905119 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/958ba4864d3f85176d6ea47c971bc37a576cf247)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Inflammation and the development of cancer
(p2.0) Inflammation is often associated with the development of cancer, and GI cancers seem to be particularly sensitive to inflammation [51,52]. Inflammation can both initiate and accelerate the development of the cancer lesions, giving rise to malignant formation. In GI cancers, the activation level of STAT3 seems to be of importance with regard to increasing tumor size and proliferation in mouse models, and IL-6 seems to be the most important activator of the STAT3cascade [52,53]. It is well documented that inflammation is related to the development of gastric cancer, an important risk factor being the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, even though the precise biological mechanism is unknown [21,54,55]. It is believed that Helicobacter pylori changes the expression of miRNAs and IL-6, which in turn downregulate other important tumor suppressor proteins such as p53 and the protein CDX2. In a study by Chung et al. [56], the treatment of gastric cancer cells with Helicobacter pylori was shown to regulate miRNA, particularly enhancing the expression of miR-195 and miR-488, which plays an important role in controlling IL-6. Saito et al. [57] showed that CDX2 is suppressed by the activation of the IL-6/STAT3 signal pathway via miR181b in vitro. CDX2 is involved in the intestinal cell differentiation in normal cells, and low CDX2 in tumor tissue is associated with a poorer cancerspecific survival. Hence, there is an increasing interest of the role of miRNA in the development of GI cancer. According to the EPIC-Eurogast study, 93% of patients with non-cardia gastric cancers were infected with Helicobacter pylori [58]. This bacterium causes a chronic inflammatory state which results in increased reactive oxidative stress, atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia of gastric mucosa cells and increased methylation silencing tumor suppressor genes [7,8,59]. Reflux (Barrett's esophagus) also predisposes to gastric cancer development [7].
## (s8) Pancreatic cancer
(p8.0) Three studies assessed the use of IL-6 as a diagnostic biomarker in patients with pancreatic cancer, all finding IL-6 useful ( Table 3). Schultz et al. [26] studied a cohort of 559 patients and compared the use of serum IL-6 to CA 19.9 and found that IL-6 was no better than CA 19.9. More pancreatic cancer patients had elevated CA 19.9 than elevated IL-6. The area under the curve (AUC) for the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer was higher for CA 19.9 (AUC 0.94) compared to IL-6 (AUC 0.87). Both serum IL-6 and serum CA 19.9 were associated with tumor stage. Mroczko et al. [82] studied the diagnostic applicability of IL-6 in differentiating between pancreatic cancer and chronic pancreatitis and found that the AUC was higher for serum IL-6 (AUC 0.94) than serum CA 19.9 (AUC 0.86), CEA (AUC 0.89) and CRP (AUC 0.84).
## (s17) DISCUSSION
(p17.0) Hayes [22] highlights that a tumor biomarker test should be used in clinical care only when there is analytic validity, clinical validity and clinical utility, meaning that the measurement should be accurate and reliable and identify a defined disorder or separate a population into groups with distinct clinical outcomes. In addition, the use of the test results should improve measurable clinical outcomes [110]. It has, however, been difficult to achieve a satisfying level of evidence due to a lack of adequate funding, inappropriately designed studies, nonpublication bias and lack of guidelines when approving new biomarkers [111]. Many initiatives have been taken to overcome these difficulties. The REMARK (reporting recommendation for tumor biomarker prognostic studies) guidelines attempt to increase the transparency in information provided by studies investigating possible tumor biomarkers [111]. The REMARK criteria consist of 20 items to report, including research goals, hypotheses, patient characteristics, assay and measurement methods, statistical design and study results [112]. Furthermore, it has been suggested that due to the low level of evidence most tumor biomarker studies achieve, multiple studies must be done to validate the usefulness of a tumor biomarker [111].
