# Review Article Ficolins and the Recognition of Pathogenic Microorganisms: An Overview of the Innate Immune Response and Contribution of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms

CorpusID: 76664104 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55e1dd43fd693f371f8cb9d449465ea427e4b22c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55e1dd43fd693f371f8cb9d449465ea427e4b22c)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) The Role of M-Ficolin in Immunity to
(p2.0) Pathogenic Microorganisms 3.1. Bacteria. As a consequence of its recognition spectrum (Table 1), it has been suggested that M-ficolin could be involved in immunity against bacterial infection. Dose-dependent binding of serum M-ficolin has been observed to capsular Streptococcus agalactiae serotype VI, which presents sialic acid as the terminal side-chain residues of the capsular polysaccharides, but does not bind to the noncapsulated strain B848/64 [38]. This concentrationdependent binding was inhibited following the addition of GlcNAc or treatment of bacteria with sialidase. Recombinant M-ficolin also exhibited the same binding preferences and activated complement only on serotype VI streptococci [38]. The same group reported that M-ficolin was unable to bind to either the capsulated or noncapsulated strains of Staphylococcus aureus, contradicting a previous observation by Liu et al. [26]. To further characterize M-ficolin binding, more than 100 different strains of Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus mitis were screened for M-ficolin binding. M-ficolin was only observed to bind to three strains: the pneumococcal serotypes 19B and 19C and a single S. mitis strain [39]. This binding exhibited the common characteristic of GlcNAc inhibition and in conjunction with MASP-2, mediated the cleavage of C4. Kjaer et al. [39] postulated that binding to these pneumococcal strains was via an N-acetylmannosamine residue linked by glycoside linkage only present in serotypes 19B and 19C. In addition, M-ficolin can function as an opsonin and enhance the action of phagocytes, as phagocytosis of Escherichia coli by U937 cells was observed to be inhibited by antibodies against M-ficolin [23]. Bartlomiejczyk and colleagues also demonstrated M-ficolin binding to Mycobacterium bovis and M. tuberculosis, although this binding had little effect on biological responses [40].
## (s3) Viruses.
(p3.0) Verma et al. [41] identified that M-ficolin could recognise and inhibit the infectivity of the Phil82 and PR-8 strains of the influenza A virus (IAV) to levels comparable to L-ficolin. H-ficolin in this study was also capable of inhibiting the infectivity of the pandemic Cal09 H1N1 strain. Furthermore, M-ficolin was also observed to interact with acute phase proteins which could potentiate the immune response against pathogens. Using surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy and electron microscopy, the interaction of M-ficolin with the long pentraxin, pentraxin 3 (PTX3), was investigated. M-ficolin was shown to bind PTX3 in a Ca 2+ -dependent manner in an interaction inhibited by GlcNAc. The M-ficolin-PTX3 interaction was attributed to sialic acid, and the activation of the lectin-complement pathway was observed [42]. Functionally, the M-ficolin-PTX3 interaction has been observed to decrease the infectivity of the PR-8 and Phil82 strains of IAV [41]. Conversely, interactions of M-ficolin with the mucin-like domain of the Zaire Ebola virus glycoprotein results in enhanced infectivity of host cells [43].
## (s5) Viruses.
(p5.0) A role for L-ficolin in viral defence is now also starting to emerge. Liu et al. [33] found that L-ficolin in patients with hepatitis C virus (HCV) was elevated and was able to bind to N-glycans of the envelope glycoproteins E1 and E2. This interaction further led to the activation of the lectin pathway. Recent evidence has been provided which displays the ability of L-ficolin to directly inhibit HCV entry into cells and demonstrated that apolipoprotein E3 (ApoE3) blocks this effect, mediating immune escape [61,62]. Recent evidence has indicated that L-ficolin concentrations are elevated in the serum of chronic hepatitis B patients also [63]. Additionally, L-ficolin has been observed to bind to HA and neuraminidase via their FBG and has been shown to have an inhibitory effect on the invasion of kidney cells by IAV in vitro [34]. Using mice deficient of the mouse orthologue of L-ficolin, ficolin-A, it was also observed that these mouse demonstrated a greatly decreased survival rate in comparison to WT. However, reconstitution of L-ficolin into a ficolin-A knockout mouse could significantly reduce mortality. Chimeric lectins whereby part of the L-ficolin collagen-like domain was added in place of MBLs have proven beneficial in defence against both the IAV and the Ebola virus [64,65].
## (s6) 4.3.
(p6.0) Fungi. L-ficolin has been observed to bind to the pathogenic fungus, Aspergillus fumigatus, leading to lectin-complement pathway activation [66]. Complement activation can be further potentiated by an L-ficolin-PTX3 complex. This group also highlighted that the classical and lectin-complement pathways can complement each other, with the classical pathway the preferred method of initiation but the lectin pathway capable of initiating complement in the absence of anti-Aspergillus antibodies [67]. Additionally, we showed that the recognition of A. fumigatus by the L-ficolin FBG also enhances the association of A. fumigatus to the A549 type II epithelial cell line, human primary neutrophils, and monocyte-derived macrophages (MDM) [9,68]. This interaction was observed to enhance fungal killing and modulate the inflammatory cytokine response, leading to increased production of IL-8 by epithelial cells, while conversely decreasing the production of IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-α from neutrophils and MDM in vitro. We have since observed the presence of L-ficolin in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of lung transplant patients with fungal lung infections, hinting at an important role in antifungal defence [68]. Recently, Genster et al. have highlighted that the absence of both the rodent orthologues ficolin-A and ficolin-B sensitised mice to A. fumigatus infections [69]. However, the absence of either one alone was not sufficient to enhance susceptibility. Furthermore, very little is understood about the recognition of other pathogenic fungi by L-ficolin, and this could be an important area to investigate, although it has been reported that there is no association observed between levels of any ficolin and intra-abdominal Candida albicans infection [70].
## (s9) Viruses.
(p9.0) Observations regarding the role of H-ficolin in the defence against viruses are encouraging. Recent studies have exhibited the ability of recombinant H-ficolin, H-ficolin from human serum, and from bronchoalveolar lavage to bind to IAV, the mouse-adapted PR-8H1N1 and a pandemic H1N1 strain [41]. Following recognition, a decrease in the ability of IAV to cause infection in vitro was observed. The role of sialic acid in these mechanisms was suggested to be important, as following sialidase treatments and removal of the sialic acid residues decorating H-ficolin, inhibition of IAV was abolished [41]. In addition, H-ficolin was capable of activating the lectin pathway on a surface coated with IAV. As observed for M-and L-ficolin, H-ficolin has the ability to interact with PTX3 in a dose-dependent manner, although it exhibits the weakest binding of the three [66]. This H-ficolin-PTX3 interaction, as for M-ficolin, exhibited the ability to inhibit HA activity and infectivity of IAV [41]. A more recent study further consolidated these earlier observations by demonstrating that H-ficolin can inhibit the replication of pandemic IAV by enhancing uptake and dampening TNF-α response in monocytes [78].
## (s12) The Role of Rodent Ficolin-A and Ficolin-B in
(p12.0) Immunity to Pathogenic Microorganisms 6.1. Bacteria. Until recently, the recognition spectrum of ficolin-A with microorganisms was relatively unknown. However, there has been much progress in characterising the interaction of ficolin-A with pathogens. Hummelshøj et al. [52] have greatly expanded current knowledge on the pathogen specificity. They showed ficolin-A to recognise a plethora of microorganisms including pathogenic gram-positive and -negative bacteria such as S. aureus and the pathogenic E. coli strain O157:H7. They also exhibited the ability of ficolin-A to bind LPS from E. coli and P. aeruginosa. However, recognition of LPS did not equate to protection or inflammatory modulation in an in vivo model of LPS-induced systemic inflammation [82]. Ficolin-A has been observed to partake in the activation of the lectin-complement pathway via the association with MASPs. Further interactions with fibrinogen and thrombin have been observed to potentiate the activation of complement on S. aureus [83]. It has also proven to be an essential activator of the lectin-complement pathway in the defence against S. pneumoniae. Ficolin-A and -B opsonisation of S. pneumoniae leads to complement deposition in the presence of ficolin-A and only weakly in its absence [15]. The role of the lectin-complement pathway in pneumococcal defence has been shown to be important [84].
