# molecules Assessment of Enzyme Inhibition: A Review with Examples from the Development of Monoamine Oxidase and Cholinesterase Inhibitory Drugs

CorpusID: 7896027 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s9) Design of Compounds that Inhibit Both MAO and ChE
(p9.0) The starting point for rational design of dual inhibitors of MAO and ChE has been existing drugs and known pharmacophores. Figure 4 shows the strategy followed in some recent publications to combine anti AD drugs donepezil or tacrine that inhibit ChEs with coumarin structures that inhibit MAO. The combination of donepezil and coumarin shown in Figure 5 met with some success with the best compound showing micromolar AChE and BChE inhibition (IC 50 = 9.10 µM and 5.90 µM, respectively), and selective hMAO-B inhibition (IC 50 = 0.30 µM), but the potency on the four enzymes varied widely across the series [14]. Using tacrine as in the example in Figure 4b was less successful because the large size decreased the inhibition of MAO (IC 50 = 10-100 µM), although the inhibtion of ChEs remained in the sub-micromolar range [129]. Huperzine A ( Figure 3) is an alkaloid that was first isolated from the club moss Huperzia serrata, which has been a traditional 'folk-medicine' remedy in in China. It binds to the PAS, but may also penetrate the active site gorge [124]. It is much less potent as an inhibitor of BChE. It appears to have several additional targets, in protecting mitochondrial function, reducing the tissue labile iron pool and behaving as an antioxidant. [125]. Although Huperzine A is licenced for use as a drug for AD and vascular dementia in China, it is only available as a nutraceutical in many other countries. This may have hampered detailed international clinical trials and account for the conflicting evidence that is presently available on its effectiveness [126,127].
## (s68) Virtual Screening
(p68.0) Rational design of ligands has been greatly facilitated by the availability of crystal structures of target enzymes. Docking programmes allow basic visualization of ligands in the active site and prediction of suitable modifications to small molecules to improve affinity and selectivity. Virtual screening using scoring functions to estimate binding energies for each compound can be used to seek new ligands from large chemical libraries. Probabilistic models, based on the compound structure, have also been used to predict both the primary pharmaceutical target and any off-target interactions [4,6]. Although virtual screening has proved successful in identifying new leads, the accuracy of predicted binding energies is doubtful [210]. Docking methods have become major tools in rational drug design, particularly for multi-target compounds, to probe the effects of alterations in ligand structure on the affinity of the compound for the target enzyme(s). However, predictions of the functional effect of ligand binding on the catalysis by the target(s) still requires verification by assays. Docking cannot predict the efficiency of the mechanism-based inhibitor-only its initial reversible binding. Combining information from theoretical and laboratory assays facilitates the design of analogs from a lead compound, as exemplified by multi-potent ASS234 analogs [183]. In another example, experimental values closely paralleled the predicted values in a test set of carbamate compounds when 3D-Quantitative-Structure-Activity Relationship (3D-QSAR) was used to define 3D-pharmacophores for inhibition of MAO A and B, and of the ChEs [211].
