# Magnetic Catalysis: A Review

CorpusID: 118087122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618)

Fields: Physics

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 4

(p0.0) The magnetic catalysis is broadly defined as an enhancement of dynamical symmetry breaking by an external magnetic field. In this review, we discuss the underlying physics behind magnetic catalysis and some of its most prominent applications. Considering that the ideas of symmetry breaking take the center stage position in many branches of modern physics, we hope that this review will be of interest to a rather wide audience. In particle and nuclear physics, spontaneous symmetry breaking is commonly used in order to explain the dynamical origin of the mass of elementary particles. In this context, the idea was realized for the first time over 50 years ago by Nambu and Jona-Lasinio [149,150], who suggested that "the nucleon mass arises largely as a self-energy of some primary fermion field through the same mechanism as the appearance of energy gap in the theory of superconductivity." As we now know, the analogy with superconductivity is not very close and the description of chiral symmetry breaking in terms of quarks may be more natural than in terms of nucleons. However, the essence of the dynamical mass generation was captured correctly in Refs. [149,150]. In fact, with the current state of knowledge, we attribute most of the mass of visible matter in the Universe to precisely this mechanism of mass generation, which is associated with breaking of the (approximate) chiral symmetry.
## (s12) Symmetry breaking as bound state problem
Number of References: 4

(p12.0) In this subsection, we consider an alternative approach to the problem of chiral symmetry breaking in the NJL model in a constant magnetic field. As we will see, this approach is particularly beneficial for illuminating the role of the dimensional reduction in magnetic catalysis. Instead of solving the gap equation, we consider the problem of bound states with the quantum numbers of the Nambu-Goldstone bosons, using the method of a homogeneous Bethe-Salpeter equation (for a review, see Ref. [142]). The underlying idea for this framework is motivated by the Goldstone theorem [148,82,83]. The theorem states that spontaneous breaking of a continuous global symmetry leads to the appearance of new massless scalar particles (i.e., Nambu-Goldstone bosons) in the low-energy spectrum of the theory. The total number of Nambu-Goldstone bosons and their quantum numbers are determined by the broken symmetry generators.
## (s22) Concluding Remarks
Number of References: 4

(p22.0) We hope that this review of magnetic catalysis is sufficient to convey the main idea of the phenomenon in terms of simple and rather general physics concepts. From the outset, this review was never meant to be comprehensive. Here we concentrated only on the bare minimum needed to understand the phenomenon as a consequence of the underlying dimensional reduction of the fermion-antifermion pairing in a magnetic field [99,102,100,101]. For further reading and for deeper insights into various aspects of the magnetic catalysis, it is suggested that the reader refers to the original literature on the topic. Over nearly 20 years of research, there has been a lot of progress made in our understanding of magnetic catalysis. A rather long list of research papers at the end of this review is a pretty objective proof of that. At present, it is evident that the key features of the underlying physics are well established and understood. At the same time, it is also evident that there are still many theoretical questions about the applications of magnetic catalysis under various conditions, where factors other than the magnetic field may also play a substantial role.
