# A Review of the Role of Wnt in Cancer Immunomodulation

CorpusID: 174814428 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e64faa86cbd7f11c1b856b12498c78442e02728](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e64faa86cbd7f11c1b856b12498c78442e02728)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s11) Immunotherapy
Number of References: 10

(p11.0) Some immunotherapies are directed at the proteins that regulate T cell function and cytolytic activity. In particular, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are monoclonal antibodies against receptors such as CLTA-4 and Programmed Death-1 (PD-1) that act to down-modulate T cell effector function. ICI are now approved for the treatment of malignant melanoma, non-small-cell lung cancer, classical Hodgkin lymphoma, head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, urothelial carcinoma, and renal cell carcinoma [93]. In addition, anti-programmed death-1 ligand (PD-L1) has also shown many promising clinical results [94]. Atezolizumab is an FDA-approved PD-L1 inhibitor that has shown improved progression-free survival and overall survival when used in combination with nabpaclitaxel for metastatic triple negative breast cancer [95]. These results were in patients with known positive PD-L1 tumors. Other anti-PD-L1 therapies include durvalumab and avelumab. Additionally, the monoclonal antibody pembrolizumab (anti-PD-1) was combined with platinum-based chemotherapy in metastatic non-small-cell lung cancer treatment in those who lacked targetable gene mutations. The combination of therapies increased progression-free and overall survival [96].

(p11.1) In a similar fashion, ipilimumab and tremelimumab are monoclonal antibodies to CTLA4, which normally functions to restrain effector T cell activation. Ipilimumab is known for its significant progression-free and overall survival advancement in melanoma [97]. Further improvements in metastatic melanoma were seen following a combination of ipilimumab and anti-PD-L1 therapy [98].

(p11.2) With the rising use of mono-and combinatorial immunotherapy in the clinical setting, there is a need to further understand the TME in patients who do not respond. It has been reported that decreased TILs result in resistance to ICIs [99]. Wnt pathway regulation may play a role in this lack of response, as tumor-intrinsic, active β-catenin signaling in human melanoma has been associated with resistance to anti-CTLA4 and anti-PD-L1 antibodies due to T cell exclusion [88]. It has also been speculated that tumor cells may lack the antigens needed for recognition by TILs, perhaps leading to immunotherapy resistance in these cancers. This was investigated with an analysis of 266 melanoma tumor samples from TCGA. Tissues were divided into categories based on a high or low expression of genes that were associated with T cell infiltration. This was correlated with nonsynonymous somatic mutations as a representative of mutational neoantigens that the tumor may possess. It was concluded that the change in tumor gene expression of infiltrating T cells did not correlate with increased mutational neoantigens [100]. However, gene signatures of these melanoma tissues did support prior evidence of a correlation between Wnt/β-catenin pathway activation and a reduction in T cell infiltration in the tumor [100]. This evidence, in addition to prior stated support, shows a strong correlation between increased Wnt signaling and decreased T cell infiltration in tumors.
