# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Archaeal/Eukaryal RNase P: subunits, functions and RNA diversification

CorpusID: 18566669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) NEW FUNCTIONS FOR EUKARYAL RNASE P
Number of References: 11

(p1.0) Recent discoveries have unveiled an unexpected role for human RNase P in transcription of small non-coding RNA genes (ncRNA) by RNA polymerase III (Pol III) and in efficient transcription of rRNA genes by Pol I (68)(69)(70). NcRNA genes, such as those that code for rRNA, 5S rRNA, tRNA and 7SL RNA, are essential for protein translation and cell growth. Another surprising discovery relates to the observations that long ncRNAs, such as the metastasis associated in lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) and multiple endocrine neoplasia b (MEN-b) transcript, are processed by human and mouse RNase P (71,72). These transcripts are cleaved at pre-tRNA-like structures located upstream of their 3 0 -end cleavage/polyadenylation signals (71,72). The 3 0 -end cleavages of mRNA and snRNA transcripts are typically carried out by specific endoribonucleases that exist in multiprotein complexes, i.e. CPSF/CstF and Integrator, respectively (73,74). These latter complexes associate with chromatin and operate cotranscriptionally through their recruitment by Pol II (73,74). Therefore, it  Figure 1. Conservation and evolution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P. Archaeal RNase P has five proteins: Rpp21, Rpp29, Rpp30, Pop5 and Rpp38 (L7Ae). The association of Alba with archaeal RNase P remains in question (see text). Human nuclear RNase P has ten distinct protein subunits, termed Rpp14, Rpp20, Rpp21, Rpp25, Rpp29, Rpp30, Rpp38, Rpp40, Pop1 and Pop5. Five of these subunits share archaeal homologs. Rpp20 and Rpp25 are homologous to Alba in archaea. In Eukarya, an ancestral RNase P RNA likely gave rise to RNase MRP RNA by a gene duplication mechanism; MRP RNA is part of RNase MRP and MRP-TERT (see text). Except for Rpp21, all the other proteins of human RNase P are shared by RNase MRP, but it remains unknown if these proteins are also associated with MRP-TERT. In S. cerevisiae, nucleolar RNase MRP possesses two additional proteins, termed RMP1 and SNM1 (see ref.
## (s5) PROSPECTS
Number of References: 4

(p5.0) RNase P is best known for its activity as an RNA enzyme with endoribonucleolytic activity. Recent findings, however, implicate this RNP complex in transcription and processing of short and long ncRNAs. Although one might argue that the scope of these recent assignments remain to be broadly investigated, we decided to emphasize these new facets of RNase P because these functional roles shed a different light on this primordial RNP. The exact contribution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P to each of these latter assignments remains to be determined. Nonetheless, the functions of the RNA moiety have been elaborated in the nucleus (68,(70)(71)(72).
