# The Significance of Biobanking in the Sustainability of Biomedical Research: A Review

CorpusID: 216031727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3)

Fields: Political Science, Medicine, Biology, Environmental Science

## (s10) "Collaboration and standardization"
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) In a non-collaborative state, access to biospecimens is isolated to an investigator's own institution, and research questions are limited by the scope of the available samples. As a result, collaboration at national or international level is essential. Poor or unknown quality of biospecimens can lead to doubts regarding research findings. The disparity in research findings arises from the lack of standardized procedures for collecting, storing, processing, and annotating biospecimens [7] . One evidence is a report by Moore et al. [9] who showed that only 30 out of 660 commercial tests available for measuring gene alterations, and germline mutations can be used to predict response to a specific treatment. It is also apparent that standardization of practices, procedures, and policies is key to achieve optimal results. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, the International Society of Biological Environmental Repositories was established to take a leading international role in standardizing the preservation and storage of biobanked material. Also, BRN under the supervision of OBBR was established in 2005 to coordinate and support systematic investigation with regards to collection, processing, and storage of human biospecimens. However, standardization processes might be a threat to smaller biobanks, because they might not be able to meet the benchmarks [33,34] .
## (s12) "Seeking sustainability amidst ongoing challenges"
Number of References: 6

(p12.0) Sustainability is one of the most troublesome issues in the field of biobanking. The financial value, operational efficiency, and social acceptability are some of the metrics in measuring the sustainability of biobanks [38] . As asserted by Professor Hank Greely, biobanking is "staggeringly expensive" [39] , which emphasizes the necessity of developing and maintaining sustainable business practices. The National Biobanking Strategy Committee suggested in their 2013 meeting that without a more stable corefunding stream, the future of biobanks, especially cancer ones, is in doubt. Cost-recovery is one of the suggested solutions to this issue; however, the model's success depends on the number of outgoing samples, providing catalogs, and advertising for marketing research data [34] . Nowadays, it has become obvious that the success of biobanks is linked to establishing and retaining public trust; failure of the Icelandic Health Sector Database, as one of the earliest population biobanks, happened because of lacking this issue [40] . It has also been predicted that the highly-expensive population biobank would not survive for much longer [34] . Therefore, biobanks and society are inseparable. It means that society needs biobanks to support its health, while society can help biobanks by providing financial resources, generalized support, and cooperation and trust of participants to guarantee its sustainability [41] .
## (s16) Living biobanks
Number of References: 4

(p16.0) Recently, in the field of chronic disease treatment, especially cancer, the inefficiency of the "one-size-fitsall" approach has been proven. Today, with the development of human genetics, pharmacogenomics, and the success of human gene mapping, the "one dose-one patient" approach in the growing field of personalized medicine needs to be replaced. In this field, the major challenge is finding a link between functional genomics and pathological data while focusing on the patient's outcome. Many different personalized tumor models have been proposed to address this challenge. One of the newest models in a three-dimensional culture tumor model named organoid [47] . With the improvements in this field, many tumor organoids derived from tumor specimens from the intestine, stomach, liver, mammary glands, retina, brain, etc.has been developed, which emphasizes the need for living biobanks [47,48] . Sachs et al. [49] have recently built a living biobank with more than 100 primary and metastatic breast cancer organoid lines.
## (s19) Shiraz ICR, the first Iranian cancer biobank
Number of References: 4

(p19.0) Developing countries, due to their high disease burden, have a large target sample population, and Iran is no exception. Cancer is the third leading cause of death among the Iranian population, which makes research in this field and the establishment of cancer biobanks are more crucial [51] . Nowadays, in spite of many different types of biobanks in Iran, no data has been documented on the history of biobanking or the number of biobanks. Based on our data, ICR biobank, built in 1998 at Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, is one the first in the country. Concurrent with the establishment of the Institute, its biobank was also started. Sample collection and data storage systems have recently changed a lot over time, going from "hypothesis-tailored" [52] collection and manual data storage at the beginning to "hypothesis-free" [52] collection with computer data storage in recent years. This attempt has brought the center's practices closer to universal standards. ICR biobank, located in the city of Shiraz, has connections with several Shiraz University Hospitals for providing blood samples. At the time of a patient's admission to a cooperating hospital, the sample and its associated data are collected and sent to ICR with a mean delay of 1.5 hours. Subsequently, DNA is extracted and stored in special refrigerators, alongside with serum and plasma samples. Samples will then be used based on the demand of researchers after signing an agreement by the directors. Since the day of establishment, the bank has registered over 12,000 patients with samples of DNA, serum, and plasma from different types of cancers and their accompanying data (Table 1). ICR biobank has also a collaboration with other universities at national and international levels in providing requested samples or performing joint research projects. Examples of such universities include Tehran University of Medical Science and multiple universities in other provinces of the country, alongside with universities around the world such as the University of California, deCODE genetics center in Iceland, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center in the Netherlands, Stanford and UCLA in the USA, etc. Up to now, over 380 PubMed articles and 300 theses have been published based on our biobank resources. Publications until 2018 are available online at http://icr.sums.ac.ir/en/publications/articles.html. Overall, ICR like other biobanks in developing countries lacks the infrastructure required for standard biobanking. Moreover, because of "pick and choose" [53] policy for sample collection due to limited budget, our biobank lacks different types of samples such as hair, cerebrospinal fluid, tissue, etc. Therefore, there is still a long way to reach international standards, especially with respect to informed consent, standardization of sample collection and storage, networking and most importantly, seeking sustainability in the "staggeringly expensive" area of biobanking. However, at its own pace, it has been effective for Iranian population's cancer research. (Fig.  1 summarizes the network of ICR biobank). More data is available online at http://icr.sums.ac.ir.
