# LITERATURE REVIEW Benefit of synbiotic intervention in Caesarean section born infants and children: A nutritional perspective

CorpusID: 224823747 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee0f2ab3ccde0cd86fd706c56bc63a847edc7049](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee0f2ab3ccde0cd86fd706c56bc63a847edc7049)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Nutritional intervention to support growth and development of children born by C-section
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) It is widely agreed that human breastmilk is the gold standard as the first and main food for infants since born to be exclusively provided during the first six months and being continued up to 24 months of age. Breast milk provides complete nutrients to support child growth and development, regardless of difference in the route of delivery. Besides having all essential nutrients, breastmilk also consists of immune-components, hormones, HMOs (human milk oligo-saccharides, and microbiota. The HMOs as prebiotic and microbiota as probiotic, or synbiotic in breastmilk are important on their function to influence on the infant gut microbiota for its longterm health benefits, e.g. lung health. Figure 1 shows the hypothetical pathway on the association of HMOs as prebiotics and microbiota as probiotic to affect infants' gut microbiota and lung health. 7 However, not all infants are being fortunate for having the breast milk, but instead will have its substitute, i.e. milk formula. To be updated, the milk formula is continued to be designed to mimic the breast milk, i.e. by 1) decreasing its protein content without changing plasma amino acid profile in preventing obesity; 2) supplemented with cow's milk lactoferrin; 3) having long-chain PUFA (omega-3 and pmega-6) to promote insulin sensitivity, prevention of obesity and dyslipidemia; 4) addition of milk fat globule membrane (MFGM) from cow's milk to add on to the plant oil; 5) supplementation of prebiotic (FOS and GOS) to have a bifidogenic effect; and/or 6) supplemented with probiotic in which there is no report on its harmful effects. 8 The use of pre-, pro-and synbiotic in infant formula is done through research and innovation by using technological advances along with the development of knowledge about the component of breast milk. However, the evidence about its clinical efficacy is limited to recommend as a routine use in infant formula. Therefore, further research is needed to be able to establish their benefits for health. 9 This recommendation is also considered to the inconsistency evidence, i.e. from 1) the negative finding of a prospective, randomized, double-blind controlled study among full term infants with diagnosed cow's mild allergy (CMA) who received synbiotic supplemented amino acid-based formula (AAF) that showed similar growth to the AAF without synbiotics; 10 to the positive finding from a randomized, double-blind, multicenter study on the effect of synbiotic on the microbiota of caesarean delivery infants in which supplementation with short-chain galacto-oligosaccharides/long-chain fructo-oligosaccharides and Bifidobacterium breveM-16V compensates the delay Bifidobacterium colonization in C-section-delivered infants and modulates the production of acetate and the acidification of the gut. Physiologically, it reveals as indicator of gut health, emulate those observed in vaginally born infants. 11
