# An overview of the safety assessment of medicines currently used in the COVID-19 disease treatment

CorpusID: 220729049 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/294b205b2e4665ec3134a5000dc88ff4b095375a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/294b205b2e4665ec3134a5000dc88ff4b095375a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Remdesivir
Number of References: 6

(p5.0) Remdesivir is broad-spectrum antiviral prodrug that acts as adenosine nucleotide analogue, used for RNA virus infections treatment . A recent study by Grein et al. (2020) revealed that the elevation of hepatic enzymes, hypotension, renal impairment, rash and diarrhea were the most common adverse effects associated with remdesivir administration in COVID-19 patients (200 mg iv on the first day, plus 100 mg for the remaining nine days). The occurrence of adverse effects was reported in 60% of subjects. Serious adverse effects, such as acute kidney injury, hypotension, septic shock and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome were reported in 12% of subjects. Four patients discontinued the treatment because of multiple organ failure, elevated hepatic enzymes and maculopapular rash (Grein et al., 2020). Another study on Ebola patients reported AST and ALT elevation as well, in patients who received intravenous remdesivir. The same study also reported a single case of hypotension, which was followed by the discontinuation of the treatment and cardiac arrest, however, the exact cause of death could not be differentiated from the existing Ebola virus disease (Mulangu et al., 2019). The patients in this study received a loading dose on the first day (200 mg in adults, adjusted for body weight in pediatric patients), followed by 100 mg in adults on the next day for the remaining nine or thirteen days, depending on the viral load.
## (s12) Chloroquine þ azithromycin
Number of References: 12

(p12.0) There are limited data concerning the efficacy and safety of the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin in COVID-19 therapy. In a study conducted in France, combined hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin therapy was far more successful compared to untreated patients or treatment with hydroxychloroquine alone. Hydroxychloroquine was chosen, rather than chloroquine, because of its lower toxicity, higher safety and higher dose capability . The results obtained in this study suggest a synergistic effect of the two drugs. The researchers report that only 6 of 20 treated patients received azithromycin with hydroxychloroquine to prevent bacterial superinfection with daily monitoring of cardiac output by electrocardiogram due to the potential, but low, risk of a prolonged QT interval. The results of the above study regarding the safety of administered medicines have not yet been published (Gautret et al., 2020). These results refer to the application of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine sulfate orally, three times a day for ten days, while 500 mg of azithromycin was administered on the first day, followed by 250 mg for the next four days, with constant ECG monitoring. In an animal study based on a model of cardiac instability in guinea pigs, azithromycin alone or in combination with chloroquine did not produce a proarrhythmogenic effect, unlike the administration of chloroquine alone (Fossa et al., 2007).

(p12.1) Chloroquine þ azithromycin combination of drugs has been used earlier. In a clinical trial conducted in Africa, the combination proved to be safe in malaria therapy, where only one patient had a serious side effect of vomiting. Most other side effects were mild or very mild (Sagara et al., 2014).

(p12.2) There are limited data concerning the efficacy and safety of the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin in COVID-19 therapy. In a study conducted in France, combined hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin therapy was far more successful compared to untreated patients or treatment with hydroxychloroquine alone. Hydroxychloroquine was chosen, rather than chloroquine, because of its lower toxicity, higher safety and higher dose capability . The results obtained in this study suggest a synergistic effect of the two drugs. The researchers report that only 6 of 20 treated patients received azithromycin with hydroxychloroquine to prevent bacterial superinfection with daily monitoring of cardiac output by electrocardiogram due to the potential, but low, risk of a prolonged QT interval. The results of the above study regarding the safety of administered medicines have not yet been published (Gautret et al., 2020). These results refer to the application of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine sulfate orally, three times a day for ten days, while 500 mg of azithromycin was administered on the first day, followed by 250 mg for the next four days, with constant ECG monitoring. In an animal study based on a model of cardiac instability in guinea pigs, azithromycin alone or in combination with chloroquine did not produce a proarrhythmogenic effect, unlike the administration of chloroquine alone (Fossa et al., 2007).

(p12.3) Chloroquine þ azithromycin combination of drugs has been used earlier. In a clinical trial conducted in Africa, the combination proved to be safe in malaria therapy, where only one patient had a serious side effect of vomiting. Most other side effects were mild or very mild (Sagara et al., 2014).
## (s22) Remdesivir
Number of References: 6

(p22.0) Remdesivir is broad-spectrum antiviral prodrug that acts as adenosine nucleotide analogue, used for RNA virus infections treatment . A recent study by Grein et al. (2020) revealed that the elevation of hepatic enzymes, hypotension, renal impairment, rash and diarrhea were the most common adverse effects associated with remdesivir administration in COVID-19 patients (200 mg iv on the first day, plus 100 mg for the remaining nine days). The occurrence of adverse effects was reported in 60% of subjects. Serious adverse effects, such as acute kidney injury, hypotension, septic shock and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome were reported in 12% of subjects. Four patients discontinued the treatment because of multiple organ failure, elevated hepatic enzymes and maculopapular rash (Grein et al., 2020). Another study on Ebola patients reported AST and ALT elevation as well, in patients who received intravenous remdesivir. The same study also reported a single case of hypotension, which was followed by the discontinuation of the treatment and cardiac arrest, however, the exact cause of death could not be differentiated from the existing Ebola virus disease (Mulangu et al., 2019). The patients in this study received a loading dose on the first day (200 mg in adults, adjusted for body weight in pediatric patients), followed by 100 mg in adults on the next day for the remaining nine or thirteen days, depending on the viral load.
## (s29) Chloroquine þ azithromycin
Number of References: 12

(p29.0) There are limited data concerning the efficacy and safety of the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin in COVID-19 therapy. In a study conducted in France, combined hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin therapy was far more successful compared to untreated patients or treatment with hydroxychloroquine alone. Hydroxychloroquine was chosen, rather than chloroquine, because of its lower toxicity, higher safety and higher dose capability . The results obtained in this study suggest a synergistic effect of the two drugs. The researchers report that only 6 of 20 treated patients received azithromycin with hydroxychloroquine to prevent bacterial superinfection with daily monitoring of cardiac output by electrocardiogram due to the potential, but low, risk of a prolonged QT interval. The results of the above study regarding the safety of administered medicines have not yet been published (Gautret et al., 2020). These results refer to the application of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine sulfate orally, three times a day for ten days, while 500 mg of azithromycin was administered on the first day, followed by 250 mg for the next four days, with constant ECG monitoring. In an animal study based on a model of cardiac instability in guinea pigs, azithromycin alone or in combination with chloroquine did not produce a proarrhythmogenic effect, unlike the administration of chloroquine alone (Fossa et al., 2007).

(p29.1) Chloroquine þ azithromycin combination of drugs has been used earlier. In a clinical trial conducted in Africa, the combination proved to be safe in malaria therapy, where only one patient had a serious side effect of vomiting. Most other side effects were mild or very mild (Sagara et al., 2014).

(p29.2) There are limited data concerning the efficacy and safety of the combination of chloroquine and azithromycin in COVID-19 therapy. In a study conducted in France, combined hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin therapy was far more successful compared to untreated patients or treatment with hydroxychloroquine alone. Hydroxychloroquine was chosen, rather than chloroquine, because of its lower toxicity, higher safety and higher dose capability . The results obtained in this study suggest a synergistic effect of the two drugs. The researchers report that only 6 of 20 treated patients received azithromycin with hydroxychloroquine to prevent bacterial superinfection with daily monitoring of cardiac output by electrocardiogram due to the potential, but low, risk of a prolonged QT interval. The results of the above study regarding the safety of administered medicines have not yet been published (Gautret et al., 2020). These results refer to the application of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine sulfate orally, three times a day for ten days, while 500 mg of azithromycin was administered on the first day, followed by 250 mg for the next four days, with constant ECG monitoring. In an animal study based on a model of cardiac instability in guinea pigs, azithromycin alone or in combination with chloroquine did not produce a proarrhythmogenic effect, unlike the administration of chloroquine alone (Fossa et al., 2007).

(p29.3) Chloroquine þ azithromycin combination of drugs has been used earlier. In a clinical trial conducted in Africa, the combination proved to be safe in malaria therapy, where only one patient had a serious side effect of vomiting. Most other side effects were mild or very mild (Sagara et al., 2014).
