# Shift-work: a review of the health consequences Article History

CorpusID: 229405284 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology, Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Shift workers have existed since ancient times, among them the watchmen of ancient kingdoms and the military. The history of shift work can be traced back to the invention of fire, when the man discovered the possibility to cook hot meals and started to stay outside the shelters for longer periods. The early nomadic tribes also had the need for "shift workers", as they usually had camp guards and shepherds awake and vigilant during normal sleeping hours (White & Keith, 1990). Although the evidence of shift work existed long before the invention of the lamp, it was the discovery and use of artificial light, initially with fire and later with electric lamps, created by Thomas Edison in 1879, which allowed workers to perform their tasks during the necessary periods, even during night time (Gordon, Cleary, Parker, & Czeisler, 1986;Grossman, 1997). The industrial revolution, followed by the urbanization, was the fact behind the development of shift work and night work. The gas and light bulbs made this form of this temporal organization of work more common, and factories recognized a bigger profit as they used this type of practice (Gordon et al., 1986;White & Keith, 1990). However, the context of shift work has been changing, and in comparison, with previous centuries, individuals involved or forced to work in shifts are spread across many different sectors. Industries, such as, agriculture, telecommunications, financial, securities, printing, health, broadcasting, food production and transportation, which are heavily influenced by accelerated urbanization, also use shift work as a mean of satisfying customer demands and increasing productivity (Frost, Kolstad, & Bonde, 2009). Shift-work: a review of the health consequences Silva et al. According to Escribá-Aguir (1992), the main reasons that justify this necessity can be divided into three categories: economy, to capitalize the high cost of technology and respond to the market requirements; technology, certain industrial processes of production need to be maintained continually, such as, the production of electric energy and social, to increase the number of jobs in the service sector, such as in health, transports, communications and safety.
