# Viburnum opulus L.-A Review of Phytochemistry and Biological Effects

CorpusID: 226296054 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/425290343d3455a3a6bd5df5804553306fafeed3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/425290343d3455a3a6bd5df5804553306fafeed3)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Environmental Science

## (s8) Effect on Lipid Metabolism
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Disturbance of homeostasis of lipid metabolism and lack of physical activity often leads to overweight, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. To approach the decrease of fatty acids absorption, inhibition of enzymes involved in fat digestion could be used. Pancreatic lipase splits triglycerides into absorbable monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in the intestinal lumen. It was demonstrated that acetone extract from dried VO fruits and isolated phenolic compounds inhibited the pancreatic lipase activity with IC50 equal to 11.5 and 3.3 mg/mL, respectively [23]. Moreover, isolated phenolics demonstrated synergistic action with orlistat, the known clinically approved lipase inhibitor. On the other hand, the juice obtained from fresh fruits was able to inhibit lipase activity by 50% at 262 mg/mL concentration, whereas IC50 for its isolated phenolics was equal to 55 mg/mL [24]. It can be concluded that extract obtained from dried plant material, which was more active against lipase, contained other bioactive compounds produced during the drying process of fruits.
## (s9) Effect on Lipid Metabolism
Number of References: 2

(p9.0) Disturbance of homeostasis of lipid metabolism and lack of physical activity often leads to overweight, obesity, and type 2 diabetes. To approach the decrease of fatty acids absorption, inhibition of enzymes involved in fat digestion could be used. Pancreatic lipase splits triglycerides into absorbable monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in the intestinal lumen. It was demonstrated that acetone extract from dried VO fruits and isolated phenolic compounds inhibited the pancreatic lipase activity with IC 50 equal to 11.5 and 3.3 mg/mL, respectively [23]. Moreover, isolated phenolics demonstrated synergistic action with orlistat, the known clinically approved lipase inhibitor. On the other hand, the juice obtained from fresh fruits was able to inhibit lipase activity by 50% at 262 mg/mL concentration, whereas IC 50 for its isolated phenolics was equal to 55 mg/mL [24]. It can be concluded that extract obtained from dried plant material, which was more active against lipase, contained other bioactive compounds produced during the drying process of fruits.
## (s11) Osteogenic Activity
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) One of the unwanted symptoms related to obesity is chronic inflammation, which in turn induces the osteoclastogenesis process leading to bone tissue demineralization and osteoporosis [98]. It was reported that VO juice and isolated phenolics increased the mineralization of the extracellular matrix of human osteogenic Saos-2 cells (Figure 4) [25]. Stronger osteogenesis potential revealed purified phenolic extract, which at 25 µg/mL dose increased alkaline phosphatase activity by 35%. This enzyme is involved in matrix calcification and mineralized nodules formation. After cell treatment, the increase of mRNA level of the Runt-related transcription factor (RUNX2) was observed. RUNX2 is the major osteogenesis regulator, which binds to osteoblast specific cis-acting element (OSE) in the promoter region of the major osteoblast bone matrix protein genes and controls their expression [103]. As was shown osteogenic differentiation markers related to matrix mineralization, such as collagen type 1 and osteonectin, were elevated at the transcription level in cells treated with phenolics isolated from VO. Purified phenolic extract also decreased the receptor activator of nuclear factor-kB ligand (RANKL) mRNA level, therefore preventing its binding with the receptor present in osteoclast, and osteoclastogenesis.
## (s13) Effect on Urinary System and the Endometriosis
Number of References: 5

(p13.0) So far, the VO effect on urinary system is the most efficiently investigated. Nephrolithiasis, known also as urolithiasis, is a kidney stone disease that develops in the urinary tract. A study performed on the Wistar rats with sodium oxalate-induced urolithiasis demonstrated that lyophilized ethanol extract obtained from VO fruits and juice, administrated orally in dose 100 mg/mL, induced a diuretic effect and reduced the level of oxalate, the main constituent of the stones [30]. This was followed by elevation of kidney glutathione and total thiols parameters, as well as the reduction of lipid peroxidation and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS). Similar studies were conducted with other ethanol-acetic, methanol, and n-hexane extracts obtained from VO fruits. They showed less potent anti-urolithiatic properties than ethanolic extract. Moreover, a histopathological study identified the most irregularly shaped calculus fragments in kidney tissue after the animals were treated with ethanol-acetic preparation. Erdem and co-workers evaluated the effects of VO fruit ethanol extract on nephrolithiasis in the Spraque-Dawley rats model [31]. The authors showed that oral administration of both 0.5 and 1 mL of the extract at a concentration of 10 mg/mL to rats for five days a week during a one-month period had a beneficial effect on the urinary system. VO fruit extract increased the urine volume and urine citrate levels, decreased urine cystine and oxalate levels, and lowered the crystal deposits in kidney tissue, and also prevented oxidant damage and crystal formation in kidney tissue. Other studies also demonstrated VO as useful in the treatment of mild to moderate level hypocitraturic stone disease [105]. Juice obtained from fruit kept in brine water for a month was used as a source of bioactive components, which has a comparable level of citrate to lemon juice. Authors suggested VO juice usage as an alternative pharmaceutical treatment method in this disease, however, there were no details presented about the used treatment.

(p13.1) Recent retrospective research performed on human subjects presented a positive effect of VO on patients with distal ureteral stones with a diameter of <10 mm [106]. It was evaluated that after treatment with diclofenac and 1000 mg of VO extract (peroral 3 x 2 on-demand) the elapsed time to stone expulsion was significantly shorter than in the group treated with diclofenac only. Additionally, in VO group the rate of stone expulsion was significantly higher and the need for additional treatment (ureteroscopy or extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy) and the analgesic requirement was lower. Despite these positive results, it needs to be mentioned that among 53 patients involved in the trial and assigned to VO treatment, five patients developed dyspeptic complaints with upper abdominal pain. There was also evidence about the induction of severe abdominal pain and acute pancreatitis in a 38-years old male patient with urolithiasis, who drank 2 glasses of VO extract water daily for 4 days [107].
