# THE POTENTIAL ROLE OF GENUS TINOSPORA IN WOUND HEALING: A REVIEW Review Article

CorpusID: 233915844 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0186d8feb0c9ae723c791bd36b5449ef4913cacb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0186d8feb0c9ae723c791bd36b5449ef4913cacb)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s9) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 4

(p9.0) There are many factors which may affect wound healing through one or more phases of the wound healing process, thus causing improper or impaired wound healing. Such wounds frequently enter a state of pathologic inflammation due to an uncoordinated wound healing process. These factors can be categorised into local and systemic factors. Local factors include oxygenation, infection, foreign body, and venous insufficiency directly influence the characteristics of the wound. On the other hand, systemic factors are those factors that associated overall health or disease state of the individual that affect the ability of the wound to heal, such as age, gender, stress, ischaemia, diseases, obesity, the use of medication, alcoholism, smoking, nutrition, and immunocompromised conditions [18]. Plants have immense potential when it comes to the management and treatment of wounds. In the past, many plants were known to be used by tribal and traditional medicine practitioners for the treatment of wounds. The natural agents induce wound healing through mechanisms such as antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant activities. As phytomedicine is not only affordable but also safe, it has been a great interest to scientists to discover new effective drugs [19].
## (s27) DISCUSSION
Number of References: 4

(p27.0) There are many factors which may affect wound healing through one or more phases of the wound healing process, thus causing improper or impaired wound healing. Such wounds frequently enter a state of pathologic inflammation due to an uncoordinated wound healing process. These factors can be categorised into local and systemic factors. Local factors include oxygenation, infection, foreign body, and venous insufficiency directly influence the characteristics of the wound. On the other hand, systemic factors are those factors that associated overall health or disease state of the individual that affect the ability of the wound to heal, such as age, gender, stress, ischaemia, diseases, obesity, the use of medication, alcoholism, smoking, nutrition, and immunocompromised conditions [18]. Plants have immense potential when it comes to the management and treatment of wounds. In the past, many plants were known to be used by tribal and traditional medicine practitioners for the treatment of wounds. The natural agents induce wound healing through mechanisms such as antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant activities. As phytomedicine is not only affordable but also safe, it has been a great interest to scientists to discover new effective drugs [19].
