# Multimodal Technologies and Interaction A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education A Systematic Literature Review on the User Experience Design for Game-Based Interventions via 3D Virtual Worlds in K-12 Education. Multimodal Technol

CorpusID: 235679897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5de8b7e0bfd74f178abd1ae83dc476e670e64ea7)

Fields: Computer Science, Psychology, Education

## (s14) Results
Number of References: 4

(p14.0) A wide range of potential benefits and challenges in K-12 settings were provided by the extracted data. To elaborate on the discussion around these benefits and shortcomings, an aggregation of information and report was made using a state-of-art overview from the analysis of all the included studies in order to answer the main RQs. To answer the RQ1, we adopted the proposition of Arnab et al. [49] that pedagogydriven game-based interventions should link learning goals and practices with game activities. Following their comprehensive "Learning Mechanics-Game Mechanics" model, we analyzed which of those were used most frequently in researched game prototypes within K-12 settings ( Figure 3). The most prevalent learning mechanics in primary education was reflection and discussion and (n = 9) followed by action tasks (n = 7), observation (n = 5), experimentation (n = 4), repetition (n = 4), exploration (n = 3), and instructional guidance (n = 3) as illustrated in Figure 3. GBL was just one component of the overall learning experience that was supplemented by debriefing sessions for reflection and discussion. For instance, Barab et al. [8] implemented a module into the game for students to record and upload their reflections, whereas Mystakidis et al. [16] facilitated students' creative reflection through the collaborative creation of a digital artefact. In another study of Barab et al. [20], students had the chance to present different narrative in-game events and endings with actual consequences. Within "semi-structured" storylines, students tend to become persuasive writers as they have specific characters and treated players differently based on the alignment between players' decisions and the characters' personal agendas.
