# Pediatric Stroke: Overview and Recent Updates

CorpusID: 235721636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Prothrombotic States
Number of References: 3

(p7.0) Although prothrombotic states are more commonly associated with venous clots, it is an important cause of stroke. This accounts for both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes. Up to 20 to 50% of children with strokes have an underlying thrombotic disorder; either hereditary or acquired [17]. Antiphospholipid antibodies, deficiency of protein C, MTHFR C677T polymorphism, factor V Leiden mutations, deficiency of antithrombin III, factor II G20210A, and elevated levels of lipoprotein(a), are examples of traits found to be significantly implicated in first occurrences of pediatric arterial ischemic strokes [18]. This also holds true for combined thrombophilias. Obtaining a family history regarding history of venous clots and strokes is essential. Also, a thorough review of medication list can aid in determining the underlying etiology. For example, valproic acid, an antiepileptic, has been linked to acquired protein C deficiency [17].
## (s11) Infections
Number of References: 3

(p11.0) A causal relationship exists between infectious processes and stroke; this includes bacterial, parasitic, viral, and fungal infections. Focal arteriopathy, vasculitis and or in situ thrombosis are common mechanisms for ischemia. These are often seen in cases of meningitis, encephalitis as well as with HIV and herpesviruses. Other common mechanisms occur either through direct invasion, prothrombotic state, accelerated atherogenesis, enhanced platelet aggregation, or secondary to an inflammatory response. Also, cardioembolic strokes can arise from endocarditis or with heart failure, for example, with Trypanosoma cruzi [21]. Subcortical strokes, in particular those involving the basal ganglia are associated with the Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV) [17]. In addition to HIV and VZV other organisms associated with strokes are: mycoplasma tuberculosis, influenza A, treponema pallidum, Parvovirus B19, and enterovirus, chlamydia pneumoniae, and aspergillus [21].
## (s19) Intravenous Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA)
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) The most comprehensive study to date regarding stroke and tPA uses in pediatrics is the TIPS study which was published in 2010. The TIPS study was an international multicenter, dose-adaptive, phase 1 study [42]. Children aged 2 through 17 years who presented with AIS were eligible for enrollment to receive IV tPA if initiated within 4.5 hours of stroke onset [42]. Three dosing tiers were planned (0.75, 0.9, and 1.0 mg/kg of IV tPA), given over the period of one hour [42]. The purpose of the TIPS study was to define safety criteria to guide the use of tPA in pediatric patients. However, the study was terminated due poor recruitment.
