# LITERATURE REVIEW Association between apolipoprotein B and dietary fibers

CorpusID: 237633856 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Nutritional status
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) Obesity is one of the risks of cardiovascular disease due to its relationship with high triglycerides, LDL cholesterol, low HDL cholesterol, increased blood glucose, insulin resistance and hypertension. New findings regarding metabolic risk factors associated with fat and obesity are the presence of a small dense LDL phenotype, postprandial hyperlipidemia with atherogenic accumulation and excessive lipoproteins production containing apolipoprotein B. These lipid disorders are characteristic of metabolic syndrome and is associated with an inflammation which partly due to the adipose tissue itself. An important relationship between obesity, metabolic syndrome and dyslipidemia, is insulin resistance in peripheral tissues that leads to increased liver fatty acids from food sources, intravascular lipolysis and from adipose tissue resistance to the antilipolytic effect of insulin. 44 2. Diet pattern Study in 28,984 Swedish individuals showed a significant correlation between dietary fiber intake and apolipoprotein B. 21 Another clinical trial by Ramos et al. 20 in 116 people with hypercholesterolemia showed that apoB levels in the group fed with fiber significantly lower after after 12 weeks. Additionally, study by Anggadiredja et al. 45 in 41 individuals with hypercholesterolemia showed that 4 weeks of fibers supplement treatment affects apolipoprotein B levels.
## (s14) Physical activity
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Study revealed that months of aerobic exercise decreased apoB concentration in hypercholesterolemic men. 48 In contrast, another study by reported that aerobic exercise for 20 weeks did not affect the concentration of apoB. Others found no change in apoB concentrations during either long or short aerobic exercise. Some factors must result in these various outcomes such as age. 49 
