# Neuron-level Interpretation of Deep NLP Models: A Survey

CorpusID: 237353268 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff56dfdbc8b86decbc6119d96c1097c0fef56ecd)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s23) Information Distribution
Number of References: 4

(p23.0) Human languages are hierarchical in structure where morphology and phonology sit at the bottom followed by lexemes, followed by syntactic structures. Concepts such as semantics and pragmatics are placed on the top of the hierarchy.  analyzed linguistic hierarchy by studying the spread of neurons across layers in various pre-trained language models. They extracted salient neurons with respect to different linguistic concepts (e.g. morphology and syntax) and found that neurons that capture word morphology were predominantly found in the lower and middle layers and those learning about syntax were found at the higher layers. The observation was found to be true in both LSTMand the transformer-based architectures, and are inline with the findings of representation analysis (Liu et al., 2019;Tenney et al., 2019;Belinkov et al., 2020b). Similarly Suau et al. (2020) analyzed sub-modules within GPT and RoBERTa transformer blocks and showed that lower layers within a transformer block accumulate more salient neurons than higher layers on the tasks of word sense disambiguation or homograph detection. They also found that the neurons that learn homographs are distributed across the network as opposed to sense neurons that were more predominantly found at the lower layers.
## (s26) Summary of Findings
Number of References: 3

(p26.0) Below is a summary of the key findings that emerged from the work we covered in this survey. Neurons learned within Deep NLP models capture non-trivial linguistic knowledge ranging from lexical phenomenon such as morphemes, words and multi-word expressions to highly complex global phenomenon such as semantic roles and syntactic dependencies. Neuron analysis resonates with the findings of representation analysis (Belinkov et al., 2017a,b;Tenney et al., 2019;Liu et al., 2019) in demonstrating that the networks follow linguistic hierarchy. Linguistic neurons are distributed across the network based on their complexity, with lower layers focused on the lexical concepts and middle and higher layers learning global phenomenon based on long-range contextual dependencies. While the networks preserve linguistic hierarchy, many authors showed that information is not discretely preserved, but is rather distributed and redundantly present in the network. It was also shown that a small optimal subset of neurons w.r.t any concept can be extracted from a network. On another dimension, a few works showed that some concepts are localized to fewer neurons while others are distributed to a large group. Finally, some interesting cross architectural analyses were drawn based on how the neurons are distributed within their layers.
