# Variable Speed Limit and Ramp Metering for Mixed Traffic Flows: A Review and Open Questions

CorpusID: 233652955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ed73f71e9c2d976159a06f79b534e9add6257fe)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s19) Rule-Based VSL
Number of References: 2

(p19.0) In [89], a comprehensive evaluation of the potential impacts of AVs on an existing motorway system was analyzed in various motorway operational scenarios, including heavily congested traffic (>95% of motorway capacity), lightly congested traffic (≈70% of motorway capacity), free-flow traffic (≈50% of motorway capacity), and future traffic (three times more than heavily congested traffic volume) conditions. A number of MoEs were measured to reflect the changes in mobility, safety, fuel consumption and emissions caused by the deployment of AVs [89]. The rule-based VSL approach was modified to mixed traffic flow conditions and also tested in different AV penetration rates. These conditions were classified as either free-flow, light congestion, or heavy congestion. The VSL control step time was set to 5 min. The minimum time-gap was set to 0.5 s for AVs and 1.1 s for HDVs. The driver imperfection was set to 0% and 50% for AVs and HDVs, respectively. The acceptance factor for speed limits was set at 1% for AVs and 15% for HDVs. For all traffic congestion scenarios, AVs showed improvements for all MoEs, as did VSL in mixed traffic flow scenarios. For heavy traffic congestion scenario, VSL improved MTT by 14% to 26% at AV penetration rates ranging from 0% to 70%. AVs improved MTT by 43% at AV penetration rates from 0% to 100% in the no control scenario. Fuel consumption was improved by 5% to 44% in the no control scenario at AV penetration rates from 0% to 100%. The case with VSL improved fuel consumption by 10% to 31% at AV penetration rates from 0% to 70%.
