# Molecular Sciences Metabolomic Approaches to Investigate the Effect of Metformin: An Overview

CorpusID: 238740897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdab80b29b635fa8d4470544d5f7136fa69fae58](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdab80b29b635fa8d4470544d5f7136fa69fae58)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry

## (s1) Metabolomics
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) Metabolomics is the large-scale identification and quantification study of all targeted metabolites within cells, biofluids, tissues, or organisms under specific conditions or diseases [35]. These metabolites are small molecules within a mass range of 50 to 1500 Daltons, and their interaction within a biological system are known as the metabolome, which is defined as the collection of the metabolites as well. Endogenous metabolites such as sugars, lipids, amino acids, fatty acids, nucleic acids, or organic acids are typically produced from the metabolism and considered as targets of metabolomics study. In the central dogma of biology, metabolites are the downstream summation of DNA, RNA, and proteins, which means any change in these molecules affects the metabolomes, as well as the changes in environment such as diet, exercise, mental stress, and disease [36]. In other words, metabolic profiling is to take a snapshot of the physiologic status of a biological system, and the metabolome changes inferred the relation between the genome (DNA), transcriptome (RNA), proteome (proteins) and biological phenotypes such as drug response or side effects [37].
## (s2) Metabolomics
Number of References: 3

(p2.0) Metabolomics is the large-scale identification and quantification study of all targeted metabolites within cells, biofluids, tissues, or organisms under specific conditions or diseases [35]. These metabolites are small molecules within a mass range of 50 to 1500 Daltons, and their interaction within a biological system are known as the metabolome, which is defined as the collection of the metabolites as well. Endogenous metabolites such as sugars, lipids, amino acids, fatty acids, nucleic acids, or organic acids are typically produced from the metabolism and considered as targets of metabolomics study. In the central dogma of biology, metabolites are the downstream summation of DNA, RNA, and proteins, which means any change in these molecules affects the metabolomes, as well as the changes in environment such as diet, exercise, mental stress, and disease [36]. In other words, metabolic profiling is to take a snapshot of the physiologic status of a biological system, and the metabolome changes inferred the relation between the genome (DNA), transcriptome (RNA), proteome (proteins) and biological phenotypes such as drug response or side effects [37].
## (s8) Effect of Metformin Treatment on Human Urine Metabolome
Number of References: 2

(p8.0) Cho et al. [84] studied the metabolomic changes in 14 healthy volunteers in response to single-dose metformin treatment (1000 mg). In particular, four metabolites, including cortisol, retinyl β-glucuronide, betaine, and cholic acid glucuronide, were identified and quantified by LC-MS analysis in this study. Among them, cortisol and its metabolite hydroxycortisol were significantly decreased after metformin administration. According to Park et al. [85], the response to metformin in early-phase T2DM patients could be predicted by their urine metabolomic profiles acquired from GC-MS, which showed significantly different metabolites as markers of metformin response. In particular, citric acid and hippuric acid were higher and myoinositol was lower in the metformin responder group than the non-responder group. These results suggested that metabolic differences enabled them to discriminate between the metformin responder and non-responder groups efficiently.
