# Design of Fieldable Cross-Layer Optimized Network using Embedded Software Defined Radios: Survey and Novel Architecture with Field Trials

CorpusID: 246240861 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fef09969a3bbb45fd9a38cae3f5a6588f8472fa)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) In recent years, we have seen explosive growth in the number of wireless devices that have become an inevitable component of our daily lives. This includes everything such as the connected devices in our smart homes, cellular network, the entire concept of Internet-of-Thing (IoT) networks controlling manufacturing, monitoring smart grids, space communications, underwater networks, tactical networks, among others. As we move from 5G (5th Generation) to 6G (6th Generation), the need to optimize the scarce resources is becoming evident and inevitable [1]- [7]. We have also seen a drive towards the software virtualization of these devices and networks to provide much-required flexibility and adaptability to the growing needs of each application. The inability to adapt the network operations depending on varying requirements and dynamic deployed scenarios due to black-box style wireless stack leads to inefficient resource usage and suboptimal performance. Dynamic network control and agile management (user scheduling, radio resources, mobility management) are the envisioned benefits of the next-generation wireless network paradigms such as software-defined networking (SDN), network function virtualization (NFV), and multi-access edge computing (MEC) [8]. Therefore, a reconfigurable radio stack that can be transformed based on diverse applications as well as to adapt to the dynamic wireless conditions is favored.
## (s4) B. Preliminary Testbed Evaluation
Number of References: 3

(p4.0) In several cases, the next logical step is to evaluate the feasibility and performance on a hardware-based testbed. The advent of SDR has significantly nurtured efforts in this direction. At the same time, there is a distinction in the maturity/utility of solutions that have been implemented using a host PC controlling the SDRs and ones efficiently ported to a standalone e-SDR. The key difference is in the rapidity of development on computationally capable hardware in the first case as opposed to carefully optimized (often C/C++ or VHDL/Verilog) implementation on embedded (resource-constrained) hardware. The host PC-based development approach saves time and resources to rule out impractical solutions before significant time is spend in optimizing the implementation for final matured deployment. Therefore, based on the resources, the risk associated with novel cross-layer solutions either approaches can be adopted to mature network control and management solutions. To this end, several frameworks have been proposed for SDR to enable cross-layer optimized control [56]- [58]. There has also been work that employs SDR hardware but rely on emulation platforms [59] to perform evaluations as opposed to over-the-air (OTA) experimentations. Such emulation-based approaches may provide more flexibility to perform larger number of experiments in various topologies but still cannot be substituted for OTA evaluations or field trials.
