# Female dietary patterns and outcomes of in vitro fertilization (IVF): a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 246002062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) 'Profertility' diet
Number of References: 6

(p10.0) The 'profertility' diet was examined alongside the Med-Diet in Gaskins 2019. The 'profertility' diet is based on findings from the EARTH study and comprises higher intake of supplemental folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin D, low-pesticide fruits and vegetables, whole grains, seafood, dairy, and soy foods; and lower intake of high pesticide fruits and vegetables [32,48] (Table 2). Higher adherence to the 'profertility' diet was positively associated with biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and probability of live birth (probability of live birth as an adjusted proportion Q1 vs Q4 (95% CI) = 0.33 (0.26-0.40), 0.56 (0.47-0.64) (Gaskins, 2019) ( Table 4). Findings were largely attributed to intake of micronutrients and pesticide residues on fruits and vegetables, however an indirect approximated measure of pesticide intake was used to assess exposure [48]. The sample included 357 women participating in the EARTH study and the 

(p10.1) 'profertility' diet has not been tested in an independent cohort [32,48]. Gaskins (2019) followed women for multiple cycles (maximum of 6 'cycles') and included all 'in study cycles' in the main analysis. The sample contained a relatively low number of frozen embryo transfer cycles (14%) versus fresh embryo transfer cycles (82%) when compared with recent (2016) U.S. wide treatment trends (33% frozen embryo transfer cycles versus 33% fresh embryo transfer cycles [58]).
## (s16) Dietary patterns and components
Number of References: 2

(p16.0) Across studies, the exposure under investigation (dietary pattern) was selected using two different methods (Supplemental Table 2). In two studies, an α-posteriori approach was utilized [51,54]. Results from participant questionnaires or FFQ were examined and the exposure was derived based on which dietary pattern best fit the data. In the remaining studies, investigators used a hypothesis driven α-priori approach. An exposure was chosen before dietary intake information was obtained and a FFQ or questionnaire appropriate for the respective pattern administered.
