# Fair Division of Indivisible Goods: A Survey *

CorpusID: 246863533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/22c77744d7f4d514340b386a37daad92a166944b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/22c77744d7f4d514340b386a37daad92a166944b)

Fields: Computer Science, Economics, Mathematics

## (s6) Open Problem 7. Does an EFR allocation always exist?
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) PMMS and GMMS: Several variations of MMS have also been considered. Caragiannis et al. [2019b] defined the notion of pairwise maximin share fairness (PMMS) according to which, for every pair of agents i and j, i's value for A i must be at least as much as the maximum she could obtain by redistributing the set of goods in A i ∪ A j into two bundles and picking the worst of them. In other words, instead of requiring the maximin share guarantee to be achieved for the set of all agents, PMMS requires that it is achieved for any pair of agents. Despite the apparent similarities in the definitions of PMMS and MMS, Caragiannis et al. [2019b] showed that their exact versions are actually incomparable. e main open problem here is the following.
## (s11) Arbitrary Entitlements
Number of References: 4

(p11.0) So far, it is always assumed that agents have equal entitlements over the goods. However, there are se ings where the fairness of an allocation must be considered with respect to asymmetric entitlements, e.g., in many inheritance scenarios, closer relatives have higher entitlements o en determined by law. In order to capture fairness in the presence of arbitrary entitlements, one may generalize existing notions to their weighted counterparts, like weighted MMS [Farhadi et al., 2019] and weighted EF1 [Chakraborty et al., 2021], or tweek their definitions approprietly, like in the MMS-inspired ℓ-out-of-d share of Babaioff et al. [2021c]. In a recent work, Babaioff et al. [2021b] introduce the notion of AnyPrice share (APS) as the maximum value an agent can guarantee to herself if she has a budget equal to her entitlement and the goods are adversarially priced with prices that sum up to 1, and show how to efficiently compute an allocation where everyone gets value no less than 3/5 of her APS.
## (s12) Group Fairness
Number of References: 5

(p12.0) In the model we discussed in the main part of the survey, each agent is assumed to be unrelated to other agents. However, there are applications where it makes more sense for agents to be grouped together (e.g., each group might correspond to a family). Several models capturing scenarios along these lines have been considered in the literature. Suksompong [2018] focused on a se ing where each agent derives full value from all the goods allocated to the group she belongs to, and showed bounds on the best possible approximation of MMS. Kyropoulou et al. [2020] considered EF1 and EFX allocations in the same se ing, as well as in se ings with dynamic group formation; some of these results were later improved by Manurangsi and Suksompong [2021] using ideas from discrepancy theory. Segal-Halevi and Suksompong [2019] focused on the case of democratic fairness, where the goal is to compute allocations that are considered fair (e.g., satisfying EF1) by a high fraction of the agents in each group. A different model was studied by Conitzer et al. [2019], where goods given to a group are then distributed among its members, and thus the agents derive value only from the goods allocated personally to them.
## (s14) Randomness in Fair Division
Number of References: 2

(p14.0) Until very recently there were barely any works on randomized algorithms for discrete fair division. is is partially due to the strong general preference for deterministic algorithms / mechanisms within the Computational Social Choice community (which is well-justified in many se ings, yet such a discussion is beyond the scope of this survey), but also due to the nature of the problem itself. On one hand, randomness cannot help with achieving ex-post fairness, i.e., fairness in each resulting allocation, for any of the deterministic notions mentioned herein. On the other hand, achieving ex-ante envy-freeness, i.e., envy freeness with respect to the expected utilities, is trivial; just allocate all the goods to a single agent uniformly at random. Freeman et al. [2020] proposed an algorithm that achieves ex-ante envy-freeness but is also ex-post EF1, i.e., all the possible allocations it outputs are deterministically EF1. Aziz [2020] gave a simpler algorithm with the same fairness guarantees that also satisfies a weak efficiency property. Finally, in a somewhat different direction,  studied interim envy-freeness, a notion which lies between ex-ante and ex-post envy-freeness.
