# A Review of Per-and Polyfluorinated Alkyl Substance Impairment of Reproduction

CorpusID: 244501492 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bb5f17da269bf657e31703af0e422b6486bb6b1)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s14) Short-Chain PFAS
Number of References: 6

(p14.0) Data for short-chain PFAS effects on human reproductive parameters are scarce and these data are inconsistent (Nian et al., 2020;Brase et al., 2021). Indeed, the threat that these long-chain replacements pose on human populations, pathophysiology and health effects are not completely understood (Sunderland et al., 2019). Effects in humans are difficult to extrapolate from laboratory dose-response results. However, existing data indicates that concentrations in humans are lower than dose-response effects found in the laboratory. For example, So et al. (2007) found a maximum human PFAS concentration of 360 ng/L (breast milk), orders of magnitude below laboratory animal model exposures which induced toxicity.

(p14.1) Because of the likelihood of co-occurrence, short-and longchain PFAS have been studied together. A three year study of 752 women in China found prenatal exposure to one short-chain and one long-chain PFAS (perfluorobutanesulfonate, PFBS and perfluoroheptanoic acid, PFHpA, respectively) was associated with alterations of fetal gonadotropins as well as free androgen levels (Nian et al., 2020). A recent review of endocrine disruption effects associated with both long-and short-chain PFAS exposure found that effects varied similarly according to gender and age of development; in some cases, short-chain effects were greater than long-chain PFAS (Mokra, 2021). While much more is needed pertaining to human reproductive effects, the implications of these studies warrant further epidemiological studies on shortchain PFAS.
