# Review Article Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis in Alzheimer's Disease: An Overview of Human and Animal Studies with Implications for Therapeutic Perspectives Aimed at Memory Recovery

CorpusID: 245995397 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43eb303b84c81f9c977bff664896d0b0799dbbc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43eb303b84c81f9c977bff664896d0b0799dbbc)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s3) Evidence of Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis in
Number of References: 6

(p3.0) Humans. The presence of newly generated neurons in the human hippocampus has raised widely contrasting, sometimes antithetic, results from different research groups. The first report of human hippocampal neurogenesis has been documented in 1998 by Eriksson et al. In this study, BrdU (a dye that intercalates DNA during cell division) was administered to 5 terminal cancer patients and 1 subject control, and the presence of positive BrdU cells (BrdU + ) was found in the postmortem autoptic DG samples [11]. However, the small sample size and the unethical implications of the study raised both doubts and contradictions concerning these results. A couple of decades later, Spalding et al. [12] employed carbon-14 dating to estimate the age of neurons in postmortem tissues of 55 people aged 15-92. Based on this indirect procedure, the study assessed the production of about 700 new neurons every day in the hippocampus of middle-aged men. It was then suggested that about 35% of the hippocampal cells renew during a lifespan, with an estimated turnover of around 2% every year [12,13].

(p3.1) Over the last few years, three relevant publications reopened the debate about adult hippocampal neurogenesis. One of these studies [14], based on immunofluorescence examination of autoptic hippocampal samples, stated that there was no evidence of hippocampal neurogenesis from an adolescent stage onward. This "denial" study has raised a number of animated methodological criticisms concerning tissue selection and preservation, including (a) the scarcity of information about perimortem causes, which might affect tissue preservation; (b) the 48 hours postmortem delay (PMD), i.e., the time elapsed between death and brain fixation, which could be associated with protein rupture and the consequent disappearance of the antigenicity of several markers including DCX [15] the main neurogenic marker used in human studies; and (c) the morphometric analysis, which was run on a small number of samples randomly chosen and not taking into consideration that neurogenesis differs considerably between the dorsal and ventral region of the hippocampus.
## (s10) TAU.
Number of References: 4

(p10.0) In physiological conditions, TAU phosphorylation facilitates migration of DCX + cells [66], but levels of hyperphosphorylated TAU have been shown to be extremely high in neurogenic microenvironments of APP/PS1ΔΕ9 mice [67]. In particular, TAU immunoreactivity colocalized with BrdU + , GFAP + , and DCX + , meaning that alterations of TAU phosphorylation may be detrimental to NSCs, NPCs, and neuroblasts. One mechanism through which phosphorylated TAU can impact on AHN has been recently described in an important paper [68]. This study reported that phosphorylated TAU accumulates in GABAergic interneurons of the DG in both AD patients and 3xTg mouse model. The consequent GABA reduction, local circuit disinhibition and astrogliosis in turn impair AHN. The evidence that these alterations are reported in mice mutant for APP suggests a role for APP products in triggering TAU phosphorylation that alters AHN. Consistent with this view, we recently reported that, at least in the subventricular zone of an AD mouse model, NSCs fail to terminally differentiate due to TAU-mediated microtubule alteration, while blocking the generation of Aβ oligomers rescues this effect [69]. Hence, the induction of TAU phosphorylation can be one other mechanism through which APP products alter AHN in AD brains.
