# Clinicopathological and prognostic significance of long non-coding RNA EWSAT1 in human cancers: A review and meta analysis

CorpusID: 247450338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4599aa0e8a97131668e169bf5132627347692222](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4599aa0e8a97131668e169bf5132627347692222)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Expressions of EWSAT1 in pancancer
Number of References: 2

(p3.0) The TCGA PanCancer Atlas refers to a data set of molecular and clinical information from over 10,000 tumors representing 33 types of cancer [20]. Therefore, UCSC Toil RNA-seq Recompute data of TCGA and GTEx database (https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/) was used to explore the expression of EWSAT1 in pancancer (33 types of cancer in TCGA) by R3.6.3 [21]. Wilcoxon rank sum test was applied to detect the differences between normal and tumor groups in pancancer. And ggplot2 package in R was adopted for result visualization. This study involved 550 patient form China (6 studies, n = 527) and Romania (1 study, n = 23), including 4 cancers: cervical cancer (n = 23), colorectal cancer (n = 151), glioma (n = 42), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (n = 108), osteosarcoma (n = 226). The minimum sample size of each study was 23, and the maximum was 176. Publication Time started from 2016 to 2021. The expressions of EWSAT1 were all detected by qRT-PCR with cancer tissues. The cutoff value for dividing high and low expression group of EWSAT1 varied in the studies ( Table 1). The HRs and 95% CIs of OS between high and low expression groups of EWSAT1 were all extracted from Kaplan-Meier curves provided by original articles. 3 out of 7 articles got a 7 score of NOS and 4 got 6. The main essential characteristics of these studies are shown in Table 1. With the EWSAT1 high of 301 patients and low of 226 patients, total 527 patients, 3 articles touched the line of no effect, heterogeneity among studies was not significant (P = 0.86, I 2 = 0.0%), the fixed effect model was adopted. The result showed that the overall effect estimated HR was 2.10 and 95% CI was 1.60-2.75, P<0.00001, which indicated high expression of EWSAT was associated with low OS. Since there was no significant heterogeneity among the studies, subgroup analysis wasn't performed (P = 0.676, I 2 = 0.0%).
