# AI-Enabled Opportunities and Transformation Challenges for SMEs in the Post-pandemic Era: A Review and Research Agenda

CorpusID: 248424867 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Business, Environmental Science

## (s19) Technology Compatibility
Number of References: 3

(p19.0) Compatibility is the degree to which technology is assimilated and integrated within an organization's existing processes and available infrastructure (40). Currently, there is a lack of unified standards amongst products, equipment, software, and systems related to AI. The implementation of AI is down to the quality of data; however, AI applications face a variety of challenges in this area. These challenges include an insufficient size of data availability, data collection standards, format, integration, continuity, transparency, repeatability, quantity, quality of data input, and dimensional obstacles (11). The data challenges are more obvious to SMEs, especially standards and data structures. Generally, SMEs lack data, or the standardized formats required to verify limited data to gain a real benefit from AI solutions. Simply AI requires the need to create a consistent format that is able to share data among different organizations or industries (11). However, it is questionable whether different algorithms for an SME can solve problems based on different organizations or industries.
## (s22) Ethical and Trust Risks
Number of References: 6

(p22.0) The collection of large data sets, its storage and sharing of that data derived from AI technology and raises ethical issues related to governance, quality, security, standards, privacy, and data ownership (60). Therefore, SMEs need to take certain measures to reduce these risks when using AI. For example, trust is an important factor in the diffusion of AI technology (11,41). Individuals and organizations may lack trust and worry about the moral dimension of the AI systems and the use of shared data (43). This is prevalent when there are analyses before decisionmaking based on the AI system. However, it is not clear how to solve moral and legal problems (11,33). Developing solutions based on AI requires a large amount of data, creating an element of risk due to user privacy, especially when the government issues user privacy laws that propose data collection cannot be at the expense of user privacy. The data collection based on protecting user privacy may limit the development of AI within SMEs, particularly "specialized and new" organizations who would worry about potential risks such as core technology leakage caused by data sharing.
