# Approximate Query Processing: What is New and Where to Go? A Survey on Approximate Query Processing

CorpusID: 256478111 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a core functionality in data management and analytics systems [33]. The performance of OLAP is crucial for many applications that need to use OLAP to make online decisions, e.g., business intelligence. However, it is rather costly to support OLAP for large datasets, especially big data. Many systems have been proposed to support OLAP on big data, e.g., Pig, Hive, Spark SQL, and they usually take tens of minutes or even hours to answer an OLAP query. However, many applications have online requirement of OLAP that want to get results in seconds.
## (s1) Online Aggregation Methods
Number of References: 4

(p1.0) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 

(p1.1) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 
## (s3) Error Estimation
Number of References: 4

(p3.0) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).

(p3.1) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).
## (s37) Smarter Query Plan
Number of References: 12

(p37.0) A general query can be divided into three components, (1) generate query plan, (2) find tuples satisfying the query conditions, (3) aggregate the results according to (1). Traditional AQP methods focus on (2) but fail to find approximationaware scheduler. Thus, many recent studies focus on finding smarter query planning [87]. Smart query planning can be implemented into online aggregation process, offline synopses generation or both. Online aggregation focuses on different online ideas and offline synopses aim to find a reasonable type of synopses while optimizing query planning focuses on better query strategies.

(p37.1) First, if the query needs to be answered with a user-given time bound, the system should be able to predict the query's latency for different sample sizes accurately, e.g., if the user needs a query processing within one second, then the sample size should be small enough to be computed within 1 second. Second, as many queries are nested and complex, a smart scheduler is crucial in query systems, e.g., the AQP engine of verdict mentioned in Sect. 2.5, and more details of such technique can be found in [87]. Third, as a single SQL query often corresponds to multiple query plans, a smart data engine needs a query optimizer to select the best plan. Traditionally, a query optimizer can estimate the computation cost of each query plan and choose the one with the minimum estimated cost. Future work could concentrate on above three aspects to generate smart query plan so as to benefit the accuracy and speed of AQP systems.

(p37.2) A general query can be divided into three components, (1) generate query plan, (2) find tuples satisfying the query conditions, (3) aggregate the results according to (1). Traditional AQP methods focus on (2) but fail to find approximationaware scheduler. Thus, many recent studies focus on finding smarter query planning [87]. Smart query planning can be implemented into online aggregation process, offline synopses generation or both. Online aggregation focuses on different online ideas and offline synopses aim to find a reasonable type of synopses while optimizing query planning focuses on better query strategies.

(p37.3) First, if the query needs to be answered with a user-given time bound, the system should be able to predict the query's latency for different sample sizes accurately, e.g., if the user needs a query processing within one second, then the sample size should be small enough to be computed within 1 second. Second, as many queries are nested and complex, a smart scheduler is crucial in query systems, e.g., the AQP engine of verdict mentioned in Sect. 2.5, and more details of such technique can be found in [87]. Third, as a single SQL query often corresponds to multiple query plans, a smart data engine needs a query optimizer to select the best plan. Traditionally, a query optimizer can estimate the computation cost of each query plan and choose the one with the minimum estimated cost. Future work could concentrate on above three aspects to generate smart query plan so as to benefit the accuracy and speed of AQP systems.
## (s49) Introduction
Number of References: 2

(p49.0) Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a core functionality in data management and analytics systems [33]. The performance of OLAP is crucial for many applications that need to use OLAP to make online decisions, e.g., business intelligence. However, it is rather costly to support OLAP for large datasets, especially big data. Many systems have been proposed to support OLAP on big data, e.g., Pig, Hive, Spark SQL, and they usually take tens of minutes or even hours to answer an OLAP query. However, many applications have online requirement of OLAP that want to get results in seconds.
## (s50) Online Aggregation Methods
Number of References: 4

(p50.0) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 

(p50.1) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 
## (s52) Error Estimation
Number of References: 4

(p52.0) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).

(p52.1) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).
## (s86) Smarter Query Plan
Number of References: 12

(p86.0) A general query can be divided into three components, (1) generate query plan, (2) find tuples satisfying the query conditions, (3) aggregate the results according to (1). Traditional AQP methods focus on (2) but fail to find approximationaware scheduler. Thus, many recent studies focus on finding smarter query planning [87]. Smart query planning can be implemented into online aggregation process, offline synopses generation or both. Online aggregation focuses on different online ideas and offline synopses aim to find a reasonable type of synopses while optimizing query planning focuses on better query strategies.

(p86.1) First, if the query needs to be answered with a user-given time bound, the system should be able to predict the query's latency for different sample sizes accurately, e.g., if the user needs a query processing within one second, then the sample size should be small enough to be computed within 1 second. Second, as many queries are nested and complex, a smart scheduler is crucial in query systems, e.g., the AQP engine of verdict mentioned in Sect. 2.5, and more details of such technique can be found in [87]. Third, as a single SQL query often corresponds to multiple query plans, a smart data engine needs a query optimizer to select the best plan. Traditionally, a query optimizer can estimate the computation cost of each query plan and choose the one with the minimum estimated cost. Future work could concentrate on above three aspects to generate smart query plan so as to benefit the accuracy and speed of AQP systems.

(p86.2) A general query can be divided into three components, (1) generate query plan, (2) find tuples satisfying the query conditions, (3) aggregate the results according to (1). Traditional AQP methods focus on (2) but fail to find approximationaware scheduler. Thus, many recent studies focus on finding smarter query planning [87]. Smart query planning can be implemented into online aggregation process, offline synopses generation or both. Online aggregation focuses on different online ideas and offline synopses aim to find a reasonable type of synopses while optimizing query planning focuses on better query strategies.

(p86.3) First, if the query needs to be answered with a user-given time bound, the system should be able to predict the query's latency for different sample sizes accurately, e.g., if the user needs a query processing within one second, then the sample size should be small enough to be computed within 1 second. Second, as many queries are nested and complex, a smart scheduler is crucial in query systems, e.g., the AQP engine of verdict mentioned in Sect. 2.5, and more details of such technique can be found in [87]. Third, as a single SQL query often corresponds to multiple query plans, a smart data engine needs a query optimizer to select the best plan. Traditionally, a query optimizer can estimate the computation cost of each query plan and choose the one with the minimum estimated cost. Future work could concentrate on above three aspects to generate smart query plan so as to benefit the accuracy and speed of AQP systems.
