# Recent Advances in Text-to-SQL: A Survey of What We Have and What We Expect

CorpusID: 251719280 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a814b76e589ef27e3f4af379d319d02d2110faa1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a814b76e589ef27e3f4af379d319d02d2110faa1)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s16) B.5 Complexity of Natural Language and SQL Query Pairs
Number of References: 8

(p16.0) In terms of the complexity for SQL queries, Finegan-Dollak et al. (2018) find that models perform better on shorter SQL queries than longer SQL queries, which indicates that shorter SQL queries are easier in general. Yu et al. (2018c) define the SQL hardness as the number of SQL components. The SQL query is harder when it contains more SQL keywords such as GROUP BY and nested subqueries. Yu et al. (2018c)  In terms of the complexity of natural utterance, there is no qualitative measure of how hard the utterance is. Intuitively, models' performance can decrease when faced with longer questions from users. However, the information conveyed in longer sentences can be more complete, while there can be ambiguity in shorter sentences. Besides, there can be domain-specific phrases that confuse the model in both short and long utterances (Suhr et al., 2020). Thus, researchers need to consider various perspectives to determine the complexity of natural utterance.  Nguyen et al., 2020) and José and Cozman (2021) translate all the English questions in Spider into Chinese, Vietnamese and Portuguese, respectively. TableQA (Sun et al., 2020) follows the data collection method from WikiSQL, while DuSQL (Wang et al., 2020c) follows Spider. Both TableQA and DuSQL collect Chinese utterance and SQL query pairs across different domains. Chen et al. (2021a) propose a Chinese domain-specific dataset, ESQL.
