# A Survey on Blockchain-Based Federated Learning and Data Privacy

CorpusID: 259308901 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305d1350ae97aba97cf00ed5c490f521235de1a7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/305d1350ae97aba97cf00ed5c490f521235de1a7)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s10) B. Differential Privacy-based Approaches
Number of References: 2

(p10.0) Zhao et al. [42] designed a blockchain-based federated learning model for home appliance manufacturers to develop their services and products. First, customers train a model using a collection of home appliance data. Then, they send the trained model to the blockchain to trace clients' or manufacturers' activities and prevent the probability of cyber threats. Finally, as a miner, one of the clients uploads the model to the blockchain. The authors recommended using differential privacy techniques on features to provide clients' privacy by adding ε-DP noise to features.
## (s15) B. Model accuracy and Latency
Number of References: 4

(p15.0) BCFL models require maintaining and improving the accuracy and efficiency of the model. The mini-batching at the client during each training epoch and increasing multi-client parallelism to reach a target test-set accuracy framework can be adopted. The learning performance of Federated Learning has not been discussed in details. It is necessary to verify the multi-key encryption protocol because of the way it secures the federated ML model data. The accuracy and latency of PrimodChain [2] systems still need optimization.

(p15.1) BCFL models require maintaining and improving the accuracy and efficiency of the model. The mini-batching at the client during each training epoch and increasing multi-client parallelism to reach a target test-set accuracy framework can be adopted. The learning performance of Federated Learning has not been discussed in details. It is necessary to verify the multi-key encryption protocol because of the way it secures the federated ML model data. The accuracy and latency of PrimodChain [2] systems still need optimization.
## (s32) B. Differential Privacy-based Approaches
Number of References: 2

(p32.0) Zhao et al. [42] designed a blockchain-based federated learning model for home appliance manufacturers to develop their services and products. First, customers train a model using a collection of home appliance data. Then, they send the trained model to the blockchain to trace clients' or manufacturers' activities and prevent the probability of cyber threats. Finally, as a miner, one of the clients uploads the model to the blockchain. The authors recommended using differential privacy techniques on features to provide clients' privacy by adding ε-DP noise to features.
## (s37) B. Model accuracy and Latency
Number of References: 4

(p37.0) BCFL models require maintaining and improving the accuracy and efficiency of the model. The mini-batching at the client during each training epoch and increasing multi-client parallelism to reach a target test-set accuracy framework can be adopted. The learning performance of Federated Learning has not been discussed in details. It is necessary to verify the multi-key encryption protocol because of the way it secures the federated ML model data. The accuracy and latency of PrimodChain [2] systems still need optimization.

(p37.1) BCFL models require maintaining and improving the accuracy and efficiency of the model. The mini-batching at the client during each training epoch and increasing multi-client parallelism to reach a target test-set accuracy framework can be adopted. The learning performance of Federated Learning has not been discussed in details. It is necessary to verify the multi-key encryption protocol because of the way it secures the federated ML model data. The accuracy and latency of PrimodChain [2] systems still need optimization.
