# Non-coding yet non-trivial: a review on the computational genomics of lincRNAs

CorpusID: 255988694 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a63f9b0555e4ec19bb5a38d4e4f282ed9bbb8612](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a63f9b0555e4ec19bb5a38d4e4f282ed9bbb8612)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Emerging characteristics of lincRNAs
Number of References: 12

(p2.0) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.
## (s3) Genome-wide detection of lincRNAs
Number of References: 48

(p3.0) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p3.1) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p3.2) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].

(p3.3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p3.4) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p3.5) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].
## (s13) Correlation with protein coding genes and biological processes
Number of References: 20

(p13.0) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.

(p13.1) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.
## (s14) Relation between lincRNAs with microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs
Number of References: 12

(p14.0) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.

(p14.1) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.
## (s17) Conclusion
Number of References: 12

(p17.0) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.

(p17.1) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.
## (s21) Emerging characteristics of lincRNAs
Number of References: 12

(p21.0) LincRNAs are a putatively heterogeneous group, conventionally defined as ncRNA transcripts of more than 200 bp located in regions with no overlap to any known proteincoding genes. According to Lncipedia, a comprehensive lncRNA database, high-throughput studies of transcriptome data have catalogued over 111,000 lncRNA transcripts, with roughly 50 % coming from intergenic regions [5]. The majority of lincRNAs are thought to be transcribed from RNA polymerase II, and are therefore usually modified by post-transcriptional 5′ capping and 3′ polyadenylation [6]. Surprisingly, lincRNAs show ribosome occupancy similar to the 5′UTRs of protein coding genes [7]. What differentiates lincRNAs from protein coding genes seems to be the lack of release upon encountering a stop codon in the lincRNA sequences [7]. Therefore, polyadenlyation and 5′ capping are not necessarily markers of protein coding functionality. However, lincRNAs show a markedly higher degree of tissue-specific [8] and disease specific expression [9], suggesting some biological function.
## (s22) Genome-wide detection of lincRNAs
Number of References: 48

(p22.0) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p22.1) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p22.2) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].

(p22.3) Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-Seq) is an NGS method that has allowed the discovery of global genomic binding sites of DNA-interacting proteins, such as transcription factors and histones. Using ChIP-Seq signatures of histone 3 lysine 4 tri-methylation (H3K4me3) and histone 3 lysine 36 tri-methylation (HK36me3), or so called "K4-K36" clusters, Guttman et al. detected approximately 1700 transcriptional units >5 kb among four mouse cell lines, which were confirmed by tiling microarrays, PCR and northern blots [16]. This type of chromatin signature was later applied to human cell lines to identify lincRNAs and was shown that along with HOTAIR, 20 % of lincRNAs were associated with the Polycomb repressive complexes 2 (PRC2) [4]. ChIP-Seq has also been applied to the detection of RNA pol II occupancy to identify lincRNAs in mouse macrophages upon endotoxin stimulation [17]. The authors found that 70 % of extragenic polymerase II peaks were associated with genomic regions with a canonical chromatin signature of enhancers.

(p22.4) Clearly, decisions made during the library preparation phase of an RNA-seq experiment will affect lincRNA measurements. Since many but not all lincRNA transcripts are poly-adenylated [18], the decision to select poly-adenylated RNAs or to use ribodepletion methods should be made with care. Yang et al. [19] state that approximately 20 % of transcripts are non-poly adenylated, suggesting that ribo-depletion methods are necessary to gain a more comprehensive picture of the transcriptome. In addition, Yang et al. find that some transcripts, such as the Malat1 lincRNA are bimorphic, meaning they exist in poly-A(+) and poly-A(−) configurations. Thus, ribo-depletion and poly-A selection methods could provide complementary information on the relative proportions of poly-adenylation of transcripts. Moreover, the adoption of strand-specific sequencing protocols provides a means of making more detailed annotations of lncRNAs, especially the antisense lncRNAs [20]. Nevertheless, even without strand information, RNA-seq has proven useful for the identification of lincRNAs. For example, Cabili et al. analysed lincRNAs in 24 tissues and mapped out nearly 9000 lincRNAs coupled to expression profile information [8].

(p22.5) Not all NGS methods are ideal for identifying the precise boundaries of lincRNAs. ChIP-Seq using antibodies against RNA polymerases can only provide a rough estimation of transcription location but not the precise boundaries of transcripts [17]. RNA-Seq may also have trouble to detect isoforms and their exact start and end sites, as the cDNA is randomly fragmented, and accumulated from all isoforms within a given genomic loci [21]. Moreover, if RNA-Seq is conducted by a poly-A enriched approach, the internal bias against 5′ ends make it difficult to map out the exact start sites of a transcript. However, some other NGS methods have been adopted to overcome this problem. For example, cap analysis gene expression (CAGE) tag sequencing has been used to aid the identification of transcription start sites in human cells [18], and 3′-end sequencing (3SEQ) has also been used in a zebrafish model to aid the determination of the 3′ bounds of lincRNA transcripts [22]. Additionally, tiling arrays that enable direct observation of lincRNAs transcript exons have been used to detect gene boundaries and alternative splicing. For example, Tahira et al. sampled intergenic and intronic ESTs from over one million ESTs from The Cancer Genome Project to develop a custom microarray, and subsequently identified lincRNAs differentially expressed between primary and metastatic pancreatic cancers [23].
## (s32) Correlation with protein coding genes and biological processes
Number of References: 20

(p32.0) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.

(p32.1) One of the simplest approaches to determine the function of lincRNAs is to examine their correlations with protein coding genes [66]. However, this is a "black box" approach that identifies neither causality nor lincRNA functions at the molecular level. Another naïve approach is to relate the function of lincRNAs to the nearby protein coding genes [67]. Many lincRNAs have been found to exert regulatory activity on protein coding genes in cis [45,52]. However, Khalil et al. found that knockdown of six different lincRNAs did not affect the expression of level of nearby genes [4]. This suggests that lincRNAs can work in trans as well, and that the correlation between a lincRNA and its nearby protein coding genes may not necessarily be a causative relationship, but rather a result of sharing a region of active transcription.
## (s33) Relation between lincRNAs with microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs
Number of References: 12

(p33.0) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.

(p33.1) Other more sophisticated tools have been developed to identify more succinct functions. Boerner and McGinnis constructed a pipeline to seek functions of lncRNAs in Zea Mays [33]. Using BLAST search, they found that the majority of lncRNAs have strong homology to small RNA molecules. They hypothesized that many lncRNAs are simply unprocessed pre-cursors to small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNA, shRNA and siRNA [33]. Based on the "ceRNA hypothesis" mentioned earlier, Liu et al. developed "linc2GO", a software for identifying mRNA and lincRNA pairs [57]. Using predicted microRNA targets from miRanda, TargetScan and PITA software, they predicted microRNA targets on both mRNAs and lincRNAs; The mRNAs and lincRNAs that had statistically significant target sites for a particular microRNA were proposed to have a "competing endogenous" relationship.
## (s36) Conclusion
Number of References: 12

(p36.0) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.

(p36.1) Statistical evaluation studies for lincRNAs are urgently needed, as datasets produced by these various methods have thus far shown only modest overlaps in their identified lincRNAs [14]. Besides lack of sequence conservation among lincRNAs, another major issue hindering functional prediction is the lack of validated data. While there are many well-studied lincRNAs, there are massively more unannotated lincRNAs. Machine learning methods often require a large training dataset to produce accurate results. Several functional lincRNA/lncRNA databases exist (such as lncrnaDB), however the number of entries are very low and do not categorize the function of the lncRNAs in a systematic manner [80]. As more and more lincRNAs become functionally validated, comprehensive and regularly updated databases would be a great source to build good prediction methods. Perhaps even more important is the advancement of experimental techniques to provide quality data required for the prediction. Currently, most experimental techniques focus on a single protein or a small number of proteins (protein-centric) or a single lincRNA or family of lincRNAs (RNA-centric) [41]. New methods are required that can provide high-throughput protein and RNA targets of thousands of lincRNAs in parallel.
