# Revolutionizing Agrifood Systems with Artificial Intelligence: A Survey

CorpusID: 258461477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44b7981a24787d87a713c5dc1467282a5b08d97c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s20) Foundation Models Contribute Modern Agricultural Systems
Number of References: 10

(p20.0) 5.1.1 Large-scale data pre-training. DL models designed for specific agrifood tasks have shown impressive performance, but they require large amounts of task-specific data and careful model design. Recently, large foundation models are attracting increasing attention because of their great potential across various domains [20,91,204]. Typically, these models are pre-trained on large-scale data [32], either supervised or unsupervised, and possess exceptional generalization ability due to their extracted representative features. As a result, they can adapt well to various tasks by fine-tuning with only a fraction of task-specific data. For instance, the pre-trained chatGPT model [14,118] can perform translation or math tasks with just a few prompt sentences. To more intuitively demonstrate the capabilities of large models, we finetune different ImageNet pre-trained models on the grocery store dataset [75], which is used for agrifood image recognition. Fig. 11 (a) depicts that, under the same finetuning setting, the performance of ViTAE-B [184] is superior to classical ViT-B [32] and ResNet-50 [55], and the accuracy can be further increased when enlarging the model capacity. While the heatmaps in Fig. 11 (b) indicate the advanced ViTAE model can accurately perceive the agrifood information inside images. The desirable property of large models reduces the need for collecting and annotating a large amount of data in agrifood systems while achieving better performance. Additionally, the long-term Manuscript submitted to ACM cycle and large-span properties of agrifood data provide a wealth of information that can be leveraged for pre-training large models, making them well-suited for use in agrifood systems.
