# What's the Situation with Intelligent Mesh Generation: A Survey and Perspectives

CorpusID: 253499424 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/04d5891518052f83a7f240b821935ccef1ca051f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s10) Classification-based Mesh Generation
Number of References: 33

(p10.0) Inspired and encouraged by the classification model in the structured data domain, many researchers have designed various effective IMG algorithms by combining classification model-based neural networks with mesh generation. These algorithms are divided into two categories: occupancy prediction [14], [32], [47], [58], [61], [65], [69], [76]- [78], [80], [81], [88]- [91], [93], [94], [96], [100], [101], [106], [107], [110], [117], [121] and mesh basic element prediction [66], [79], [82], [83]. The former voxelized the three-dimensional space and decides whether the voxel belongs to an object, which is a binary classification problem. Alternatively, occupancy prediction can be further regarded as the three classification problems of the interior, surface and exterior of the object. The latter regards mesh generation as a combination of basic elements, so the generation model only needs to judge whether the basic elements to be detected should exist, which is also a binary classification problem in essence. Examples include the classification of facet existence and local connectivity. Besides binary classification, multiclassification can also be designed to generate meshes, such as IER [79]. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the IGM methods based on occupancy and basic element classification, respectively.

(p10.1) IMG algorithms based on occupancy prediction are represented by occupancy networks [61], which are mainly used to address the task of reconstructing mesh by giving single or multiple images. Early works locate the object surface by judging the occupancy of each grid and then reconstruct the  mesh by marching cubes [122]. In the high-resolution case, the floating point operation proportional to the cube of the voxel resolution is unbearable. The grid occupied by the object often consists of only a small number of cubes gathered in the same area, which means that many calculations are wasted. To overcome the problem of high computational complexity, IM-NET [65] proposed a more efficient sampling approach that samples more points near shape surfaces and disregards most points far away. When addressing the task of generating meshes from point clouds, subsequent works [80], [121] focused on judging the occupancy of the point cloud instead of the whole 3D space, which directly reduces the floating-point computation.
## (s18) Hybrid Polygon Mesh Generation
Number of References: 3

(p18.0) In practical applications, due to various nonideal conditions, it is often impossible to generate only a single basic facet. Therefore, some researchers have designed hybrid mesh generation algorithms out of active or passive intention. However, due to the limitation of their application, there are only a few types of IMG with hybrid meshes as the generation target. In the literature that we searched, only BP-ANN [114], AnalyticMesh [101] and PolyGen [70] belong to this category. BP-ANN generates anisotropic quadrilateral and isotropic triangular meshes by the advancing front method, which improves the level of automation and efficiency of hybrid mesh generation. AnalyticMesh marches among analytic cells to recover the exact mesh of the closed, piecewise planar surface captured by an implicit surface network. The algorithm is applicable to more advanced MLP architectures, including those with shortcut connections and max pooling operations, which support a richer set of architectural designs for learning and exactly meshing complex surface shapes. Polygen more compactly represents the surface of the object with different polygons.
