# materials The Obstacles to a Broader Application of Alkali-Activated Binders as a Sustainable Alternative-A Review

CorpusID: 258195201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e6e2f440fa38efdc67b2e320618283a11b3677](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e6e2f440fa38efdc67b2e320618283a11b3677)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s10) Obstacles Related to Economic Performance
Number of References: 3

(p10.0) Economic performance is the least-studied aspect and, if investigated, has usually been conducted with environmental performance studies. According to Figure 9, we cannot generate straightforward conclusions regarding the economic performance of AAMs. This shows the complexity of the issue. Similar to LCA, the specification of the system boundary and the functional unit for LCC varied between studies (e.g., either m 3 or t). In addition, it is difficult to compare the results because of the various currencies used depending on the region in which the studies were performed. Hence, identifying the main factors impacting such cost data of AAMs is essential. Key challenges regarding LCC include expensive feedstocks and transportation costs connected to their acquisition. Benefits could be generated by carefully choosing the sources of raw materials [10]. Hence, the local availability of primary and secondary raw materials will positively impact the total cost of AAMs [8]. Nguyen et al. investigated costs for alternative cementitious binders such as OPC, SC, FAC, MKG, and HLAASC (check Section 3.3 for a detailed explanation of mixes). It was shown that all alternatives to OPC presented environmental advantages, but none of them could overcome the cost obstacle [85]. However, including LCC in future studies on AABs is essential since their application in the related industry would be hindered by their high cost. Optimisation should be achieved by considering the critical challenging factors of certain mixes and addressing them to generate a competitively priced product without compromising its technical and environmental performance. 
## (s14) Regional Context
Number of References: 3

(p14.0) The transportation costs for the raw materials used in AABs are especially important for relatively isolated regions such as Australia. McLellan et al. [10] examined the LCC of OPC and geopolymer pastes based on Australian practices. The assessment covered the life-cycle stages up to the production of the binder. It was recognised that the critical factors influencing the costs of geopolymers are the source location, the energy source, and the transportation mode. When only production was considered, geopolymers were acknowledged as potentially competitive in terms of cost. However, when transportation was included in the assessment, a negative impact was observed due to long distances. Moreover, the influence of transport on cost was more significant for the geopolymer paste than the OPC paste. Compared to OPC, the difference ranged from a 7% reduction to a 39% increase for the geopolymer paste. Through optimising transport, further cost reductions could be afforded [10]. On the other hand, in a study based on US data, the use of MK-based AAB resulted in a fivefold higher cost than OPC. The scarcity of the mineral in the USA and supply-related costs were recognised as the main contributors to such a trend. Therefore, transportation was a key contributor to the cost for all investigated types of binders, corresponding to increases of up to 65% [85]. The overall interconnectivity of the main contributors to AABs' economic performance could also be related to the diagram shown in Figure 8. Hence, the utilisation of locally available raw materials for producing AABs would also lead to lower costs.
