# A review of SARS-CoV-2 drug repurposing: databases and machine learning models

CorpusID: 260671013 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08de4ebae463c00e3ab12c65a3b8ab5955f1aa0d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08de4ebae463c00e3ab12c65a3b8ab5955f1aa0d)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s1) Databases for drug repurposing studies
Number of References: 3

(p1.0) There have been onerous efforts to collate, archive, and digitize life sciences research data worldwide, leading to a rise of hundreds of online databases providing various features for specific purposes. There are numerous repository classifications depending on the classifier perspective. Bagherian et al (2021) categorized the databases as drug-target interaction (DTI), drug/target-centered, drug-target binding affinity, and supporting databases. Wu et al (2022) classified the databases as drug combination databases and databases listed in the other related databases section. Tanoli et al (2021) grouped the databases as chemical, genomics, threedimensional protein structures, protein classifications and interactions, reaction pathways, molecular omics, DTI, and disease databases. Nevertheless, it is clear that various databases fit under multiple categories. Given these observations, most databases have different data types, therefore, they can be referred to as heterogeneous databases. In this section, 20 frequently used repositories in drug repurposing studies have been considered. An overview of the data types provided by each database is rendered in Table 1. Within these databases, some of them provide specific services considering relevant SARS-CoV-2 data and are jointly represented in Table 2, while being elaborated beneath each database section below.
## (s6) DrugCentral
Number of References: 2

(p6.0) DrugCentral (https://drugcentral.org/) is a drug-centred database that was first released in 2016 to quantify the existing pharmaceutical drugs and their targets (Avram et al, 2021). The Division of Translational Informatics currently maintains it at the University of New Mexico (UNM) in collaboration with Illuminating the Druggable Genome (IDG) Consortium. This database provides information on active ingredients, general drugs, FDA-approved drugs, European Medicines Agency (EMA)-approved drugs, and Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA)-approved drugs. Drug annotation includes drug dosage, absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET), adverse events for both males and females, pharmacologic action, drug use, pharmaceutical products, bioactivity, and new drug applications. Also, this repository offers target search to allocate the drugs acting on them. DrugCentral compiles 4,927 active ingredients and 112,359 FDA drug labels. The last updated database release comprises 226 veterinary drugs along with 804 targets.   (Kanehisa et al, 2017). This resource provides numerous rich databases for multiple purposes. KEGG-Drugs database gathers information about approved drugs in Japan, the US, and Europe. Two additional databases are associated with the KEGG-Drug database, KEGG-pathway database, and KEGG-Medicus database. The former database provides information about the drug pathway, whilst the latter database delivers reported drug-target interaction. Furthermore, the known drug-target interaction pairs can be extracted from the KEGG-Brite database. KEGG-COMPOUND database collects the most relevant compounds in the biological system. The database is integrated with other KEGG databases and provides information about the chemical properties, reactions, pathways, modules, and enzymes associated with the compound of interest. Moreover, KEGG-Genes are a collection of gene and protein sequences of cellular organisms and viruses from public databases, mainly NCBI RefSeq and GenBank. As per 2023 statistics, 46,086,588 and 648,811 genes expressing proteins are appended for organisms and viruses, respectively. The counts for proteins are 312 for viruses and 4,125 for other organisms. The similarity among the sequences is generated through KEGG (Sequence Similarity DataBase) SSDB. Furthermore, the molecular function of functional orthologs in many biological pathways are provided in KEGG-KO database. Each functional ortholog is given a KO entry which is cross-referenced with experimental evidence. Additionally, the KEGG-Genome database collects detailed genomic information about many cellular organisms and viruses. Besides, there is the KEGG-Enzymes database that collects information about enzymatic reactions.
## (s36) Machine learning models
Number of References: 4

(p36.0) Machine learning (ML) is a distinct division of artificial intelligence (AI) that gained attention in drug repurposing field for its appealing advantages. It was proven to have an efficient intervention to accelerate the prediction of potential SARS-CoV-2 inhibitors and to prioritize drugs for in vitro testing (Yang et al, 2022). A significant feature of ML models is their ability to learn and explore functional relationships in the given data set that humans could hardly investigate. Usually, ML workflow comprises four steps: 1) data curation and preprocessing, 2) feature extraction, 3) model fitting, and 4) interpretation (Angermueller et al, 2016). Upon the human intervention intensity in each step, the ML can be classified into conventional ML models and deep learning (DL) models. In the former models, significant human intervention is required compared to the latter models. Specifically, in DL models, the feature extraction step is automated, unlike in the conventional ML models where it is done manually (Sarker, 2021). Both models can be implemented for classification, regression, clustering, or pattern recognition problems (Carracedo-Reboredo et al, 2021).
## (s37) Deep learning models
Number of References: 8

(p37.0) Deep learning (DL) also known as deep structured learning or hierarchical learning, refers to a learning system composed of several information processing layers (LeCun et al, 2015) (Yang et al, 2019). The model is related explicitly to artificial neural networks (ANN). Therefore the two terms are often used interchangeably (Sarvepalli, 2015;Schmidhuber, 2015;Di Franco and Santurro, 2021). Accordingly, in this review article, both ANN and DL will be used to represent the same concept. Originally, ANN was introduced by Fran Rosenblatt in 1957 (University of Massachusetts Amherst, 2022), followed by consistent research in this area until 1998 (Schmidhuber, 2015;Emmert-Streib et al, 2020). The field gained recognition again in 2006 (Hinton et al, 2006), where the current flow of Deep Neural Networks (DNN) is growing. The quality of DNN outcomes relies on implementing the correct architecture to solve the problem (Miikkulainen et al, 2019). DNN comprises many models with different architectures for different applications and purposes.
## (s39) Application in drug repurposing
Number of References: 4

(p39.0) Ton et al (2020) screened 1.3 billion molecules to investigate potential drugs against SARS-CoV-2 main protease (3CL pro ), also referred to as M pro , using the deep docking (DD) platform. The platform comprised deep learning models based on quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) models that were trained on docking scores. The results provided a valuable 1,000 compounds that could have a potential anti-3CL pro activity. Zeng et al (2020) employed deep learning to hasten drug discovery by locating potential treatments for COVID-19. The model is based on the construction of a knowledge graph (KG). The authors built a comprehensive KG representing 39 relationships between drugs, diseases, proteins, genes, pathways, and the gene expression from various publications. The deep learning system identified 41 potential drugs, including Dexamethasone, Indomethacin, Niclosamide, Tetrandrine, Estradiol, Rifampicin, Idoxuridine, Sirolimus, and Ampicillin. Choi et al (2020) implemented the previously developed MT-DTI model and molecular docking analysis to predict drugs that may block the virus entry by inhibiting the binding of the viral proteins to the human Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptor and Transmembrane protease, serine 2 (TMPRSS2) receptor. The study identified 20 drug predictions for both receptors. The ACE2 inhibitors list included Enalaprilat, Zofenopril, Lisinopril, Benazepril, Cilazapril, Trandolapril, Perindopril, Ramipril, Fosinopril, Moexipril, and Spirapril (2021) proposed an integrative framework for COVID-19 drug repurposing. The pipeline of the framework consists mainly of six phases: construction of a knowledge graph (KG), implementation of a network-based knowledge mining algorithm (CoV-DTI), application of a deep learning model (BERE), manual curation, execution of connectivity map analysis approach, and experimental testing using in vitro assays. The KG emphasized the interactions between three types of nodes, drugs, human targets, and viral targets, then the CoV-DTI algorithm proposed a list of initial predictions of effective drugs against the virus. The list was narrowed down by using the BERE model based on text-mining evidence for each drug's antiviral activity from the literature. The extracted list was subjected to a manual curation followed by further refining using the connectivity map analysis approach. Among the 41 predicted drugs, Mefuparib (CVL218) was prioritized for in vitro experimental validation and exhibited significant inhibition activity against SARS-CoV-2 replication by interacting with nucleocapsid (N) protein with high affinity. Karki et al (2021) proposed a tiered in silico approach of machine learning and molecular docking to accelerate the discovery of effective drugs against SARS-CoV-2. The authors used a pre-trained algorithm called SSnet to predict the protein-ligand interaction (PLI) probability of approved drugs and natural therapeutics to the open and closed conformation of the ACE2 receptor and the ACE2-S1 complex. The pairs with high binding affinity scores were further analysed by molecular docking analysis using Smina software. The study returned numerous probable drugs for each target. Among the predictions, Naldemedine, Dihydroergotamine, Sorafenib Beta-D-Glucuronide, Entrectinib, Irinotecan, and Capmatinib are the drugs that scored the highest SSnet and Smina scores for the three targets.
## (s46) Application in drug repurposing
Number of References: 2

(p46.0) Ivanov et al (2020) developed an SVM (radial kernel) model based on QSAR methodology to predict inhibitors of SARS-CoV-2 RdRp protein. The model screened three datasets, FDA-approved drugs dataset, molecules from the COVID-19 Antiviral dataset, and molecules from published research studies on SARS, MERS, and SARS-CoV-2. Among the total predictions, 92 FDA-approved drugs were suggested as RdRp inhibitors. Some of which are Thalomid, Grazoprevir, Sildenafil, Ruxolitinib, Duvelisib, Moxifloxacin, Acalabrutinib, and Telmisartan. Kowalewski and Ray (2020) aimed to mine potential drugs for COVID-19. Instead of considering a particular target, the authors gathered a compendium of 65 human proteins which were proven to interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins as targets from bioassay data. Three RBF-SVM models for classification and regression were combined (ensemble model) and implemented for all the targets. For only one target, namely, EIF4H, regularized random forest (RRF) was aggregated along with the SVM ensemble model. After training, the ML models were utilized to predict inhibitors against the targets from a set of approved and registered drugs. Predictions were categorized and curated based on the estimated mammalian toxicity and vapor pressure. The team constructed a network of the predicted drugs and targets. The targets with few drug candidates were excluded. The multi-target drug predictions comprise Phenazopyridine, Abemaciclib, Promazine, Tyverb, Pirenzepine, and Ebastine. Rajput et al (2021b) implemented SVM to predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 drugs. The model predicted 12 drugs: Verteporfin, Argatroban, Reboxetine, Guanfacine, Telotristat ethyl, Betrixaban, Leuprolide, Trovafloxacin, Peramivir, Salmeterol, Oxybuprocaine, and Warfarin. These predictions were further validated by molecular docking to investigate the binding affinity of the drugs against the complex of spike protein and ACE2 receptor. The authors decided that the most potential candidates are those having binding affinities ranging from −9.5 kcal/mol to -8 kcal/mol. Accordingly, seven molecules were prioritized: Verteporfin, Alatrofloxacin, Metergoline, Rescinnamine, Goserelin, Leuprolide, and Telotristat ethyl.
