# Exposure to Agrochemicals and Cardiovascular Disease: A Review

CorpusID: 260555102 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s6) Epidemiological Studies
Number of References: 16

(p6.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.

(p6.1) The following: edema, pallor and tachycardia were some of the common symptoms related to cardiovascular disease of agrochemicals exposure. There was a total of 26 (23 males and 3 females) farmworkers responsible for spraying duties in the flower section. The total of 13 (50.0%) of these farmworkers complain of palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling. The mean comparison complainant and non-complainants of the spray user was significantly different with p-value < 0.05 [5] ( Table 2). The over exposure to agrochemicals and health consequences needs to be taken into consideration by the farmers and government sectors to reduce the rate of mortality due to cardiovascular diseases.

(p6.2) A study conducted in North Carolina and Iowa reported that the use agrochemicals were positively associated with either myocardial infarction (MI) mortality or incidence among farm workers [4] (Table 2). Farmers were also exposed to several types of particulates matter, including diesel exhaust and high level of dust containing endotoxin and mold. A study in Sweden found an elevated risk of ischemic heart diseases mortality among those who experienced occupational exposure to due agrochemical exposure [8]. In North Carolina and Iowa the occurrence of mortality and incidence among farmworkers were due to agrochemicals as the risk factor for MI development.

(p6.3) The participants of older age, white race and those with family history of MI, cigarette smokers, obesity, hypertension and diabetes were also associated with an increased risk of MI (Table 2). Also alcoholic drinkers were more likely to experience MI if compared to nondrinkers [4]. Currently, there is an extensive literature that showed that confounders in Table 2 might have the negative impacts farmworkers. In all the study the baseline was established that to exclude the farmworkers with risk factors that might cause cardiovascular conditions. An ecological study in Montana, Minnesota and North and South Dakota found that those living in the countries with wheat production and exposed to agrochemicals were more likely to die from acute myocardial infarction over a period of time [9]. The pathophysiological mechanisms of particulate matter exposure and MI have been well characterized. Allon et al. [10] hypothesized that the pathophysiology of particulate matter (PM) occurs through an inflammation leading to the increase of plasma fibrinogen. There are lot of unreported case of dead or sick farmworkers due to agrochemical exposure without knowing the cause of that might cause death.
## (s21) Epidemiological Studies
Number of References: 16

(p21.0) A study that was conducted in Naivash which is situated 80 km North West of the Kenyan rift valley showed that most of the farmworker complain of health issues related to agrochemical. Most farms were green house, floriculture and horticulture with an extensive usage of wide variety of agrochemicals throughout the year to control the development of plants and weeds [6]. The large proportions of farmworkers were predominant spraying agrochemicals most of the time. Also, farmworkers that perform removal of weeds, planting and harvesting reported the highest proportion of symptoms potentially related to pesticide exposure over a period of time. The total number of 247 (34.5%) farmworkers showed cardiovascular symptoms (palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling) [6] (Table 2). There was an indication that a higher proportion of flower farm labours that continuously using the agrochemicals exhibited high incident of cardiovascular disease during their lifetime. These findings had been linked with handling and usage of agrochemical over time.

(p21.1) The following: edema, pallor and tachycardia were some of the common symptoms related to cardiovascular disease of agrochemicals exposure. There was a total of 26 (23 males and 3 females) farmworkers responsible for spraying duties in the flower section. The total of 13 (50.0%) of these farmworkers complain of palpitation, chest pain and leg swelling. The mean comparison complainant and non-complainants of the spray user was significantly different with p-value < 0.05 [5] ( Table 2). The over exposure to agrochemicals and health consequences needs to be taken into consideration by the farmers and government sectors to reduce the rate of mortality due to cardiovascular diseases.

(p21.2) A study conducted in North Carolina and Iowa reported that the use agrochemicals were positively associated with either myocardial infarction (MI) mortality or incidence among farm workers [4] (Table 2). Farmers were also exposed to several types of particulates matter, including diesel exhaust and high level of dust containing endotoxin and mold. A study in Sweden found an elevated risk of ischemic heart diseases mortality among those who experienced occupational exposure to due agrochemical exposure [8]. In North Carolina and Iowa the occurrence of mortality and incidence among farmworkers were due to agrochemicals as the risk factor for MI development.

(p21.3) The participants of older age, white race and those with family history of MI, cigarette smokers, obesity, hypertension and diabetes were also associated with an increased risk of MI (Table 2). Also alcoholic drinkers were more likely to experience MI if compared to nondrinkers [4]. Currently, there is an extensive literature that showed that confounders in Table 2 might have the negative impacts farmworkers. In all the study the baseline was established that to exclude the farmworkers with risk factors that might cause cardiovascular conditions. An ecological study in Montana, Minnesota and North and South Dakota found that those living in the countries with wheat production and exposed to agrochemicals were more likely to die from acute myocardial infarction over a period of time [9]. The pathophysiological mechanisms of particulate matter exposure and MI have been well characterized. Allon et al. [10] hypothesized that the pathophysiology of particulate matter (PM) occurs through an inflammation leading to the increase of plasma fibrinogen. There are lot of unreported case of dead or sick farmworkers due to agrochemical exposure without knowing the cause of that might cause death.
