# (online) Integration of Artificial Intelligence in Education: Opportunities, Challenges, Threats and Obstacles. A Literature Review

CorpusID: 261413770 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f468af724a9a269172e5e617830c8aa6ac40e99d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f468af724a9a269172e5e617830c8aa6ac40e99d)

Fields: Computer Science, Education

## (s0) B. Research Method
Number of References: 2

(p0.0) The research method used in this study is semy-systematic literature review. This study is designed to analyze a number of research results that are in accordance with the topic being analyzed. This study analyzes the development of a topic over time from various aspects. This research also analyzes the relevant potential and has implications for the topic being studied. The analysis used in this study tends to be similar to qualitative research in general, which uses a metanarrative approach that includes the process of identifying, analyzing, recognizing patterns and themes from various research results relevant to the topic [11], [12]. The data analyzed in this study is a type of secondary data in the form of research results that have been published and detected on the Google Scholar web. The keyword used in the search process is "challenges and opportunities of AI in education". The research data that has been collected is then selected based on several criteria such as theme, title, content, and quality of research. The technical stages of selection of this study can be observed as follows: The opportunities offered by AI in education are vast, flexible and can be utilized practically. The opportunities provided by AI can be applied in various aspects of education both from technical teaching which includes the process of delivering learning materials, evaluating learning and managing learning systems, and other aspects of education. Some of the opportunities that AI provides to education are as follows:
