# Protecting DNA from errors and damage: an overview of DNA repair mechanisms in plants compared to mammals

CorpusID: 31229576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33cf05fe5608bbc171dcc28cd919acb29e3398](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33cf05fe5608bbc171dcc28cd919acb29e3398)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Environmental Science

## (s8) A B
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.

(p8.1) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.
## (s14) Homologous recombination
Number of References: 52

(p14.0) HR is favored during the S/G2 phase of the cell cycle, when sister chromatids are available as homologous templates [128,129]. This mechanism was the subject of several recent reviews [130][131][132]. In this pathway, four steps are required (Table 6A). (1) DNA end resection and nucleoprotein filament formation. Initial processing of the ends involves the trimeric complex MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) and the CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) interacting protein (CtIP) [133,134]. Further resection involves the 5 0 -3 0 exonuclease EXO1 or the combined helicase/ nuclease activities of the BLM/DNA2 (Bloom Syndrome RecQ Like Helicase/DNA replication helicase/nuclease2) [135]. The 3 0 single-strand DNA (ssDNA) tails generated are initially bound by ssDNA-binding protein RPA [136]. Subsequently, RPA is replaced by another ssDNA-binding protein, RAD51, which forms a nucleoprotein filament on the DNA. The replacement of RPA by RAD51 requires several mediator proteins, such as BRCA2 (protein encoded by the breast cancer-associated gene 2) and RAD54 [137][138][139]. Human cells have two RAD54 homologs, RAD54 and RAD54B, which display similar biochemical activities [140]. Evidence also suggests that RAD51 paralogs, such as XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B, RAD51C, and RAD51D, function in promoting and/or stabilizing RAD51 nucleofilaments [131,141]. However, unlike RAD51 that self-assembles, RAD51 paralogs form at least four different heterodimeric and heterotetrameric complexes. (2) DNA homology search and strand invasion. The RAD51 nucleoprotein filament begins searching for a homologous DNA sequence and then invades the intact double-stranded DNA molecule to form a heteroduplex DNA structure termed the displacement loop (D-loop). D-loop formation is stimulated by RAD54 [131,132]. Besides ssDNA binding, RAD51 also interacts with dsDNA and associates with the newly formed heteroduplex DNA. (3) DNA heteroduplex extension. The invading strand in the D-loop structure is then extended by several components of the replication machinery, namely DNA polymerase d, PCNA and RFC [142]. (4) Processing of the D-loop. HR can take several different steps: synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA), Holliday junction (HJ) resolution (the DSBR model) and HJ dissolution [130,132]. SDSA involves the displacement of the newly synthesized strand by DNA helicase(s), followed by strand annealing, DNA synthesis and ligation. DSBR is characterized by the capture of the second end of the DSB, formation of a double HJ (dHJ) structure and resolution by specialized resolvases (e.g., GEN1, MUS81-EME1, SLX1-SLX4). Alternatively, the dHJ can be dissolved by the BTB complex consisting of BLM helicase, DNA topoisomerase IIIa and BLAP75. Regulation of HJ processing enzymes has been covered in recent reviews [143,144]. Depending on the pathway employed for HJ processing, different recombination outcomes are generated. SDSA and HJ dissolution lead to the formation of non-crossover while HJ resolution contributes to the formation of non-crossover or crossover. The formation of non-crossover recombinants is promoted in mitotic cells, in contrast with that occurring in meiotic cells.

(p14.1) An alternative process that involves recombination between regions of homology at both sides of the break can also occur. This process, known as single-strand annealing (SSA), requires HR proteins involved in DNA end resection and annealing and also RPA, but is independent of RAD51 [130][131][132]145]. After DNA end resection, the 3 0 ssDNA tails generated can reveal complementary sequences on both sides of the break. These sequences anneal forming a branched structure. The 3 0 tails are then removed and the nicks are ligated. This process inevitably results in a deletion at the repair junction.
## (s33) A B
Number of References: 8

(p33.0) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.

(p33.1) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.
## (s39) Homologous recombination
Number of References: 52

(p39.0) HR is favored during the S/G2 phase of the cell cycle, when sister chromatids are available as homologous templates [128,129]. This mechanism was the subject of several recent reviews [130][131][132]. In this pathway, four steps are required (Table 6A). (1) DNA end resection and nucleoprotein filament formation. Initial processing of the ends involves the trimeric complex MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) and the CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) interacting protein (CtIP) [133,134]. Further resection involves the 5 0 -3 0 exonuclease EXO1 or the combined helicase/ nuclease activities of the BLM/DNA2 (Bloom Syndrome RecQ Like Helicase/DNA replication helicase/nuclease2) [135]. The 3 0 single-strand DNA (ssDNA) tails generated are initially bound by ssDNA-binding protein RPA [136]. Subsequently, RPA is replaced by another ssDNA-binding protein, RAD51, which forms a nucleoprotein filament on the DNA. The replacement of RPA by RAD51 requires several mediator proteins, such as BRCA2 (protein encoded by the breast cancer-associated gene 2) and RAD54 [137][138][139]. Human cells have two RAD54 homologs, RAD54 and RAD54B, which display similar biochemical activities [140]. Evidence also suggests that RAD51 paralogs, such as XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B, RAD51C, and RAD51D, function in promoting and/or stabilizing RAD51 nucleofilaments [131,141]. However, unlike RAD51 that self-assembles, RAD51 paralogs form at least four different heterodimeric and heterotetrameric complexes. (2) DNA homology search and strand invasion. The RAD51 nucleoprotein filament begins searching for a homologous DNA sequence and then invades the intact double-stranded DNA molecule to form a heteroduplex DNA structure termed the displacement loop (D-loop). D-loop formation is stimulated by RAD54 [131,132]. Besides ssDNA binding, RAD51 also interacts with dsDNA and associates with the newly formed heteroduplex DNA. (3) DNA heteroduplex extension. The invading strand in the D-loop structure is then extended by several components of the replication machinery, namely DNA polymerase d, PCNA and RFC [142]. (4) Processing of the D-loop. HR can take several different steps: synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA), Holliday junction (HJ) resolution (the DSBR model) and HJ dissolution [130,132]. SDSA involves the displacement of the newly synthesized strand by DNA helicase(s), followed by strand annealing, DNA synthesis and ligation. DSBR is characterized by the capture of the second end of the DSB, formation of a double HJ (dHJ) structure and resolution by specialized resolvases (e.g., GEN1, MUS81-EME1, SLX1-SLX4). Alternatively, the dHJ can be dissolved by the BTB complex consisting of BLM helicase, DNA topoisomerase IIIa and BLAP75. Regulation of HJ processing enzymes has been covered in recent reviews [143,144]. Depending on the pathway employed for HJ processing, different recombination outcomes are generated. SDSA and HJ dissolution lead to the formation of non-crossover while HJ resolution contributes to the formation of non-crossover or crossover. The formation of non-crossover recombinants is promoted in mitotic cells, in contrast with that occurring in meiotic cells.

(p39.1) An alternative process that involves recombination between regions of homology at both sides of the break can also occur. This process, known as single-strand annealing (SSA), requires HR proteins involved in DNA end resection and annealing and also RPA, but is independent of RAD51 [130][131][132]145]. After DNA end resection, the 3 0 ssDNA tails generated can reveal complementary sequences on both sides of the break. These sequences anneal forming a branched structure. The 3 0 tails are then removed and the nicks are ligated. This process inevitably results in a deletion at the repair junction.
