# A review of human sensory dynamics for application to models of driver steering and speed control

CorpusID: 3578825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/954c95c6af0a9ab215755667c7f9f0c424b1cb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/954c95c6af0a9ab215755667c7f9f0c424b1cb98)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Psychology, Medicine

## (s18) Visual thresholds
Number of References: 4

(p18.0) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.
## (s24) Coherence zones
Number of References: 2

(p24.0) The term 'coherence zone' was coined by van der Steen (1998) to describe the range of amplitudes of inputs to two sensory systems (such as visual and vestibular systems) which are perceived as consistent with each other, as shown in Fig. 14 Fig. 14 Coherence zone between visual and vestibular stimuli. For a given visual stimulus, there will be an upper and lower limit of vestibular stimulus amplitude which is perceived as coherent with the visual stimulus. The coherence zone width (CZW) is the difference between these two limits, and the point of mean coherence (PMC) is defined as the point halfway between the limits. The gain of mean coherence (GMC) is defined as the ratio of the vestibular amplitude to the visual amplitude at the PMC and represents the preferred gain between the visual and vestibular cues the point of mean coherence (PMC), coherence zone width (CZW) and gain of mean coherence (GMC) as shown.
## (s55) Visual thresholds
Number of References: 4

(p55.0) Various studies have measured perception thresholds and JNDs for the visual perception of self-motion. A difficulty in interpreting these results with any certainty is that they may well be dependent on the characteristics of the visual scene, such as the relative motion of stationary reference objects in the visual field, so it is not clear how generally applicable the results are. However, it may still be possible to find some useful information about the performance limits of the visual system. A driving simulator display was used by Bigler (2013) to measure yaw angle and lateral displacement thresholds. The display was not calibrated to give full-scale visual feedback so the absolute values of the measured thresholds may not be at the correct scale; however, the frequency response should not depend on the display scaling. The results are shown in Fig. 10. The visual transfer function given in Eq. 1 was used with the model of Soyka et al. (2011Soyka et al. ( , 2012 to give predicted thresholds, shown by the solid lines in Fig. 10. The model fits the thresholds very well, which is not surprising considering that the visual transfer function was found by fitting parameters to these results. The additive noise levels found are 0.0011 rad/s* for the yaw angular velocity and 0.032 m/s* for the lateral velocity.
## (s61) Coherence zones
Number of References: 2

(p61.0) The term 'coherence zone' was coined by van der Steen (1998) to describe the range of amplitudes of inputs to two sensory systems (such as visual and vestibular systems) which are perceived as consistent with each other, as shown in Fig. 14 Fig. 14 Coherence zone between visual and vestibular stimuli. For a given visual stimulus, there will be an upper and lower limit of vestibular stimulus amplitude which is perceived as coherent with the visual stimulus. The coherence zone width (CZW) is the difference between these two limits, and the point of mean coherence (PMC) is defined as the point halfway between the limits. The gain of mean coherence (GMC) is defined as the ratio of the vestibular amplitude to the visual amplitude at the PMC and represents the preferred gain between the visual and vestibular cues the point of mean coherence (PMC), coherence zone width (CZW) and gain of mean coherence (GMC) as shown.
