# Recent Developments in Cancer Treatment: A Review

CorpusID: 44794049 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/800938b5c26d55ce2f3476aa6f50fb89dfda6991)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p0.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p0.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
## (s8) Introduction
Number of References: 8

(p8.0) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.

(p8.1) Cancer was first described by Hippocrates using the Greek word "karkinos" (crab or crayfish) [1]. This name came from the appearance of the cut surface of a solid malignant tumor, with "the veins stretched on all sides as the crab has its feet, whence it derives its name" [2]. According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that worldwide there will be almost 22.2 million new cancer cases diagnosed annually by 2030. The overall survival times of patients with many types of malignancies remain low. The above findings underline the urgent need for the development of new therapeutic models, and the improvement of the existing ones, to inhibit cancer progression and deliver improved therapeutic outcomes.
