# An overview of integrative analysis in cancer studies

CorpusID: 55984211 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bee70b69438245272b31ae29c65e6be5261f49ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bee70b69438245272b31ae29c65e6be5261f49ff)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science, Biology

## (s1) Integration of molecular dataset with biological information
Number of References: 11

(p1.0) Fu et al. [6] proposed an integrative method using miRNA and mRNA expression datasets, and miRNA and its target mRNA information from both TargetScan [1] and miRanda [2]. The method identified the robust target mRNA of miRNAs. Integrating pathway information and microarray gene expression datasets also provided more accurate results than just using mRNA expression profiles.

(p1.1) The classification based on pathway presented comparable or even better performance than the gene-based classification method. For example, Guo et al. [7] suggested a method to infer module activity using mean or median gene expression values in gene ontology [8]. Su et al. [9] presented a method for classification based on the probabilistic inference of pathway activity. In addition, Lee et al. [10,11] proposed a classification method for cancer phenotypes using the core genes in pathways as the differentiators of the disease phenotypes. Kim et al. [12] proposed an integrative method using KEGG pathway [13] information extracted from gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) [14] and mRNA expression datasets. In the study, features based on core genes from enrichment pathway performed better than the methods using only the pathway features or mRNA itself (Figure 1). Integr Cancer Sci Therap, 2016 doi: 10.15761/ICST.1000193 results of using integrative datasets are more accurate than just using single profiles.
