# IT applications in healthcare management: a survey

CorpusID: 65012249 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b690e197e405d2fab5b0dccf9e25568581afb98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b690e197e405d2fab5b0dccf9e25568581afb98)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) Medic robots
Number of References: 2

(p2.0) Since the introduction in 1960s, robots have been used in many scientific and social fields. Their use in fields like nuclear arsenal, production of automobiles, and manipulations in space has been widespread. In comparison, the medical science field has somewhat been gradual to take advantage of this technology. Nevertheless, robots are now days being utilised to assist in or perform many complex medical procedures, which has given rise to the term Robotic Surgery. A comprehensive discussion of robotic surgery is available in [6]. Indeed there are many advantages of using robots in healthcare management. For example, developing pharmaceuticals through clinical trials can take many years and cost may rise to billions of dollars. Making this process faster and more affordable could change the world. Robots can play a critical role in such trials. Robots are also very effective in medico training where simulations are achieved.
## (s15) Medic robots
Number of References: 2

(p15.0) Since the introduction in 1960s, robots have been used in many scientific and social fields. Their use in fields like nuclear arsenal, production of automobiles, and manipulations in space has been widespread. In comparison, the medical science field has somewhat been gradual to take advantage of this technology. Nevertheless, robots are now days being utilised to assist in or perform many complex medical procedures, which has given rise to the term Robotic Surgery. A comprehensive discussion of robotic surgery is available in [6]. Indeed there are many advantages of using robots in healthcare management. For example, developing pharmaceuticals through clinical trials can take many years and cost may rise to billions of dollars. Making this process faster and more affordable could change the world. Robots can play a critical role in such trials. Robots are also very effective in medico training where simulations are achieved.
