# Gravitational lensing in galaxy redshift surveys

CorpusID: 117369601
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c98d7725415dbf9f8f87137a1096b22dc971f56](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c98d7725415dbf9f8f87137a1096b22dc971f56)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Gravitational lensing in galaxy redshift surveys
8 Nov 2000

Daniel J Mortlock 
School of Physics
University of Melbourne
ParkvilleVic. 3052Australia

Rachel L Webster 
School of Physics
University of Melbourne
ParkvilleVic. 3052Australia

Gravitational lensing in galaxy redshift surveys
8 Nov 2000


## Introduction

Gravitationally-lensed quasars are both valuable (individually and statistically) and rare. They are mostly discovered through time-consuming re-imaging of known quasars, but can also be found spectroscopically in galaxy redshift surveys. Q 2237+0305 (Huchra et al. 1985) was found in this manner, but remains the only such discovery. Kochanek (1992) predicted that ∼ 1 in 10 5 redshifts would yield a lens although this is somewhat pessimistic, as described below. It is also important that lenses discovered in galaxy surveys tend to have bright, low redshift lens galaxies. Such lenses are particularly useful, as shown by the successful measurement of the source-size and transverse velocity in the Q 2237+0305 system (e.g., Wambsganss et al. 1990;Wyithe et al. 1999).


## Calculation

The calculation, detailed in , of the expected number of lenses, N lens , is based on the formalism developed in Kochanek (1992). The lensing probability of a single galaxy is integrated over the survey population, subject to a number of selection effects. A lens of total magnitude m, in which the quasar images have magnitude m q and the galaxy has magnitude m g , is detectable in a galaxy redshift survey if: the quasar-galaxy composite image is brighter than the survey limit (i.e., m ≤ m lim ); the quasar images are bright enough to be detected in the composite spectrum (which can be quantified by requiring that m q − m g ≤ ∆m qg ≃ 2; Kochanek 1992); and the galaxy is bright enough for the composite object to be classified as non-stellar, and hence enter the redshift survey at all (which can be characterised by the condition that m g − m q ≤ ∆m gq ≃ 0). The inclusion of the quasar light in the calculation of m is critical to this calculation, as the sensitivity to lenses is increased by ∼ 1 mag, and the number of lenses is increased by up to an order of magnitude, relative to the results of Kochanek (1992). Figure 1 shows the number of lenses expected per 10 4 redshifts as a function of survey depth. Several values of ∆m qg are shown, as this represents the largest single uncertainty in the calculation. Note that, at least at the depths of the current redshift surveys, there is very little dependence on the cosmological model, which stands in marked contrast to the usual quasar lensing probability. The expected number of lenses, N lens , per 10 4 measured redshifts in a galaxy redshift survey of magnitude limit m lim . The three sets of lines are for different values of the "spectral prominence" parameter, ∆m qg , as indicated. In each case results are shown for three cosmological models: Einstein-de Sitter (solid lines); empty (dashed lines); and empty and flat (dot-dashed lines).


## Results

These results imply that the a posteriori likelihood of a lens being discovered in the Center for Astrophysics (CfA) survey is ∼ 0.03, which is much greater than the previous estimate of ∼ 0.003 (Kochanek 1992).

The new generation of surveys -in particular the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and the 2 degree Field (2dF) redshift survey -will dwarf the CfA survey, and should result in the discovery of many new lenses. The SDSS will obtain ∼ 10 6 high quality galaxy spectra (i.e., ∆m qg ∼ > 4) to m lim ≃ 19, which implies N lens ≃ 100. The 2dF redshift survey will contain a quarter the number of galaxies, but has m lim = 19.5, and should yield ∼ 10 lenses. Most of these lenses will have deflector redshifts of ∼ < 0.2, and in several cases the observerdeflector distance should be comparable to that in the Q 2237+0305 system.

## Figure 1 .
1Figure 1.

. J P Huchra, M Gorenstien, S Kent, I Shapiro, G Smith, E Horine, R Perley, AJ. 90691Huchra, J.P., Gorenstien, M., Kent, S., Shapiro, I., Smith, G., Horine, E., & Perley, R. 1985, AJ, 90, 691

. C S Kochanek, ApJ. 397381Kochanek, C.S. 1992, ApJ, 397, 381

. D J Mortlock, R L Webster, J Wambsganss, B Paczyński, P Schneider, MNRAS. 35833ApJMortlock, D.J., & Webster, R.L. 1999, MNRAS, in preparation Wambsganss, J., Paczyński, B., & Schneider, P., 1990, ApJ, 358, L33

. J S B Wyithe, R L Webster, E L Turner, D J Mortlock, MNRAS. submittedWyithe, J.S.B., Webster, R.L., Turner, E.L., & Mortlock, D.J., 1999, MNRAS, submitted