# Linear bias forecasts for emission line cosmological surveys

CorpusID: 119330180
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb9db4aa59bd9892112809ee887677256db82df7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb9db4aa59bd9892112809ee887677256db82df7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Linear bias forecasts for emission line cosmological surveys
2019

Alexander Merson 
Jet Propulsion Laboratory
California Institute of Technology
4800 Oak Grove Drive91109PasadenaCAUSA

IPAC
Mail Code 314-6

California Institute of Technology
1200 East California Boulevard91125PasadenaCAUSA

Alex Smith 
IRFU
CEA
Université Paris-Saclay
F-91191Gif-sur-YvetteFrance

Institute for Computational Cosmology
Department of Physics
University of Durham
South RoadDH1 3LEDurhamUK

Andrew Benson 
Carnegie Observatories
813 Santa Barbara Street91101PasadenaCAUSA

Yun Wang 
IPAC
Mail Code 314-6

California Institute of Technology
1200 East California Boulevard91125PasadenaCAUSA

Carlton M Baugh 
Institute for Computational Cosmology
Department of Physics
University of Durham
South RoadDH1 3LEDurhamUK

Linear bias forecasts for emission line cosmological surveys

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc
0002019Printed 7 March 2019(MN L A T E X style file v2.2)galaxies:formationcosmology: large-scale structure of Universegalaxies: statisticsmethods:numerical
We forecast the linear bias for Hα-emitting galaxies at high redshift. To simulate a Euclidlike and a WFIRST-like survey we place galaxies into a large-volume dark matter halo lightcone by sampling a library of luminosity-dependent halo occupation distributions, which is constructed using a physically motivated galaxy formation model. We calibrate the dust attenuation in the lightcones such that they are able to reproduce the Hα luminosity function or the Hα cumulative number counts. The angle-averaged galaxy correlation function is computed for each survey in redshift slices of width ∆z = 0.2. In each redshift bin the linear bias can be fitted with a single, scale-independent value that increases with increasing redshift. We find that the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys yield linear biases that are consistent within error, as the galaxies in the two surveys occupy halos of similar mass M 200 ∼ 10 11.7 h −1 M − 10 11.9 h −1 M . Adopting a lightcone calibrated to match the Hα luminosity function, we find that the linear biases for a Euclid-like and a WFIRST-like survey are both consistent with the relation b(z) 0.72z +0.7. Our bias forecasts are consistent with bias measurements from the HiZELS survey.

# INTRODUCTION

Probing the nature of the driving force behind the observed accelerated expansion of the Universe continues to be one of the major goals of modern cosmology. Most of the observational evidence gathered to date is consistent with the theory that the expansion is the result of a mysterious phenomenon known as dark energy, although existing observations lack the statistical precision to allow alternative theories to be differentiated and conclusively ruled out. Up and coming cosmological missions aim to make very precise measurements of different cosmological probes of the expansion history of the Universe and the growth rate of cosmic large-scale structure in order to distinguish between the competing theories (e.g. Albrecht et al. 2006;Guzzo et al. 2008;Wang 2008a,b).

For missions such as the ESA-led Euclid mission (Laureijs et al. 2011) and the NASA-led Wide Field Infrared Survey Telescope mission (WFIRST, Dressler et al. 2012;Green et al. 2012;Spergel et al. 2015), dark energy will be probed using a spectroscopic galaxy redshift survey, which will measure the galaxy clustering and redshift-space distortions of the galaxy distribution, and a photometric survey, which will be used to measure weak gravitational lensing shear of the galaxies. Specifically for the galaxy E-mail: alex.i.merson@gmail.com clustering measurements, these missions will measure the baryon acoustic oscillations (BAO) in the galaxy population, which can be used as a standard ruler to probe the expansion history of the Universe (Blake & Glazebrook 2003;Seo & Eisenstein 2003), and redshift-space distortions, which are sensitive to the growth rate of the large-scale structure (Kaiser 1987;Song & Percival 2009).

The spectroscopic redshift surveys of the Euclid and WFIRST missions will target many tens of millions of emission line galaxies (ELGs), which will be identified using near-IR grism spectroscopy. The primary targets for the spectroscopic galaxy redshift surveys are Hα-emitting galaxies between redshifts 0.9 z 2. The Euclid wide-area survey will cover 15,000 square degrees to an Hα line flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 and is expected to detect Hα-emitting galaxies in the redshift range 0.9 z 1.8. In a similar fashion, the WFIRST High Latitude Survey (HLS) will cover ∼ 2200 square degrees to a fainter Hα line flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 and is expected to detect Hα-emitting galaxies in a redshift range of 1 z 2. Due to their observing strategy, both missions are expected to detect additional emission lines belonging to galaxies outside these redshift ranges. For instance, both Euclid and WFIRST expect to detect [OIII] emission from galaxies at z 2. In this work we focus on the redshift surveys of Hα-emitting galaxies. The Euclid and WFIRST dark energy missions are designed to be highly complementary: the large area and shallower depth of Euclid is ideal for optimising statistical precision in cosmological measurements, whilst the the smaller area and greater depth of WFIRST is ideal for understanding the systematics that are expected to dominate over measurement uncertainties.

One of the systematics that must be taken into account is galaxy bias, which describes how galaxies trace the underlying dark matter distribution. Galaxy formation does not occur uniformly in space, but occurs primarily in the peaks of the matter density field, making galaxies biased tracers of the density field, sampling only the over-dense regions (e.g. Kaiser 1984; Bardeen et al. 1986; see Desjacques et al. 2018 for a recent review). The bias, b, of a population of galaxies is defined according to,
ξ gal (r) = b 2 (r)ξDM(r),(1)
where ξ gal (r) is the galaxy correlation function and ξDM(r) is the dark matter correlation function, as a function of spatial separation r. Observational evidence indicates that different galaxy populations, identified for example by luminosity or morphological type, display different clustering amplitudes (e.g. Davis & Geller 1976;Dressler 1980;Guzzo et al. 1997;Norberg et al. 2001Norberg et al. , 2002Zehavi et al. 2002Zehavi et al. , 2011Guo et al. 2013;Skibba et al. 2014;Kim et al. 2015;Favole et al. 2017;Law-Smith & Eisenstein 2017;Cochrane et al. 2017;Durkalec et al. 2018). This has been further confirmed with simulations of galaxy formation (e.g. Kauffmann et al. 1997;Benson et al. 2000a;Orsi et al. 2010;Contreras et al. 2013). As such, different galaxy populations are expected to display different bias values. This can be understood in terms of the halo model, which predicts that different galaxy populations commonly reside in dark matter halos of different mass. The hierarchical nature of structure formation means that the bias of galaxies will additionally vary with redshift (e.g. Fry 1996;Tegmark & Peebles 1998;Hui & Parfrey 2008;Basilakos et al. 2012;Mirbabayi et al. 2015). In the non-linear regime the bias is typically scale-dependent, but in the linear regime at scales r 50 h −1 Mpc the bias approaches a constant value (Mann et al. 1998;Peacock & Smith 2000;Seljak 2000;Benson et al. 2000b;Blanton et al. 2000;Berlind & Weinberg 2002;Verde et al. 2002). We refer to the constant bias on large-scales as linear bias, b(r) ∼ b lin . To date, many of the clustering analyses of emission line galaxies at high redshift have been carried out using data from the High-z Emission Line Survey (HiZELS, Geach et al. 2008;Sobral et al. 2009) -a ground-based, narrow band survey capable of detecting emission line galaxies up to z ∼ 9. Using a sample of ∼ 700 Hα-emitters at z = 0.84, Sobral et al. (2010) observed that the clustering strength of Hα-emitters is strongly dependent on the Hα luminosity. Geach et al. (2012) examined the clustering of 370 Hα-emitters at z = 2.23 to measure a bias of 2.4 +0.1 −0.2 and estimate that the dark matter halos hosting Hα-emitters have a typical mass of log 10 (M h ) = 11.7 ± 0.1. Geach et al. (2012) additionally construct a parametric model for the halo occupation distribution (HOD) of their Hα-emitters and attempt to fit this model to their data, though their small sample size prevented them from placing strong constraints on the HOD parameters. Recently Cochrane et al. (2017) built upon the previous HiZELS results by carrying out an extensive clustering analysis of ∼ 3000 Hα-emitters at z = 0.8, ∼ 450 emitters at z = 1.47 and ∼ 730 emitters at z = 2.23, split into both differential and cumulative luminosity bins. Using Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling, Cochrane et al. (2017) fit a parametrised HOD to their clustering results to estimate the bias and halo mass of their Hα-emitters. They find that the bias of the emitters increases both with redshift and with luminos-ity, and that their emitters are hosted by halos with mass typically ∼ 10 12 h −1 M .

In this work we use simulated galaxy catalogues to forecast the linear bias as a function of redshift for Hα-emitting galaxies in a Euclid-like redshift survey and a WFIRST-like redshift survey. Forecasts of the galaxy bias are important for two reasons. Firstly, understanding the bias of the Hα-emitting galaxies will be crucial for Euclid and WFIRST if we are to correctly infer the dark matter clustering from the galaxy clustering measurements, and thereby accurately estimate cosmological parameters (Gaztañaga et al. 2012;Salvador et al. 2019). Clerkin et al. (2015) provide a comparison of several bias evolution prescriptions and impact that choice of prescription has on cosmological parameter constraints. Secondly, the figure-of-merit of a cosmological mission, which indicates the ability of a mission to successfully measure dark energy, is sensitive to the understanding of galaxy bias. As such forecasting of the bias is vital for helping optimise the observational strategy of a cosmological mission. For example, Orsi et al. (2010) used galaxy mock catalogues built using the GALFORM semi-analytical galaxy formation model to compare effective volumes that could be probed by an Hα-selected galaxy survey and an H-band selected galaxy survey. They determine that for an Hα-selected galaxy survey to probe an effective volume comparable to that of an HAB = 22 slit-based survey, the Hα-selected would need to probe down to a flux depth of 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 . Orsi et al. (2010) additionally provide some forecasts for the luminosity dependence of the bias of Hα-emitters between z = 0 and z = 2, though due to the limited volume of the underlying N-body simulation they are unable to estimate the bias well into the linear regime (r 50 h −1 Mpc).

The structure of the paper is as follows: in section 2 we give details of how we construct our lightcone galaxy catalogues, in section 3 we discuss how we calibrate our lightcone catalogues to match the luminosity function and cumulative number counts of Hα-emitters, in section 4 we present our linear bias forecasts, and in section 5 we summarise and conclude.


# MOCK CATALOGUE CONSTRUCTION

For this work we use a pair of mock catalogues built using the methodology of Smith et al. (2017), who populate the dark matter halos of the Millennium XXL simulation (MXXL, Angulo et al. 2012) using a set of luminosity-dependent HODs. In this section we provide further details on the construction of these mock catalogues.


## The Millennium XXL Simulation

In this work we use the Millennium XXL simulation (MXXL, Angulo et al. 2012), which uses 6720 3 = 303, 464, 448, 000 particles of mass 8.456 × 10 9 M to follow the non-linear, hierarchical growth of dark matter structure within a cubic volume of 3 h −1 Gpc. The cosmology adopted in the MXXL simulation is a ΛCDM cosmology with parameters identical to the cosmological parameters adopted for the Millennium Simulation (Springel et al. 2005). These parameters are: a baryon matter density Ω b = 0.045; a total matter density Ωm = Ω b + ΩCDM = 0.25, where ΩCDM is the density in cold dark matter; a dark energy density ΩΛ = 0.75; a Hubble constant H0 = 100h km s −1 Mpc −1 , where h = 0.73; a primordial scalar spectral index ns = 1 and a fluctuation amplitude σ8 = 0.9. This cosmological parameter set is consistent with the first year results from the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy  Figure 1. Non-linear matter power spectra (top panel) and dark matter twopoint correlation function (bottom panel) for an MXXL cosmology for redshifts in range 0.8 z 2, as indicated by the inset colour bar. All power spectra and correlation functions were computed using the CLASS and HALOFIT functionality in the NBodyKit python package (Hand et al. 2018). In the upper panel a vertical dotted line indicates the wavenumber corresponding to a co-moving distance of 150 h −1 Mpc. In the lower panel the BAO peak is clearly visible at approximately 110 h −1 Mpc.

Probe (Spergel et al. 2003). We note that this cosmology is discrepant with the latest cosmological parameters measured from the Planck mission (Planck Collaboration et al. 2018), but argue that this should not be of major concern since our ignorance in the modelling of galaxy formation will dominate over any discrepancies in cosmology. In Fig. 1 we show, for reference, the non-linear matter power spectrum and corresponding real-space correlation function as computed for the MXXL cosmology using the open source Nbodykit 1 python package (Hand et al. 2018). The BAO peak is clearly visible and, given the paremeters of the simulation, is located at approximately 110 h −1 Mpc.

Particle positions and velocities are stored in 63 snapshots at fixed epochs spaced approximately logarithmically in expansion factor between z = 20 and z = 0, as was done for the Millennium 1 https://github.com/bccp/nbodykit Simulation (see Lemson & Virgo Consortium 2006). Halo merger trees have also been constructed using the SUBFIND structure finding algorithm (Springel et al. 2001). Smith et al. (2017) additionally constructed friends-of-friends (FOF) merger trees using the most massive subhalo in each FOF group. Further details regarding the MXXL simulation can be found in Angulo et al. (2012). Smith et al. (2017) constructed a lightcone catalogue of dark matter halos from the MXXL simulation using the methodology described in Merson et al. (2013). An observer is first placed in the simulation box at a randomly chosen position and the simulation box is replicated about the observer so as to generate a sufficiently large volume reaching out to the user-specified redshift. Using the positions of halos and their associated descendants, one can determine the pair of snapshots between which any particular merger tree intercepted the past lightcone of the observer (if it intercepts the lightcone at all). Once the pair of snapshots has been identified, a binary search algorithm is used to interpolate along the trajectory of the halo to compute the exact location at which the halo crosses the lightcone. Interpolation of the halo trajectories between pairs of snapshots is done using cubic interpolation, with the initial position and velocity of a halo and its corresponding descendant used to set the boundary conditions. The lightcone that Smith et al. (2017) built is all-sky and extends out to redshift z = 2.2.


## Populating the MXXL dark matter halos

Ideally we would like to populate the halos of the MXXL simulation with galaxies by running a physically motivated galaxy formation model directly on the MXXL halo merger trees. Unfortunately the mass resolution of the MXXL simulation is too poor, such that running a semi-analytical galaxy formation model on the MXXL trees directly would yield an unrealistic galaxy population (e.g. see Angulo et al. 2014).

To populate the MXXL halos we therefore use the pipeline presented in Smith et al. (2017). This pipeline follows the methodology of Skibba et al. (2006), whereby halos are populated with galaxies of different luminosities by random sampling of probability distribution functions created from sets of luminosity-dependent halo occupation distributions (HODs) that evolve with redshift. Smith et al. (2017) originally developed this pipeline for the purpose of constructing an r-band selected galaxy catalogue to mimic the Dark Energy Spectroscopic Instrument Bright Galaxy Survey (DESI BGS, DESI Collaboration et al. 2016). For broadband photometrically-selected samples such as this, the HOD is well understood and can be parametrised easily, (e.g. Zehavi et al. 2011;Zhai et al. 2017). However, the HOD of Hα-emitting galaxies is much less well understood, although some parametrisation has been attempted based upon clustering results from HiZELS (Geach et al. 2012;Cochrane et al. 2017).

Rather than adopting any parametrisation for the HODs of Hα-emitting galaxies, we again consider again using a semianalytical galaxy formation model, but in this case using a model to generate a library of luminosity-dependent HODs that we can interpolate over as a function of luminosity and redshift. We choose to use the open source galaxy formation model GALACTICUS (Benson 2012).


### The GALACTICUS galaxy formation model

The GALACTICUS 2 semi-analytical galaxy formation model is designed to follow the formation and evolution of a galaxy population within a merging hierarchical distribution of dark matter halos. The astrophysical processes governing the baryonic processes occurring within the dark matter halos are described using a set of coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs). These processes include the rate of radiative gas cooling, the quiescent star formation rate, the chemical enrichment of the stellar and gaseous components, as well as the regulation of feedback processes from supernovae and active galactic nuclei. By calling the ODE solver within GALACTICUS at various epochs, one can compute the star formation histories of a population of galaxies from high redshift to the present day. Given a stellar initial mass function (IMF), these histories can be convolved with a single stellar population synthesis model to generate a spectral energy distribution for each galaxy, with which we can compute photometric luminosities for a specified set of filter transmission curves. By default GALACTICUS adopts the Flexible Stellar Population Synthesis code of Conroy et al. (2010), with a Chabrier (2003) IMF. Typically the GALACTICUS model parameters are calibrated to reproduce numerous observational statistics of the galaxy population, in particular those statistics of the local Universe that are the most tightly constrained, such as the z = 0 galaxy stellar mass function. Details of the calibration process for GALACTICUS, can be found in Benson (2014) and Knebe et al. (2015).

Emission line luminosites are computed for the GALACTICUS galaxies by interpolating over tabulated libraries generated from the CLOUDY photo-ionisation code (Ferland et al. 2013). These libraries store emission line luminosities as a function of (i) the ionizing continuua luminosities for various species (HI, HeI and OII), (ii) the hydrogen gas density, (iii) the metallicity of the interstellar medium and (iv) the volume filling factors of HII regions. All of these properties can be computed for the galaxies from GALACTI-CUS and so by interpolating over the CLOUDY tables in this manner we obtain emission line luminosities that are consistent with the other galaxy properties. Further details regarding the calculation of the emission line luminosities are provided in Merson et al. (2018).


### Generating a library of luminosity-dependent HODs

As we have previously mentioned, the poor mass resolution of the MXXL simulation means that we are unable to run GALACTICUS directly on the MXXL merger trees. Instead we run the model on the halo merger trees of the Millennium Simulation, which we remind the reader has a cosmology identical to that of the MXXL simulation. Populations of galaxies are output at 31 snapshots with redshifts in the range 0.7 < z < 2.2 (i.e. completely spanning the redshift ranges of Euclid and WFIRST). For each snapshot we split the galaxies into 31 cumulative luminosity-limited samples, with blended luminosity limits evenly separated in logspace between L Hα+[N II] = 10 38 h −2 erg s −1 and L Hα+[N II] = 10 43 h −2 erg s −1 . We select galaxies by their blended Hα+[NII] luminosity as the resolution of the grisms proposed for Euclid will be too poor to deblend the Hα line and [NII] doublet. See Faisst et al. (2018) and Martens et al. (2019) for discussions on the impact that Hα and [NII] line blending can have on Euclid and WFIRST cosmological measurements. To introduce [NII] contamination into the Hα luminosities from GALACTICUS, we follow the methodology adopted by Merson et al. (2018). The blended luminosities have no dust attenuation applied. For each luminosity-limited sample we construct the HOD by computing the mean number of central and satellite galaxies in halos binned by halo mass, M200, which we define as the mass within an over-density with an average density corresponding to 200 times the mean density of the Universe. Each HOD is measured in 26 mass bins evenly separated in log-space between M200 = 10 9.7 h −1 M and M200 = 10 14.7 h −1 M . At this stage we now have a tabulated library of luminosity-dependent HODs over which we can interpolate as a function of halo mass, luminosity and redshift. Note that in the library we store three sets of HODs: the HODs for the central galaxies only, the HOD for the satellite galaxies only, and the combined HOD.

In Fig. 2 we show the combined HODs for our 31 blended luminosity-limited samples as measured from running GALACTI-CUS on three of the redshift snapshots of the Millennium Simulation. The shapes of these HODs are consistent with the shapes of emission line luminosity-selected HODs presented elsewhere in the literature (e.g. Geach et al. 2012;Contreras et al. 2013;Gonzalez-Perez et al. 2018). For the faintest luminosity limits considered, the HODs show a smooth step-like function, similar to the HODs for galaxy samples selected using broad-band photometry. For masses below 10 11 h −1 M there is evidence for a secondary step feature, particularly towards lower redshift. However, we note that at such low masses we are approaching the resolution limit of the Millennium Simulation and so the extent to which this secondary step is real is uncertain.

Towards brighter luminosity limits the amplitude of the HOD decreases with the step-like shape of the HOD disappearing as the number of galaxies with bright Hα luminosity rapidly declines, particularly for very massive halos. For the brightest luminosity limits considered, the distribution of central galaxies is much more peaked, with a maximum value at a halo mass of approximately 10 12 h −1 M . This is understandable as Hα emission occurs in regions of ongoing star-formation and so Hα luminosity is correlated with galaxy star-formation rate, which, due to feedback from active galactic nuclei, does not increase monotonically with increasing halo mass. The quenching of satellite galaxies in massive halos also leads to a decline in the number of satellite galaxies with bright Hα emission. Indeed the occupation number for satellite galaxies still appears to follow a power law relation, but with a slope that decreases with increasing luminosity. The impact of these quenching mechanisms is that for bright luminosities the HOD turns over for halos with mass M200 10 12 h −1 M . We can see from Fig. 2 that the turn-over is more significant towards lower redshifts. In addition we can see that the amplitude of the HOD decreases with increasing luminosity limit, suggesting that galaxies that are bright in Hα-emission are becoming increasingly rare. This change in the amplitude of the HOD, along with the change in the strength of the turnover, is consistent with the observed decline in the global starformation rate density towards the present day (e.g. Madau et al. 1998;Arnouts et al. 2005;Ly et al. 2007;Shim et al. 2009;Brammer et al. 2011;Madau & Dickinson 2014).


### Placing galaxies into the MXXL halos

Having generated a library of HODs we now randomly sample the HODs to populate the halos in the MXXL halo lightcone. Note that by doing so, we lose any environmental-dependence (i.e., assembly log 10 ( . The various colours of the lines indicate the blended Hα + [N II ] luminosity limit used to select the galaxies, as indicated in the colour bar. The luminosities have not been attenuated due to dust. The halo mass assumed is the mass within an over-density with average density corresponding to 200 times the mean density of the Universe. Table 1. Specifications for the lightcone catalogues considered in this work. Note that the Euclid-like lightcone is constructed by applying a completeness limit to the MXXL-15K. The WFIRST-like lightcone is dervied from the MXXL-2K lightcone in a similar manner. The sky areas for the MXXL-15K and the Euclid-like lightcones have been rounded to the nearest integer -in reality these lightcones each have an area of (3/8) × 4π steradians.


## Catalogue

Flux In order to sample the HODs we will need to interpolate over the library as a function of halo mass, luminosity and redshift. At low masses we can interpolate linearly in log-space between the tabulated values. However, for the most massive halos in the MXXL lightcone, approaching 10 15 h −1 M , we will need to extrapolate beyond the halo mass range of the tabulated HODs. The limited volume of the Millennium Simulation means that our library of tabulated HODs from GALACTICUS extends only to M200 = 10 14.7 h −1 M . In order to extrapolate to the higher halo masses we therefore decide to fit smoothed functional forms to the tabulated occupation distributions for the central galaxies and the satellite galaxies. Details of this fitting procedure are provided in Appendix A.

The functional fits to the tabulated HODs are shown in Fig. 3. In the majority of cases the fits provide a reasonably good description of the tabulated HODs. In some cases, particularly at lower redshifts, the noise in the tabulated HODs for the brightest luminosity limits leads to overlap between the HODs of different luminosity limits. In these instances fits to the HODs will cross such that interpolation between the HODs as a function of luminosity would yield a constant HOD with increasing luminosity, which can be a problem in the random sampling of the HODs. This issue can be resolved by applying small vertical shifts of less than 0.3 dex to the HODs of the brightest luminosity limits. Given the rarity of bright Hα-emitting galaxies in massive halos at lower redshift, applying these offsets leads to only negligible differences in the number density of galaxies in our lightcone catalogues (Smith 2018).

Galaxies are then placed into each halo using a methodology presented in Smith et al. (2017) and Smith (2018). The first step in the process is to select a minimum luminosity, Lmin, for the lightcone catalogue. Here we adopt Lmin = 10 40 h −2 erg s −1 , which, at the lowest redshift in the mock, is about an order of magnitude fainter than the luminosity limit for a WFIRST-like selection. Following this we identify all of the halos that could host a central galaxy with L Hα+[N II ] Lmin by interpolating over the HOD with the corresponding luminosity threshold. We assign a central galaxy to each of these halos for which x1 < Ncen (> Lmin|M200, z) , where Ncen (> Lmin|M200, z) is the mean number of central galaxies brighter than L lim that could be found in a halo of mass M200 at redshift z, and x1 is a random number drawn from a uniform distribution 0 x1 1. Central galaxies are placed at the centre-of-mass of the halos, with a velocity equal to the velocity of their host halo. The luminosity of the galaxy, Lcen, is determined by interpolating over the library of HODs to find the luminosity luminosity limit used to select the galaxies, as indicated in the lower right-hand panel. Luminosities have not had any dust attenuation applied. The halo mass assumed is the mass within an over-density with average density corresponding to 200 times the mean density of the Universe. that satisfies,
Ncen (> Lcen|M200, z) Ncen (> Lmin|M200, z) = x2,(2)
where x2 is a second random number, again drawn from a 0 x2 1 uniform distribution. The number of satellite galaxies assigned to a halo is determined by drawing from a Poisson distribution with a mean equal to Nsat (> Lmin|M200, z) , where Nsat (> Lmin|M200, z) is the mean number of satellite galaxies brighter than L lim that could be found in a halo of mass M200 at redshift z. Satellite galaxies are placed randomly within the halo following a Navarro et al. (1997) profile and are given random velocities relative to the velocity of the halo. These velocities are drawn from an isotropic Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution with a line-of-sight velocity dispersion, σ 2 (M200), given by,
σ 2 (M200) = GM200 2R200 ,(3)
where R200 is the radius of a sphere, centred on the halo centreof-mass, within which the enclosed density is 200 times the mean density of the Universe. The luminosities of the satellite galaxies are assigned using random number generation in the same manner as was done for assigning the luminosities of the central galaxies.


## Catalogue specifications

We employ the methodology laid out above to construct two lightcone catalogues: one covering an area of 15 470 deg 2 (MXXL-15K), and another covering a smaller area of 2 000 deg 2 (MXXL-2K). Note that in reality the MXXL-15K lightcone covers 3/8 ths of the sky. The specifications for these two lightcones are shown in Table 1. With these two lightcones we are able to simulate a Euclid-like and a WFIRST-like survey by applying the appropriate completeness expected for the redshift survey: 45 per cent for Euclid (Laureijs et al. 2011) and 70 per cent for WFIRST (Spergel et al. 2015). Both surveys have completeness significantly below 100 per cent due to slitless effects. This incompleteness will arise in the Euclid and WFIRST galaxy redshift surveys due to the inability to measure redshifts for galaxies with particularly noisy spectra, or for galaxies in high density regions where slitless spectra will overlap and be confused. At this point we note that due to the wide-angle area of the lightcones and their redshift extent, as well as the finite volume of the MXXL simulation, we expect these lightcones to contain repeated structures. Given the cosmology of the simulation, Smith et al. (2017) determined that an observer placed at the very centre of the box would not observe any repeated structures for z 0.5. Therefore we expect to observe repeated structures, although we do not expect this to significantly affect our clustering measurements. However, we should expect this feature to lead to underestimates in the uncertainties on our clustering measurements, and therefore the uncertainties on the bias estimates. Note that those effects should be negligible, since the mass density variance is very small on scales larger than 3000 h −1 Mpc.


# MOCK CATALOGUE CALIBRATION

Before we can compute the galaxy bias it is necessary to calibrate the lightcone catalogues so that they reproduce, as closely as possible, existing observations of Hα-emitting galaxies. To calibrate the mock catalogue we apply dust attenuation to the galaxy luminosities, using chi-squared minimisation to determine the dust attenuation, AHα, that leads to the best agreement with a particular observational dataset. The dust attenuation AHα relates the un-attenuated luminosity, L 0 Hα , and attenuated luminosity, L att Hα , according to, log 10 L att Hα = log 10 L 0
Hα − 0.4AHα.(4)
Here we choose to calibrate the catalogues to match the luminosity functions and cumulative number counts of Hα-emitters. Being able to reproduce the luminosity function helps ensure that we have the correct number density, whilst reproducing the cumulative number counts confirms that we have the correct total number of galaxies (e.g. Pozzetti et al. 2016;Valentino et al. 2017;Merson et al. 2018). For calibration we adopt the Hα luminosity functions from HiZELS and the cumulative number counts from the WFC3 Infrared Spectroscopic Parallels Survey (WISP, Atek et al. 2010Atek et al. , 2011, which uses slitless grism spectroscopy to detect Hαemitting galaxies up to z ∼ 1.5. We choose to compare to the WISP number counts due to the similarly between the WISP observing strategy and that of Euclid and WFIRST.


## Number counts calibration

For calibrating the number counts of the lightcone we use the most recent published WISP cumulative number counts from by Mehta et al. (2015), who measured the number counts in two broad redshift bins 0.7 < z < 1.5 and 0.8 < z < 1.2. For each of these redshift bins we compute the number counts using the dust-free luminosities from the lightcone catalogue and use chi-squared minimisation to determine the optimum value for AHα needed to shift these counts into agreement with the observations. Note that this approach assumes that AHα has a single fixed value for each redshift bin.

The results of our calibration procedure are shown in Fig. 4 where we compare the number counts for the MXXL-2K lightcone to the observed cumulative number counts from Mehta et al. (2015) in the redshift ranges 0.7 < z < 1.5 (left-hand panel) and 0.8 < z < 1.2 (right-hand panel). In each panel the dotted blue line shows the number counts assuming the dust-free luminosities from the lightcone, and the solid blue line shows the number counts for the value of AHα that leads to the best match to the counts in that particular redshift bin, i.e. the value that minimises the chisquared statistic. The blue shaded region shows the range of allowed number counts given the uncertainty on AHα, which we define as the range of AHα values whose chi-squared value is within one standard deviation of the minimum chi-squared value. We see that for both redshift bins the calibrated counts from the lightcone are in excellent agreement with the counts, particularly at faint flux limits. Towards brighter flux limits, however, the lightcone underpredicts the number of galaxies. Since the number of bright Hαemitters is only a very small fraction of the samples for Euclid and WFIRST, we expect this deficit to have negligible effect on our results. Thus, for a Euclid-like flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , or a WFIRST-like flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , the lightcone shows a deficit of bright galaxies but predicts the correct overall number of galaxies. We do not show the counts for the MXXL-15K lightcone but confirm that they are in equally good agreement with the WISP observations as the MXXL-2K lightcone.

The WISP-calibrated values for AHα are shown in Fig. 5, where the diamond symbols indicate the calibration results for the 0.7 < z < 1.5 redshift bin and square symbols indicate the calibration results for the 0.8 < z < 1.2 redshift bin. Filled sym-


# -16

10 -15
f lim [erg s −1 cm −2 ] 10 2 10 3 10 4 N(f Hα + [NII] > f lim ) [deg −2 ] MXXL-2K (dust free) MXXL-2K (WISP calib.) MXXL-2K (HiZELS calib.)
0.7 < z < 1.5 Mehta et al. (2015) 10 -16 10 -15 Mehta et al. (2015) Figure 4. Cumulative number counts measured from the MXXL-2K lightcone over the redshift range 0.7 < z < 1.5 (left-hand panel) and the redshift range 0.8 < z < 1.2 (right-hand panel). Black data points show the WISP number counts measured by Mehta et al. (2015). In each panel the blue dotted line shows the MXXL-2K number counts assuming no dust attenuation. The blue solid lines show the number counts for the MXXL galaxies when assuming a dust attenuation, A Hα , that leads to the best match to the WISP counts in that redshift range. In the left-hand panel the black dot-dashed line shows the number counts obtained when assuming the value for A Hα that leads to the best match to counts over the redshift range 0.8 < z < 1.2. The light blue dashed lines show the number counts for the MXXL galaxies in the corresponding redshift range assuming a HiZELS-calibrated dust attenuation. Shaded regions show the spread in the counts given the corresponding uncertainty in A Hα (see text for details). All fluxes correspond to blended Hα + [N II ] fluxes. bols correspond to the results for the MXXL-2K lightcone and empty symbols correspond to the results for the MXXL-15K lightcone. For both redshift bins the calibration results for the MXXL-2K lightcone are in excellent agreement with the results for the MXXL-15K lightcone. Furthermore, for both lightcones the value for AHα obtained by calibrating to the 0.7 < z < 1.5 counts is consistent within error with the value obtained by calibrating to the 0.8 < z < 1.2 counts. Therefore, adopting the calibration result for either redshift bin has negligible impact on the counts. This can be seen in the left-hand panel of Fig. 4 where the black dot-dashed line shows the counts over the redshift range 0.7 < z < 1.5 computed assuming the value of AHα obtained by calibrating to the counts in the 0.8 < z < 1.2 bin. Going forward, we therefore adopt the results from the calibration to the counts in the 0.8 < z < 1.2 bin, which we note in the next section are marginally closer in value to the dust attenuation values obtained from calibrating the lightcone luminosity function. The calibration using the luminosity function, which yields the HiZELS attenuation factors, is discussed in the next subsection.
f lim [erg s −1 cm −2 ] 0.8 < z < 1.2

## Luminosity function calibration

For calibrating the lightcone luminosity function we use the HiZELS luminosity functions measured at z = 0.84, z = 1.45 and z = 2.23 by Sobral et al. (2013). For each redshift, we compute the dust-free luminosity function from the lightcone using a thin redshift slice centred on the appropriate HiZELS redshift. Note that since z 2.23 is beyond the upper redshift extent of our lightcone, in this case we use a thin redshift slice with z = 2.2 as the upper bound. As with the cumulative counts, we use chi-squared minimisation to determine the optimum value for AHα needed to shift these luminosity functions into agreement with the observational estimates.

The calibrated luminosity functions for the MXXL-2K light- . Luminosity functions for Hα-emitting galaxies measured from the MXXL-2K lightcone compared to the HiZELS luminosity functions (Sobral et al. 2013) measured in three redshift slices centred at: z 0.84 (left-hand panel), z 1.47 (centre panel) and z 2.2 (right-hand panel). In each panel the blue dotted line shows the luminosity functions of the MXXL galaxies computed using the dust-free luminosities. The solid blue line shows the luminosity function for the MXXL galaxies computed assuming the dust attenuation, A Hα , that leads to the best match to the HiZELS luminosity function at that particular redshift. The symbols show the HiZELS observations from Sobral et al. (2013), with the empty symbols corresponding to the luminosity bins that were excluded from the chi-squared minimisation procedure due to incompleteness of the MXXL-2K lightcone. The light blue dashed line shows the luminosity function obtained assuming the dust attenuation obtained from calibration to the 0.8 < z < 1.2 WISP number counts. Shaded regions indicate the range of allowable luminosity functions given the uncertainty on the dust attenuation A Hα (see text for details). The black dot-dashed line shows the luminosity function predicted by the third of the three empirical models presented by (Pozzetti et al. 2016 cone are shown in Fig. 6. In each panel the blue dotted line shows the luminosity function computed using the dust-free luminosities and the symbols correspond to the observed HiZELS luminosity functions. Note that the HiZELS luminosity functions assumed Hα luminosities that had been corrected to remove [NII] contamination and so for our calibration we re-introduce the [NII] contamination. We do this boosting the HiZELs luminosity bins brightwards by a factor of 4/3. This factor was chosen to match median correction of [NII] / (Hα + [NII]) ≈ 0.25 reported by Sobral et al. (2013). In Fig. 6 the open symbols correspond to luminosity bins that were excluded in our calibration procedure. These bins were left out following a preliminary calibration that indicated that the MXXL-2K lightcone is incomplete at these faint luminosities and so including these luminosity bins would unfairly bias our calibration results. The two vertical lines indicate the luminosities at each redshift that correspond to the Euclid and WFIRST flux limits. For reference we also show the luminosity function predicted by the third of the three empirical models presented by Pozzetti et al. (2016), which we have also corrected by a factor of 4/3 in order to introduce [NII] contamination.

In each panel the solid blue lines show the MXXL-2K luminosity function for the value of AHα that minimised the chisquared statistic and leads to the best match to the HiZELS luminosity function at that particular redshift. The blue shaded region shows the range of allowed luminosity functions given the uncertainty on AHα, which again is defined as the range of AHα values whose chi-squared value is within one standard deviation of the minimum chi-squared value. We can see that at each redshift the MXXL-2K is able to reproduce very well the HiZELS luminosity function brightwards of the Euclid flux limit. For z 1.47 and z 2.2 the lightcone provides a good match to the HiZELS luminosity function down to the WFIRST flux limit. At z 0.84 we see the impact of incompleteness in the lightcone luminosity function as it falls below the observations for luminosities faintwards of the Euclid flux limit. We do not expect this to have a significant impact our clustering analysis however as we note that z 0.84 is the below the lower redshift limit of WFIRST. We do not show the luminosity functions for the MXXL-15K lightcone but can confirm that they are in equally good agreement to the HiZELS observations as the MXXL-2K lightcone.

The dust attenuation values for our luminosity function calibration are also shown with circular symbols in Fig. 5. As with the number counts calibration, the attenuations obtained for the MXXL-15K and the MXXL-2K lightcones are in excellent agreement. The values for AHα from our luminosity calibration are much larger than the values obtained from the number counts calibration, particularly at low redshift. At z 2.2 the luminosity function calibrated attenuation is consistent with the number counts attenuation. To see how large an impact this difference has on the luminosity function we show in Fig. 6 the luminosity function obtained when assuming the dust attenuation AHα calibrated to reproduce the WISP counts in the redshift range 0.8 < z < 1.2. Using the WISP-calibrated attenuation leads to the lightcone overpredicting the luminosity function, particularly for bright luminosities at low redshift. At z 2.2 the luminosity function assuming the HiZELS-calibrated attenuation and the luminosity function assuming the WISP-calibrated attenuation are virtually identical. For z 0.84 and z 1.47 the difference between the HiZELScalibrated luminosity function and the WISP-calibrated luminosity function is negligible for luminosities corresponding to the Euclid and WFIRST flux limits. We additionally show in Fig. 4 the cumulative number counts obtained when assuming the HiZELScalibrated dust attenuation. As expected, the HiZELS-calibrated counts are lower than the WISP-calibrated counts, but the discrep-ancy decreases towards fainter flux limits, such that at the Euclid and WFIRST flux limits the discrepancy is less than a factor of two. It is not clear why calibration to the WISP number counts and calibration to the HiZELS luminosity functions leads to different values for the dust attenuation. It is possible that this difference arises from the different selection functions used by the surveys: space-based slitless grism spectroscopy for WISP versus groundbased narrow band detection for HiZELS. Another possible cause for the difference maybe if the WISP number counts are probing a restricted luminosity range compared to the HiZELS luminosity functions. Or the difference may simply arise due to cosmic variance between the WISP and HiZELS catalogues.

Using the HiZELS-calibrated attenuation results in Fig. 5 we can construct a toy model of how the attenuation evolves with redshift, such that we can apply a HiZELS-calibrated attenuation to any galaxy in the mock catalogue by interpolating over these results as a function of redshift. Finally, we note that in our toy model we assume that AHα depends only on redshift and not additionally on the Hα luminosity. However, for our purposes we argue that adding a luminosity-depenence is not necessary given that we are able to reproduce the HiZELS luminosity functions very well down to the luminosity limits of relevance for Euclid and WFIRST.

In summary, given the difference in the dust attenuation required to reproduce the WISP number counts and the HiZELS luminosity functions, we choose to carry out our bias forecasts using both a WISP-calibrated version of the lightcones (adopting the values for calibration to the counts in the 0.8 < z < 1.2 bin) and a HiZELS-calibrated version of the lightcones.


## Galaxy number densities

Before progressing to examine the clustering of the galaxies in the lightcones, we examine the number densities of the galaxies as a check that our calibration yields number densities that are consistent with previous estimates.

In Fig. 7 we show in the upper panel the number densities for the galaxies in the MXXL-15K lightcone, and in the lower panel the number densities for the galaxies in the MXXL-2K lightcone. We have applied a flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 to the dustattenuated luminosities in the MXXL-15K lightcone and a flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 to the dust-attenuated luminosities in the MXXL-2K lightcone. In both panels the solid line shows the number densities when adopting the WISP-calibrated dust attenuations and the dashed line shows the number densities when adopting the HiZELS-calibrated dust attenuations. The dotted line corresponds to applying no dust attenuation. The symbols correspond to the number densities presented in Merson et al. (2018) obtained by applying three different dust attenuation methods to a GALACTICUS lightcone. The dust attenuation methods considered in Merson et al. (2018) were: (i) interpolation over the library of dust curves from Ferrara et al. (1999), (ii) the Charlot & Fall (2000) model where the dust attenuation follows a power law with wavelength, and (iii) the Calzetti et al. (2000) dust screen law.

Considering first the MXXL-15K lightcone we see that when adopting a WISP-calibrated dust attenuation, the galaxy number density is consistent with the results from Merson et al. (2018). Adopting a HiZELS-calibrated dust attenuation leads to a number density that is slightly below the Merson et al. (2018) results, but typically remains within approximately a factor of two. The fact that the number densities for the WISP-calibrated attenuations are in better agreement than the HiZELS-calibrated attenuations is not surprising as the GALACTICUS lightcone in Merson et al.  (2018) was calibrated to reproduce the WISP number counts from Mehta et al. (2015). Turning to the MXXL-2K lightcone we see that the number densities for the WISP-calibrated attenuations and the HiZELS-calibrated attenuations are both consistent with the number densities from Merson et al. (2018), with the difference between the two being consistent in size with the scatter between the number densities predicted for the different dust methods used in Merson et al. (2018). The redshift distributions for the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones are provided in Appendix B.

Overall, when we apply the WISP-calibrated and HiZELScalibrated dust attenuations to the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones, the number densities that we obtain are entirely consistent with previous number density estimates.  Table 1. The shaded regions indicate the redshift range that is considered in our clustering analysis: 0.9 z < 1.9 for our Euclid-like survey and 1 z < 2 for our WFIRST-like survey.


# LINEAR BIAS FORECASTS

Having calibrated our lightcone catalogues we now proceed to make forecasts for the linear bias of Hα-emitters as a function of redshift for a Euclid-like survey and a WFIRST-like survey. To calculate the linear bias we will first need to compute the correlation functions for the galaxies in our catalogues.


## Catalogue preparation

The first step is to build catalogues for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. We firstly apply a flux limit to the dust attenuated luminosities from the appropriate lightcone. For our Euclidlike surveys we apply a flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 to select galaxies from the MXXL-15K lightcone and for our WFIRSTlike surveys we apply a flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 to select galaxies from the MXXL-2K lightcone. Secondly, we introduce incompleteness into the surveys, as was mentioned in § 2.3. Incompleteness is introduced by using random number generation to discard the appropriate fraction of galaxies. Note that we simply draw random numbers from a uniform distribution and make no attempt to introduce a density-dependent incompleteness. For our Euclid-like surveys we apply a completeness limit of 0.45, consistent with the completeness limit estimated in Laureijs et al. (2011), and reject a random 55 per cent of the galaxies. For our WFIRST-like surveys we apply a completeness limit of 0.7, consistent with the completeness limit provided in Spergel et al. (2015), and reject a random 30 per cent of the galaxies. The specifications for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys are listed in Table 1 alongside the specifications of the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones. In Fig. 8 we show the redshift distributions for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys, as well as for the MXXL-15K and the MXXL-2K lightcones.

In our clustering analysis we consider two versions of a Euclid-like survey and WFIRST-like survey: one calibrated to reproduce the WISP cumulative number counts, and one calibrated to reproduce the HiZELS luminosity functions. Additionally, for each version we repeat the analysis twice. In the first instance we take the observed redshifts of the galaxies (i.e. with peculiar velocities included), which we shall refer to as redshift-space, and in the second instance we take the cosmological redshifts of the galaxies (i.e. with peculiar velocities removed), which we will refer to as real-space. Note that galaxies are not observed in real-space, but we include this analysis to show the impact of redshift-space distortions.


## Clustering analysis

For our clustering analysis we split each of our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys into 5 equal redshift bins of width ∆z = 0.2 and compute the two-point galaxy correlation function in each bin. For the Euclid-like surveys these bins cover the redshift range 0.9 z < 1.9, and for the WFIRST-like surveys these bins cover the redshift range 1 z < 2.

In order to compute the galaxy correlation functions we generate individual catalogues of randoms for each redshift bin. In each instance we choose a sufficiently large number of randoms (at least ten times the number of galaxies in the redshift bin) chosen arbitrarily such that adding any additional randoms does not improve our recovery of the galaxy correlation function. The number of randoms required increases with redshift as the number density of galaxies decreases. For the lower redshifts the number of randoms were also limited by available computing resources. The right ascension and declination of the randoms were found by sampling uniform distributions bounded by the right ascension limits and the cosine of the declination limits of the particular lightcone. To assign redshifts to the randoms we do not sample a uniform dis-tribution as this would not reproduce the correct shape of the galaxy redshift distribution across the bin. Instead we assign redshifts by first replicating the redshifts of the galaxies, until we match the required number of randoms, and then randomly shuffling the galaxy redshifts.

We compute the angle-averaged galaxy two-point correlation function, ξ(r), using the open-source TREECORR package (Jarvis et al. 2004), and the Landy & Szalay (1993) estimator,
ξLS(r) = DD(r) − 2DR(r) + RR(r) RR(r) ,(5)
where DD(r) are the weighted galaxy-galaxy pair counts, DR(r) are the weighted galaxy-random pair counts and RR(r) are the weighted random-random pair counts as a function of separation r in units of h −1 Mpc. For each redshift bin the correlation function is calculated 5 times, each time using a different random seed when applying the survey incompleteness (see § 4.1) and using a different catalogue of randomly generated positions. The correlation function is calculated between 50 h −1 Mpc and 150 h −1 Mpc using 48 equally spaced bins.

In Table 2 we report for our Euclid-like surveys the average number of galaxies in each redshift bin after introducing incompleteness and the effective redshift of these galaxies. We also report the average ratio of the number of galaxies to the number of random positions. The number of randoms was increased with increasing redshift to account for the decreasing number densities of the galaxy samples. Memory limitations of available computing resources forced us to limit the number of randoms, but in each case we ensured that a sufficient number was used to adequately recover the clustering signal of the galaxies. We report equivalent numbers for our WFIRST-like surveys in Table 3.

The results of our clustering analysis are shown in Fig. 9, which assumes WISP-calibrated surveys, and Fig. 10, which assumes HiZELS-calibrated surveys. In each case the upper grid shows the results for the Euclid-like survey and the lower grid shows the results for the WFIRST-like survey. The top-row of each grid shows the correlation function in each redshift bin, with the darker lines showing the redshift-space result and the fainter lines showing the real-space result. The lines show the average result over 5 repeats (each time changing the random seed) and the error bars showing the standard deviation.

We can see that in each instance we are able to recover the BAO peak in every redshift bin, albeit with increased noise in the highest redshift bin for the Euclid-like surveys. However, in each instance the recovery is significant over the statistical noise, particularly in real-space. For r 140 h −1 Mpc the correlation functions measured in redshift-space have a higher amplitude than the equivalent measurement in real-space, consistent with the expectations of Kaiser (1987), which are based on linear perturbation theory. The impact of redshift-space distortions (RSDs) leads to some smearing out of the BAO peak.


## Linear bias measurements and fitting

Given our galaxy clustering results, we can now use Eq. 1 to compute the linear bias in each redshift bin for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. Each galaxy correlation function is divided by the non-linear dark matter correlation function computed at the same effective redshift. The dark matter correlation functions, which we compute using the CLASS and HALOFIT functionality in the NBodyKit python package assuming an MXXL cosmology (see Fig. 1), are shown with black dashed lines in the panels in the upper row of each grid in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10.

The lower row of panels in each grid in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 show the measured linear bias as a function of separation. As with the correlation functions, the darker lines correspond to the bias estimated using the redshift-space galaxy correlation functions and the fainter lines correspond to the bias estimated using the real-space galaxy correlation functions. The lines show the bias estimate in each bin of separation averaged over the 5 repeat clustering calculations and the error bars show the standard deviation.

Examining first the bias measurements in real-space, we see that for both the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys the measured bias is consistent with a constant value for scales r 75 h −1 Mpc. For scales larger than this we begin to see deviations away from a constant value, particularly for the WFIRSTlike survey. At the largest scales, r 125 h −1 Mpc, the bias grows rapidly as the galaxy and matter correlation functions tend toward zero and ultimately become negative due to the integral constraint. If we move to redshift-space we see a similar behaviour, although the deviations away from a constant on scales 75 h −1 Mpc r 125 h −1 Mpc are now more pronounced than in real-space. In several instances these scale-dependent deviations display a sinusoidal-like shape and in every instance occur around the BAO scale. Similar sinusoidal features can be seen in Hada & Eisenstein (2019) when the authors examine the difference between the correlation function for a mock galaxy field in redshift-space and the correlation function for the initial linear density field (see also the plots showing the scale dependence of the bias of star forming galaxies in Angulo et al. 2014). It is possible that these deviations arise due to a distortion of the galaxy correlation function relative to the correlation function expected from linear theory. This distortion, which is manifested as a smoothing of the BAO peak and slight shift of the peak away from the linear theory position, is understood to arise from a combination of non-linear collapse, mode coupling, redshift-space distortions, as well as the bias itself (Jeong & Komatsu 2006;Eisenstein et al. 2007;Angulo et al. 2008;Crocce & Scoccimarro 2008;Sánchez et al. 2008;Smith et al. 2008;Anselmi et al. 2016). It is possible to model these effects to correct the shape of the BAO in the linear theory predictions (e.g. Crocce & Scoccimarro 2008;Smith et al. 2008).

In each redshift bin we attempt to fit the real-space and redshift-space measurements of the bias with a constant, scaleindependent value, b lin . To do this we use the NUMPY polyfit function to fit a zeroth-order polynomial to the measured bias values b(r < rcut). Given the impact of the large-scale deviations around the BAO scale, care must be taken when selecting the scale at which to fit a constant bias value, unless the BAO distortions are corrected for. We adopt rcut = 75 h −1 Mpc for each redshift bin, as below this scale our bias measurements are consistent with a constant value. The results of these fits are shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 as horizontal dotted lines with shaded regions showing an associated uncertainty, δb lin , which we estimate as the root-meansquare (RMS) of the difference between the measured values and the fitted value b lin ,
δb lin = 1 N r r cut (b(r) − b lin ) 2 ,(6)
where N is the number of measured bias values with r rcut. Our fitted values for the linear bias, b lin ± δb lin , are reported in Table 2 and Table 3. Our choice of calibration does not appear to have a large impact on our measurements of the bias, or linear bias fits. We can see Table 2. Catalogue specifications and linear bias fits for our Euclid-like catalogues, measured in redshifts-space (upper table) and in real-space (lower table). The properties shown are: the effective redshift of the galaxies in the redshift slice, z eff ; the mean number of galaxies used to compute the correlation function, N gal ; the mean value for ratio of randoms to galaxies,Nran/N gal ; and the linear bias fit. The columns show the results for each redshift slice considered. Each table shows the equivalent results when adopting a WISP-calibrated lightcone or a HiZELS-calibrated lightcone.


## Calibration

Property 0.90 z < 1.1 1. . Clustering results and bias fits for a Euclid-like survey with dust-attenuated flux limit 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 (upper grid) and a WFIRST-like survey with dust-attenuated flux limit 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 (lower grid), constructed from lightcones whose luminosities were attenuated using WISPcalibrated dust attenuation values. In each grid the darker lines show the results in redshift-space, the brighter lines correspond to real-space (i.e. assuming the cosmological redshifts of the galaxies with no peculiar velocity component), and the black dashed line shows the dark matter correlation function at the effective redshift of the bin. In the lower panels of each grid the horizontal dotted lines and shaded regions correspond to the linear bias fits assuming the appropriate correlation function (see text for details). The redshift range used for selection is shown in the bottom left-hand corner of the lower panels.

in Table 2 or Table 3 that the linear bias fits using a WISP-calibrated lightcone and the fits using a HiZELS-calibrated lightcone are consistent within error with one another, despite the WISP-calibrated lightcones and HiZELS-calibrated lightcones showing a clear difference in the number density of galaxies (see Fig. 7). Additionally, we find that our Euclid-like surveys and WFIRST-like surveys yield linear bias values that are consistent and in reasonable agreement with each other. At first sight this appears surprising, as one would expect the Euclid-like survey, which has a brighter flux-limit, to have a higher bias. This can be understood if we consider the dark matter halos in which the Hα-emitting galaxies reside. In Fig. 11 we show the HODs, in each redshift bin, for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. Solid lines show the HOD for the WISPcalibrated version of the catalogues, whilst the dashed lines show the HOD for the HiZELS-calibrated version. Open symbols indi-cate the mean halo mass for the galaxies in each case. These mean halo masses are also provided in Table 2 and Table 3.

In every panel of Fig. 11 we see that the HODs for the WISP-calibrated catalogue and HiZELS-calibrated catalogue have a similar shape and differ only in their amplitude, which is understandable given the difference in the galaxy number densities see in Fig. 7. We also see that the typical halo mass for the galaxies in the WISP-calibrated catalogues are virtually identical to the typical halo masses for the corresponding HiZELs-calibrated catalogues. Since the linear bias is sensitive to the typical halo mass, we can therefore see that the WISP-calibrated catalogues and HiZELS-calibrated catalogues will yield consistent bias measurements. The same is also true if we compare the HODs and typical halo masses for the galaxies in our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. We see that, at all redshifts, in both our Euclid-like and  1.8 z < 2.0 Figure 10. Clustering results and bias fits for a Euclid-like survey with dust-attenuated flux limit 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 (upper grid) and a WFIRSTlike survey with dust-attenuated flux limit 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 (lower grid), constructed from lightcones whose luminosities were attenuated using HiZELS-calibrated dust attenuation values. All the lines have the same meanings as in Fig. 9.
Bias (r-space) blin ± δblin (r-space) Bias (z-space) blin ± δblin (z-
our WFIRST-like surveys the galaxies reside in halos with typical mass 10 11.7 h −1 M − 10 11.9 h −1 M and so should yield similar bias results despite the difference in limiting flux. This halo mass is in excellent agreement with Geach et al. (2012), who concluded from their clustering analysis of HiZELS galaxies at z = 2.23 that Hα-emitting galaxies are typically hosted by dark matter halos with mass log 10 (M h / h −1 M ) = 11.7 ± 0.1. Also, based upon their empirical modelling of the stellar mass-halo mass relation, Behroozi et al. (2013) determined that halos of mass 10 11.8 h −1 M are the most efficient at forming stars for all redshifts z < 8, which is in very good agreement with our typical halo mass values.


## Linear bias evolution with redshift

We now examine how the linear bias of Hα-emitting galaxies evolves with redshift. We can see from Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 that our fitted values for the linear bias increase with increasing redshift, as we would expect. In Fig. 12 we plot the fits for the linear bias from the individual redshift bins as a function of effective redshift. The filled red diamonds show the fitted bias values for the redshift bins of the Euclid-like survey, whilst the filled blue circles show the fitted bias values for the redshift bins of the WFIRST-like survey.

We can now see clearly the consistency between the bias values predicted for the Euclid-like surveys and those predicted for the WFIRST-like surveys. The faint symbols in Fig. 12 show the fitted linear bias values obtained if we perform the clustering analysis with the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones, i.e. assuming that both surveys are 100 per cent complete. This analysis is presented in Appendix C. The level of agreement between the linear bias values from the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones and the Euclid-like and WFIRSTlike surveys suggests that the introduction of incompleteness does not significantly affect our recovery of the bias.

It is clear from Fig. 12 that we can model the evolution of the linear bias with redshift using a linear relation. As such, we fit linear relations, using the NUMPY polyfit function, to Galaxies are assigned to redshift bins using their observed redshifts (i.e. including peculiar velocities). The symbols correspond to the mean halo mass and standard deviation for the galaxies in that particular sample. Table 4. Gradient and intercept parameters for the linear relations describing the redshift evolution of the linear bias for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. We report the parameters for both WISP-calibrated and HiZELS-calibrated versions of the surveys. The linear relations described by these parameters are shown in Fig. 12.


## Calibration

Euclid-like WFIRST-like Gradient Intercept Gradient Intercept  Table 4.


## Redshift-space

Comparing the gradients and intercepts, we see that in redshift-space the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys have consistent linear relations of b(z) 0.72z + 0.7 for the HiZELScalibrated case, but for the WISP-calibrated case the Euclid-like survey has a shallower gradient. The differences between the gradients and intercepts for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys are typically smaller in the real-space fits, though we note that the uncertainties stated in Table 4 may well be under-estimated, particularly for the Euclid-like survey.

To compare with linear bias estimates in the literature we show in the upper panels of Fig. 12   Evolutionary fits Spergel et al. (2015) Euclid-like WFIRST-like  Table 4. The black cross shows the bias result from Geach et al. (2012), the black stars show the bias results from Cochrane et al. (2017) and the black dotted line shows the linear relation assumed by Spergel et al. (2015).

We find that the Spergel et al. (2015) relation is consistent with our relations in real-space, particularly at z ∼ 2. However, a difference in the slopes leads to our forecasts predicting a smaller bias for z 2. Comparing the Spergel et al. (2015) relation to our relations in redshift-space we see that our relations predict a larger bias for all redshifts z > 0.9. This is understandable given that the Spergel et al. (2015) relation was based upon the clustering analysis of Orsi et al. (2010) that was carried out in real-space.


# CONCLUSIONS & SUMMARY

In this work we forecast the linear bias, as a function of redshift, for Hα-emitting galaxies in a Euclid-like survey and also in a WFIRST-like survey.

To simulate our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys, we use the methodology of Smith et al. (2017), whereby dark matter halos in a lightcone are populated with galaxies by sampling of a set of luminosity-dependent halo occupation distributions (HODs). The lightcone of dark matter halos that we use is the halo lightcone created by Smith et al. (2017) from the Millennium XXL simulation (MXXL, Angulo et al. 2012), which is consistent with the first year results of the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe Spergel et al. (2003). This lightcone covers the entire sky out to a redshift of z = 2.2 and has a halo mass resolution of M200 10 11 h −1 M , where M200 is the mass enclosed within a sphere whose mean density is 200 times the mean density of the Universe.

In order to populate the lightcone with galaxies, we construct a set of Hα-luminosity-dependent HODs. Unlike broad-band photometric samples, the HOD of Hα-emitters is less well understood and to-date has not been extensively parametrised. As such, instead of using a parametric form for the HOD, we generate a library of HODs as function of limiting Hα + [NII] luminosity using a physically-motivated galaxy formation model. The model that we

use is the open source GALACTICUS semi-analytical model (Benson 2010), which predicts emission line luminosities based upon outputs from the CLOUDY photo-ionisation code (Ferland et al. 2013). Unfortunately the mass resolution of the MXXL halo merger trees prevents us from running GALACTICUS on the simulation directly. However, we apply GALACTICUS to the Millennium Simulation (Springel et al. 2005), which has an identical cosmology to the MXXL. We acknowledge that this cosmology is not consistent with current cosmological results from Planck Collaboration et al. (2018), but argue that the uncertainties are most likely dominated by our ignorance of the process of galaxy formation.

Examining the Hα HODs predicted by GALACTICUS, we see that for faint Hα + [NII] luminosity limits the shape of the HOD resembles a smoothed step-like function, whilst towards brighter Hα+[NII] luminosity limits the amplitude of the HOD decreases, with the HOD displaying a broad peak at masses M200 ∼ 10 12 h −1 M (Fig. 2). This shape, which is consistent with the shapes HODs of emission line galaxies and star-forming galaxies seen elsewhere in the literature, can be understood as resulting from feedback processes quenching star-formation in more massive halos. Galaxies are placed into the dark matter halos of the MXXL halo lightcone by interpolating over the library of HODs and using random sampling to draw a population of galaxies. Central galaxies are placed at the centre-of-mass of their host halo and move at the halo velocity. Satellite galaxies are placed randomly within the halo following a Navarro et al. (1997) profile, with velocities drawn randomly from an isotropic Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.

We build two lightcone galaxy catalogues: one covering 15 000 deg 2 with a Hα+[NII] flux limit of 2×10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , from which we build our Euclid-like survey, and one covering 2 000 deg 2 with a Hα + [NII] flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , from which we build our WFIRST-like survey. To calibrate the lightcones so that they have the correct number density and total number of galaxies, we apply dust attenuation to the Hα + [NII] luminosities such that the lightcone luminosity functions are consistent with the luminosity functions from HiZELS (Sobral et al. 2013) and the cumulative number counts from the WISP survey (Mehta et al. 2015). The values for the attenuation, AHα, are determined through a chi-squared analysis. We find that the lightcones are able to independently reproduce the WISP number counts (Fig. 4) and the HiZELS luminosity functions (Fig. 6), but that different values for AHα are required to reproduce these datasets (Fig. 5). The cause of this difference is uncertain, but may be due to cosmic variance between the WISP and HiZELS surveys, differences in the selection functions of the surveys or the WISP number counts probing a restricted luminosity range compared to the HiZELS luminosity functions. We therefore proceed with our bias forecasts considering both a WISP-calibrated version and a HiZELS-calibrated version of the each lightcone.

To make bias forecasts we first build our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys by using random sampling to apply incompleteness to the appropriate lightcone. We assume a completeness of 45 per cent for our Euclid-like survey and 70 per cent for our WFIRST-like survey. The TREECORR software (Jarvis et al. 2004) is then used to compute the angle averaged galaxy correlation function in five redshift bins of ∆z = 0.2 between 0.9 z < 1.9 for the Euclid-like survey and between 1 z < 2 for the WFIRSTlike survey. For each redshift bin, the galaxy correlation function is computed for both WISP-calibrated and HiZELS-calibrated versions of the surveys. The correlation function is computed five times for each bin, each time using a different random seed to apply survey incompleteness. The entire set of calculations is repeated twice with galaxies selected in redshift-space in the first instance and in real-space in the second instance. By computing the correlation function between 50 h −1 Mpc and 150 h −1 Mpc we are able to recover the BAO peak for each redshift bin (upper panels of Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). Comparing the correlation functions in real-space and redshift-space we see that the correlation function in redshift-space has a higher amplitude, consistent with theory of redshift-space distortions from Kaiser (1987).

To compute the linear bias we divide the galaxy correlation function in each redshift bin by the non-linear dark matter correlation, which we compute at the effective redshift of the galaxies in that bin using the NBODYKIT (Hand et al. 2018) Python package. We find that for scales r 75 h −1 Mpc the measured linear bias in each redshift bin is consistent with a fixed, scale-independent value. However, at larger scales the measured bias displays scaledependent deviations away from a constant. These sinusoidal-like deviations, which are more pronounced in redshift-space, occur at scales around the BAO scale, which suggests that they could be being caused by distortions of the shape and position of the BAO in the galaxy correlation function relative to the shape and postion predicted by linear theory. Such distortions can arise due a combination of non-linear effects, mode coupling, redshift-space distortions, as well as even the bias itself.

Taking the measured linear bias for separations r < 75 h −1 Mpc we use the NUMPY polyfit function to fit a constant, scale-independent value for the measured linear bias in each redshift. Note that the presence of the deviations due to distortion of the BAO means that care must be taken when considering the scales at which to fit the linear bias. We estimate the uncertainties on the fitted linear bias values by computing the root-mean-square (RMS) of the difference between the measured and the fitted values (lower panels of Fig. 9 and Fig. 10). The fitted linear bias values increase with increasing redshift, as we would expect. Comparing the fitted linear bias values between the WISP-calibrated and HiZELScalibrated versions of the surveys, we find that the choice of calibration has negligible impact on the linear bias values.

Additionally, we find that our fitted linear bias values for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys are consistent with one another. This can be seen clearly when the linear bias values are plotted as a function of effective redshift (Fig. 12). Due to the brighter flux limit of the Euclid-like survey, we would expect that survey to yield higher bias values due the brighter flux limit. However, examination of the halo occupation distributions for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys shows the galaxies in the two surveys to typically occupy halos that are similar in mass (Fig. 11).

We fit linear relations to the linear bias as a function of effective redshift (Fig. 12). The gradients and intercepts for these linear relations, listed in Table 4, are consistent between the Euclidlike and WFIRST-like surveys for the HiZELS-calibrated case, but the Euclid-like relation has a shallower gradient for the WISPcalibrated case. In redshift-space, for the HiZELS-calibrated case, the linear bias results for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys are both consistent with the relation b(z) 0.72z + 0.7. By extrapolating these linear relations we find that they are in excellent agreement with the bias result from Geach et al. (2012). Our linear bias results are consistent with the results from Cochrane et al. (2017), particularly at z = 1.47, though our results suggest a shallower slope for the evolution of bias with redshift. Our redshiftspace forecast of b(z) = (0.77 ± 0.03)z + (0.62 ± 0.04) for the HiZELS-calibrated WFIRST-like survey provides the closest match to the Cochrane et al. (2017) results. Comparing to the linear bias relation assumed by Spergel et al. (2015), we find that our real-space relations are consistent with the Spergel et al. (2015) relation, but in redshift-space our relations predict larger linear bias for all redshifts z > 0.9. m fit log 10 L Hα+[N II ] . This relation can be then be extrapolated to fit the slopes for luminosities for which the tabulated HOD is noisy and also ensures that the central galaxy occupation distributions for the luminosity limited samples never cross.

The fits to the tabulated occupation numbers of central galaxies are shown in Fig. A1. Whilst these linear relations generally provide reasonably good fits to the tabulated numbers, there are some small discrepancies, particularly when examining the brightest luminosity limits at lower redshift and higher halo mass. However, we note from Fig. 2 that there are very few bright Hα-emitting galaxies in the most massive halos at these redshifts and so these small discrepancies in the fitting do not have a significant impact on the number densities of central galaxies in our lightcone catalogues.


## A2 Fitting the satellite galaxy component

For the occupation numbers of satellite galaxies, we find that the satellite component of the tabulated HODs are well fit by a double power law. For the faintest luminosity limits a power law fit for masses above 10 13 h −1 M is used to extrapolate the occupation number to higher halo mass.

The fits to the tabulated satellite galaxy occupation numbers are shown in Fig. A2. These fits are able to provide a reasonable match to the tabulated satellite galaxy occupation numbers, even for the brightest luminosity limits.

Just as with the central galaxies, at lower redshifts the satellite occupation numbers for the brightest luminosity limits are quite noisy and power law fits for these bright luminosity limits lead to crossing of the HODs, which we wish to minimise. Therefore for these brightest limits we simply apply a vertical offset to the double power law fitted to occupation numbers for the log 10 L Hα+[N II ] /erg s −1 cm −2 > 42.14 limit. These fits, which can be seen in the upper row of panels in Fig. A2, lead to an underestimate of the number of satellite galaxies, though since the fraction of satellite galaxies in these bright luminosity samples is relatively small, these under-estimates do not have a significant impact on the number density of satellite galaxies in our lightcone catalogues.


## APPENDIX B: LIGHTCONE REDSHIFT DISTRIBUTIONS

In Table B1 we provide the redshift distributions, dN/dz, for the MXXL-15K and the MXXL-2K lightcones. Galaxy counts are shown per unit redshift, per square degree. The MXXL-15K lightcone has an Hα + [NII] blended flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 and the MXXL-2K lightcone has an Hα + [NII] blended flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 . The galaxy fluxes have had dust attenuation applied and we provide the galaxy counts for both a WISP-calibrated attenuation and a HiZELScalibrated attenuation.


## APPENDIX C: LINEAR BIAS FITS FOR MXXL-15K AND MXXL-2K LIGHTCONES

In this section we report the results of the clustering analysis for the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones. This analysis is carried out in an identical manner to that for the Euclid-like and WFIRSTlike surveys (see § 4) but with the difference that we do not apply any incompleteness to the lightcone catalogues. In other words, Table B1. Sky-averaged redshift distributions dN/dz for galaxies in the WISP-calibrated and a HiZELS-calibrated versions of the MXXL-15 and MXXL-2K lightcones. The MXXL-15K lightcone has an Hα + [N II ] blended flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 and the MXXL-2K lightcone has an Hα + [N II ] blended flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 . The redshift column corresponds to the bin centre. Distributions correspond to number of galaxies per unit redshift per square degree on the sky. Galaxy counts do not include any incompleteness due to instrument-dependent efficiency.

this analysis corresponds to making linear bias forecasts for idealised Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys that have 100 per cent completeness. The MXXL-15K lightcone, which has a Hα + [NII] blended flux limit of 2×10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , corresponds to an idealised Euclid-like survey, whilst the MXXL-2K lightcone, which has a Hα + [NII] blended flux limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 , corresponds to an idealised WFIRST-like survey.

Just as with the clustering analysis for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys, we divide the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones into 5 equal redshift bins of width ∆z = 0.2 spanning 0.9 z < 1.9 for the MXXL-15K lightcone and 1 z < 2 for the MXXL-2K lightcone. The correlation function is computed 5 times for each redshift bin, each time using a different random seed to select the random catalogue. We again consider two versions of the lightcones: one calibrated to reproduce the WISP number counts and one calibrated to reproduce the HiZELS luminosity functions. The whole analysis is again repeated twice, firstly selecting the galaxies in redshift-space and secondly selecting the galaxies in real-space. In Table C1 we show for each instance of MXXL-15K analysis the effective redshift, mean number of galax-  . Satellite galaxy occupation distributions for 10 blended luminosity-selected samples from GALACTICUS plotted at selected redshifts between z = 0.7 and z = 2.2. The solid lines show the fits to the occupation numbers as discussed in Appendix A2. The various colours of the lines indicate the blended Hα + [N II ] luminosity limit used to select the galaxies, as indicated in the colour bar. The halo mass assumed is the mass within an over-density with average density corresponding to 200 times the mean density of the Universe.

ies and the mean ratio for the number of galaxies to the number of randoms used for the clustering analysis. Table C2 shows the equivalent numbers for the MXXL-2K analyses. The galaxy correlation functions for the MXXL-15K lightcone are shown in upper row of each grid in Fig. C1, where the dark red lines show the mean correlation functions in redshift-space (averaged over 5 repeat calculations), and the lighter red lines show the mean correlation functions in real-space (also averaged over 5 repeat calculations). The upper grid assumes a WISP-calibrated version of the lightcone and the lower panel assumes a HiZELScalibrated version of the lightcone. In every instance the BAO peak is clearly identifiable and we see a larger clustering amplitude in redshift-space compared to real-space, consistent with the expectations from Kaiser (1987). Comparing Fig. C1 with the upper grids of Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 we can see that for the MXXL-15K our correlation functions are less noisy than those for the Euclid-like survey due to the lack of incompleteness. In Fig. C2 we show the equivalent results for the MXXL-2K lightcone where we again are able to identify the BAO peak in each redshift bin, though with perhaps less significance in the highest redshift bins.

The lower row in each grid of panels in Fig. C1 and Fig. C2 show the measured bias b(r) computed from the galaxy and dark matter correlation functions. Comparing our bias measurements to the equivalent measurements for the Euclid-like and WFIRSTsurveys ( Fig. 9 and Fig. 10) we see again see that the bias measurements are consistent with a constant for scales r 75 h −1 Mpc and that at larger scales we see pronounced scale-dependent deviations away from a constant value. As discussed in § 4.3, these deviations are most likely a result of distortions to the BAO caused by a combination of non-linear collapse, mode coupling effects and redshift-space distortions.

The horizontal dotted lines in the lower row in each grid in Fig. C1 and Fig. C2 show the fit for the linear bias on scales r 75 h −1 Mpc, obtained using the NUMPY polyfit function, and the shaded region show the RMS of the residuals. The linear bias fits for the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K lightcones are reported in Table C1 and Table C2 respectively. For the MXXL-15K and MXXL-2K bias results we again see that the linear bias is larger in redshift-space and increases with increasing redshift. Comparing the linear bias values in Table C1 and Table 2 we see that for the corresponding redshift bins the linear bias values for the MXXL-15K lightcone and the Euclid-like survey are consistent with one another, suggesting that introduction of incompleteness has a negligible impact on our estimates for the linear bias. We also find that there is no difference in the mean halo mass. If we compare the linear bias values in Table C2 and Table 3 we see a similar result for the MXXL-2K lightcone and the WFIRST-like survey. Table C1. Catalogue specifications and linear bias fits for the MXXL-15K lightcone, measured in redshifts-space (upper table) and in real-space (lower table). In each instance, the properties shown are: the effective redshift of the slice, z eff ; the mean number of galaxies used to compute the correlation function,N gal ; the mean value for ratio of randoms to galaxies,Nran/N gal ; and the linear bias fit. The columns show the results for each redshift slice considered. Each table shows the bias fits when adopting a WISP-calibrated version of the lightcone and a HiZELS-calibrated version of the lightcone.

## Figure 2 .
2Halo Occupation Distributions (HODs) as measured from running GALACTICUS on three snapshots of the Millennium Simulation: z = 0.85 (left-hand panel), z = 1.45 (centre panel) and z = 2.2 (right-hand panel)

## M 0 Figure 3 .
03200 (h −1 M ) log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 38.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 39.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 40.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.5 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.3 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.6 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.8 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 43.Tabulated halo occupation distributions (HODs) from GALACTICUS for 10 luminosity-selected samples of Hα-emitting galaxies shown for various redshifts between z = 0.7 and z = 2.2. Solid lines show the functional fits to the HODs. The various colours of the lines indicate the blended Hα + [N II ]

## Figure 6
6Figure 6. Luminosity functions for Hα-emitting galaxies measured from the MXXL-2K lightcone compared to the HiZELS luminosity functions (Sobral et al. 2013) measured in three redshift slices centred at: z 0.84 (left-hand panel), z 1.47 (centre panel) and z 2.2 (right-hand panel). In each panel the blue dotted line shows the luminosity functions of the MXXL galaxies computed using the dust-free luminosities. The solid blue line shows the luminosity function for the MXXL galaxies computed assuming the dust attenuation, A Hα , that leads to the best match to the HiZELS luminosity function at that particular redshift. The symbols show the HiZELS observations from Sobral et al. (2013), with the empty symbols corresponding to the luminosity bins that were excluded from the chi-squared minimisation procedure due to incompleteness of the MXXL-2K lightcone. The light blue dashed line shows the luminosity function obtained assuming the dust attenuation obtained from calibration to the 0.8 < z < 1.2 WISP number counts. Shaded regions indicate the range of allowable luminosity functions given the uncertainty on the dust attenuation A Hα (see text for details). The black dot-dashed line shows the luminosity function predicted by the third of the three empirical models presented by (Pozzetti et al. 2016). All luminosities correspond to blended Hα + [N II ] luminosities. The HiZELS and Pozzetti et al. (2016) luminosities have been boosted by a factor of 4/3 to account for [N II ] contamination. Vertical dotted lines indicate the luminosities that correspond at each redshift to the Euclid and WFIRST flux limits.


al. (2018) [Calzetti] Merson et al. (2018) [Ferrara] Merson et al. (2018) [C&F]

## Figure 7 .
7Number density per unit volume of Hα-emitting galaxies in the MXXL-15K lightcone (upper panel) and MXXL-2K lightcone (lower panel). A flux limit of 2 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 has been applied to the dust-attenuated luminosities in the MXXL-15K lightcone and a limit of 1 × 10 −16 erg s −1 cm −2 to the dust-attenuated luminosities in the MXXL-2K lightcone. In each panel the solid line shows the number density obtained when adopting the WISP-calibrated dust attenuation, and the dashed line shows the number density obtained when adopting a HiZELScalibrated dust attenuation. The dotted line shows the number density of the corresponding lightcone when no dust attenuation is applied. The various symbols show the predicted Euclid and WFIRST number densities from the GALACTICUS catalogues presented inMerson et al. (2018), who considered three different dust attenuation methods:Ferrara et al. (1999),Calzetti et al. (2000), andCharlot & Fall (2000, C&F). All flux selections assume a blended Hα + [N II ] flux.

## Figure 8 .
8Redshift distributions for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys assuming a WISP-calibrated dust attenuation (left-hand panel) and a HiZELScalibrated dust attenuation (right-hand panel). Thin lines show the redshift distribution of the galaxies in the corresponding MXXL lightcone and thick lines show the redshift distribution for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys. Specifications of the lightcones and Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys are provided in

## Figure 11 .
11Halo occupation distributions (HODs) predicted for the Euclid-like (top row) and WFIRST-like (bottom row) surveys. Each panel shows the HODs for one of the redshift slices adopted in our clustering analysis with the solid line showing the HOD for the WISP-calibrated case and the dashed line showing the HOD for the HiZELS-calibrated case.


0.6531 ± 0.0002 0.3992 ± 0.0002 0.694 ± 0.009 0.36 ± 0.01 HiZELS 0.6840 ± 0.0005 0.3790 ± 0.0006 0.701 ± 0.003 0.375 ± 0.006 the b lin (z eff ) values for the Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys, in both redshift-space and real-space and for both the WISPcalibrated values and the HiZELS-calibrated values. In Fig. 12 solid lines show the linear fits to the linear bias values for the Euclid-like surveys and dashed lines show the linear fits to the linear bias values for the WFIRST-like surveys. The gradients and intercepts for these linear fits, along with the corresponding uncertainties, are reported in


the linear bias estimates from Geach et al. (2012) and Cochrane et al. (2017) obtained from clustering analyses of HiZELS galaxies. The Cochrane et al. (2017) results that we plot correspond to the effective bias results from their 'full' samples, with no additional luminosity selection applied. If we extrapolate our linear fits for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys out to z = 2.23, we estimate that b lin (z eff = 2.23) ∼ 2.3, which is in excellent agreement with the Geach et al. (2012) result of b lin = 2.4 +0.1 −0.2 . We see that our linear bias relations are in excellent agreement with the Cochrane et al. (2017) result at z = 1.47, but our forecasts suggest a shallower evolutionary relation with redshift leading to our forecasts predicting a higher bias at z = 0.8 and a lower bias at z = 2.23 compared to the Cochrane et al. (2017) results. The Cochrane et al. (2017) bias results can be fitted by a linear relation with a gradient of approximately 0.98. Of our linear bias relations, the relation that is closest to the Cochrane et al. (2017) results is the b(z) = (0.77 ± 0.03)z + (0.62 ± 0.04) relation fitted to the WFIRST-like survey in the WISP-calibrated case. Overall our forecasts are in good agreement with the observational bias estimates from HiZELS.The dotted lines inFig. 12correspond to the linear bias relation b lin (z) = 0.4z+0.9 that was assumed bySpergel et al. (2015).

## Figure 12 .
12Linear bias values for each redshift slice shown as a function of effective redshift for both redshift-space (upper panels) and real-space (lower panels). The left-hand column shows the results obtained when adopting a WISP-calibrated lightcone and the right-hand column shows the results obtained when adopting a HiZELS-calibrated lightcone. The various symbols show the fitted bias values for the individual redshift bins. Filled symbols show the results for our Euclid-like and WFIRST-like surveys, whilst empty symbols show equivalent results from a clustering analysis of the MXXL-15 and MXXL-2K lightcones without the introduction of any incompleteness effects (see Appexndix C). The red solid lines show the result of fitting a linear relation to the bias results for the Euclid-like survey, whilst the blue dashed lines show the result of fitting a linear relation to the bias results for the WFIRST-like survey. Gradient and intercept parameters for these relations are reported in

## M 0 Figure A1 .
0A1200 (h −1 M ) log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 38.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 39.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 40.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.5 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.3 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.6 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.8 log 10 L Hα + [NII]/h −2 erg s −1 43.Central galaxy occupation distributions for 10 blended luminosity-selected samples from GALACTICUS plotted at selected redshifts between z = 0.7 and z = 2.2. The solid lines show the fits to the occupation numbers as discussed in Appendix A1. The various colours of the lines indicate the blended Hα + [N II ] luminosity limit used to select the galaxies, as indicated in the colour bar. The halo mass assumed is the mass within an over-density with average density corresponding to 200 times the mean density of the Universe.

## M 0 Figure A2
0A2200 (h −1 M ) log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 38.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 39.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 40.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 41.5 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.0 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.3 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.6 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 42.8 log 10 L Hα + [NII] /h −2 erg s −1 43.


Figure 5. Dust attenuation values, A Hα , recovered from our calibration procedure. Filled symbols correspond to the MXXL-2K lightcone, whilst empty symbols correspond to the MXXL-15K lightcone. Circles show the attenuation values required for a lightcone to reproduce the HiZELS luminosity functions, squares show the attenunation values requred to reproduce the WISP number counts in the redshift range 0.8 < z < 1.2 and diamonds show the attenunation values requred to reproduce the WISP number counts in the redshift range 0.7 < z < 1.5. Uncertainties in the attenuation correspond to the range of A Hα values whose chi-squared value is within one standard deviation of the minimum chi-squared value. Error bars in the redshift direction indicate the width of the redshift range used to compute the counts or luminosity function.1.0 
1.5 
2.0 

z 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

1.2 

1.4 

A 

Hα 

MXXL-2K, WISP 0.7 < z < 1.5 
MXXL-15K, WISP 0.7 < z < 1.5 
MXXL-2K, WISP 0.8 < z < 1.2 
MXXL-15K, WISP 0.8 < z < 1.2 
MXXL-2K, HiZELS 
MXXL-15K HiZELS 




). All luminosities correspond to blended Hα + [N II ] luminosities. The HiZELS and Pozzetti et al. (2016) luminosities have been boosted by a factor of 4/3 to account for [N II ] contamination. Vertical dotted lines indicate the luminosities that correspond at each redshift to the Euclid and WFIRST flux limits.


Table 3. Catalogue specifications and linear bias fits for our WFIRST-like catalogues, measured in redshifts-space (upper table) and in real-space (lowertable). The meanings of the various properties are the same as inTable 2. The columns show the results for each redshift slice considered. Each table shows the equivalent results when adopting a WISP-calibrated lightcone or a HiZELS-calibrated lightcone.1 
z < 1.3 1.3 
z < 1.5 1.5 
z < 1.7 1.7 
z < 1.9 

Euclid-like (redshift-space) 
WISP 
z eff 
0.991 
1.19 
1.38 
1.59 
1.79 
N gal 
13175397 
8688180 
5045749 
2912673 
1748220 
Nran/N gal 
10 
10 
14 
25 
30 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.40 ± 0.03 
1.51 ± 0.05 
1.70 ± 0.04 
1.82 ± 0.02 
1.96 ± 0.09 

HiZELS 
z eff 
0.988 
1.19 
1.39 
1.59 
1.79 
N gal 
7785058 
4642807 
2635798 
1687841 
1215424 
Nran/N gal 
10 
10 
15 
25 
29 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.42 ± 0.03 
1.55 ± 0.05 
1.69 ± 0.04 
1.88 ± 0.05 
1.9 ± 0.1 

Euclid-like (real-space) 
WISP 
z eff 
0.991 
1.19 
1.38 
1.59 
1.79 
N gal 
13171311 
8682758 
5050012 
2910250 
1748428 
Nran/N gal 
10 
10 
15 
30 
35 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.05 ± 0.01 
1.16 ± 0.04 
1.30 ± 0.03 
1.44 ± 0.05 
1.60 ± 0.10 

HiZELS 
z eff 
0.988 
1.19 
1.39 
1.59 
1.79 
N gal 
7782514 
4639483 
2638085 
1686470 
1215545 
Nran/N gal 
10 
10 
14 
30 
35 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.8 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
11.9 ± 0.3 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.055 ± 0.009 
1.21 ± 0.04 
1.32 ± 0.03 
1.49 ± 0.08 
1.6 ± 0.1 

Calibration 
Property 
1.0 
z, < 1.2 1.2 
z < 1.4 1.4 
z < 1.6 1.6 
z < 1.8 1.8 
z < 2.0 

WFIRST-like (redshift-space) 
WISP 
z eff 
1.10 
1.29 
1.49 
1.69 
1.89 
N gal 
5915244 
4839323 
3576093 
2442191 
1673105 
Nran/N gal 
20 
20 
25 
30 
40 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.46 ± 0.02 
1.64 ± 0.01 
1.61 ± 0.04 
2.0 ± 0.1 
2.15 ± 0.04 

HiZELS 
z eff 
1.09 
1.29 
1.49 
1.69 
1.89 
N gal 
4193549 
3278049 
2341326 
1768644 
1369560 
Nran/N gal 
20 
20 
25 
30 
40 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.47 ± 0.02 
1.64 ± 0.01 
1.62 ± 0.04 
2.1 ± 0.1 
2.14 ± 0.06 

WFIRST-like (real-space) 
WISP 
z eff 
1.10 
1.29 
1.49 
1.69 
1.89 
N gal 
5918784 
4832447 
3578623 
2449899 
1673483 
Nran/N gal 
20 
20 
25 
30 
40 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.13 ± 0.02 
1.27 ± 0.04 
1.22 ± 0.06 
1.57 ± 0.06 
1.70 ± 0.05 

HiZELS 
z eff 
1.09 
1.29 
1.49 
1.69 
1.89 
N gal 
4196198 
3273552 
2342872 
1773791 
1370214 
Nran/N gal 
20 
20 
25 
30 
40 
log 10 M h /h −1 M 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.7 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
11.8 ± 0.4 
b lin ± δb lin 
1.15 ± 0.02 
1.28 ± 0.02 
1.25 ± 0.10 
1.56 ± 0.07 
1.72 ± 0.04 
0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

ξ(r) 

× 10 2 

Euclid-like 
Dark Matter 
Galaxies (r-space) 
Galaxies (z-space) 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

b(r) 

0.9 z < 1.1 

Bias (r-space) 
blin ± δblin (r-space) 
Bias (z-space) 
blin ± δblin (z-space) 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.1 z < 1.3 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.3 z < 1.5 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.5 z < 1.7 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.7 z < 1.9 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

ξ(r) 

× 10 2 

WFIRST-like 
Dark Matter 
Galaxies (r-space) 
Galaxies (z-space) 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

b(r) 

1.0 z < 1.2 

Bias (r-space) 
blin ± δblin (r-space) 
Bias (z-space) 
blin ± δblin (z-space) 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.2 z < 1.4 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.4 z < 1.6 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.6 z < 1.8 

50 75 100 125 
r [h −1 Mpc] 

1.8 z < 2.0 

Figure 9
 Merson et al.   
c 2019 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1-??
Here we use version 0.9.4 of GALACTICUS, which is publicly available from: bitbucket.org/galacticusdev/galacticus. The Mercurial hash I.D. for the particular revision used is: 4787d94cd86e.
c 2019 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1-?? 6 Merson et al.
c 2019 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1-?? 8 Merson et al.
c 2019 RAS, MNRAS 000, 1-?? 22 Merson et al.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank Anahita Alvari, Andreas Faisst, Zhongxu Zhai,APPENDIX A: COMPONENT FITTING FOR THE HALO OCCUPATION DISTRIBUTIONS As described in § 2.2.2, we generate a library of luminositydependent HODs obtained from running the GALACTICUS galaxy formation model on snapshots from the Millennium Simulation. In order to randomly sample the HODS for halo masses beyond the tabulated range, we choose to fit functional forms to the separate central galaxy and satellite galaxy components.A1 Fitting the central galaxy componentGiven the occupation numbers of central galaxies, Ncen, we find that for the faintest luminosity limits Ncen ∼ 1 for M200 > 10 11 h −1 M . As discussed in § 2.2.2, for brighter luminosity limits Ncen becomes peaked around 10 12 h −1 M , with a slight increase towards higher mass. We find that the increase in Ncen for halo masses above 10 14 h −1 M can be modelled using the linear relation, log 10 (− log 10 (Ncen)) ∝ m fit log 10 (M200)where m fit is the fitted slope, which will take a different value for each luminosity limit. Unfortunately, for the brightest luminosity limits the tabulated HODs are quite noisy and there is the potential for the HODs for the different luminosity limits to cross, which must be avoided if we are to draw random samples from the HODs. In order to address these two issues, we take the values for m fit and fit a second linear relation such that we have a description for the slope as a function of blended luminosity threshold,
. A Albrecht, G Bernstein, R Cahn, W L Freedman, J Hewitt, W Hu, J Huth, M Kamionkowski, arXiv:0609591Albrecht A., Bernstein G., Cahn R., Freedman W. L., Hewitt J., Hu W., Huth J., Kamionkowski M. et al, 2006, arXiv:0609591

. R E Angulo, C M Baugh, C S Frenk, C G Lacey, 383755MN-RASAngulo R. E., Baugh C. M., Frenk C. S., Lacey C. G., 2008, MN- RAS, 383, 755

. R E Angulo, V Springel, S D M White, A Jenkins, C M Baugh, C S Frenk, MNRAS. 4262046Angulo R. E., Springel V., White S. D. M., Jenkins A., Baugh C. M., Frenk C. S., 2012, MNRAS, 426, 2046

. R E Angulo, S D M White, V Springel, B Henriques, MNRAS. 4422131Angulo R. E., White S. D. M., Springel V., Henriques B., 2014, MNRAS, 442, 2131

. S Anselmi, G D Starkman, R K Sheth, MNRAS. 4552474Anselmi S., Starkman G. D., Sheth R. K., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 2474

. S Arnouts, D Schiminovich, O Ilbert, L Tresse, B Milliard, M Treyer, S Bardelli, T Budavari, ApJ. 61943Arnouts S., Schiminovich D., Ilbert O., Tresse L., Milliard B., Treyer M., Bardelli S., Budavari T. et al, 2005, ApJ, 619, L43

. H Atek, M Malkan, P Mccarthy, H I Teplitz, C Scarlata, B Siana, A Henry, J W Colbert, ApJ. 723104Atek H., Malkan M., McCarthy P., Teplitz H. I., Scarlata C., Siana B., Henry A., Colbert J. W. et al, 2010, ApJ, 723, 104

. H Atek, B Siana, C Scarlata, M Malkan, P Mccarthy, H Teplitz, A Henry, J Colbert, ApJ. 743121Atek H., Siana B., Scarlata C., Malkan M., McCarthy P., Teplitz H., Henry A., Colbert J. et al, 2011, ApJ, 743, 121

. J M Bardeen, J R Bond, N Kaiser, A S Szalay, ApJ. 30415Bardeen J. M., Bond J. R., Kaiser N., Szalay A. S., 1986, ApJ, 304, 15

. S Basilakos, J B Dent, S Dutta, L Perivolaropoulos, M Plionis, Phys. Rev. D. 85123501Basilakos S., Dent J. B., Dutta S., Perivolaropoulos L., Plionis M., 2012, Phys. Rev. D, 85, 123501

. P S Behroozi, R H Wechsler, C Conroy, ApJ. 77057Behroozi P. S., Wechsler R. H., Conroy C., 2013, ApJ, 770, 57

. A J Benson, Phys. Rep. 4952599MNRASBenson A. J., 2010, Phys. Rep., 495, 33 -, 2012, New A, 17, 175 -, 2014, MNRAS, 444, 2599

. A J Benson, C M Baugh, S Cole, C S Frenk, C G Lacey, MNRAS. 316107Benson A. J., Baugh C. M., Cole S., Frenk C. S., Lacey C. G., 2000a, MNRAS, 316, 107

. A J Benson, S Cole, C S Frenk, C M Baugh, C G Lacey, MNRAS. 311793Benson A. J., Cole S., Frenk C. S., Baugh C. M., Lacey C. G., 2000b, MNRAS, 311, 793

. A A Berlind, D H Weinberg, ApJ. 575587Berlind A. A., Weinberg D. H., 2002, ApJ, 575, 587

. C Blake, K Glazebrook, ApJ. 594665Blake C., Glazebrook K., 2003, ApJ, 594, 665

. M Blanton, R Cen, J P Ostriker, M A Strauss, M Tegmark, ApJ. 5311Blanton M., Cen R., Ostriker J. P., Strauss M. A., Tegmark M., 2000, ApJ, 531, 1

. G B Brammer, K E Whitaker, P G Van Dokkum, D Marchesini, M Franx, M Kriek, I Labbé, K.-S Lee, ApJ. 73924Brammer G. B., Whitaker K. E., van Dokkum P. G., Marchesini D., Franx M., Kriek M., Labbé I., Lee K.-S. et al, 2011, ApJ, 739, 24

. D Calzetti, L Armus, R C Bohlin, A L Kinney, J Koornneef, T Storchi-Bergmann, ApJ. 533682Calzetti D., Armus L., Bohlin R. C., Kinney A. L., Koornneef J., Storchi-Bergmann T., 2000, ApJ, 533, 682

. G Chabrier, ApJ. 586133Chabrier G., 2003, ApJ, 586, L133

. Charlot S Fall, S M , ApJ. 539718Charlot S., Fall S. M., 2000, ApJ, 539, 718

. L Clerkin, D Kirk, O Lahav, F B Abdalla, E Gaztañaga, MNRAS. 4481389Clerkin L., Kirk D., Lahav O., Abdalla F. B., Gaztañaga E., 2015, MNRAS, 448, 1389

. R K Cochrane, P N Best, D Sobral, I Smail, D A Wake, J P Stott, J E Geach, MNRAS. 4692913Cochrane R. K., Best P. N., Sobral D., Smail I., Wake D. A., Stott J. P., Geach J. E., 2017, MNRAS, 469, 2913

. C Conroy, D Schiminovich, M R Blanton, ApJ. 718184Conroy C., Schiminovich D., Blanton M. R., 2010, ApJ, 718, 184

. S Contreras, C M Baugh, P Norberg, N Padilla, MNRAS. 4322717Contreras S., Baugh C. M., Norberg P., Padilla N., 2013, MNRAS, 432, 2717

. M Crocce, R Scoccimarro, Phys. Rev. D. 7723533Crocce M., Scoccimarro R., 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 023533

. M Davis, M J Geller, ApJ. 20813Davis M., Geller M. J., 1976, ApJ, 208, 13

. A Aghamousa, DESI CollaborationJ Aguilar, DESI CollaborationS Ahlen, DESI CollaborationS Alam, DESI CollaborationL E Allen, DESI CollaborationAllende Prieto, DESI CollaborationC Annis, DESI CollaborationJ , DESI CollaborationarXiv:161100036DESI Collaboration, Aghamousa A., Aguilar J., Ahlen S., Alam S., Allen L. E., Allende Prieto C., Annis J. et al, 2016, arXiv:161100036

. V Desjacques, D Jeong, F Schmidt, Phys. Rep. 7331Desjacques V., Jeong D., Schmidt F., 2018, Phys. Rep., 733, 1

. A Dressler, ApJ. 236351Dressler A., 1980, ApJ, 236, 351

. A Dressler, D Spergel, M Mountain, M Postman, E Elliott, E Bendek, D Bennett, J Dalcanton, arXiv:12107809Dressler A., Spergel D., Mountain M., Postman M., Elliott E., Bendek E., Bennett D., Dalcanton J. et al, 2012, arXiv:12107809

. A Durkalec, O Le Fèvre, A Pollo, G Zamorani, B C Lemaux, B Garilli, S Bardelli, N Hathi, A&A. 61242Durkalec A., Le Fèvre O., Pollo A., Zamorani G., Lemaux B. C., Garilli B., Bardelli S., Hathi N. et al, 2018, A&A, 612, A42

. D J Eisenstein, H.-J Seo, M White, ApJ. 664660Eisenstein D. J., Seo H.-J., White M., 2007, ApJ, 664, 660

. A L Faisst, D Masters, Y Wang, A Merson, P Capak, S Malhotra, J E Rhoads, ApJ. 855132Faisst A. L., Masters D., Wang Y., Merson A., Capak P., Malhotra S., Rhoads J. E., 2018, ApJ, 855, 132

. G Favole, S A Rodríguez-Torres, J Comparat, F Prada, H Guo, A Klypin, A D Montero-Dorta, MNRAS. 472550Favole G., Rodríguez-Torres S. A., Comparat J., Prada F., Guo H., Klypin A., Montero-Dorta A. D., 2017, MNRAS, 472, 550

. G J Ferland, R L Porter, P A M Van Hoof, R J R Williams, N P Abel, M L Lykins, G Shaw, W J Henney, Rev. Mexicana Astron. Astrofis. 49137Ferland G. J., Porter R. L., van Hoof P. A. M., Williams R. J. R., Abel N. P., Lykins M. L., Shaw G., Henney W. J. et al, 2013, Rev. Mexicana Astron. Astrofis., 49, 137

. A Ferrara, S Bianchi, A Cimatti, C Giovanardi, ApJS. 123437Ferrara A., Bianchi S., Cimatti A., Giovanardi C., 1999, ApJS, 123, 437

. J N Fry, ApJ. 46165Fry J. N., 1996, ApJ, 461, L65

. E Gaztañaga, M Eriksen, M Crocce, F J Castander, P Fosalba, P Marti, R Miquel, A Cabré, MNRAS. 4222904Gaztañaga E., Eriksen M., Crocce M., Castander F. J., Fosalba P., Marti P., Miquel R., Cabré A., 2012, MNRAS, 422, 2904

. J E Geach, I Smail, P N Best, J Kurk, M Casali, R J Ivison, K Coppin, MNRAS. 3881473Geach J. E., Smail I., Best P. N., Kurk J., Casali M., Ivison R. J., Coppin K., 2008, MNRAS, 388, 1473

. J E Geach, D Sobral, R C Hickox, D A Wake, I Smail, P N Best, C M Baugh, J P Stott, MNRAS. 426679Geach J. E., Sobral D., Hickox R. C., Wake D. A., Smail I., Best P. N., Baugh C. M., Stott J. P., 2012, MNRAS, 426, 679

. V Gonzalez-Perez, J Comparat, P Norberg, C M Baugh, S Contreras, C Lacey, N Mccullagh, A Orsi, MNRAS. 4744024Gonzalez-Perez V., Comparat J., Norberg P., Baugh C. M., Contr- eras S., Lacey C., McCullagh N., Orsi A. et al, 2018, MNRAS, 474, 4024

. J Green, P Schechter, C Baltay, R Bean, D Bennett, R Brown, C Conselice, M Donahue, arXiv:12084012Green J., Schechter P., Baltay C., Bean R., Bennett D., Brown R., Conselice C., Donahue M. et al, 2012, arXiv:12084012

. H Guo, I Zehavi, Z Zheng, D H Weinberg, A A Berlind, M Blanton, Y Chen, D J Eisenstein, ApJ. 767122Guo H., Zehavi I., Zheng Z., Weinberg D. H., Berlind A. A., Blan- ton M., Chen Y., Eisenstein D. J. et al, 2013, ApJ, 767, 122

. L Guzzo, M Pierleoni, B Meneux, E Branchini, O Le Fèvre, C Marinoni, B Garilli, J Blaizot, Nature. 451541Guzzo L., Pierleoni M., Meneux B., Branchini E., Le Fèvre O., Marinoni C., Garilli B., Blaizot J. et al, 2008, Nature, 451, 541

. L Guzzo, M A Strauss, K B Fisher, R Giovanelli, M P Haynes, ApJ. 48937Guzzo L., Strauss M. A., Fisher K. B., Giovanelli R., Haynes M. P., 1997, ApJ, 489, 37

. R Hada, D J Eisenstein, MNRAS. 4825685Hada R., Eisenstein D. J., 2019, MNRAS, 482, 5685

. N Hand, Y Feng, F Beutler, Y Li, C Modi, U Seljak, Z Slepian, AJ. 156160Hand N., Feng Y., Beutler F., Li Y., Modi C., Seljak U., Slepian Z., 2018, AJ, 156, 160

. L Hui, K P Parfrey, Phys. Rev. D. 7743527Hui L., Parfrey K. P., 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 043527

. M Jarvis, G Bernstein, B Jain, MNRAS. 352338Jarvis M., Bernstein G., Jain B., 2004, MNRAS, 352, 338

. D Jeong, E Komatsu, ApJ. 651619Jeong D., Komatsu E., 2006, ApJ, 651, 619

. N Kaiser, MNRAS. 2841ApJKaiser N., 1984, ApJ, 284, L9 -, 1987, MNRAS, 227, 1

. G Kauffmann, A Nusser, M Steinmetz, MNRAS. 286795Kauffmann G., Nusser A., Steinmetz M., 1997, MNRAS, 286, 795

. J.-W Kim, M Im, S.-K Lee, A C Edge, D A Wake, A I Merson, Y Jeon, ApJ. 806189Kim J.-W., Im M., Lee S.-K., Edge A. C., Wake D. A., Merson A. I., Jeon Y., 2015, ApJ, 806, 189

. A Knebe, F R Pearce, P A Thomas, A Benson, J Blaizot, R Bower, J Carretero, F J Castander, MNRAS. 4514029Knebe A., Pearce F. R., Thomas P. A., Benson A., Blaizot J., Bower R., Carretero J., Castander F. J. et al, 2015, MNRAS, 451, 4029

. S D Landy, A S Szalay, ApJ. 41264Landy S. D., Szalay A. S., 1993, ApJ, 412, 64

. R Laureijs, J Amiaux, S Arduini, J Auguères, J Brinchmann, R Cole, M Cropper, C Dabin, arXiv:11103193Laureijs R., Amiaux J., Arduini S., Auguères J. ., Brinchmann J., Cole R., Cropper M., Dabin C. et al, 2011, arXiv:11103193

. J Law-Smith, D J Eisenstein, ApJ. 83687Law-Smith J., Eisenstein D. J., 2017, ApJ, 836, 87

Virgo Consortium t. G Lemson, arXiv:0608019Lemson G., Virgo Consortium t., 2006, arXiv:0608019

. C Ly, M A Malkan, N Kashikawa, K Shimasaku, M Doi, T Nagao, M Iye, T Kodama, ApJ. 657738Ly C., Malkan M. A., Kashikawa N., Shimasaku K., Doi M., Na- gao T., Iye M., Kodama T. et al, 2007, ApJ, 657, 738

. P Madau, M Dickinson, ARA&A. 52415Madau P., Dickinson M., 2014, ARA&A, 52, 415

. P Madau, L Pozzetti, M Dickinson, ApJ. 498106Madau P., Pozzetti L., Dickinson M., 1998, ApJ, 498, 106

. R G Mann, J A Peacock, A F Heavens, MNRAS. 293209Mann R. G., Peacock J. A., Heavens A. F., 1998, MNRAS, 293, 209

. D Martens, X Fang, M A Troxel, J Derose, C M Hirata, R H Wechsler, Y Wang, MNRAS. 485211Martens D., Fang X., Troxel M. A., DeRose J., Hirata C. M., Wechsler R. H., Wang Y., 2019, MNRAS, 485, 211

. V Mehta, C Scarlata, J W Colbert, Y S Dai, A Dressler, A Henry, M Malkan, M Rafelski, ApJ. 811141Mehta V., Scarlata C., Colbert J. W., Dai Y. S., Dressler A., Henry A., Malkan M., Rafelski M. et al, 2015, ApJ, 811, 141

. A Merson, Y Wang, A Benson, A Faisst, D Masters, A Kiessling, J Rhodes, MNRAS. 474177Merson A., Wang Y., Benson A., Faisst A., Masters D., Kiessling A., Rhodes J., 2018, MNRAS, 474, 177

. A I Merson, C M Baugh, J C Helly, V Gonzalez-Perez, S Cole, R Bielby, P Norberg, C S Frenk, MNRAS. 429556Merson A. I., Baugh C. M., Helly J. C., Gonzalez-Perez V., Cole S., Bielby R., Norberg P., Frenk C. S. et al, 2013, MNRAS, 429, 556

. M Mirbabayi, F Schmidt, M Zaldarriaga, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 730Mirbabayi M., Schmidt F., Zaldarriaga M., 2015, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 7, 030

. J F Navarro, C S Frenk, S D M White, ApJ. 490493Navarro J. F., Frenk C. S., White S. D. M., 1997, ApJ, 490, 493

. P Norberg, C M Baugh, E Hawkins, S Maddox, D Madgwick, O Lahav, S Cole, C S Frenk, MNRAS. 332827Norberg P., Baugh C. M., Hawkins E., Maddox S., Madgwick D., Lahav O., Cole S., Frenk C. S. et al, 2002, MNRAS, 332, 827

. P Norberg, C M Baugh, E Hawkins, S Maddox, J A Peacock, S Cole, C S Frenk, J Bland-Hawthorn, MNRAS. 32864Norberg P., Baugh C. M., Hawkins E., Maddox S., Peacock J. A., Cole S., Frenk C. S., Bland-Hawthorn J. et al, 2001, MNRAS, 328, 64

. A Orsi, C M Baugh, C G Lacey, A Cimatti, Y Wang, G Zamorani, MNRAS. 4051006Orsi A., Baugh C. M., Lacey C. G., Cimatti A., Wang Y., Zamorani G., 2010, MNRAS, 405, 1006

. J A Peacock, R E Smith, MNRAS. 3181144Peacock J. A., Smith R. E., 2000, MNRAS, 318, 1144

. N Aghanim, Planck CollaborationY Akrami, Planck CollaborationM Ashdown, Planck CollaborationJ Aumont, Planck CollaborationC Baccigalupi, Planck CollaborationM Ballardini, Planck CollaborationA J Banday, Planck CollaborationarXiv:180706209Planck Collaboration, Aghanim N., Akrami Y., Ashdown M., Au- mont J., Baccigalupi C., Ballardini M., Banday A. J. et al, 2018, arXiv:180706209

. L Pozzetti, C M Hirata, J E Geach, A Cimatti, C Baugh, O Cucciati, A Merson, P Norberg, A&A. 5903Pozzetti L., Hirata C. M., Geach J. E., Cimatti A., Baugh C., Cuc- ciati O., Merson A., Norberg P. et al, 2016, A&A, 590, A3

. A I Salvador, F J Sánchez, A Pagul, J García-Bellido, E Sanchez, A Pujol, J Frieman, E Gaztanaga, MNRAS. 4821435Salvador A. I., Sánchez F. J., Pagul A., García-Bellido J., Sanchez E., Pujol A., Frieman J., Gaztanaga E. et al, 2019, MNRAS, 482, 1435

. A G Sánchez, C M Baugh, R E Angulo, MNRAS. 3901470Sánchez A. G., Baugh C. M., Angulo R. E., 2008, MNRAS, 390, 1470

. U Seljak, MNRAS. 318203Seljak U., 2000, MNRAS, 318, 203

. H.-J Seo, D J Eisenstein, ApJ. 598720Seo H.-J., Eisenstein D. J., 2003, ApJ, 598, 720

. H Shim, J Colbert, H Teplitz, A Henry, M Malkan, P Mccarthy, L Yan, ApJ. 696785Shim H., Colbert J., Teplitz H., Henry A., Malkan M., McCarthy P., Yan L., 2009, ApJ, 696, 785

. R Skibba, R K Sheth, A J Connolly, 36968Scranton R., 2006, MN-RASSkibba R., Sheth R. K., Connolly A. J., Scranton R., 2006, MN- RAS, 369, 68

. R A Skibba, M S M Smith, A L Coil, J Moustakas, J Aird, M R Blanton, A D Bray, R J Cool, ApJ. 784128Skibba R. A., Smith M. S. M., Coil A. L., Moustakas J., Aird J., Blanton M. R., Bray A. D., Cool R. J. et al, 2014, ApJ, 784, 128

. A Smith, S Cole, C Baugh, Z Zheng, R Angulo, P Norberg, I Zehavi, MNRAS. 4704646Durham University Smith A.,PhD thesisSmith A., 2018, PhD thesis, Durham University Smith A., Cole S., Baugh C., Zheng Z., Angulo R., Norberg P., Zehavi I., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4646

. R E Smith, R Scoccimarro, R K Sheth, Phys. Rev. D. 7743525Smith R. E., Scoccimarro R., Sheth R. K., 2008, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 043525

. D Sobral, P N Best, J E Geach, I Smail, M Cirasuolo, T Garn, G B Dalton, J Kurk, MNRAS. 4041551Sobral D., Best P. N., Geach J. E., Smail I., Cirasuolo M., Garn T., Dalton G. B., Kurk J., 2010, MNRAS, 404, 1551

. D Sobral, P N Best, J E Geach, I Smail, J Kurk, M Cirasuolo, M Casali, R J Ivison, MNRAS. 39875Sobral D., Best P. N., Geach J. E., Smail I., Kurk J., Cirasuolo M., Casali M., Ivison R. J. et al, 2009, MNRAS, 398, 75

. D Sobral, I Smail, P N Best, J E Geach, Y Matsuda, J P Stott, M Cirasuolo, J Kurk, MNRAS. 4281128Sobral D., Smail I., Best P. N., Geach J. E., Matsuda Y., Stott J. P., Cirasuolo M., Kurk J., 2013, MNRAS, 428, 1128

. Y.-S Song, W J Percival, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 104Song Y.-S., Percival W. J., 2009, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 10, 004

. D Spergel, N Gehrels, C Baltay, D Bennett, J Breckinridge, M Donahue, A Dressler, B S Gaudi, arXiv:150303757Spergel D., Gehrels N., Baltay C., Bennett D., Breckinridge J., Donahue M., Dressler A., Gaudi B. S. et al, 2015, arXiv:150303757

. D N Spergel, L Verde, H V Peiris, E Komatsu, M R Nolta, C L Bennett, M Halpern, G Hinshaw, ApJS. 148175Spergel D. N., Verde L., Peiris H. V., Komatsu E., Nolta M. R., Bennett C. L., Halpern M., Hinshaw G. et al, 2003, ApJS, 148, 175

. V Springel, S D M White, A Jenkins, C S Frenk, N Yoshida, L Gao, J Navarro, R Thacker, Nature. 435629Springel V., White S. D. M., Jenkins A., Frenk C. S., Yoshida N., Gao L., Navarro J., Thacker R. et al, 2005, Nature, 435, 629

. V Springel, S D M White, G Tormen, G Kauffmann, MNRAS. 328726Springel V., White S. D. M., Tormen G., Kauffmann G., 2001, MNRAS, 328, 726

. M Tegmark, P J E Peebles, ApJ. 50079Tegmark M., Peebles P. J. E., 1998, ApJ, 500, L79

. F Valentino, E Daddi, J D Silverman, A Puglisi, D Kashino, A Renzini, A Cimatti, L Pozzetti, MNRAS. 4724878Valentino F., Daddi E., Silverman J. D., Puglisi A., Kashino D., Renzini A., Cimatti A., Pozzetti L. et al, 2017, MNRAS, 472, 4878

. L Verde, A F Heavens, W J Percival, S Matarrese, C M Baugh, J Bland-Hawthorn, T Bridges, R Cannon, MNRAS. 335432Verde L., Heavens A. F., Percival W. J., Matarrese S., Baugh C. M., Bland-Hawthorn J., Bridges T., Cannon R. et al, 2002, MNRAS, 335, 432

. Y Wang, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys. 5123525Phys. Rev. DWang Y., 2008a, J. Cosmology Astropart. Phys., 5, 021 -, 2008b, Phys. Rev. D, 77, 123525

. I Zehavi, M R Blanton, J A Frieman, D H Weinberg, H J Mo, M A Strauss, S F Anderson, J Annis, ApJ. 571172Zehavi I., Blanton M. R., Frieman J. A., Weinberg D. H., Mo H. J., Strauss M. A., Anderson S. F., Annis J. et al, 2002, ApJ, 571, 172

. I Zehavi, Z Zheng, D H Weinberg, M R Blanton, N A Bahcall, A A Berlind, J Brinkmann, J A Frieman, ApJ. 73659Zehavi I., Zheng Z., Weinberg D. H., Blanton M. R., Bahcall N. A., Berlind A. A., Brinkmann J., Frieman J. A. et al, 2011, ApJ, 736, 59

. Z Zhai, J L Tinker, C Hahn, H.-J Seo, M R Blanton, R Tojeiro, H O Camacho, M Lima, ApJ. 84876Zhai Z., Tinker J. L., Hahn C., Seo H.-J., Blanton M. R., Tojeiro R., Camacho H. O., Lima M. et al, 2017, ApJ, 848, 76

. Mxxl-15k Mxxl-2k Redshift, Redshift MXXL-15K MXXL-2K