# Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace

CorpusID: 16161993
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology, #Geography

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/341d646cc0b3beef0639ea75b78099e65d081ae4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/341d646cc0b3beef0639ea75b78099e65d081ae4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace
Published: 13 Apr 2016

Gregor Bračko 
Kadri Kiran 
Celal Karaman 
Sebastian Salata 

Lech Borowiec ‡ University of Ljubljana
LjubljanaSlovenia


Trakya University
EdirneTurkey


University of Wrocław
WrocławPoland

Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace

Biodiversity Data Journal
47945Published: 13 Apr 201610.3897/BDJ.4.e7945Received: 27 Jan 2016 | Accepted: 06 Apr 2016 |General Article Corresponding author: Lech Borowiec (lech.borowiec@uwr.edu.pl) Academic editor: Donat Agosti Citation: Bračko G, Kiran K, Karaman C, Salata S, Borowiec L (2016) Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera:
BackgroundThe ant fauna of Greek Thrace has been least known of all Greek regions with only 12 species mentioned in the literature. We conducted two field trips to this region in 2014 and 2015 and included some unpublished ant material, thus compiling new records from 72 sampling localities.New informationWe found 115 ant species, 108 of them are recorded for the first time in Greek Thrace. Cataglyphis viaticoides, Temnothorax aeolius, Tetramorium cf. davidi, Tetramorium hippocratis, and Tetramorium rhodium were so far not known for continental Greece. In the checklist of recorded species, we also give information on the taxonomic status and distribution of certain taxa. ‡ § § | | © Bračko G et al. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY 4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.

## Introduction

The ant fauna of Greece has been an object of investigations for almost two centuries, but most of the contributions were restricted to particular parts or regions of the country. The first comprehensive checklist, comprising the past studies on Greek ants, was done only recently by Legakis (2011). In the last few years, the ant fauna of Greece was more intensively studied as part of the inventory of the ants of the Mediterranean region (Borowiec and Salata 2012, Borowiec and Salata 2013, Borowiec and Salata 2014b, Borowiec and Salata 2014a, Salata and Borowiec 2015a, Salata and Borowiec 2015b, Salata and Borowiec 2015c. Based on the above mentioned studies, it turned out that the Greek ant fauna is probably the richest in Europe, with about 280 recorded species including almost 20 endemic to this country. Among the geographic regions of Greece, Macedonia has richest ant fauna with at least 158 species recorded, followed by Dodecanese (111), Ionian Islands (107), East Aegean Islands (106), Peloponnese (102), Crete (98), Sterea Ellas (72), Thessaly (67), Cyclades (46), and Epirus (42) respectively (Borowiec & Salata unpublished data). The ants of Greek Thrace have been more or less neglected so far. This region has not been studied in recent years, while older data are very scarce. As a result, only 12 species were mentioned from this region (Legakis 2011).

Greek Thrace (or Western Thrace) is one of the geographic and historical regions of Greece. It is the eastern-most mainland part of the country, bordered by Greek Macedonia to the west, Bulgaria to the north (the southern part of Bulgaria is also known as the Bulgarian or Northern Thrace), Turkish (or Eastern) Thrace to the east and the Aegean Sea to the south. Most of the northern part of Greek Thrace is occupied by the Rhodope Mountains. Larger plains are situated especially in the south-western, central and northeastern part of the region. A Mediterranean climate prevails in the southern part of Thrace and is modified by continental influences in the Rhodope Mountains (Encyclopaedia Britannica 2015).

To improve the knowledge on Thracian ants, we conducted two field trips, in spring 2014 and in summer 2015, and included some previously collected unpublished material. Altogether, we compiled the samples from more than 70 localities throughout the region. As a result we present a check-list of all ant species recorded so far in Greek Thrace with comments on the taxonomy and distribution of poorly known or unnamed species.  Images of ant specimens shown in this paper were taken using a Nikon SMZ 1500 and Nikon SMZ 18 stereomicroscopes, Nikon D5200 photo camera and Helicon Focus software. All of them have assigned a CASENT number and are available on www.antweb. org.

Below, we present a list of all known ant species from Greek Thrace with the localities of the sampled material (see Table 1 for the description of locality codes) and literature data.

We give information about the presence of the recorded species in other Greek regions, based on Borowiec and Salata (2012) . We add comments on the taxonomy and distribution of poorly known or unnamed species. Following the list of recorded species, we give notes on the taxa which were mentioned in Legakis (2011), but their occurence in Greek Thrace is doubtful. 


## Results


## List of ants of Greek Thrace

Aphaenogaster epirotes (Emery, 1895) Records in Greek Thrace: 9,13,25,51,70 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Aphaenogaster festae Emery, 1915 (Fig. 2) Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 30; Legakis 2011

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Macedonia

Aphaenogaster subterranea (Latreille, 1798)

Records in Greek Thrace: 5,8,18,36,41,43,44,45,46,47,51,52,53,54,56,57,59,60,61,62,63,65,66,67,70 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Cyclades, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace   Camponotus kiesenwetteri (Roger, 1859) Records in Greek Thrace: 38

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas

Camponotus lateralis (Olivier, 1792) Records in Greek Thrace: 10,12,17,18,20,30,31,33,35,36,37,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,50,51,61,62,63,64,65,66,67,69,71 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Camponotus oertzeni Forel, 1889 ( Fig. 4) Records in Greek Thrace: 4,8,17,25,26,36,46,56,60,61,63,64,65,66 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia

Notes: This poorly known species was recorded from five Greek regions Salata 2012, Legakis 2011). Our material from the Balkan Peninsula shows that C. oertzeni is more common and widespread as indicated from the checklists, probably due to the misidentification with very common C. aethiops. Its redescription, habitat preferences and remarks on the diagnostic characters in comparison with C. aethiops will be provided in a separate paper (Salata & Borowiec in preparation). a b Notes: The status of this species was misinterpreted probably due to confusion with type material preserved in the Museum of Natural History in Paris. André (1881), in the original description, clearly wrote that specimens named as a Myrmecocystus albicans var. viaticoides were collected in Beyruth (Lebanon). As diagnostic features he noted red colouration of the head and mesosoma and mostly black gaster. In the same paper he described another taxon: Myrmecocystus albicans var. lividus. Specimens of this species were collected in Jaffa, Syria (now Israel) and were distinguished by whole body pale reddish and only apex of gaster infuscate (now dried syntypes appear faded and are almost completely yellow). Surprisingly, in the material preserved in Paris Museum one bicoloured syntype with dark gaster with determination label "viaticoides" has locality label "Syrie" (available in AntWeb https://www.antweb.org/specimen/ CASENT0912236) and another one, uniformly yellow syntype with determination label " viaticoides", has locality label "Beyrouth" (available in AntWebhttps://www.antweb.org/ specimen/CASENT0915503). In the same collection there is also one syntype of uniformly yellow body with determination label "lividus" and locality label "Syrie" (available in AntWebhttps://www.antweb.org/specimen/CASENT0915499). We found two other syntypes with determination label "lividus" and locality label "Jaffa" in Forel's collection in Genève (available in AntWeb https://www.antweb.org/specimen/ CASENT0911099) and in Santschi's collection in Basel (available in AntWeb https:// www.antweb.org/specimen/CASENT0912207). Radchenko (1997) studied syntype labelled "Beyrouth" (with mostly yellow abdomen) and suggested that records of bicoloured Cataglyphis viaticoides from Turkey, Caucasus and Iran concern Cataglyphis rubra (Forel, 1903). In his next paper with a key to Asian members of the genus Cataglyphis (Radchenko 1998), he named bicoloured taxon as a C. rubra and unicoloured taxa as a C. lividus and C. vi aticoides with note that C. viaticoides is a problematic species. Agosti (1990), in his review of Cataglyphis, noted that syntypes of C. viaticoides do not correspond with species description but he did not propose any solution of this problem. In our opinion only syntypes from Beyruth should be the true types of C. viaticoides, while syntypes from Syrie or Jaffa should be treated as a true types of C. lividus. Probably, discussed above syntypes, were inversely labeled in Paris Museum (bicolored specimens should have label "Beyrouth / Abeille" and uniformly a b Figure 5.

Cataglyphis viaticoides. Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

a: worker (specimen code: CASENT0763858) b: gyne (specimen code: CASENT0763857) yellow specimens should have label "Jaffa / Abeille" or "Syrie / Abeille"). Cataglyphis viaticoides is the only species of the mentioned above two taxa which occurs in Greece. Data on the distribution of C. bicolor (Fabricius, 1793)  Records in Greek Thrace: 3,5,9,10,12,17,18,20,30,31,33,34,35,36,37,40,41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,50,51,54,61,62,63,65,66,68,69,70,71 Distribution Records in Greek Thrace: 1,2,8,19,26,33,34,35,36,37,42,43,46,47,58,60,66,67,70 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Cyclades, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Lasius balcanicus Seifert, 1988 or L. distinguendus (Emery, 1916) Records in Notes: Lasius niger was listed for six Greek regions (Legakis 2011), but most records are from the period before the revision of Lasius s. str. (Seifert 1992) and probably concern other similar species. In recently collected Greek material, we have only one reliable record from Greek Macedonia (Borowiec and Salata 2012).

Lasius paralienus Seifert, 1992 Records in Greek Thrace: 3, 5, 55 Notes: Leptothorax acervorum was only recorded generally from Greece by Agosti and Collingwood (1987b). In recently collected material we found this species only from two localities in Drama regional unit in Macedonia. Our material from Greece suggests the occurrence of at least three morphospecies of complex in this country but their correct identification will be possible only after the revision of all names proposed in this group.

Messor hellenius Agosti & Collingwood, 1987 Records in Greek Thrace: 3,6,7,10,15,19,21,22,24,27,29,48,68,71 Distribution    Thrace: 3,5,6,8,9,12,14,17,18,20,22,26,30,32,33,35,36,37,38,41,42,43,46,47,48,50,51,54,64,67,68,69,70 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Notes: Mediterranean populations of taxon named Pheidole pallidula (Nylander, 1849) are now under revision (B. Seifert pers. comm.). Preliminary results suggest occurrence of at least three taxa in the Mediterranean Basin. True P. pallidula is restricted mostly to the western part of the studied area, while in Greece probably occur two other species although introduction of true P. pallidula to tourist resorts is also possible.

Plagiolepis pallescens sensu Radchenko (Fig. 7) Records in Greek Thrace: 48,49,67 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish Thrace

Notes: Under this taxon we placed the samples of Plagiolepis with densely pubescent first gaster tergite. Radchenko (1996) reviewed members of the genus Plagiolepis from Central and Southern Palaearctic and proposed the name P. pallescens Forel, 1889 for taxon with densely pubescent first gaster tergite of both workers and gynes. We studied syntype of P. pallescens described from Rhodes Island preserved in Museum of Genève (available in AntWeb https://www.antweb.org/specimen/CASENT0909854) which is yellowish and has first gaster tergite sparsely pubescent. We have many samples of yellow coloured and sparsely pubescent mature workers collected from Rhodes and observed nests with workers of exclusively yellow aberration and nests with mixed yellow and brown aberrations. Both light and dark colored specimens showed similar level of sclerotization of cuticle. Thus the light colour in this case is not indicative of callow workers. Our specimens of Plagiolepis pallescens sensu Radchenko have darker colouration, from yellowish brown to brown. Only the callow workers are lighter yellowish. In morphometric characters samples of both yellow and dark aberrations from Rhodes appear to be conspecific with Plagiolepis taurica Santschi, 1920, a sparsely pubescent species which is also variable in colour (Salata and Borowiec in preparation). Plagiolepis schmitzi Forel, 1885 is the only other densely pubescent taxon from the Mediterranean area, distributed from Portugal to Sicily (recent record from Iran by Ghahari et al. 2015 is probably based on misidentification), but it is not conspecific with the eastern form named by Radchenko 1996 as P. pallescens. Therefore, densely pubescent taxon from the eastern part of the Mediterranean Basin has no valid name and its proper identification needs a revision of several available names of infraspecific taxa proposed from the Mediterranean area.  2010) redescribed Solenopsis fugax and suggested that four distinct species groups occur in the territory of Europe and the Mediterranean area. They also suggested that several taxa proposed by Bernard (1950) are probably synonyms but they did not take any formal nomenclatorial decisions. In Thrace, we found samples belonging to at least two distinct morphospecies. One sample from the Rhodope Mountains (no. 1) appears to be true S. fugax. This species seems to be rare in Greece and we have only few samples from Macedonia in our collection. All other samples, characterized by shorter hairs on mesosoma and small gynes, belong to Solenopsis lusitanica group as proposed by Galkowski et al. (2010). Probably most of literature records of S. fugax from lowland, warm areas and regions outside Macedonia and Thrace concern taxa of S. lusitanica group. According to Galkowski et al. 2010, the group comprises three taxa described from the western part of the Mediterranean Basin, but we cannot exclude the presence of other undescribed species in the eastern Mediterranean.

Stigmatomma denticulatum Roger, 1859

Records in Greek Thrace: 66

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas; Turkish Thrace Tapinoma erraticum (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 1,3,4,9,10,13,25,43,51,55,56,57,58,67,68,69,70,71 Distribution  Temnothorax cf. bulgaricus (Fig. 11) Records in Greek Thrace: 10, 71

Notes: Balkan and Turkish populations of Temnothorax bulgaricus group need a revision based on detailed morphometric studies. Recently collected material suggests a big diversity of taxa within this group. Samples from the localities 25 and 43 well agree with studied types of T. bulgaricus while samples from the localities 10 and 71 belong to another species of this group. Therefore, prior to the revision of all taxa in this group, proper identification is impossible.   


## Temnothorax cf. interruptus

Records in Greek Thrace: 9,37,61,64,68 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Ionian Is., Macedonia, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Notes: Recent studies suggest that true T. interruptus (Schenck, 1852) does not occur in Greece. All Greek populations belong to one or more undescribed taxa of the T. interruptus complex (Csősz et al. in preparation).

Temnothorax lichtensteini (Bondroit, 1918) Records Temnothorax recedens (Nylander, 1856) Records in Greek Thrace: 6,8,17,20,31,36,39,41,43,44,46,47,50 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Temnothorax semiruber (André, 1881) Records in Greek Thrace: 10,26,31,37,69,71 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Temnothorax subtilis Csősz, Heinze & Mikó, 2015 (Fig. 14) Records in Greek Thrace: 10,60,70 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Thessaly

Temnothorax tergestinus (Finzi, 1928) Records in Greek Thrace: 5,53 Distribution Greek taxa belonging to Temnothorax tuberum group need revision based on detailed morphometric studies. Our material from various parts of Greece suggests that in this area occur more than one species related to T. tuberum (Fabricius, 1775). Specimens collected in Thrace appear to belong to two closely related species. Temnothorax turcicus (Santschi, 1934) Records in Greek Thrace: 71 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Temnothorax cf. unifasciatus sp. 1 and sp. 2

Records in Greek Thrace: 8,18,25,26,50,52,56,57,60,61,63,66 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Thessaly; Turkish Thrace

Notes: Greek taxa belonging to Temnothorax unifasciatus group need revision based on detailed morphometric studies. Our material from various parts of Greece suggests that in this area occur at least two species related to T. unifasciatus (Latreille, 1798). Also, in our material from Thrace we have identified two morphospecies of this group. Records in Greek Thrace: 2,6,7,10,22,33,35,42,45,46,47,48,49,59,71 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Notes: Molecular and morphometric studies suggest occurrence of at least nine species of Tetramorium caespitum/impurum complex in Europe and the Mediterranean area, but so far only five were named formally (Csősz and Markó 2004, Csősz et al. 2014, Schlick-Steiner et al. 2006a). Our samples from Thrace belong to two named species (T. hungaricum and T. impurum) and two not formally described morphospecies we list here as T. cf. caespitum sp. 1 and sp. 2.

Tetramorium chefketi Forel, 1911 Records in Greek Thrace: 5,22,27,35,49,51,65,67,68,70,71 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace   Tetramorium moravicum Kratochvil, 1941 Records in Greek Thrace: 3,4,5,7,26,55,56,57,58,59 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Epirus, Macedonia, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace

Tetramorium rhodium Emery, 1924 (Fig. 17) Records in Greek Thrace: 9

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is.

Tetramorium cf. semilaeve (Fig. 18) Records in Greek Thrace: 9, 13, 17, 22, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 43, 48, 51, 68, 69;Legakis 2011 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish Thrace Notes: Tetramorium semilaeve group from the Balkan Peninsula and Turkish Aegean regions is now under revision (Salata & Borowiec in preparation). We grouped samples with mostly reduced head sculpture under name T. depressum complex (T. hippocratis and at least three unnamed species) and taxa with more expressed head sculpture under T. semilaeve complex (at least two unnamed morphospecies and T. galaticum Menozzii, 1936). For proper identification of all taxa nest samples with males and gynes are required. In our material from Thrace we have three species from T. depressum complex (T. hippocratis, T. cf. depressum sp. 1 and T. cf. depressum sp. 2) and at least one species from T. semilaeve complex (T. cf. semilaeve). We managed to collect only one nest sample of T. semilaeve complex and it belongs to an undescribed species which seems to be widespread in Greece. Probably most literature records of T. semilaeve from Greece concern this undescribed taxon. True T. semilaeve André, 1883 is distributed only in western part of Mediterranean basin (Borowiec et al. 2015).


## Doubtful published records

Legakis 2011 listed five species from Thrace which are probably based on misidentification or misinterpretation.

Aphaenogaster ovaticeps (Emery, 1898) 


## Discussion

Although Thracian ant fauna has been almost totally neglected thus far, we can consider this Greek region as relatively diverse. We collected 115 species, only 7 already mentioned in the checklist in Legakis 2011. Other five taxa mentioned in this checklist can be treated as doubtful records and they probably concern species found also by us, but we cannot specify their true identity without checking voucher specimens. Thus, in total we can confirm the presence of 115 ant species for Greek Thrace. Out of the 11 geographic regions of Greece, only Macedonia with 158 species has richer ant fauna, while Dodecanese, East Aegean Islands and Ionian Islands have similar number of registered species (Borowiec & Salata unpubl. data). One reason for high species richness in Greek Thrace is probably the geographic position of the region, which is situated between the Aegean Sea and the Rhodope Mountains. As the result, we can encounter here species which are otherwise more common in the southern Greek regions, islands of eastern part of Aegean Sea or Aegean part of Turkey (e.g. Since they belong to taxonomically problematic groups it is very possible that they have already been recorded under different names from other parts of the country. Many ant genera and species groups are taxonomically unresolved so we cannot give the exact names for several species from the checklist. Some of them probably have available specific or infraspecific names now trated as synonyms of different taxa, and some are probably taxa new to science.

Results of the present study and recent investigations from other parts of the country show great richness of Greek ant fauna. Based on the material we have collected from various parts of Greece and which includes many still unidentified taxa (Borowiec & Salata unpublished data), it is estimated that at least 320 ant species occur in the fauna of Greece, several of them new to science.


taxonomic literature was used for the identification of the collected ants: Agosti and Collingwood 1987a, Borowiec and Salata 2013, Csősz et al. (2007), Csősz et al. (2015), Karaman et al. (2011), Radchenko and Elmes (2010), Salata and Borowiec 2015b, Seifert (1992), Seifert (2003), Seifert (2007), Seifert (2012), Seifert and Schultz (2009). Where available, we compared our samples with high quality images of the type specimens on the AntWeb website (http://www.antweb.org). In the checklist all recently proposed nomenclatural changes made in the subfamily Myrmicinae Ward et al. 2015 and Formicinae Ward et al. 2016 were included.


,Borowiec and Salata (2013),Borowiec and Salata (2014a),Borowiec and Salata unpubl. data, Csősz et al. (2015), as well as in the neighbouring regions of Bulgarian Thrace, Lapeva-Gjonova and Kiran 2012, Lapeva-Gjonova et al. 2010 and Turkish Thrace(Csősz et al. 2015, Kiran andKaraman 2012, Kiran and Karaman unpubl. data)

## Figure 1 .
1Sampling localities of ants in Greek Thrace (sampling in 1999 -green diamonds, in 2013blue triangles, in 2014 -yellow rectangles, in 2015 -red circles).

## Figure 2 .
2Aphaenogaster festae worker (specimen code: CASENT0763854). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 3 .
3Aphaenogaster cf. subterranea worker (specimen code: CASENT0763853). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 4 .
4Camponotus oertzeni worker. Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm). a: major worker (specimen code: CASENT0763855) b: minor worker (specimen code: CASENT0763856)

## Figure 6 .
6Messor cf. ebeninus worker (specimen code: CASENT0763589). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 7 .
7Plagiolepis pallescens sensu Radchenko worker (specimen code: CASENT0763860). Scale bar = 1mm. a: dorsal view of the body b: lateral view of the body Notes: The status of most European species of genus Solenopsis in Europe requires an extensive revision. Galkowski et al. (

## Figure 8 .
8Solenopsis cf. lusitanica worker (specimen code: CASENT0763861). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 9 .
9Temnothorax aeolius worker (specimen code: CASENT0763862). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).Temnothorax cf. affinis (Fig. 10) Records in Greek Thrace: 43 Notes: Our sample named here as Temnothorax cf. affinis slightly differs in sculpture of head and lighter coloration from Central European population of T. affinis and those from locality 8 and one other sample from the locality 43. In our opinion Balkan populations of T. affinis need a revision based on detailed morphometric studies. Temnothorax bulgaricus (Forel, 1892) Records in Greek Thrace: 25, 43 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under Temnothorax cf. bulgaricus.

## Figure 10 .
10Temnothorax cf. affinis worker (specimen code: CASENT0763863). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).Temnothorax crasecundusSeifert & Csősz, 2015    Records in GreekThrace: 55, 56, 59, 71    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Temnothorax exilis(Emery, 1869)    Records in GreekThrace: 6, 30, 33, 38, 68    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas; Turkish Thrace Temnothorax cf. graecus(Fig. 12 )Records in GreekThrace: 38, 43    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish Thrace Notes: Balkan and Turkish populations of Temnothorax graecus need a revision based on detailed morphometric studies. Our collected material from the Balkan Peninsula suggests that this taxon comprises several cryptic species.

## Figure 11 .Figure 12 .
1112Temnothorax cf. bulgaricus worker (specimen code: CASENT0763864). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm). Temnothorax helenae Csősz, Heinze & Mikó, 2015 (Fig. 13) Records in Greek Thrace: 60, 63 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Macedonia, Sterea Ellas, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Temnothorax cf. graecus worker (specimen code: CASENT0763865). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 13 .
13Temnothorax helenae worker (specimen code: CASENT0763866). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 14 .
14Temnothorax subtilis worker (specimen code: CASENT0763867). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 15 .
15Tetramorium cf. flavidulum(Fig. 15)Tetramorium cf. flavidulum worker (specimen code: CASENT0763868). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 17 .
17Tetramorium rhodium worker (specimen code: CASENT0763871). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).

## Figure 18 .
18Tetramorium cf. semilaeve worker (specimen code: CASENT0763869). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm).


Description of the localities in Greek Thrace where ants were sampled in 1999 and 2013 -2015.1 
2 km S of 

Leivaditis 

Xanthi 
Xanthi 
41.2874°N, 

24.6651°E 

1200 
12.8.1999 
E. 

Nikolakakis 

2 
3 km N of Ano 

Karyofyto 

Xanthi 
Xanthi 
mountain 

grassland/ 

pasture with 

scrub and 

rocks 

41.2865°N, 

24.66617°E 

1180 
28.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

3 
1.5 km NW of 

Dafnonas 

Xanthi 
Xanthi 
grassland 

with some 

scrub and 

trees 

41.228°N, 

24.6605°E 

220 
28.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

4 
2.5 km NE of 

Kallithea 

Xanthi 
Xanthi 
scrub with 

some trees; 

deciduous 

forest 

41.2595°N, 

24.76183°E 

1030 
28.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

5 
Komnina-Ano 

Livera road 

Topeiros 
Xanthi 
41.1595°N, 

24.6961°E 

450 
10.10.1999 
E. 

Nikolakakis 

Table 1. 

Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace 6 

1.5 km W of 

Galani 

Topeiros 
Xanthi 
thermophilous 

rocky slope 

on limestone 

with scrub 

and some 

trees; parking 

area with 

some trees 

41.0935°N, 

24.75883°E 

70 
3.5.2014 
G. Bračko 

7 
1.5 km N of 

Kirnos 

Topeiros 
Xanthi 
field path with 

some trees 

41.00133°N, 

24.7752°E 

20 
27.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

8 
2 km NW of 

Echinos 

Myki 
Xanthi 
thermophilous 

deciduous 

forest on a 

stony ground 

41.295°N, 

24.96383°E 

370 
28.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

9 
4.5 km SW of 

Nea Kessani 

Abdera 
Xanthi 
grassland 

(partly wet); 

oak forest 

41.0075°N, 

25.02667°E 

10 
29.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

10 
0.5 km W of 

Lagos 

Abdera 
Xanthi 
pine forest on 

a wet ground 

41.00683°N, 

25.10783°E 

5 
29.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

11 
Mesi 
Komotini 
Rodopi 
40.983°N, 

25.2095°E 

20 
3.7.2013 
T.K. Amet 

12 
1.5 km N of 

Pandrosos 

Komotini 
Rodopi 
dry scrub with 

some trees 

on a stony 

ground 

41.19233°N, 

25.44683°E 

250 
29.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

13 
1.5 km W of 

Karidia 

Komotini 
Rodopi 
grassland 

with some 

scrub 

41.14322°N, 

25.4202°E 

110 
29.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

14 
Komotini 
Komotini 
Rodopi 
41.12217°N, 

25.4145°E 

40 
12.9.2013 
T.K. Amet 

15 
Kikidio 
Komotini 
Rodopi 
41.1075°N, 

25.43283°E 

50 
11.9.2013 
T.K. Amet 

16 
1 km SW of 

Drimi 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.213°N, 

25.56717°E 

260 
28.8.2013, 

8.9.2013 

Ş. 

Karabela 

17 
Drimi 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
dry hills with 

scarce oak 

forest 

41.21394°N, 

25.5734°E 

190 
2.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 
18 

1.3 km SW of 

Kato Drosini 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
oak forest 

along dry 

stream valley 

41.21515°N, 

25.59189°E 

260 
2.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

19 
Kato Drosini 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.22617°N, 

25.59783°E 

320 
23.6.2013, 

19.10.2013 

T.K. Amet, 

Ş. 

Karabela 

20 
Kato Drosini-

Drania road 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
oak forest 

along dry 

stream valley 

41.23172°N, 

25.62033°E 

250 
2.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

21 
Neo Kallintiri 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.14717°N, 

25.572°E 

70 
19.-20.10.2013 Ş. 

Karabela 

22 
1 km N of Neo 

Kallintiri 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
pasture along 

the river bank 

with several 

poplars 

41.15683°N, 

25.57605°E 

70 
2.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

23 
Dokos 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.137°N, 

25.597°E 

100 
24.9.2013 
Ş. 

Karabela 

24 
Drosia 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.16217°N, 

25.63667°E 

260 
22.8.2013, 

5.9.2013 

T.K. Amet 

25 
4 km NE of 

Plagia 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
open oak 

forest 

41.157°N, 

25.7595°E 

630 
30.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

26 
2.5 km W of 

Kampos 

Arriana 
Rodopi 
grassy slope 

with some 

scrub and 

trees 

41.18717°N, 

25.84117°E 

840 
30.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

27 
Vragia 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.09083°N, 

25.55633°E 

30 
6.-8.9.2013, 

15.9.2013 

T.K. Amet 

28 
Archontika 
Arriana 
Rodopi 
41.0725°N, 

25.54167°E 

30 
5.9.2013 
T.K. Amet 

29 
Salmoni 
Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
41.00467°N, 

25.5345°E 

80 
22.9.2013 
M. Gazios-

manpaşa 

30 
near Strimi 
Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
dry stream 

valley with 

Platanus 

forest and 

mossy rocks 

40.97329°N, 

25.54116°E 

170 
5.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

31 
Krovili-

Maroneia road 

Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
pine forest 

with shale 

rocks 

40.94286°N, 

25.53441°E 

210 
5.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace 32 

ancient Ismara, 

SE of Maroneia 

Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
pastures with 

numerous 

stones and 

rocks inside 

the ruins of 

ancient 

settlements 

40.86727°N, 

25.53691°E 

80 
5.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

33 
Petrota 
Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
northern 

slope of the 

hill with great 

rock 

40.9013°N, 

25.60546°E 

220 
28.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

34 
2.2 km N of 

Petrota 

Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
coniferous 

forest with 

Pinus nigra 

40.91982°N, 

25.61517°E 

130 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

35 
3.8 km W of 

Mesimvria 

Maroneia-

Sapes 

Rodopi 
dry pastures; 

dry stream 

valley 

40.86628°N, 

25.63135°E 

10 
28.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

36 
near Avra 
Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
dry oak forest 

with 

limestone 

rocks; dry 

stream valley 

40.92227°N, 

25.67666°E 

250 
28.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

37 
Dikella-Avra 

road 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
dry oak forest 

with 

limestone 

rocks 

40.90827°N, 

25.68754°E 

230 
28.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

38 
2 km N of 

Makri 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
scrubby slope 

on a stony 

ground 

40.8725°N, 

25.74183°E 

250 
2.5.2014 
G. Bračko 

39 
Alexandroupoli-

Kirki road (loc. 

1) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
oak forest 

edge 

40.94409°N, 

25.77836°E 

350 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

40 
Alexandroupoli-

Kirki road (loc. 

2) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
oak forest 

edge 

40.92764°N, 

25.80323°E 

320 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

41 
Alexandroupoli-

Kirki road (loc. 

3) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
oak forest 
40.91697°N, 

25.81271°E 

220 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 
42 

2.9 km E of 

Kirki 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
river valley 

with gravel; 

poplar forest 

40.97157°N, 

25.82591°E 

160 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

43 
Alexandroupoli-

Kirki road (loc. 

4) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
Platanus 

forest along a 

dry stream 

valley 

40.90222°N, 

25.83497°E 

120 
29.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

44 
1 km N of 

Palagia 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
pine forest 
40.9194°N, 

25.86687°E 

330 
6.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

45 
N of Avas (loc. 

1) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
rest area 

close to 

stream valley 

40.97921°N, 

25.91529°E 

150 
31.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

46 
N of Avas (loc. 

2) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
rest area 

close to road; 

oak forest 

with rocky 

walls 

40.94644°N, 

25.90533°E 

100 
31.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

47 
N of Avas (loc. 

3) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
Platanus 

forest along a 

river valley 

40.94276°N, 

25.91075°E 

100 
31.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

48 
Alexandroupoli, 

Hotel Plaza 

env. 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
ruderal sites 

in suburban 

area 

40.84866°N, 

25.84221°E 

10 
26.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

49 
Alexandroupoli, 

Port Area 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
urban park; 

ruderal sites 

in port area 

40.84389°N, 

25.8721°E 

10 
27.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

50 
1.6 km N of 

Loutros 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
rest area 

close to river 

with Platanus 

forest 

40.89605°N, 

26.05279°E 

40 
4.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

51 
0.5 km S of 

Itea 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
open oak 

forest; forest 

edge 

40.96483°N, 

26.18967°E 

40 
2.5.2014 
G. Bračko 

52 
near 

Leptokaria 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
rest area 

close to 

roadside with 

mixed oak-

beech forest 

41.06553°N, 

25.90852°E 

750 
3.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace 53 

Aisymi-

Leptokaria 

road (loc. 1) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
rest area on 

the bank of 

oak forest 

41.06121°N, 

25.9122°E 

750 
30.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

54 
Aisymi-

Leptokaria 

road (loc. 2) 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
thicket near a 

source of 

water intake 

41.06043°N, 

25.92451°E 

690 
30.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

55 
6.7 km NE of 

Leptokaria 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
fir forest on 

the banks 

with oak 

buffer zone 

41.10967°N, 

25.96282°E 

910 
30.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

56 
6.6 km NE of 

Leptokaria 

Alexand-

roupoli 

Evros 
mountain fir; 

pine forest 

41.10698°N, 

25.96444°E 

930 
3.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

57 
Leptokaria-

Mega Dereio 

road (loc. 1) 

Soufli 
Evros 
mountain 

pass of dwarf 

oak forest 

41.1186°N, 

25.94328°E 

860 
30.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

58 
Sapka, 13 km 

NE of Nea 

Santa 

Soufli 
Evros 
mountain 

grassland 

with scrub 

and rocks 

41.13383°N, 

25.92267°E 

900 
30.4.2014 
G. Bračko 

59 
Leptokaria-

Mega Dereio 

road (loc. 2) 

Soufli 
Evros 
mountain oak 

forest 

41.15638°N, 

25.92475°E 

820 
30.8.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

60 
Leptokaria-

Mega Dereio 

road (loc. 3) 

Soufli 
Evros 
mountain oak 

forest 

41.16249°N, 

25.95632°E 

720 
3.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

61 
4.4 km NW of 

Lefkimmi 

Soufli 
Evros 
mixed pine 

and oak 

forest with 

mossy rocks 

41.05035°N, 

26.15935°E 

280 
4.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

62 
2.7 km NW of 

Lefkimmi 

Soufli 
Evros 
dry stream 

valley inside 

pine forest on 

the site of the 

fire 

41.03864°N, 

26.16716°E 

220 
4.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

63 
Mt. Kapsalo, 

NW of 

Lefkimmi 

Soufli 
Evros 
mountain oak 

forest with 

mossy rocks 

41.09038°N, 

26.13448°E 

570 
4.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 
64 

4.9 km W of 

Dadia 

Soufli 
Evros 
edge of an 

oak forest 

with mossy 

rocks 

41.1206°N, 

26.16635°E 

180 
1.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

65 
2.8 km W of 

Dadia 

Soufli 
Evros 
oak forest 
41.1241°N, 

26.19078°E 

140 
1.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

66 
1.6 km NW of 

Dadia 

Soufli 
Evros 
pine forest; 

dry stream 

valley 

41.13659°N, 

26.20799°E 

40 
1.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

67 
Dadia 
Soufli 
Evros 
pine forest 
41.12367°N, 

26.21939°E 

130 
1.9.2015 
L. 

Borowiec 

68 
0.5 km NW of 

Likofos 

Soufli 
Evros 
rocks with 

moss and 

pines on a 

relatively wet 

ground 

41.12283°N, 

26.28533°E 

40 
2.5.2014 
G. Bračko 

69 
2.5 km SE of 

Petrota 

Orestiada 
Evros 
dry grassland 

with some 

scrub; forest 

edge 

41.672°N, 

26.15017°E 

180 
1.5.2014 
G. Bračko, 

K. Kiran 

70 
2.5 km SE of 

Pentalofos 

Orestiada 
Evros 
oak forest; 

forest edge 

41.63117°N, 

26.20583°E 

220 
1.5.2014 
G. Bračko, 

K. Kiran 

71 
1 km NE of 

Rizia 

Orestiada 
Evros 
grassland 

with some 

scrub and 

trees on a 

sandy 

ground; wet 

deciduous 

forest 

41.63633°N, 

26.43267°E 

40 
1.5.2014 
G. Bračko, 

K. Kiran 

72 
Orestiada 
Orestiada 
Evros 
41.50117°N, 

26.52967°E 




Notes: Our material from Greece showed that at least seven morphospecies belonging to A. subterranea complex occur in this country. However, only two of them have aAphaenogaster cf. subterranea (Fig. 3) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 62 

formal name, i.e. A. subterranea (Latreille, 1798) and A. lesbica Forel, 1913. 
Specimens sampled in the vicinity of Lefkimmi (62) look very similar to samples of A. 
lesbica, recorded hitherto only from Lesbos and to another unnamed morphospecies, 
spreaded in various localities of Pieria Mountains in southern part of Macedonia. This 
complex is now under revision and status of the sample from Thrace will be explained 
in the future. 

Bothriomyrmex communistus Santschi, 1919 

Records in Greek Thrace: 51, 58 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, Eastern Aegean Is., 
Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, 
Turkish Thrace 

Bothriomyrmex corsicus Santschi, 1923 

Records in Greek Thrace: 69 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., 
Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 




in Transcaucasia, Asia Minor, Iran, the Middle East and Arabian Peninsula should refer to C. viaticoides. True C. bicolor is restricted only to North Africa(Wehner et al. 1994, C. Galkowski pers. comm). Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish ThraceColobopsis truncata (Spinola, 1808) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 7, 10, 71 

Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Crematogaster ionia Forel, 1911 

Records in Greek Thrace: 6 

Crematogaster lorteti Forel, 1910 

Records in Greek Thrace: 25, 51, 69 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Sterea 
Ellas; Turkish Thrace 

Crematogaster schmidti (Mayr, 1853) 




Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thracein Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East 
Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian 
Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Crematogaster sordidula (Nylander, 1849) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 9, 12, 38, 46, 69, 70; Legakis 2011 [as Crematogaster 
mayri (Nylander, 1849)] 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East 
Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian 
Thrace, Turkish Thrace 
Dolichoderus quadripunctatus (Linnaeus, 1771) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 18, 20, 35, 47, 65 

Formica cinerea Mayr, 1853 

Records in Greek Thrace: 5 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Epirus, Macedonia, Thessaly; 
Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica clara Forel, 1886 

Records in Greek Thrace: 7, 10, 15, 16, 22, 27, 28, 29, 42, 48, 49, 53, 62, 71, 72 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Macedonia, 
Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica cunicularia Latreille, 1798 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 2, 5, 42, 46, 47, 49, 53, 58, 59, 60 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, East Aegean Is., Epirus, 
Macedonia, Sterea Ellas; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica fusca Linnaeus, 1758 

Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 56, 60 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, 
Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica gagates Latreille, 1798 

Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 26, 40, 53, 55, 65 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Sterea 
Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica pratensis Retzius, 1783 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 2, 7 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish 
Thrace 
Formica rufa Linnaeus, 1761 

Records in Greek Thrace: 56; Legakis 2011 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace 

Formica rufibarbis Fabricius, 1793 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 5 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Cyclades, East Aegean Is., Epirus, 
Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Formica sanguinea Latreille, 1798 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 5, 53 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian 
Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Lasius alienus (Förster, 1850) 




Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Thessaly; Turkish ThraceGreek Thrace: 1, 69; Legakis 2011 [as L. distinguendus] 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish 
Thrace 

Notes: Proper identification of both species requires nest samples with gynes (Seifert 
2007). We have only workers available in our material. 

Lasius brunneus (Latreille, 1798) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 26, 47, 50, 53, 54, 59 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., 
Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Lasius flavus (Fabricius, 1782) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 42 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., 
Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 
Lasius fuliginosus (Latreille, 1798) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 52, 69, 71 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish 
Thrace 

Lasius illyricus Zimmermann, 1935 

Records in Greek Thrace: 4, 5, 8, 20, 26, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 58, 59, 60 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Ionian Is., Macedonia, 
Peloponnese 

Lasius jensi Seifert, 1982 

Records in Greek Thrace: 4 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace 

Lasius lasioides (Emery, 1869) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 48 

Lasius myops Forel, 1894 

Records in Greek Thrace: 44 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Turkish Thrace 

Lasius neglectus/turcicus complex 

Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 12, 13, 18, 20, 22, 30, 32, 38, 42, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 
56, 65, 68, 69 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., 
Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas; Turkish Thrace 

Notes: The status of both taxa, L. neglectus Van Loon, Boomsma & Andrasfalvy, 1990 
and L. turcicus Santschi, 1921, is still under discussion. Populations of both taxa show 
differences in biology and ecology and quite expressed morphometric differences in 
males (these are less expressed in female castes), which could indicate that these are 
two distinct species (Seifert 2000). However, preliminary molecular studies suggest 
conspecifity of both taxa, what confirm hypothesis of occurrence of two eco-
morphotypes of one species. 
Lasius niger (Linnaeus, 1758) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 71 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia (see notes below); 
Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 




Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish ThraceDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., 
Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Lepisiota frauenfeldi (Mayr, 1855) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 12, 13, 18, 20, 22, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 43, 44, 46, 
47, 48, 49, 50, 67, 68 

Leptothorax acervorum (Fabricius, 1793) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia (see notes below); 
Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 




Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Turkish ThraceNotes: Our samples named here as Messor cf. ebeninus and M. cf. semirufus (listed below) belong to the Messor semirufus complex. This complex comprises numerous names of various rank, partly available to nomenclature. Most taxa were described from the eastern part of the Mediterranean Basin(Borowiec 2014, Tohmé andTohmé 1981).Liometopum microcephalum (Panzer, 1798) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 16, 17, 24, 25, 42, 47 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., 
Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 
Messor cf. ebeninus (Fig. 6 ) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 7, 12, 25, 26 




in Greece and neighbouring regions: Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish ThraceMessor oertzeni Forel, 1910 

Records in Greek Thrace: 9, 30, 32, 33, 44, 48; Legakis 2011 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Thrace; 
Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 




Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Ionian Is., Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish ThraceDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; 
Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Myrmica lonae Finzi, 1926 

Records in Greek Thrace: 69 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish 
Thrace 

Myrmica sabuleti Meinert, 1861 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 55, 59, 60 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, Epirus, Macedonia, 
Sterea Ellas; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace 

Myrmica scabrinodis Nylander, 1846 

Records in Greek Thrace: 1, 5 

Myrmica specioides Bondroit, 1918 

Records in Greek Thrace: 71 

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish 
Thrace 

Pheidole cf. pallidula 

Records in Greek 


Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Turkish ThraceTetramorium cf. caespitum sp. 1 and sp. 2Tetramorium atratulus (Schenck, 1852) 

Records in Greek Thrace: 47 




Tetramorium cf. davidi Records in Greek Thrace: 25 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese; Turkish Thrace Notes: This sample belongs to a species group with head costulae diverging on occipital part of head and needs a revision. Our material from the eastern part of the Mediterranean suggests the occurrence of at least two distinct morphospecies. Tetramorium cf. depressum sp. 1 Records in Greek Thrace: 12, 68 Notes: See notes under Tetramorium cf. semilaeve. Tetramorium cf. depressum sp. 2 Records in Greek Thrace: 71 Notes: See notes under Tetramorium cf. semilaeve.Tetramorium feroxRuzsky, 1903    Records in GreekThrace: 27, 42, 46, 72    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace


Records in GreekThrace: 56    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Dodecanese, Macedonia Notes: In the eastern part of Mediterranean Basin, Tetramorium flavidulum group is represented by several morphospecies with centre of diversity in Anatolian Turkey (our unpublished data). Our material from Greece suggests the occurrence of at least three distinct species in this country. Male genitalia, petiole and postpetiole sculpture of the members of this group are very similar to those of the species of T. chefketi group revised byCsősz et al. 2007. However, all investigated specimens are devoid of microsculpture on the first gastral tergite, characteristic of the T. chefketi group. Proper identification of the sample from Thrace is impossible prior to the revision of all taxa of T. flaviulum group. hippocratisAgosti & Collingwood, 1987 (Fig. 16) Records in Greek Thrace: 39 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is.; Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under Tetramorium cf. semilaeve. Tetramorium hippocratis worker (specimen code: CASENT0763870). Lateral view of the body (scale bar = 1mm). Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Tetramorium impurum (Förster, 1850) Records in Greek Thrace: 1 Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Turkish ThraceTetramorium Tetramorium hungaricum Röszler, 1935 

Records in Greek Thrace: 3, 25, 26, 58, 71, 

Figure 16. 




Notes: This species, a member of A. splendida group, occurs only in Italy. Four other members of the group were recorded from Greece: A. muelleriana Wolf, 1915 from Epirus and Ionian Is., A. splendida (Roger, 1859) from Macedonia, Peloponnese and Sterea Ellas, A. rugosoferruginea Forel, 1889 endemic to Crete and A. festae Emery, 1915 from Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Macedonia and Thrace. Without


Aphaenogaster festae, Camponotus kiesenwetteri, Camponotus samius, Cataglyphis viaticoides, Temnothorax helenae) as well as species with more northern distribution that are rarely found in other parts of Greece (e.g. Formica fusca, Formica pratensis, Formica rufa, Lasius fuliginosus, Lasius jensi, Lasius niger, Leptothorax acervorum, Myrmica hellenica, Myrmica lonae, Myrmica specioides, Tetramorium impurum). Among the collected material, we have some particulary interesting species, as they have not been found in the continental part of Greece yet, namely Cataglyphis viaticoides, Temnothorax aeolius, Tetramorium cf. davidi, Tetramorium hippocratis and Tetramorium rhodium. Temnothorax aeolius and Tetramorium rhodium are also absent from the neighbouring regions of Bulgarian and Turkish Thrace. In the checklist of species, we listed some taxa under names that have not been mentioned in the literature for Greece, i.e. Messor cf. ebeninus, Messor cf. semirufus, Temnothorax cf. affinis, Temnothorax cf. bulgaricus, Tetramorium cf. depressum sp. 1, Tetramorium cf. depressum sp. 2.
Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace
Bračko G et al.
Bračko G et al.
Records in GreekThrace: 8, 9, 18, 22, 31, 36, 39, 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 60, 61, 62, 65, 67,  69, 71    Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Thessaly
Bračko G et al.   
Bračko G et al.
AcknowledgementsWe wish to thank Sándor Csősz (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco) for the identification of some samples of Temnothorax and Tetramorium. We are grateful to students from Trakya University who contributed ant material during invertebrate sampling. We thank Teo Delić (University of Ljubljana) for preparing the map and Apostolos Trichas (Iraklion University) for providing all Formicidae material deposited in the Natural History Museum of Crete. Thanks to Marek L. Borowiec (University of California, Davis) for a linguistic review of the manuscript and to Jolanta Świętojańska (University of Wrocław) for her assistance during field trips of Lech Borowiec.Author contributionsGregor Bračko and Lech Borowiec performed field work, identification of the material and led the writing of the manuscript. Kadri Kiran performed field work and contributed in the identification of the material. Sebastian Salata performed field work and contributed in the identification of the material from Natural History Museum of Crete. Celal Karaman contributed in the identification of the material. KK, SS and CK read the manuscript and contributed with suggestions.voucher specimens it is impossible to determine which species was recorded by Legakis 2011.Lepisiota melas(Emery, 1915)Notes: In the key to Balkan ants(Agosti and Collingwood 1987a)L. melas is distingushed from L. frauenfeldi by the colouration of the mesosoma (alitrunk), being mainly or entirely reddish in L. melas and mainly or entirely dark in L. frauenfeldi. After examining photos of type specimens of both taxa (available in AntWeb https:// www.antweb.org/specimen/CASENT0905146, https://www.antweb.org/specimen/ CASENT0909884) it is evident that these species were misinterpreted and L. melas Notes: Arnol'di 1977 placed several populations from Transcaucasia, Turkey and Central Asia under the name M. caducus, and described several infraspecific taxa. The closest to Greek border described taxon is M. caducus caucasicola Arnoldi, 1977 with type locality in Transcaucasia. Specimens of this taxon were recently collected in southwestern Turkey (our unpublished data). In our collection we also have a new endemic species from Crete, belonging to M. caducus group. Since all known localities for taxa of M. caducus group are far from Greek Thrace, we assume the record in Legakis 2011 probably does not belong to this group but to a related M. semirufus group.Bondroit, 1918Notes: M. bouvieri is a western Mediterranean species distributed from Portugal to Italy and its occurrence in Greece is unlikely. Record in Legakis 2011 is probably based on misidentification of one of the species from the M. semirufus group.Menozzii, 1933Notes: This species was misinterpreted in the key to Balkan ants(Agosti and Collingwood 1987a). True T. lucidulum is a distinct species of T. semilaeve group (T. depressum complex), well distinguished by extremely narrow frons. It was described from "Syrien, Kleinasien, Turkestan" by Emery 1909 under unavailable name Tetramorium caespitum punicum var. lucidula, and is most probably absent from Greece. At least four other species of T. depressum complex occur in Greece and it is impossible to conclude what is the identity of the species mentioned in Legakis 2011 under the name T. lucidulum. See also notes under T. cf. semilaeve.Messor bouvieriTetramorium lucidulum
. Emery Camponotus Aegaeus, Camponotus aegaeus Emery, 1915

Records in Greek Thrace: 66. 68Records in Greek Thrace: 66, 68

Turkish Thrace Camponotus aethiops (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 3. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., MacedoniaLegakis 2011 [as Camponotus marginatus (Latreille, 1798)Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Macedonia; Turkish Thrace Camponotus aethiops (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 13, 25, 30, 31, 32, 33, 38, 48, 51, 53, 58, 63, 66, 68, 69, 70; Legakis 2011 [as Camponotus marginatus (Latreille, 1798)]

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese; Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, ThessalyEast Aegean Is.Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly;

Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus atricolor (Nylander, 1849) Records in Greek Thrace: 3, 7, 51. 6971Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus atricolor (Nylander, 1849) Records in Greek Thrace: 3, 7, 51, 69, 71

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Turkish Thrace Camponotus dalmaticus (Nylander, 1849) Records in Greek Thrace: 30. 3569Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Turkish Thrace Camponotus dalmaticus (Nylander, 1849) Records in Greek Thrace: 30, 35, 36, 41, 44, 46, 61, 69

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus fallax (Nylander, 1856) Records in Greek Thrace. 2071Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus fallax (Nylander, 1856) Records in Greek Thrace: 20, 71

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is. Macedonia, PeloponneseBulgarian Thrace1878Turkish Thrace Camponotus gestroi EmeryDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus gestroi Emery, 1878

Greek Thrace: 13. 3538Records in Greek Thrace: 13, 35, 38

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese; Macedonia, PeloponneseBulgarian ThraceTurkish Thrace Camponotus ionius EmeryDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Camponotus ionius Emery, 1920

. Greek Records In, Thrace, 6Records in Greek Thrace: 6

East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly Messor orientalis (Emery, 1898) Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 9. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Cyclades, Dodecanese4958Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly Messor orientalis (Emery, 1898) Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 9, 13, 17, 25, 30, 33, 35, 43, 48, 49, 58

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is. 3Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, ThessalyTurkish Thrace Messor cf. semirufus Records in Greek ThraceDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Turkish Thrace Messor cf. semirufus Records in Greek Thrace: 3

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under M. cf. ebeninus. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under M. cf. ebeninus.

Messor cf. structor Records in Greek Thrace: 2, 23. 2772Messor cf. structor Records in Greek Thrace: 2, 23, 27, 29, 50, 53, 72

Turkish Thrace Notes: According to molecular studies, taxon previously named as a Messor structor (Latreille, 1798) comprises two cryptic species. Both can be found in different parts of the Balkan Peninsula, also in southern Bulgaria close to Greek border (Schlick-Steiner et al. 2006b). Cyclades Crete, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is, Ionian Is, Macedonia, Sterea Peloponnese, Ellas, Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Bulgarian ThraceSince many available names of various rank were proposed in the Messor structor complex. the proper identification of our samples is impossible prior to the revision of all proposed taxaDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Notes: According to molecular studies, taxon previously named as a Messor structor (Latreille, 1798) comprises two cryptic species. Both can be found in different parts of the Balkan Peninsula, also in southern Bulgaria close to Greek border (Schlick-Steiner et al. 2006b). Since many available names of various rank were proposed in the Messor structor complex, the proper identification of our samples is impossible prior to the revision of all proposed taxa.

. Krausse Messor Wasmanni, Messor wasmanni Krausse, 1910

Greek Thrace: 9. 6871Records in Greek Thrace: 9, 13, 15, 29, 30, 32, 33, 38, 47, 48, 49, 67, 68, 71

East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Myrmecina graminicola (Latreille, 1802) Records in Greek Thrace: 5. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese671Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Myrmecina graminicola (Latreille, 1802) Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 6, 9, 60, 70, 71

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, ThessalyBulgarian ThraceTurkish Thrace Myrmica hellenica FinziDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Myrmica hellenica Finzi, 1926

. Greek Records In, Thrace, 710Records in Greek Thrace: 7, 10

Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace Plagiolepis pygmaea (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 6. 870Survey of the antsSurvey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace Plagiolepis pygmaea (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 6, 8, 9, 12, 17, 20, 30, 32, 35, 36, 37, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51, 61, 64, 65, 66, 69, 70

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese; Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, ThessalyEast Aegean Is.Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese, Sterea Ellas, Thessaly;

Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Plagiolepis taurica Santschi. Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Plagiolepis taurica Santschi, 1920

East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Ponera coarctata (Latreille, 1802) Records in Greek Thrace: 30. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions. Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese6071Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Cyclades, Dodecanese, East Aegean Is., Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Ponera coarctata (Latreille, 1802) Records in Greek Thrace: 30, 60, 71

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Epirus, Ionian Is. Macedonia, Sterea Ellas, Peloponnese, ThessalyBulgarian Thrace1895Turkish Thrace Ponera testacea EmeryDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Sterea Ellas, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Ponera testacea Emery, 1895

Records in Greek Thrace: 46. 6970Records in Greek Thrace: 46, 69, 70

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace Prenolepis nitens (Mayr, 1853) Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 8, 51. 6970Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Crete, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Peloponnese; Bulgarian Thrace Prenolepis nitens (Mayr, 1853) Records in Greek Thrace: 5, 8, 51, 69, 70

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is. Macedonia, Sterea Ellas, Peloponnese, ThessalyBulgarian Thrace1Turkish Thrace Solenopsis fugax (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek ThraceDistribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: East Aegean Is., Epirus, Ionian Is., Macedonia, Sterea Ellas, Peloponnese, Thessaly; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Solenopsis fugax (Latreille, 1798) Records in Greek Thrace: 1

Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under S. cf. lusitanica. Distribution in Greece and neighbouring regions: Macedonia; Bulgarian Thrace, Turkish Thrace Notes: See notes under S. cf. lusitanica.

Review and reclassification of Cataglyphis (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). D Agosti, 10.1080/00222939000770851Journal of Natural History. 246Agosti D (1990) Review and reclassification of Cataglyphis (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). Journal of Natural History 24 (6): 1457-1505. DOI: 10.1080/00222939000770851

A provisional list of the Balkan ants. D Agosti, C A Collingwood, Hym• Agosti D, Collingwood CA (1987a) A provisional list of the Balkan ants (Hym.

• André E (1881) Catalogue raisonne des formicides provenant du Voyage en Orient de M. Abeille de Perrin et description des especes nouvelles. ; Formicidae, D Agosti, C A Collingwood, 10.5281/ZENODO.27167DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.27167I. Synonymic list. Mitteilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft. 601Zoologicheskii Zhurnal. In RussianFormicidae) with a key to the worker caste : II. key to the worker caste, including the European species without the Iberian. Mitteilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft 60: 261-293. DOI: 10.5169/SEALS-402274 • Agosti D, Collingwood CA (1987b) A provisional list of the Balkan ants (Hym. Formicidae) and a key to the worker caste. I. Synonymic list. Mitteilungen der Schweizerischen Entomologischen Gesellschaft 60: 51-62. DOI: 10.5281/ ZENODO.27083 • André E (1881) Catalogue raisonne des formicides provenant du Voyage en Orient de M. Abeille de Perrin et description des especes nouvelles. Annales de la Société Entomologique de France 6 (1): 53-78. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.27096 • Arnol'di KV (1977) Survey of harvester ants of the genus Messor (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of the fauna of the USSR. Zoologicheskii Zhurnal 56: 1637-1648. [In Russian]. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.27167

Catalogue of ants of Europe, the Mediterranean Basin and adjacent regions (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). F Bernard, Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace • Borowiec L, Salata S (2012) Ants of Greece -checklist, comments and new faunistic data (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). 115Notes sur les fourmis de France. IIGenus• Bernard F (1950) Notes sur les fourmis de France. II. Peuplement des montagnes meridionales. Annales de la Société Entomologique de France 115: 1-36. URL: http:// antcat.org/documents/195/6389.pdf • Borowiec L (2014) Catalogue of ants of Europe, the Mediterranean Basin and adjacent regions (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Genus (Special issue -Monograph) 25: 1-340. Survey of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Greek Thrace • Borowiec L, Salata S (2012) Ants of Greece -checklist, comments and new faunistic data (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Genus 23 (4): 461-563.

Ants of Greece -additions and corrections (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). L Borowiec, S ; • Salata, L Borowiec, S Salata, 10.5281/ZENODO.11430Redescription of Camponotus nitidescens Forel, 1889, new status and notes on ants from Kefalonia, Greece (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). 24Genus• Borowiec L, Salata S (2013) Ants of Greece -additions and corrections (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Genus 24 (3): 335-401. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.11430 • Borowiec L, Salata S (2014a) Redescription of Camponotus nitidescens Forel, 1889, new status and notes on ants from Kefalonia, Greece (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Genus 25 (3): 499-517.

Review of Mediterranean members of the Aphaenogaster cecconii group (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), with description of four new species. L Borowiec, S ; • Salata, L Borowiec, C Galkowski, S ; • Salata, S Csősz, B Markó, 10.3897/zookeys.512.10006DOI: 10.3897/ zookeys.512.10006What is Tetramorium semilaeve André, 1883? (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). 3861Hymenoptera: Formicidae)• Borowiec L, Salata S (2014b) Review of Mediterranean members of the Aphaenogaster cecconii group (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), with description of four new species. Zootaxa 3861: 40-60. DOI: 10.11646/zootaxa.3861.1.2 • Borowiec L, Galkowski C, Salata S (2015) What is Tetramorium semilaeve André, 1883? (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). ZooKeys 512: 39-62. DOI: 10.3897/ zookeys.512.10006 • Csősz S, Markó B (2004) Redescription of Tetramorium hungaricum Röszler, 1935, a related species of T. caespitum (Linnaeus, 1758) (Hymenoptera: Formicidae).

Taxonomic Synopsis of the Ponto-Mediterranean Ants of Temnothorax nylanderi Species-Group. S Csősz, J Heinze, I Mikó, 10.1371/journal.pone.0140000e0140000. DOI: 10.137 1/journal.pone.0140000Myrmecologische Nachrichten. 611PLOS ONEMyrmecologische Nachrichten 6: 49-59. URL: http://antcat.org/documents/4299/ Csosz_&_Markó_2004_Myrmecol_Nachr.pdf • Csősz S, Heinze J, Mikó I (2015) Taxonomic Synopsis of the Ponto-Mediterranean Ants of Temnothorax nylanderi Species-Group. PLOS ONE 10 (11): e0140000. DOI: 10.137 1/journal.pone.0140000

Tetramorium indocile Santschi, 1927 stat. rev. is the proposed scientific name for Tetramorium sp. C sensu Schlick. S Csősz, A Radchenko, A ; • Schulz, S Csősz, H C Wagner, M Bozsó, B Seifert, W Arthofer, B C Schlick-Steiner, F M Steiner, Z ; Pénzes, Steiner, Hymenoptera: Formicidae). 1405Taxonomic revision of the Palaearctic Tetramorium chefketi species complex (Hymenoptera: Formicidae)• Csősz S, Radchenko A, Schulz A (2007) Taxonomic revision of the Palaearctic Tetramorium chefketi species complex (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Zootaxa 1405: 1-38. • Csősz S, Wagner HC, Bozsó M, Seifert B, Arthofer W, Schlick-Steiner BC, Steiner FM, Pénzes Z (2014) Tetramorium indocile Santschi, 1927 stat. rev. is the proposed scientific name for Tetramorium sp. C sensu Schlick-Steiner et al. (2006) based on combined molecular and morphological evidence (Hymenoptera: Formicidae).

. 10.1016/j.jcz.2014.06.002DOI: 10.1 016/j.jcz.2014.06.002Zoologischer Anzeiger -A Journal of Comparative Zoology. 2536Zoologischer Anzeiger -A Journal of Comparative Zoology 253 (6): 469-481. DOI: 10.1 016/j.jcz.2014.06.002

Redescription de Solenopsis fugax (Latreille, 1798) et notes sur les Solenopsis de France (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). • Emery, C ; • Galkowski, C Casevitz-Weulersee, J Cagniant, H , 10.1002/mmnd.48019090202Teil IX. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift. 32Beiträge zur Monographie der Formiciden des paläarktischen Faunengebietes. Revue Française d'Entomologie• Emery C (1909) Beiträge zur Monographie der Formiciden des paläarktischen Faunengebietes. (Hym.). Teil IX. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift 1909: 695-712. DOI: 10.1002/mmnd.48019090202 • Encyclopaedia Britannica (2015) Thrace. Encyclopaedia Britannica Online. http:// www.britannica.com/place/Thrace. Accession date: 2015 12 28. • Galkowski C, Casevitz-Weulersee J, Cagniant H (2010) Redescription de Solenopsis fugax (Latreille, 1798) et notes sur les Solenopsis de France (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). Revue Française d'Entomologie 32 (3): 151-163.

Ants of the genus Camponotus Mayr, 1861 (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the Kaz Mountains, Turkey, with descriptions of sexuals of Camponotus candiotes Emery, 1894 and Camponotus ionius Emery. H Ghahari, M Sharaf, A Aldawood, C A Collingwood, C ; • Karaman, N Aktaç, K Kiran, First annotated checklist of the ant fauna of Turkey (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Turkey.pdf • Kiran K, Karaman C65Zootaxa• Ghahari H, Sharaf M, Aldawood A, Collingwood CA (2015) A contribution to the study of the ant fauna (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of Eastern Iran. Contributions to Entomology 65 (2): 341-359. • Karaman C, Aktaç N, Kiran K (2011) Ants of the genus Camponotus Mayr, 1861 (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in the Kaz Mountains, Turkey, with descriptions of sexuals of Camponotus candiotes Emery, 1894 and Camponotus ionius Emery, 1920. Turkish Journal of Zoology 35: 183-197. URL: http://antcat.org/documents/4853/ Karaman_et_al_2011_Turk_J_Zool Camponotus in Kaz Mts, Turkey.pdf • Kiran K, Karaman C (2012) First annotated checklist of the ant fauna of Turkey (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Zootaxa 3548: 1-38.

Ants of the genus Plagiolepis Mayr (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of the central and southern Palearctic. • Lapeva-Gjonova, A Kiran, K ; • Lapeva-Gjonova, A Antonova, V Radchenko, A G Atanasova, M , 10.3897/zookeys.62.430DOI: 10.3897/ zookeys.62.430 • Legakis ACatalogue of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of Bulgaria. 8Entomologicheskoe Obozrenie. In Russian• Lapeva-Gjonova A, Kiran K (2012) Ant fauna (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of Strandzha (Istranca) Mountain and adjacent Black Sea coast. North-Western Journal of Zoology 8: 72-84. • Lapeva-Gjonova A, Antonova V, Radchenko AG, Atanasova M (2010) Catalogue of the ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of Bulgaria. ZooKeys 62: 1-124. DOI: 10.3897/ zookeys.62.430 • Legakis A (2011) Annotated list of the ants (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of Greece. Hellenic Zoological Archives 7: 1-55. URL: http://www.antcat.org/documents/5309/ legakis_2011_hellenic_zool_arch-list-of-greek-ants.pdf • Radchenko AG (1996) Ants of the genus Plagiolepis Mayr (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of the central and southern Palearctic. Entomologicheskoe Obozrenie 75: 178-187. [In Russian].

A review of ants of the genus Cataglyphis Foerster (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) from Asia. A G • Radchenko, Entomologicheskoe obozrenie. 76In Russian• Radchenko AG (1997) A review of ants of the genus Cataglyphis Foerster (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) from Asia. Entomologicheskoe obozrenie 76: 424-442. [In Russian].

A key to the ants of the genus Cataglyphis Foerster (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of Asia. A G • Radchenko, Entomologicheskoe Obozrenie. 77In Russian• Radchenko AG (1998) A key to the ants of the genus Cataglyphis Foerster (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) of Asia. Entomologicheskoe Obozrenie 77: 502-508. [In Russian].

Redescription of Temnothorax antigoni (Forel, 1911) and description of its new social parasite Temnothorax curtisetosus sp. n. from Turkey (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). A G • Radchenko, G ; • Elmes, S Salata, L ; • Borowiec, S Salata, L ; • Borowiec, S Salata, L ; • Borowiec, B C Schlick-Steiner, F M Steiner, K Moder, B Seifert, M Sanetra, E Dyreson, C Stauffer, E ; • Christian, B C Schlick-Steiner, F M Steiner, H Konrad, B Marko, S Csősz, G Heller, B Ferencz, B Sipos, E Christian, C Stauffer, 10.14411/eje.2006.060DOI: 10.14411/eje.2006.060Redescription of Crematogaster cypria Santschi, 1930, new status, with description of two new related species from Greece and Turkey (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). Warszawa789European Journal of Entomology• Radchenko AG, Elmes G (2010) Myrmica ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) of the Old World. Natura optima dux, Warszawa, 789 pp. • Salata S, Borowiec L (2015a) Redescription of Crematogaster cypria Santschi, 1930, new status, with description of two new related species from Greece and Turkey (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). ZooKeys 505: 59-77. DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.505.9566 • Salata S, Borowiec L (2015b) Redescription of Temnothorax antigoni (Forel, 1911) and description of its new social parasite Temnothorax curtisetosus sp. n. from Turkey (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). ZooKeys 523: 129-148. DOI: 10.3897/zookeys.523.6103 • Salata S, Borowiec L (2015c) A taxonomic revision of the genus Oxyopomyrmex André, 1881 (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Zootaxa 4025: 1-66. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.33627 • Schlick-Steiner BC, Steiner FM, Moder K, Seifert B, Sanetra M, Dyreson E, Stauffer C, Christian E (2006a) A multidisciplinary approach reveals cryptic diversity in Western Palearctic Tetramorium ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 40 (1): 259-273. DOI: 10.1016/j.ympev.2006.03.005 • Schlick-Steiner BC, Steiner FM, Konrad H, Marko B, Csősz S, Heller G, Ferencz B, Sipos B, Christian E, Stauffer C (2006b) More than one species of Messor harvester ants (Hymenoptera: Formicidae) in Central Europe. European Journal of Entomology 103: 469-476. DOI: 10.14411/eje.2006.060

A taxonomic revision of the Palaearctic members of the ant subgenus Lasius s. str. (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). B Seifert, 10.1002/mmnd.4800470206DOI: 10.1002/mmnd.4800470206Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift. 665Naturkundemuseums Görlitz• Seifert B (1992) A taxonomic revision of the Palaearctic members of the ant subgenus Lasius s. str. (Hymenoptera, Formicidae). Abhandlungen und Berichte des Naturkundemuseums Görlitz 66 (5): 1-67. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.24614 • Seifert B (2000) Rapid range expansion in Lasius neglectus (Hymenoptera, Formicidae) -an Asian invader swamps Europe. Deutsche Entomologische Zeitschrift 47 (2): 173-179. DOI: 10.1002/mmnd.4800470206

Die Ameisen Mittel-und Nordeuropas. Lutra Verlags-und Vertriebsgesellschaft, Görlitz/Tauer, 368 pp. • Seifert B (2012) A review of the West Palaearctic species of the ant genus Bothriomyrmex Emery. • Seifert, B ; C. Bulgarica, C Batesii, C Nuda, C Shuckardi, C Stambuloffii, C Wroughtonii, C , C , The ant genus Cardiocondyla (Insecta: Hymenoptera: Formicidae) -a taxonomic revision of the C. elegans. Wien. B, Botanik, Zoologie104minutior species groups. Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in• Seifert B (2003) The ant genus Cardiocondyla (Insecta: Hymenoptera: Formicidae) -a taxonomic revision of the C. elegans, C. bulgarica, C. batesii, C. nuda, C. shuckardi, C. stambuloffii, C. wroughtonii, C. emeryi, and C. minutior species groups. Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien. B, Botanik, Zoologie 104: 203-338. URL: http:// antcat.org/documents/4036/21102.pdf • Seifert B (2007) Die Ameisen Mittel-und Nordeuropas. Lutra Verlags-und Vertriebsgesellschaft, Görlitz/Tauer, 368 pp. • Seifert B (2012) A review of the West Palaearctic species of the ant genus Bothriomyrmex Emery, 1869. Myrmecological News 17: 91-104.

A taxonomic revision of the Formica rufibarbis Fabricius, 1973 group (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). B Seifert, R Schultz, Myrmecological News. 12• Seifert B, Schultz R (2009) A taxonomic revision of the Formica rufibarbis Fabricius, 1973 group (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Myrmecological News 12: 255-272.

A multisource solution for a complex problem in biodiversity research: description of the cryptic ant species Tetramorium alpestre sp. n. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). F M Steiner, B Seifert, K Moder, B C Schlick-Steiner, 10.1016/j.jcz.2010.09.003Zoologischer Anzeiger. 249• Steiner FM, Seifert B, Moder K, Schlick-Steiner BC (2010) A multisource solution for a complex problem in biodiversity research: description of the cryptic ant species Tetramorium alpestre sp. n. (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Zoologischer Anzeiger 249: 223-254. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcz.2010.09.003

A revised phylogenetic classification of the ant subfamily Formicinae (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), with resurrection of the genera Colobopsis and Dinomyrmex. G Tohmé, H ; • Tohmé, P S Ward, B Blaimer, B ; • Fisher, P S Ward, S G Brady, B L Fisher, T R Schultz, 10.1111/syen.12090DOI: 10.1111/syen.12090Les fourmis du genre Messor en Syrie. Position systématique. Description de quelques ailés et de formes nouvelles. 7Systematic Entomology• Tohmé G, Tohmé H (1981) Les fourmis du genre Messor en Syrie. Position systématique. Description de quelques ailés et de formes nouvelles. Répartition géographique. Ecologia Mediterranea 7 (1): 139-153. DOI: 10.5281/ZENODO.24902 • Ward PS, Blaimer B, Fisher B (2016) A revised phylogenetic classification of the ant subfamily Formicinae (Hymenoptera: Formicidae), with resurrection of the genera Colobopsis and Dinomyrmex . Zootaxa 4072 (3): 343-357. DOI: 10.11646/ zootaxa.4072.3.4 • Ward PS, Brady SG, Fisher BL, Schultz TR (2015) The evolution of myrmicine ants: phylogeny and biogeography of a hyperdiverse ant clade (Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Systematic Entomology 40: 61-81. DOI: 10.1111/syen.12090

Patterns of biogeographic distribution within the bicolor species group of the North African desert ant. R Wehner, S Wehner, D Agosti, Cataglyphis FOERSTER 1850 (Insecta: Hymenoptera: Formicidae). 74• Wehner R, Wehner S, Agosti D (1994) Patterns of biogeographic distribution within the bicolor species group of the North African desert ant, Cataglyphis FOERSTER 1850 (Insecta: Hymenoptera: Formicidae). Senckenbergiana Biologica 74: 163-191. URL: htt p://antbase.org/ants/publications/9365/9365.pdf