# Original Paper The Seismic Refraction Survey to Determine the Depth of Bedrock at the Damansara Area for Horizontal Directional Drilling Method Application

CorpusID: 201323316
 
tags: #Engineering, #Environmental_Science, #Geology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45706965cf458291c81feb8d8fcbe6f6dc0f48e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45706965cf458291c81feb8d8fcbe6f6dc0f48e4)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Original Paper The Seismic Refraction Survey to Determine the Depth of Bedrock at the Damansara Area for Horizontal Directional Drilling Method Application
2019. 2019

Mohd Rozi Umor 
Geology Program
Centre of Earth Science and Environmental
Faculty of Science and Technology


MohdHariri Arifin 
Geology Program
Centre of Earth Science and Environmental
Faculty of Science and Technology


Nora Muda 
Statistic Program
Centre of Mathematic Sciences
Faculty of Science and Technology
Centre of Earth Science and Environmental
Faculty of Science and Technology
Universiti
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
UKM43600BangiSelangorMalaysia

Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia 
Ukm Bangi 
Malaysia Selangor 
Kebangsaan Malaysia 
SelangorUkm Bangi 
Malaysia * Mohd 
Rozi Umor 
Geology Program 
Original Paper The Seismic Refraction Survey to Determine the Depth of Bedrock at the Damansara Area for Horizontal Directional Drilling Method Application

Applied Science and Innovative Research
332019. 201910.22158/asir.v3n3p123Received: July 10, 2019 Accepted: July 22, 2019 Online Published: August 4, 2019123 124 Published by SCHOLINK INC.Seismic Refraction SurveyDamansaraBedrock determination
The seismic reflection survey conducted along the road at Damansara to determine the depth of bedrock in order to justify whether HDD method can be utilize to store the fiber optic cable. 10 line seismic survey performed along 1.2 km roadside. The result show that the subsurface profile represent by two layer of earth materials that is topsoil and bedrock granite. Determination between topsoil and granite based on the values of seismic velocity. The boundary between granite and soil interpreted by a velocity value 1,200 m/s. If the velocity values is less than 1,200 m/s, it interpreted as soil or highly weathered rock. Meanwhile the velocity value more than 1,200 m/s is refer as rock and hard to excavate especially using HDD method. The study shows that the general thickness of topsoil along the road in Damansara is around 2.0 to 4.0 m. The minimum thickness of topsoil is 1.0 m and maximum found around 6.0 m. The bedrock observed very shallow and not suitable for HDD method to implement.

## Introduction


## Background

This paper presents the result of the seismic refraction survey method along the road from SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 to SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 1 at Bandar Sri Damansara, Selangor, Malaysia. The study carried out with the ultimate objective to determine the depth of bedrock along the road from SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 until SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 1. It anticipated that this project would provide the information about the depth profile of bedrock in detail that is required to decide the suitable method for piping the fiber optic cable within the area.

Although the Horizontal Directional Drilling (HDD) is the best method of installing underground pipelines, cables and service conduit through trenchless methods but the limitation is this method cannot penetrate through the hard rock or bedrock such as granite. The area with shallow bedrock less than 7.0 m considered not suitable using HDD method. The seismic survey will show the profile and depth of bedrock along the pipeline proposed in the study area.


## The Study Area

The study area is located at Bandar Sri Damansara Selangor. It located at the north of Kota Damansara nearby Kepong (Figure 1). The line survey follow the alignment of pipeline fiberoptic from SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 to SMK Bandar Sri Damansara. The line survey conducted along the road, which is about 1.2 km length. The length for each line seismic survey is 125 m. Therefore, to cover 1.2 km length of pipeline, we construct about 10 line of seismic surveys. 


## The General Geology

Based on literature review, the study area considered as part of Main Range Granite Batholith ( Figure   2). It assigned as Bukit Lanjan Granite and beside it the Kuala Lumpur Granite. The age of Main Range Granite is between 207-230 Ma. The main rock type is a coarse to very coarse grained megacrystic biotite granite that has typical S-type and ilmenite-series characteristics. Large K-feldspar phenocrysts up to 7 cm long are common and often give the rock a distinctly megacrystic appearance in hand specimen. Quartz vein, aplo-pegmatite complexes and sclieren are among common modification in the granite.

Based on our site visit, we discover the boulder during our fieldwork is consists of granite rock. It was white colour contain quartz as a major mineral with size more than 2 cm. The boulders found fresh and very hard (Figure 3).  


## Introduction

Seismic methods commonly used in shallow depth investigations. It was implement to discovering the potential groundwater area and subsurface profile in many area nowadays (Haeni, 1986;Umar & Abdul, 2006;Mohd et al., 2016). The method is based on recording the travel time of an elastic wave created by hitting a steel plate with a hammer (in this study) or gun, refracted from an interface at the subsurface, and received via geophones on the surface.

The seismic refraction method based on the measurement of the travel time of seismic waves refracted at the interfaces between subsurface layers of different velocity. Seismic energy provided by a source ("shot") located on the surface. For shallow applications, this normally comprises a hammer and plate, weight drop or small explosive charge (blank shotgun cartridge). Energy radiates out from the shot point, either travelling directly through the upper layer (direct arrivals), or travelling down to and then laterally along higher velocity layers (refracted arrivals) before returning to the surface. This energy is detected on surface using a linear array (or spread) of geophones spaced at regular intervals. Beyond a certain distance from the shot point, known as the crossover distance, the refracted signal observed as a first-arrival signal at the geophones (arriving before the direct arrival). Observation of the travel-times of the direct and refracted signals provides information on the depth profile of the refractor.


## Line Distribution and Data Acquisition

In our study, we conduct 10 lines of seismic survey along the road from SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 to SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 1. The view of survey line S1 near SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 was show in Figure 4 Each shot locations will produce graph of wiggle traces that is displaying travel time of wave against distance. It means for one seismic survey line, we have seven seismic time-distance graphs. In our study, we have 10 lines of seismic survey, which is give the total number of graph need to process is 70 graphs.

We used the software picked the first time-arrival from seven seismic time-distance graphs and tabulated it into excel. By combining seven time-distance graphs and first-arrival reading collected from each graphs, we established the whole view of segmentation of survey line to calculate the velocity for each layer and their thickness. The values of velocities and thickness of every electrode point inserted into software. It purposed is to generate the pattern of graph and layers of the soil profile.


## The Result


## The Line Distribution

The location of line survey is proposed by client followed exactly the alignment of their pipeline for fiber optic. The alignment is along the roadside. In our survey, we marked the line survey as S1 until S10 refers to Seismic survey. The survey line is continuous from line S1 until S10 as show in Figure 5. 


## The Interpretation of Velocity and Rip Ability Scale

The seismic velocity of a rock formation related to characteristics of the rock mass that include rock hardness and strength, degree of weathering and discontinuities. Usually the velocity is just one of several parameters used in the assessment of excavate ability (Bailey, 1975). Weaver (1975) presented a comprehensive rippability rating chart (Table 1) in which the p-wave velocity value and the relevant geological factors could be entered and assigned appropriate weightings. The total weighted index found to correlate very well with actual rippability.

In this study, we use directly the seismic velocity values to interpret their rippability of the rock because in many cases we conducted the seismic study, the result show the similarity and correlated directly in practice with rating chart proposed by Weaver (1975). Based on the rip ability-rating chart by Weaver (1975), we can divide the rock into rippable and non-rippable as shown in Table 2.

The boundary between rock and soil interpreted by a velocity value 1,200 m/s. If the velocity values is less than 1,200 m/s, it interpreted as soil or highly weathered rock. Meanwhile the velocity value more than 1,200 m/s is refer as rock and hard to excavate especially using HDD method    Table 3.The subsurface profile for line seismic surveys conducted in the study area were shown in Figure 6. The top layer defined as the topsoil and the second layer is correspond to bedrock.  


## Conclusion

The study shows that the general thickness of topsoil along the road from SMK Bandar Sri Damansara 2 to SMK Bandar Sri Damansara is around 2.0 to 4.0 m. The minimum thickness of topsoil is 1.0 m and maximum found around 6.0 m. The depth of bedrock observed is very shallow. The type of bedrock consists of granitic rock, which is in common very hard, compact and difficult to excavate, and at certain point need to blast to remove it.

In our case, the HDD method was propose to be implement for preparing the pipeline of fiber optic along this proposed road. The HDD method only suitable in the area with soil thickness more than 6.0 Line S1 Line S2 m. It cannot penetrate through the hard bedrock such as granite. The problem arises when during drilling using method HDD, they found the bedrock and work unsuccessful to go much further.

Based on the seismic survey finding, we concluded that the HDD method cannot be perform along the proposed line. This is because the bedrock is very shallow. The HDD method cannot penetrate the hard bedrock. In this situation, the very practical for preparing the fiber optic line is using open excavation on road surface. The proper step need to practice during the work for safety and cleanest

## Figure 1 .
1The Location of the Study Area at Bandar Sri Damansara. It Located at the North of Kota Damansara Nearby Kepong

## Figure 2 .
2The Geological Map of the Area around Kinta Valley Including the Study Area

## Figure 3 .
3The Boulder of Granite Observed Near Line S8 2. Methodology


by SCHOLINK INC.


(a). The view of survey conducted for other lines shown in Figure 4(b). The example of seismic wave recorded on machine shown in Figure 4(c). ABEM Terraloc MK6 24-channel seismic recording equipment used in this survey. Geophone interval was set 5 m. During the survey, the P wave travel times considered. First arrivals to each geophone are marked and extracted from the data 2.3 The Processing Data The seismic survey was conducted by create 7 individual shots at certain distance along the survey line. Seven shot locations were done at -5.0 m (offset), 3.0 m, 28.0 m, 58.0 m, 88.0 m, 113.0 m and 120.0 m.

## Figure 4 .Figure 5 .
45The Data Acquisition on Site (a) & (b) The View During Data Acquisition, (c) The Example of Seismic Wave Recorded on Machine The Line Distribution along the Road in the Study Area

## Figure 6 .
6The Result of Subsurface Profile for Seismic Refraction Survey Conducted in the Study


www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/asirApplied Science and Innovative Research 
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2019 


## Table 1 .
1The Rippability Rating Chart byWeaver (1975) Rock class 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 

Description 
Very good rock 
Good rock 
Fair rock 
Poor rock 
Very poor rock 

Seismic velocity (m/s) 
>2150 
2150-1850 
1850-1500 
1500-1200 
1200-450 

Rating 
26 
24 
20 
12 
5 

Rock hardness 
Extremely hard rock 
Very hard rock 
Hard rock 
Soft rock 
Very soft rock 

Rating 
10 
5 
2 
1 
0 

Rock weathering 
Unweathered 
Slightly weathered 
Weathered 
Highly weathered 
Completely 

weathered 

Rating 
9 
7 
5 
3 
1 

Joint spacing (mm) 
>3000 
3000-1000 
1000-300 
300-50 
<50 

Rating 
30 
25 
20 
10 
5 

Joint continuity 
Non continuous 
Slightly continuous 
Continuous-

no gougo 

Continuous-

some gougo 

Continuous-

with gougo 

Rating 
5 
5 
3 
0 
0 

Joint gougo 
No separation 
Slightly separation 
Separation< 

1mm 

Gouge 

<5mmm 

Gouge 

>5mmm 

Rating 
5 
5 
4 
3 
1 

Strike 
and 
dip 

orientation 

Very unfavourable 
Unfavourable 
Slightly 

unfavourable 

Favourable 
Very 

favourable 

Rating 
15 
13 
10 
5 
3 

Total rating 
100-90 
90-70* 
70-50 
50-25 
<25 

Rippability assessment 
Blasting 
Extremely 
hard 

ripping and blasting 

Very 
hard 

ripping 

Hard ripping 
Easy ripping 

Tractor horsepower 
770/385 
385/270 
270/180 
180 

Tractor kilowatts 
575/290 
290/200 
200/135 
135 



## Table 2 .
2The Interpretation of Rock Type Using Velocities ValuesClass Description 
Seismic Velocity 
Type of rock 
Rippability 

I 
Very good Rock > 2,150 
Fresh bedrock 
Non-rippable 

II 
Good Rock 
2,150 -1,850 
Fresh Rock 
Non-rippable 

III 
Fair Rock 
1,850 -1,500 
Moderate fresh rock 
Very hard Rippable 

IV 
Poor Rock 
1,500 -1,200 
Weathered rock 
Hard Rippable 

V 
Very poor Rock 
< 1,200 
Soil or highly weatehered rock Rippable 

3.3 The Result of Seismic Refraction Survey 

Based on the seismic refraction survey, we interpreted the subsurface profile along the road consists 

two layers which is topsoil as the top layer and the second layer is granite bedrock. The topsoil velocity 

is range between 340.48 m/s until 507.96 m/s, while granite bedrock is range between 1,752.24 m/s 

until 3,446.45 m/s. The thickness of topsoil is in average about 3.0 m thick. The result show that HDD 

method cannot be perform along this line survey because the minimum thickness of soil needed is 5 to 

6 m. The HDD method cannot penetrate through fresh rock. The summarize of the result was shown in 



## Table 3 .
3The Summarizes of Result of Seismic Refraction SurveyLine Survey Rock Layers 
Seismic Velocity (m/s) Thickness range (m) HDD Method Application 

S1 
Topsoil 
415.39 
1.5 -2.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
2,180.03 

S2 
Topsoil 
340.48 
2.0 -4.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
1,938.03 

S3 
Topsoil 
399.42 
2.0 -3.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
2,898.03 

S4 
Topsoil 
380.91 
4.0 -6.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
1,752.24 

S5 
Topsoil 
339.97 
1.0 -3.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
3,121.08 

S6 
Topsoil 
434.87 
3.0 -4.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
3,446.45 

S7 
Topsoil 
426.08 
2.0 -3.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
2,707.22 

S8 
Topsoil 
507.96 
6.0 -7.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
2,062.70 

S9 
Topsoil 
367.80 
2.0 -3.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
1,952.13 

S10 
Topsoil 
392.18 
2.0 -4.0 
Not Suitable 
Bedrock 
2,170.43 



www.scholink.org/ojs/index.php/asirPublished by SCHOLINK INC.Line S5 

Line S4 
Line S3 

Line S6 

Line S7 

Line S10 
Line S9 

Line S8 

Applied Science and Innovative Research 
Vol. 3, No. 3, 2019 

132 


Published by SCHOLINK INC.
AcknowledgementWe are very grateful to technical support by Mr Shahrizal Deris and team for seismic refraction survey conducted on site, and Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for generously providing us with a ABEM Terraloc MK6 24-channel seismic equipment.
Rock types and seismic velocities versus rippability. A D Bailey, Proceedings of the Highway Geology Symposium. the Highway Geology SymposiumBailey, A. D. (1975). Rock types and seismic velocities versus rippability. Proceedings of the Highway Geology Symposium, 135-142.

Application of seismic refraction methods in groundwater modeling studies in New England. F P Haeni, 10.1190/1.1442083Geophysics. 512Haeni F. P. (1986). Application of seismic refraction methods in groundwater modeling studies in New England. Geophysics, 51(2), 236-249. https://doi.org/10.1190/1.1442083

Determination layer of metasediment rock using seismic refraction survey at the vicinity of Alor Gajah town. R U Mohd, M Nora, S Akhmal, R S Abdul, H Umar, International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences. 3SMohd, R. U., Nora, M., Akhmal, S., Abdul, R. S., & Umar, H. (2016). Determination layer of meta- sediment rock using seismic refraction survey at the vicinity of Alor Gajah town, Melaka, Peninsular Malaysia. International Journal of Advanced and Applied Sciences, 3(S), 65-72.

2D Seismic Refraction Tomography Survey on Metasedimentary at a Proposed Development Site in Dengkil. H Umar, R S Abdul, 10.7186/bgsm52200601Selangor. Geological Society of Malaysia Bulletin. 52Umar, H., & Abdul, R. S. (2006). 2D Seismic Refraction Tomography Survey on Metasedimentary at a Proposed Development Site in Dengkil, Selangor. Geological Society of Malaysia Bulletin, 52, 1-6. https://doi.org/10.7186/bgsm52200601

Geological factors significant in the assessment of rippability. J M Weaver, Civ Eng S Afr. 1712Weaver, J. M. (1975). Geological factors significant in the assessment of rippability. Civ Eng S Afr., 17(12), 313-316.