# Letter to the editor: A RECENT OVERVIEW ON SULFORAPHANE AS A DIETARY EPIGENETIC MODULATOR

CorpusID: 213191970
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77957ed62fdd44108e9fc192de59470fc79176b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77957ed62fdd44108e9fc192de59470fc79176b1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Letter to the editor: A RECENT OVERVIEW ON SULFORAPHANE AS A DIETARY EPIGENETIC MODULATOR
2020

Tae Kyung 
Department of Industrial Plant Science and Technology
College of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Chungbuk National University
361-763CheongjuRepublic

Hyun 
Department of Industrial Plant Science and Technology
College of Agricultural, Life and Environmental Sciences
Chungbuk National University
361-763CheongjuRepublic

Letter to the editor: A RECENT OVERVIEW ON SULFORAPHANE AS A DIETARY EPIGENETIC MODULATOR

EXCLI Journal
19202010.17179/excli2019-2039Received: December 06, 2019, accepted: January 08, 2020, published: January 15, 2020131 Dear Editor,
Gene expression is mediated by chromatin epigenetic changes, including DNA methylation, histone modifications, promoter-enhancer interactions, and non-coding RNA (microRNA and long non-coding RNA)-mediated regulation(Chen et al., 2017). Approximately 50 % of all tumor suppressor genes are inactivated through epigenetic modifications, rather than by genetic mechanisms, in sporadic cancers(Meeran et al., 2010;Su et al., 2018). Accumulating evidence suggests that epigenetic modulators are important tools to improve the efficacy of disease prevention strategies(Ratovitski, 2017;Carlos-Reyes et al., 2019;Hassan et al., 2019).Sulforaphane ([1-isothioyanato-4-(methyl-sulfinyl)butane], SFN) is a naturally occurring, sulfur-containing isothiocyanate derivative that is found in the seeds and sprouts of cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, and kale(Vanduchova et al., 2019). Because SFN induces the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-antioxidant response element pathway that induces the cellular defense against oxidative stress (Trio et al., 2016), SFN has received increased attention because it acts as an antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer agent(Vanduchova et al., 2019). Various mechanisms, including apoptosis activation, nuclear factor-κB pathway inhibition, and cell cycle arrest induction, have been proposed to explain the beneficial effects of SFN in preventing multiple types of cancer(Tortorella et al., 2015). Indeed, the increasing attention of SFN as an epigenetic modulator continues to contribute to new developments in clinical trials.This letter presents a summary of key recent studies investigating the function of SFN as an epigenetic modulator in several human diseases(Table 1). I believe that this letter will stimulate future research on the development of SFN as an epigenetic modulator for successful chemoprevention and alternative therapeutic approaches.

## Dear Editor,

Gene expression is mediated by chromatin epigenetic changes, including DNA methylation, histone modifications, promoter-enhancer interactions, and non-coding RNA (microRNA and long non-coding RNA)-mediated regulation (Chen et al., 2017). Approximately 50 % of all tumor suppressor genes are inactivated through epigenetic modifications, rather than by genetic mechanisms, in sporadic cancers (Meeran et al., 2010;Su et al., 2018). Accumulating evidence suggests that epigenetic modulators are important tools to improve the efficacy of disease prevention strategies (Ratovitski, 2017;Carlos-Reyes et al., 2019;Hassan et al., 2019).

Sulforaphane ([1-isothioyanato-4-(methyl-sulfinyl)butane], SFN) is a naturally occurring, sulfur-containing isothiocyanate derivative that is found in the seeds and sprouts of cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, and kale (Vanduchova et al., 2019). Because SFN induces the nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2)-antioxidant response element pathway that induces the cellular defense against oxidative stress (Trio et al., 2016), SFN has received increased attention because it acts as an antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer agent (Vanduchova et al., 2019). Various mechanisms, including apoptosis activation, nuclear factor-κB pathway inhibition, and cell cycle arrest induction, have been proposed to explain the beneficial effects of SFN in preventing multiple types of cancer (Tortorella et al., 2015). Indeed, the increasing attention of SFN as an epigenetic modulator continues to contribute to new developments in clinical trials.

This letter presents a summary of key recent studies investigating the function of SFN as an epigenetic modulator in several human diseases (Table 1). I believe that this letter will stimulate future research on the development of SFN as an epigenetic modulator for successful chemoprevention and alternative therapeutic approaches. SFN demethylated CpG sites of the promoter of miR-9-3, known as a tumor suppressor miRNA, and reactivated miR-9-3 expression via attenuating enzymatic DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) activity and protein expression of DNMT3a and histone deacetylase 1, 3 and 6 in human lung cancer A549 cells. SFN reversed the expression of silenced tumor suppressor genes, including RARβ (retinoic acid receptor beta), CDH1 (cadherin 1) and DAPK1 (death-associated protein kinase 1) through the reversal in the 5′-CpG island methylation and by inhibiting the activity of DNA methyltransferases and histone deacetylases in human cervical cancer cells.

Ali Khan et al., 2015 Effects


## Epigenetic regulation Reference

Treatment of Alzheimer's disease SFN increased the expression of Nrf2 and promoted the nuclear translocation of Nrf2 by reducing DNA demethylation levels of the Nrf2 promoter, thus leading to antioxidative (reducing reactive oxygen species and malondialdehyde, and increasing superoxide dismutase) and anti-inflammatory effects (decreasing the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines) in a cellular model of Alzheimer's disease. Zhao et al., 2018 Cell protection SFN protects against ethanol-induced apoptosis by decreasing ethanol-induced reduction of H3K4me3 at the promoter regions of the Snail1 transcriptional factor, restoring the expression of Snail1 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition in ethanol-exposed neural crest cells. Li et al., 2019 SFN restored the expression of B-cell leukemia/lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) and attenuated ethanol-induced apoptosis through restoring acetyl-histone H3 binding to Bcl-2 promoter in ethanolexposed neural crest cells. Yuan et al., 2018 Anti-inflammatory effects SFN inhibited expression of LPS (bacterial lipopolysaccharide)-induced cluster of differentiation 14 (CD14) that enhances the inflammatory response, through the suppression of CD14 gene body (coding sequence) methylation that might be caused by the downregulation of DNA methyltransferase 3a expression in pulmonary alveolar macrophages. Yang et al., 2015 


induced cell cycle arrest, nitro-oxidative stress and genotoxicity were accompanied by global DNA hypomethylation, decreased levels of DNA methyltransferase 1 and 3B, diminished pools of N 6 -methyladenosine RNA methylation and changes in microRNA profile (upregulation of sixty microRNAs and downregulation of thirty-two microRNAs) in breast cancer cells.Lewinska et al., 2017 SFN reduced the tumor formation and growth of melanoma stem cells by reducing histone methyltransferase EZH2 levels and histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation.Fisher et al., 2016 SFN inhibited the expression and activity of human telomerase reverse transcriptase, the catalytic subunit of telomerase, through modulation of acetylation of histone H3 lysine 18 and di-methylation of histone H3 lysine 4, resulting in induction of cell death and growth arrest in prostate cancer cells.Abbas et al., 2016 SFN led to hypomethylation of tumor suppressor gene promoters, phosphatase and tensin homologue (PTEN) and retinoic acid receptor beta 2 (RARbeta2), resulting in up-regulation of expression of these genes in human breast

## Table 1 :
1Recent updates on sulforaphane (SFN) as a dietary epigenetic modulatorAnticancer SFN promotes demethylation at the promoter region of Nrf2 to increase activation of Nrf2, which induces chemoprevention of human colon cancer.Effects 
Epigenetic regulation 

Conflict of interestThe author declares no conflict of interest.
Sulforaphane modulates telomerase activity via epigenetic regulation in prostate cancer cell lines. A Abbas, J A Hall, W L Patterson, E Ho, A Hsu, F Al-Mulla, P T Georgel, Biochem Cell Biol. 94Abbas A, Hall JA, Patterson WL 3rd, Ho E, Hsu A, Al- Mulla F, Georgel PT. Sulforaphane modulates telomer- ase activity via epigenetic regulation in prostate cancer cell lines. Biochem Cell Biol 2016;94:71-81.

Sulforaphane reverses the expression of various tumor suppressor genes by targeting DNMT3B and HDAC1 in human cervical cancer cells. Ali Khan, M , Kedhari Sundaram, M Hamza, A Quraishi, U Gunasekera, D Ramesh, L Goala, P , Al Alami, U Ansari, M Z Rizvi, T A Sharma, C Hussain, A , Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 412149Ali Khan M, Kedhari Sundaram M, Hamza A, Quraishi U, Gunasekera D, Ramesh L, Goala P, Al Alami U, Ansari MZ, Rizvi TA, Sharma C, Hussain A. Sul- foraphane reverses the expression of various tumor suppressor genes by targeting DNMT3B and HDAC1 in human cervical cancer cells. Evid Based Comple- ment Alternat Med 2015;2015:412149.

HDAC5-LSD1 axis regulates antineoplastic effect of natural HDAC inhibitor sulforaphane in human breast cancer cells. C Cao, H Wu, S N Vasilatos, U Chandran, Y Qin, Y Wan, S Oesterreich, N E Davidson, Y Huang, Int J Cancer. 143Cao C, Wu H, Vasilatos SN, Chandran U, Qin Y, Wan Y, Oesterreich S, Davidson NE, Huang Y. HDAC5- LSD1 axis regulates antineoplastic effect of natural HDAC inhibitor sulforaphane in human breast cancer cells. Int J Cancer 2018;143:1388-401.

Dietary compounds as epigenetic modulating agents in cancer. Carlos-Reyes Á López-González, J S Meneses-Flores, M Gallardo-Rincón, D Ruíz-García, E Marchat, L A , Front Genet. 1079Carlos-Reyes Á, López-González JS, Meneses-Flores M, Gallardo-Rincón D, Ruíz-García E, Marchat LA, Astudillo-de la Vega H, Hernández de la Cruz ON, López-Camarillo C. Dietary compounds as epigenetic modulating agents in cancer. Front Genet 2019;10:79.

Epigenetic regulation: a new frontier for biomedical engineers. Z Chen, S Li, S Subramaniam, J Y Shyy, S Chien, Annu Rev Biomed Eng. 19Chen Z, Li S, Subramaniam S, Shyy JY, Chien S. Epi- genetic regulation: a new frontier for biomedical engi- neers. Annu Rev Biomed Eng 2017;19:195-219.

The Ezh2 polycomb group protein drives an aggressive phenotype in melanoma cancer stem cells and is a target of diet derived sulforaphane. M L Fisher, G Adhikary, D Grun, D M Kaetzel, R L Eckert, Mol Carcinog. 55Fisher ML, Adhikary G, Grun D, Kaetzel DM, Eckert RL. The Ezh2 polycomb group protein drives an ag- gressive phenotype in melanoma cancer stem cells and is a target of diet derived sulforaphane. Mol Carcinog 2016;55:2024-36.

Sulforaphane epigenetically demethylates the CpG sites of the miR-9-3 promoter and reactivates miR-9-3 expression in human lung cancer A549 cells. L Gao, D Cheng, J Yang, R Wu, W Li, A N Kong, J Nutr Biochem. 56Gao L, Cheng D, Yang J, Wu R, Li W, Kong AN. Sul- foraphane epigenetically demethylates the CpG sites of the miR-9-3 promoter and reactivates miR-9-3 expres- sion in human lung cancer A549 cells. J Nutr Biochem 2018;56:109-15.

Curcumin as an alternative epigenetic modulator: mechanism of action and potential effects. F U Hassan, M S Rehman, M S Khan, M A Ali, A Javed, A Nawaz, C Yang, Front Genet. 10514Hassan FU, Rehman MS, Khan MS, Ali MA, Javed A, Nawaz A, Yang C. Curcumin as an alternative epige- netic modulator: mechanism of action and potential ef- fects. Front Genet 2019;10:514.

Sulforaphane-induced cell cycle arrest and senescence are accompanied by DNA hypomethylation and changes in microrna profile in breast cancer cells. A Lewinska, J Adamczyk-Grochala, A Deregowska, M Wnuk, Theranostics. 7Lewinska A, Adamczyk-Grochala J, Deregowska A, Wnuk M. Sulforaphane-induced cell cycle arrest and senescence are accompanied by DNA hypomethylation and changes in microrna profile in breast cancer cells. Theranostics 2017;7:3461-77.

Sulforaphane protects against ethanol-induced apoptosis in neural crest cells through restoring epithelialmesenchymal transition by epigenetically modulating the expression of Snail1. Y Li, F Yuan, T Wu, L Lu, J Liu, W Feng, Chen Sy, Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 1865Li Y, Yuan F, Wu T, Lu L, Liu J, Feng W, Chen SY. Sulforaphane protects against ethanol-induced apopto- sis in neural crest cells through restoring epithelial- mesenchymal transition by epigenetically modulating the expression of Snail1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis 2019;1865:2586-94.

Sulforaphane alone and in combination with clofarabine epigenetically regulates the expression of DNA methylation-silenced tumour suppressor genes in human breast cancer cells. K Lubecka-Pietruszewska, A Kaufman-Szymczyk, B Stefanska, B Cebula-Obrzut, P Smolewski, K Fabianowska-Majewska, J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 8Lubecka-Pietruszewska K, Kaufman-Szymczyk A, Stefanska B, Cebula-Obrzut B, Smolewski P, Fabian- owska-Majewska K. Sulforaphane alone and in combi- nation with clofarabine epigenetically regulates the ex- pression of DNA methylation-silenced tumour sup- pressor genes in human breast cancer cells. J Nutri- genet Nutrigenomics 2015;8:91-101.

Epigenetic targets of bioactive dietary components for cancer prevention and therapy. S M Meeran, A Ahmed, T O Tollefsbol, Clin Epigenetics. 1Meeran SM, Ahmed A, Tollefsbol TO. Epigenetic tar- gets of bioactive dietary components for cancer pre- vention and therapy. Clin Epigenetics 2010;1:101-16.

Heterocyclic analogs of sulforaphane trigger DNA damage and impede DNA repair in colon cancer cells: interplay of HATs and HDACs. A Okonkwo, J Mitra, G S Johnson, L Li, W M Dashwood, M L Hegde, C Yue, R H Dashwood, P Rajendran, Mol Nutr Food Res. 621800228Okonkwo A, Mitra J, Johnson GS, Li L, Dashwood WM, Hegde ML, Yue C, Dashwood RH, Rajendran P. Heterocyclic analogs of sulforaphane trigger DNA damage and impede DNA repair in colon cancer cells: interplay of HATs and HDACs. Mol Nutr Food Res 2018;62:e1800228.

Anticancer natural compounds as epigenetic modulators of gene expression. E A Ratovitski, Curr Genomics. 18Ratovitski EA. Anticancer natural compounds as epi- genetic modulators of gene expression. Curr Genomics 2017;18:175-205.

Withaferin A and sulforaphane regulate breast cancer cell cycle progression through epigenetic mechanisms. K J Royston, B Paul, S Nozell, R Rajbhandari, T O Tollefsbol, Exp Cell Res. 368Royston KJ, Paul B, Nozell S, Rajbhandari R, Tollefsbol TO. Withaferin A and sulforaphane regulate breast cancer cell cycle progression through epigenetic mechanisms. Exp Cell Res 2018;368:67-74.

Anticancer activity of sulforaphane: the epigenetic mechanisms and the Nrf2 signaling pathway. X Su, X Jiang, L Meng, X Dong, Y Shen, Y Xin, Oxid Med Cell Longev. 5438179Su X, Jiang X, Meng L, Dong X, Shen Y, Xin Y. An- ticancer activity of sulforaphane: the epigenetic mech- anisms and the Nrf2 signaling pathway. Oxid Med Cell Longev 2018;2018:5438179.

Dietary sulforaphane in cancer chemoprevention: the role of epigenetic regulation and HDAC inhibition. S M Tortorella, S G Royce, P V Licciardi, T C Karagiannis, Antioxid Redox Signal. 22Tortorella SM, Royce SG, Licciardi PV, Karagiannis TC. Dietary sulforaphane in cancer chemoprevention: the role of epigenetic regulation and HDAC inhibition. Antioxid Redox Signal 2015;22:1382-424.

DNA microarray highlights Nrf2-mediated neuron protection targeted by wasabi-derived isothiocyanates in IMR-32 cells. P Z Trio, S Fujisaki, S Tanigawa, A Hisanaga, K Sakao, D X Hou, Gene Regul Syst Bio. 10Trio PZ, Fujisaki S, Tanigawa S, Hisanaga A, Sakao K, Hou DX. DNA microarray highlights Nrf2-medi- ated neuron protection targeted by wasabi-derived isothiocyanates in IMR-32 cells. Gene Regul Syst Bio 2016;10:73-83.

Isothiocyanate from broccoli, sulforaphane, and its properties. A Vanduchova, P Anzenbacher, E Anzenbacherova, J Med Food. 22Vanduchova A, Anzenbacher P, Anzenbacherova E. Isothiocyanate from broccoli, sulforaphane, and its properties. J Med Food 2019;22:121-6.

Upregulation of miR-328 and inhibition of CREB-DNA-binding activity are critical for resveratrol-mediated suppression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and subsequent metastatic ability in human osteosarcomas. S F Yang, W J Lee, P Tan, C H Tang, M Hsiao, F K Hsieh, M H Chien, Oncotarget. 6Yang SF, Lee WJ, Tan P, Tang CH, Hsiao M, Hsieh FK, Chien MH. Upregulation of miR-328 and inhibi- tion of CREB-DNA-binding activity are critical for resveratrol-mediated suppression of matrix metallo- proteinase-2 and subsequent metastatic ability in hu- man osteosarcomas. Oncotarget 2015;6:2736-53.

Sulforaphane restores acetyl-histone H3 binding to Bcl-2 promoter and prevents apoptosis in ethanol-exposed neural crest cells and mouse embryos. F Yuan, X Chen, J Liu, W Feng, L Cai, X Wu, Chen Sy, Exp Neurol. 300Yuan F, Chen X, Liu J, Feng W, Cai L, Wu X, Chen SY. Sulforaphane restores acetyl-histone H3 binding to Bcl-2 promoter and prevents apoptosis in ethanol-ex- posed neural crest cells and mouse embryos. Exp Neu- rol 2018;300:60-6.

Epigenetic modification of Nrf2 by sulforaphane increases the antioxidative and anti-inflammatory capacity in a cellular model of Alzheimer's disease. F Zhao, J Zhang, N Chang, Eur J Pharmacol. 824Zhao F, Zhang J, Chang N. Epigenetic modification of Nrf2 by sulforaphane increases the antioxidative and anti-inflammatory capacity in a cellular model of Alz- heimer's disease. Eur J Pharmacol 2018;824:1-10.

Sulforaphane-induced epigenetic regulation of Nrf2 expression by DNA methyltransferase in human Caco-2 cells. J W Zhou, M Wang, N X Sun, Y Qing, T F Yin, C Li, D Wu, Oncol Lett. 18Zhou JW, Wang M, Sun NX, Qing Y, Yin TF, Li C, Wu D. Sulforaphane-induced epigenetic regulation of Nrf2 expression by DNA methyltransferase in human Caco-2 cells. Oncol Lett 2019;18:2639-47.