# S2 Table. Literature review of chondroblastoma cases treated with chemotherapy Case

CorpusID: 221099361
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9312cacf33f977aaf19fed53063614d49569e43](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9312cacf33f977aaf19fed53063614d49569e43)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

S2 Table. Literature review of chondroblastoma cases treated with chemotherapy Case


S2 Table. Literature review of chondroblastoma cases treated with chemotherapy Case



D 5 yr 13 Elek et al. [12] 12 M Calcaneus Lung metastasis treated with six cycles of cisplatin 100 mg/m 2 and doxorubicin 75 mg/m 2 , with complete resolution. Disease free for 1 yr, than relapse pulmonary disease, resected surgically and post-operative whole-lung radiotherapy. Alive and symptom free 3 yr from diagnosis. 


Local recurrence 1 yr later, treated with excision and denosumab therapy was restarted (same dosage for a year). Alive and disease free 1 yr since last recurrence.A 1 yr FU, follow-up; A, alive; D, dead.A 2.5 yr 

14 Ostrowski et al. [13] 28 
M 
Pelvis 
Multiple pulmonary metastases 18 yr after surgery. RT on pelvic region 
and multiagent chemotherapy (no drugs or doses are reported), with 
progression of lung disease. Died 8 mo later. 

D 8 mo 

21 Our case (2020) 
16 
M 
Left humerus Multiple bilateral lung nodules at diagnosis. Diagnostic wedge resection of 
4 left lung nodules, progressive increase in numbers and dimensions of 
others metastasis. Denosumab 120 mg at day 1, 8, 15, 28 and then 
monthly. Alive and well ad 2-yr FU. 

A 2 yr 

22 Calvert et al. [20] 
64 
M 
Temporal 
bone 

Treatment with denosumab after excision of a local recurrence (16 mo, 
120 mg/monthly). 

Malignant chondroblastoma: report of two cases and reviw of the literature. L B Kahn, F M Wood, L V Ackerman, Arch Pathol. 88Kahn LB, Wood FM, Ackerman LV. Malignant chondroblastoma: report of two cases and reviw of the literature. Arch Pathol. 1969;88:371-6.

Chondroblastoma of the scapula: a case report with ultrastructural observations. K F Wellmann, Cancer. 24Wellmann KF. Chondroblastoma of the scapula: a case report with ultrastructural observations. Cancer. 1969;24:408-16.

Pulmonary metastases from chondroblastoma of the tibia: report of a case. R J Riddell, C J Louis, N A Bromberger, J Bone Joint Surg Br. 55Riddell RJ, Louis CJ, Bromberger NA. Pulmonary metastases from chondroblastoma of the tibia: report of a case. J Bone Joint Surg Br. 1973;55:848-53.

Benign chondroblastoma: case report with pulmonary metastasis. P Green, R P Whittaker, J Bone Joint Surg Am. 57Green P, Whittaker RP. Benign chondroblastoma: case report with pulmonary metastasis. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 1975;57:418-20.

Aggressive chondroblastoma: review of the literature on aggressive behavior and metastases with a report of one new case. A G Huvos, N L Higinbotham, R C Marcove, O Leary, P , Clin Orthop Relat Res. 126Huvos AG, Higinbotham NL, Marcove RC, O'Leary P. Aggressive chondroblastoma: review of the literature on aggressive behavior and metastases with a report of one new case. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 1977;(126):266-72.

Recurrent and aggressive chondroblastoma of the pelvis with late malignant neoplastic changes. C V Reyes, S Kathuria, Am J Surg Pathol. 3Reyes CV, Kathuria S. Recurrent and aggressive chondroblastoma of the pelvis with late malignant neoplastic changes. Am J Surg Pathol. 1979;3:449-55.

Metastatic chondroblastoma: report of an unusual case treated with radiotherapy. J A Wirman, J D Crissman, Aron Bf, Cancer. 44Wirman JA, Crissman JD, Aron BF. Metastatic chondroblastoma: report of an unusual case treated with radiotherapy. Cancer. 1979;44:87-93.

Metastatic chondroblastoma: report of a fatal case with a review of the literature on atypical, aggressive, and malignant chondroblastoma. M Kyriakos, V J Land, H L Penning, S G Parker, Cancer. 55Kyriakos M, Land VJ, Penning HL, Parker SG. Metastatic chondroblastoma: report of a fatal case with a review of the literature on atypical, aggressive, and malignant chondroblastoma. Cancer. 1985;55:1770-89.

. E Kunze, T Graewe, Peitsch E Histology, report of a case with a review of the literatureKunze E, Graewe T, Peitsch E. Histology and biology of metastatic chondroblastoma: report of a case with a review of the literature.

. Pathol Res Pract. 182Pathol Res Pract. 1987;182:113-23.

Late pulmonary metastases from chondroblastoma of the distal femur: a case report. J R Van Horn, J G Vincent, A M Wiersma-Van Tilburg, M Pruszczynski, T J Slooff, J F Molkenboer, Acta Orthop Scand. 61van Horn JR, Vincent JG, Wiersma-van Tilburg AM, Pruszczynski M, Slooff TJ, Molkenboer JF. Late pulmonary metastases from chondroblastoma of the distal femur: a case report. Acta Orthop Scand. 1990;61:466-8.

Benign metastasizing chondroblastoma: a case report. N A Jambhekar, P B Desai, D A Chitale, P Patil, S Arya, Cancer. 82Jambhekar NA, Desai PB, Chitale DA, Patil P, Arya S. Benign metastasizing chondroblastoma: a case report. Cancer. 1998;82:675-8.

Malignant chondroblastoma of the os calcis. E M Elek, R J Grimer, D C Mangham, A M Davies, S R Carter, R M Tillman, Sarcoma. 2Elek EM, Grimer RJ, Mangham DC, Davies AM, Carter SR, Tillman RM. Malignant chondroblastoma of the os calcis. Sarcoma. 1998;2:45-8.

Malignant chondroblastoma presenting as a recurrent pelvic tumor with DNA aneuploidy and p53 mutation as supportive evidence of malignancy. M L Ostrowski, M E Johnson, L D Truong, M J Hicks, F E Smith, H J Spjut, Skeletal Radiol. 28Ostrowski ML, Johnson ME, Truong LD, Hicks MJ, Smith FE, Spjut HJ. Malignant chondroblastoma presenting as a recurrent pelvic tumor with DNA aneuploidy and p53 mutation as supportive evidence of malignancy. Skeletal Radiol. 1999;28:644-50.

Chondroblastoma of bone. A J Ramappa, F Y Lee, P Tang, J R Carlson, M C Gebhardt, H J Mankin, J Bone Joint Surg Am. 82Ramappa AJ, Lee FY, Tang P, Carlson JR, Gebhardt MC, Mankin HJ. Chondroblastoma of bone. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2000;82:1140-5.

Metastatic chondroblastoma with elevated creatine kinase and paraneoplastic neurologic autoimmunity. D D Joshi, P M Anderson, J Matsumoto, C Moir, T Shives, K Unni, J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 25Joshi DD, Anderson PM, Matsumoto J, Moir C, Shives T, Unni K, et al. Metastatic chondroblastoma with elevated creatine kinase and paraneoplastic neurologic autoimmunity. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2003;25:900-4.

Giant chondroblastoma of the scapula with pulmonary metastases. G Ozkoc, G Gonlusen, M Ozalay, F Kayaselcuk, A Pourbagher, R N Tandogan, Skeletal Radiol. 35Ozkoc G, Gonlusen G, Ozalay M, Kayaselcuk F, Pourbagher A, Tandogan RN. Giant chondroblastoma of the scapula with pulmonary metastases. Skeletal Radiol. 2006;35:42-8.

A case of spine origin chondroblastoma metastasis to lung. S H Sohn, S A Koh, D G Kim, S W Park, K H Lee, M K Kim, Cancer Res Treat. 41Sohn SH, Koh SA, Kim DG, Park SW, Lee KH, Kim MK, et al. A case of spine origin chondroblastoma metastasis to lung. Cancer Res Treat. 2009;41:241-4.

Chondroblastoma with pulmonary metastasis in a patient presenting with spontaneous bilateral pneumothorax: report of a case. M Tamura, M Oda, I Matsumoto, S Sawada-Kitamura, G Watanabe, Surg Today. 41Tamura M, Oda M, Matsumoto I, Sawada-Kitamura S, Watanabe G. Chondroblastoma with pulmonary metastasis in a patient presenting with spontaneous bilateral pneumothorax: report of a case. Surg Today. 2011;41:1439-41.

Chondroblastomas presenting in adulthood: a study of 39 patients with emphasis on histological features and skeletal distribution. I John, C Y Inwards, D E Wenger, D D Williams, K J Fritchie, Histopathology. 76John I, Inwards CY, Wenger DE, Williams DD, Fritchie KJ. Chondroblastomas presenting in adulthood: a study of 39 patients with emphasis on histological features and skeletal distribution. Histopathology. 2020;76:308-17.

Use of denosumab in recurrent chondroblastoma of the squamous temporal bone: a case report. N Calvert, D Wood, Clin Case Rep. 5Calvert N, Wood D. Use of denosumab in recurrent chondroblastoma of the squamous temporal bone: a case report. Clin Case Rep. 2017;5:411-3.