# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES Rosehip Neuron -A Review Production and Hosted by

CorpusID: 225289279
 
tags: #Medicine, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b1d2a4ac1f310d468e4f4b1688235e8adb480c7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b1d2a4ac1f310d468e4f4b1688235e8adb480c7)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES Rosehip Neuron -A Review Production and Hosted by


Yuvaraj Babu 
K 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES Rosehip Neuron -A Review Production and Hosted by

Int. J. Res. Pharm. Sci
2020SPL310.26452/ijrps.v11iSPL3.2890Article History: Received on: 10 Jul 2020 Revised on: 10 Aug 2020 Accepted on: 12 Aug 2020ORIGINAL ARTICLE Published by JK Welfare & Pharmascope Foundation Journal Home Page: www.pharmascope.org/ijrps * Corresponding Author Name: Yuvaraj Babu KNeuronsRosehip neuronsNewly discovered neuronsInhibitory GABAergic neurons
Rosehip neuron is a special type of neuron present only in humans. It has inhibitory actions over other cells. It is present in the irst layer of the human cerebral cortex. These neurons have an inhibitory action over other neuronal cells. This research is seen as a scoping literature review. In seeking to identify the relevant literature from the past twenty years, we used common databases such as Pubmed, Google scholar online websites. Nearly 30 reference articles are collected related to the topic. The obtained articles were later read thoroughly and understood. Rosehip neurons are unique neurons and can treat neuronal disorders. It can also maintain the activities of other neuronal cells. It is concluded that more research has to be done on the actions of rosehip neurons and about its functions. This review is an attempt to understand the various functions of Rosehip neurons in humans. Further research is needed to know about its full use of humanity.

## INTRODUCTION

A neuron or nerve cell is an electrically excitable cell that communicates with the other cells through a specialised system called the synapses or synaptic knobs. The neuron is the basic working unit of the brain. These are the specialised one which transmits the information to other nerve cells, muscles or glands (Jourquin et al., 2003). The parts of the neuronal cell are the cell body, axon and dendrites.

They are the components of the spinal cord and peripheral nerves. There are three different types of neurons, and they are sensory-motor and interneuron. All three types of neurons have different functions. Rosehip neurons are the newly found neuron. They are inhibitory GABAergic neurons present in the irst layer of the cerebral cortex. They make up about 10-15% of all the inhibitory neurons. The name rosehip neuron is because of its appearance. It resembles the rose bushes (Schembri, 2018).

According to previous research, this neuron is not found in mice. The dendrites of this neuron are very compact with many branch points. As it is present only in humans, many of the treatments for brain disorders have failed in humans. The speci ic action of the rosehip neuron is not quite clear. This neuron appears to be an inhibitory neuron, which regulates the low of information to certain parts of the brain (Salzer, 1997;Rutherford, 2018).

These neurons have complex dendrites (Nitin et al., 2018). The main aim of this review is to explore detailed information about rosehip neurons. Many researchers now plan to study how these neurons are organised in these larger circuits and also to explore whether their dysfunction might play a role in neuropsychiatric disease (Berger, 2000). Over the past ten years (Choudhari and Thenmozhi, 2016;Pratha and Thenmozhi, 2016;Nandhini et al., 2018), various researches Subashri and Thenmozhi (2016) were done by our team was on osteology Hafeez and Thenmozhi (2016); Kannan and Thenmozhi (2016); Keerthana and Thenmozhi (2016), stature estimation (Krishna and Babu, 2016), uses and ill effects of electronic gadgets (Sriram et al., 2015;Thejeswar and Thenmozhi, 2015), on RNA Johnson (2020); Sekar (2019), animal studies (Seppan et al., 2018) and few in other ields (Menon and Thenmozhi, 2016;Samuel and Thenmozhi, 2015). There is a lack of much information on the current topic, hence the main aim of this study is to explore detailed information about the functions of the Rosehip neuron.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

This research is seen as a scoping literature review. We did not follow a systematic review or metaanalysis. In seeking to identify relevant literature from the past ten years, articles are collected from the Pubmed, google scholar online websites. Nearly 43 articles are found related to the topic. Thirty articles are reviewed for this study.

Articles collected are related to the neurons, neuronal functions, rosehip neurons and its signi icance. Articles related to other categories are excluded from this study. The obtained articles were later thoroughly read and understood. Quality of articles used was assessed using a quality assessment tool and graded as strong, moderate and weak Table 1.


## General Studies on Neuron

Neurons of this type are found using a single nucleus-RNA sequencing. This effects on ageing symptoms. It also has some detoxifying enzymes. Rosehip cells present in the layer of the cerebral cortex have homotypic gap junctions (Morrison and Soto-Avellaneda, 2020). Inhibitory action of rosehip neurons is tested in the invertebrate model organisms. Rosehip neuron is a type of dopaminergic neuron which prevents the neurodegeneration (Brunetti, 2020). Rosehip neuron is a most complex neuron with perplexing features. It is a unique neuron, because it is present only in humans and not in rodents. It has a more signi icant and complex circuitry (Boldog, 2018). This neuron is the important building block of presynaptic biogenesis. Rosehip neurons have the potential to treat neurological pathogens. It is implicated as a risk factor for neuropsychiatric disorders (Vukoja, 2018). Rosehip neurons can activate a unique set of genes. Further studies have to be done to evaluate the use of animal specimens (Shervin and Frank, 1977;Harnett and Harnett, 2008). Areas within the neurons act like tiny transistors, instead of whole cells like in animals (Shervin and Frank, 1977).


## Recent Findings

This neuron makes homotypic gap junctions, and it inhibits the action potentials in microdomains. The dendrites of this neuron are very large and have (Hampson and Deadwyler, 2000) complex computations (Matsuto et al., 1984). FUS is an RNA binding protein which is present in the RNA biosynthetic process is linked to pathogenesis. This neuron plays a role in frontotemporal dementia. In this type of dementia, frontal and temporal lobes start to shrink (Polak and Bloom, 1982). It is found that this neuron also plays a part light response, impairs cytoprotective mechanisms, activates insulin pathway and the neural stress hormone. It also acts as a switch between the acute light and long term stress response. Rosehip neuron gives a better treatment for neurological disorders like dementia. It also has an interaction with local alpha and beta. Ciliary genes are required for the hypothalamic accurate neuron development (Krishna and Babu, 2016;Pascoal, 2019;Rosa, 2020). It is found that the presynaptic zone is essential for axonal transport. It is assumed that this neuron is homozygous, and it develops from the embryonic stem cell (Boscia, 2016).


## Signi icance

Rosehip neurons are found in the cerebral cortex; these are histochemical cells and are inhibitory in action (Postnova et al., 2010). Rosehip neuronal cells help in treating disorders like Alzheimer's disease and dementia. In case of increased food intake, this neuron causes obesity, and the development of Proopiomelanocortin neurons will lead to hyperphagia, which is the increased adiposity (Postnova et al., 2010;Garcia-Garcia, 2020).

Rosehip neuron is a speci ic part of the excitatory neuron, which is involved in synaptic membrane fusion. Sometimes mutation occurs in the neurovascular part, which affects the synaptic membrane leads to impairment in neuronal development (Freeman, 2012).

Rosehip neuron cells have GABAergic inhibitory action potentials, expected to treat the neuronal disorders. As it is a spiral type of cell, its action cannot be observed other than humans. This would be a signi icant disadvantage. 


## Review

Rosehip neuron cells are derived from the bone marrow stem cell.

It plays a signi icant role in sensory neuropathy in patients with diabetes.


## Moderate


## 19

( Innis et al., 1985) Review In these types of cells, the effect of neurotrophin promotes both neuronal differentiation. This study was carried out in a culture of chick retinal cells.

Strong 20 (Boscia, 2016) Review These types of cells are tolerant against the cerebral ischemia, and sodium exchange occurs in these cells.


## Moderate


## Controlling Mechanisms

Rosehip neuron has an extraordinary translational potential with the neurotransmitters, which controls some of the actions of other cells (Yan, 2015). There is a disorder called hyperkinetic movement disorder which is caused due to single amino acid deletions in the C-terminal region. This disorder can be treated by rosehip neuron (Sun, 2001). This neuron supports some of the neural mechanisms, but its action is inhibition, and it has bold response characteristics. In some cases, this neuron acts as an inducer like the neurotrophins and plays a role in neuronal exocytosis (Habeck, 2006;Nagy et al., 2004). It also helps in the controlling of sensory neuropathy hampers, bone marrow, stem cells and diabetes. Effects of neurotrophin promote both neuro differentiation and translation. It also controls the opening and closing of sodium-potassium channels and is an excellent tolerant of cerebral ischemia (Wolf, 2009). It also controls the functions of serotonin in the prelimbic cortex.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

From the references collected and reviewed, rosehip neurons are the inhibitory neurons found only in humans. It has detoxifying enzymes. More information is given in previous research. This neuron is a complex neuron with perplexing features (Mcconalogue, 1998). It helped in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders and mentioned about the neuronal actions. A case study is also done, but the results are not precise.

In general, neurons in any animal cells act as a tiny transistor. Recent studies have given detailed information on the biosynthetic process and about its complexity. Previous research has mentioned the controlling mechanisms of rosehip neurons. It plays a role in the insulin pathway, stress hormone and serotonin. (Innis et al., 1985). They also discussed the clinical progression of dementia, indings of genes, stem cells. Rosehip neurons develop from the embryonic stem cells. Clear results are given for the development of rosehip neurons. Rosehip neurons are the important building blocks for presynaptic biogenesis. It can activate a unique set of genes. Rosehip neuron derives from the embryonic stem cell, and the axonal transport is homozygous. It is a speci ic part of excitatory neurons and is involved in the synaptic membrane fusion. It supports neural mechanisms and has bold response characteristics. Limitations of this study are more extensive and more accurate, an in-depth research is required. Further research is to be carried out about inhibitory actions and bene its of inhibitory action.


## CONCLUSION

From this review, it is concluded that all information is expected to help the people to know about Rosehip neurons. Future studies have to be done on neuronal functions and actions of Rosehip neurons. This review is an attempt to understand the various functions of Rosehip neurons in humans. Further research is needed to know about its full use of humanity.

## Table 1 :
1Quality of study for articles used in the reviewS.no 
Author, Year 
Type of Study 
Key points 
Quality 
1 
(Boldog, 2018) 
Review 
Mentioned 
that 
neuron has a sin-
gle nucleus RNA 
sequencing 

Strong 

2 
(Brunetti, 2020) 
Review 
Discussed 
the 
inhibitory action of 
rosehip neurons. 

Moderate 

3. 
(Pascoal, 2019) 
Review 
Rosehip neuron is a 
most complex neu-
ron 

Moderate 

4 
(Vukoja, 2018) 
Review 
Rosehip neuron is 
an essential build-
ing block for presy-
naptic biogenesis. 

Strong 

5 
(Shervin and Frank, 
1977) 

Review 
Rosehip neuron is 
unique to humans 
and can activate a 
unique set of genes 

Weak 

6 
(Boldog, 2018) 
Review 
These type of neu-
rons make homo-
typic gap junction 

Moderate 

7 
(Pascoal, 2019) 
Review 
Rosehip neurons 
inhibit 
action 
potentials 
in 
microdomains 

Moderate 

8 
(Vukoja, 2018) 
Review 
These types of neu-
rons have interac-
tion between local 
alpha and beta neu-
rons. 

Moderate 

9 
(Sekar, 2019) 
Review 
In this neuron, 
axonal transport 
occurs in the presy-
naptic neuron. 

Strong 

10 
(Rutherford, 2018) 
Review 
Rosehip neurons 
are found the cere-
bral cortex and are 
histochemical cells 

Moderate 

11 
(Schembri, 2018) 
Review 
Rosehip 
neu-
rons help treat 
disorders 
like 
Alzheimer's 
dis-
ease 

Moderate 

12 
(Nitin et al., 2018) 
Review 
This type of neu-
rons has long 
branches 
called 
dendrites and are 
involved in nature 

Strong 

13 
(Morrison and Soto-
Avellaneda, 2020) 

Review 
Rosehip neuron is a 
speci ic part of the 
excitatory neuron. 

Moderate 

Continued on next page 

© International Journal of Research in Pharmaceutical Sciences
© International Journal of Research in Pharmaceutical SciencesYuvaraj Babu K et al., Int. J. Res. Pharm. Sci., 2020, 11 (SPL3), 53-59   
Con lict of InterestThe authors declare that they have no con lict of interest for this study.Funding SupportThe authors declare that they have no any funding support for this study.
Scientists ind a new way around blood clotting disorders. A Berger, BMJ. 3207236Berger, A. 2000. Scientists ind a new way around blood clotting disorders. BMJ, 320(7236):670- 670.

Transcriptomic and morphophysiological evidence for a specialised human cortical GABAergic cell type. E Boldog, Nature Neuroscience. Boldog, E. 2018. Transcriptomic and morphophysi- ological evidence for a specialised human cortical GABAergic cell type. Nature Neuroscience, pages 1185-1195.

NCX1 Exchanger Cooperates with Calretinin to Confer Preconditioning-Induced Tolerance Against Cerebral Ischemia in the Striatum. F Boscia, Molecular Neurobiology. Boscia, F. 2016. NCX1 Exchanger Cooperates with Calretinin to Confer Preconditioning-Induced Tol- erance Against Cerebral Ischemia in the Striatum. Molecular Neurobiology, pages 1365-1376.

Healthspan Maintenance and Prevention of Parkinson's-like Phenotypes with Hydroxytyrosol and Oleuropein Aglycone in. G Brunetti, International Journal of molecular sciences. 7Brunetti, G. 2020. Healthspan Maintenance and Prevention of Parkinson's-like Phenotypes with Hydroxytyrosol and Oleuropein Aglycone in. Inter- national Journal of molecular sciences, (7):21-21.

Occurrence and Importance of Posterior Condylar Foramen. S Choudhari, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 98Choudhari, S., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. Occur- rence and Importance of Posterior Condylar Fora- men. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technol- ogy, 9(8):1083-1083.

Sensory neuropathy hampers nociception-mediated bone marrow stem cell release in mice and patients with diabetes. Z Dang, D Maselli, G Spinetti, E Sangalli, F Carnelli, F Rosa, E Seganfreddo, F Canal, A Furlan, A Paccagnella, E Paiola, B Lorusso, C Specchia, M Albiero, R Cappellari, A Avogaro, A Falco, F Quaini, K Ou, I Rodriguez-Arabaolaza, C Emanueli, M Sambataro, G P Fadini, P Madeddu, Diabetologia. 5811Dang, Z., Maselli, D., Spinetti, G., Sangalli, E., Car- nelli, F., Rosa, F., Seganfreddo, E., Canal, F., Furlan, A., Paccagnella, A., Paiola, E., Lorusso, B., Spec- chia, C., Albiero, M., Cappellari, R., Avogaro, A., Falco, A., Quaini, F., Ou, K., Rodriguez-Arabaolaza, I., Emanueli, C., Sambataro, M., Fadini, G. P., Madeddu, P. 2015. Sensory neuropathy ham- pers nociception-mediated bone marrow stem cell release in mice and patients with diabetes. Dia- betologia, 58(11):2653-2662.

Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics. W Freeman, Freeman, W. 2012. Neurodynamics: An Exploration in Mesoscopic Brain Dynamics.

Role of nerve growth factor in the reproductive physiology of female rabbits: A review. R M Garcia-Garcia, Theriogenology. Garcia-Garcia, R. M. 2020. Role of nerve growth fac- tor in the reproductive physiology of female rab- bits: A review. Theriogenology, pages 321-328.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor mediates aversion to social contact. M Habeck, Nature Clinical Practice Neurology. 26Habeck, M. 2006. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor mediates aversion to social contact. Nature Clinical Practice Neurology, 2(6):290-290.

Accessory foramen in the middle cranial fossa. N Hafeez, Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 911Hafeez, N., Thenmozhi 2016. Accessory foramen in the middle cranial fossa. Research Journal of Phar- macy and Technology, 9(11):1880-1880.

Cannabinoids Reveal the Necessity of Hippocampal Neural Encoding for Short-Term Memory in Rats. R E Hampson, S A Deadwyler, The Journal of Neuroscience. 2023Hampson, R. E., Deadwyler, S. A. 2000. Cannabi- noids Reveal the Necessity of Hippocampal Neu- ral Encoding for Short-Term Memory in Rats. The Journal of Neuroscience, 20(23):8932-8942.

Substance K excites dopaminergic and nondopaminergic neurons in rat substantia nigra. W Harnett, M M Harnett, R B Innis, R Andrade, G K Aghajanian, Brain Research. 102Therapeutic immunomodulators from nematode parasitesHarnett, W., Harnett, M. M. 2008. Therapeu- tic immunomodulators from nematode parasites. Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine, 10. Innis, R. B., Andrade, R., Aghajanian, G. K. 1985. Substance K excites dopaminergic and non- dopaminergic neurons in rat substantia nigra. Brain Research, 335(2):381-383.

Computational identi ication of MiRNA-7110 from pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) ESTs: a new microRNA that links diabetes and PAH. J Johnson, Hypertension Research. Johnson, J. 2020. Computational identi ication of MiRNA-7110 from pulmonary arterial hyperten- sion (PAH) ESTs: a new microRNA that links dia- betes and PAH. Hypertension Research, pages 360- 362.

Neuronal activity-dependent increase of net matrix metalloproteinase activity is associated with MMP-9 neurotoxicity after kainate. J Jourquin, E Tremblay, N Decanis, G Charton, S Hanessian, A.-M Chollet, T L Diguardher, M Khrestchatisky, S Rivera, European Journal of Neuroscience. 186Jourquin, J., Tremblay, E., Decanis, N., Charton, G., Hanessian, S., Chollet, A.-M., Diguardher, T. L., Khrestchatisky, M., Rivera, S. 2003. Neuronal activity-dependent increase of net matrix metallo- proteinase activity is associated with MMP-9 neu- rotoxicity after kainate. European Journal of Neu- roscience, 18(6):1507-1517.

Morphometric Study of Styloid Process and its Clinical Importance on Eagle's Syndrome. R Kannan, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 98Kannan, R., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. Morphomet- ric Study of Styloid Process and its Clinical Impor- tance on Eagle's Syndrome. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 9(8):1137-1137.

Occurrence of foramen of huschke and its clinical significance. B Keerthana, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 911Keerthana, B., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. Occur- rence of foramen of huschke and its clinical signif- icance. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technol- ogy, 9(11):1835-1835.

Estimation of stature from physiognomic facial length and morphological facial length. R N Krishna, K Y Babu, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 911Krishna, R. N., Babu, K. Y. 2016. Estimation of stature from physiognomic facial length and morphologi- cal facial length. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 9(11):2071-2071.

The excitatory action of the newly-discovered mammalian tachykinins, neurokinin α and neurokinin β, on neurons of the isolated spinal cord of the newborn rat. T Matsuto, M Yanagisawa, M Otsuka, I Kanazawa, E Munekata, Neuroscience Research. 21-2Matsuto, T., Yanagisawa, M., Otsuka, M., Kanazawa, I., Munekata, E. 1984. The excitatory action of the newly-discovered mammalian tachykinins, neu- rokinin α and neurokinin β, on neurons of the iso- lated spinal cord of the newborn rat. Neuroscience Research, 2(1-2):105-110.

Activation and internalisation of the µ-opioid receptor (MOR) by endomorphin-1 and -2. K Mcconalogue, Gastroenterology. Mcconalogue, K. 1998. Activation and inter- nalisation of the µ-opioid receptor (MOR) by endomorphin-1 and -2. Gastroenterology, pages 84730-84736.

Correlation between thyroid function and obesity. A Menon, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 910Menon, A., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. Correlation between thyroid function and obesity. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 9(10):1568- 1568.

Central nervous system and peripheral cell labeling by vascular endothelial cadherin-driven lineage tracing in adult mice. B Morrison, A Soto-Avellaneda, Neural Regeneration Research. 1510Morrison, B., Soto-Avellaneda, A. 2020. Central nervous system and peripheral cell labeling by vascular endothelial cadherin-driven lineage trac- ing in adult mice. Neural Regeneration Research, 15(10):1856-1856.

Update on connexins and gap junctions in neurons and glia in the mammalian nervous system. J I Nagy, F E Dudek, J E Rash, Brain Research Reviews. 471-3Nagy, J. I., Dudek, F. E., Rash, J. E. 2004. Update on connexins and gap junctions in neurons and glia in the mammalian nervous system. Brain Research Reviews, 47(1-3):191-215.

Size, Shape, Prominence and Localization of Gerdy's Tubercle in Dry Human Tibial Bones. J S T Nandhini, K Y Babu, K G Mohanraj, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 118Nandhini, J. S. T., Babu, K. Y., Mohanraj, K. G. 2018. Size, Shape, Prominence and Localiza- tion of Gerdy's Tubercle in Dry Human Tibial Bones. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technol- ogy, 11(8):3604-3604.

Millipede: Die-Stacked Memory Optimisations for Big Data Machine Learning Analytics. T Nitin, M Vijaykumar, N , T , IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS). Nitin, T., Vijaykumar, M., N, T. 2018. Milli- pede: Die-Stacked Memory Optimisations for Big Data Machine Learning Analytics. IEEE Interna- tional Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo- sium (IPDPS).

Aβ-induced vulnerability propagates via the brain's default mode network. T A Pascoal, Nature Communications. Pascoal, T. A. 2019. Aβ-induced vulnerability propa- gates via the brain's default mode network. Nature Communications.

Regulatory Peptides and Neuron-Speci ic Enolase in the Respiratory Tract of Man and Other Mammals. J M Polak, S R Bloom, Experimental Lung Research. 33-4Polak, J. M., Bloom, S. R. 1982. Regulatory Pep- tides and Neuron-Speci ic Enolase in the Respira- tory Tract of Man and Other Mammals. Experimen- tal Lung Research, 3(3-4):313-328.

Neurones and Synapses for Systemic Models of Psychiatric Disorders. S Postnova, E Rosa, H Braun, Pharmacopsychiatry. S 01Postnova, S., Rosa, E., Braun, H. 2010. Neurones and Synapses for Systemic Models of Psychiatric Disor- ders. Pharmacopsychiatry, 43(S 01):S82-S91.

A study of the occurrence and morphometric analysis on meningo orbital foramen. A A Pratha, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. A & V Publications. 97Pratha, A. A., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. A study of the occurrence and morphometric analysis on meningo orbital foramen. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. A & V Publications, 9(7):880-882.

Brain Structural Plasticity: From Adult Neurogenesis to Immature Neurons. Frontiers in Neuroscience. C L Rosa, Rosa, C. L. 2020. Brain Structural Plasticity: From Adult Neurogenesis to Immature Neurons. Fron- tiers in Neuroscience.

A new kind of surgery for a new kind of war: gunshot wounds and their treatment in the British Civil Wars. S M Rutherford, Rutherford, S. M. 2018. A new kind of surgery for a new kind of war: gunshot wounds and their treat- ment in the British Civil Wars. pages 57-77.

Clustering Sodium Channels at the Node of Ranvier: Close Encounters of the Axon-Glia Kind. J L Salzer, Neuron. 186Salzer, J. L. 1997. Clustering Sodium Channels at the Node of Ranvier: Close Encounters of the Axon- Glia Kind. Neuron, 18(6):843-846.

Study of impaired vision due to Amblyopia. A R Samuel, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 87Samuel, A. R., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2015. Study of impaired vision due to Amblyopia. Research Jour- nal of Pharmacy and Technology, 8(7):912-912.

Top stories: an Alzheimer's gamble, a new kind of brain cell, and catching asteroids. F Schembri, ScienceSchembri, F. 2018. Top stories: an Alzheimer's gam- ble, a new kind of brain cell, and catching aster- oids. Science.

Methylation-dependent is circulating microRNA 510 in preeclampsia patients. D Sekar, Hypertension Research. Sekar, D. 2019. Methylation-dependent is circulating microRNA 510 in preeclampsia patients. Hyper- tension Research, pages 1647-1648.

Therapeutic potential of Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) on ageing induced damage in dorsal nerve of the penis and its implication on erectile function: an experimental study using albino rats. P Seppan, I Muhammed, K G Mohanraj, G Lakshmanan, D Premavathy, S J Muthu, K W Shimray, S B Sathyanathan, The Aging Male. Seppan, P., Muhammed, I., Mohanraj, K. G., Lak- shmanan, G., Premavathy, D., Muthu, S. J., Shim- ray, K. W., Sathyanathan, S. B. 2018. Therapeu- tic potential of Mucuna pruriens (Linn.) on ageing induced damage in dorsal nerve of the penis and its implication on erectile function: an experimen- tal study using albino rats. The Aging Male, pages 1-14.

ChemInform Abstract: Make Methanol by Three Phase Reaction. M B Shervin, M E Frank, Chemischer Informationsdienst. 811Shervin, M. B., Frank, M. E. 1977. ChemInform Abstract: Make Methanol by Three Phase Reac- tion. Chemischer Informationsdienst, 8(11):no-no.

Effects of Mobile Phone Radiation on Brain: A questionnaire based study. N Sriram, Thenmozhi, S Yuvaraj, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 87Sriram, N., Thenmozhi, Yuvaraj, S. 2015. Effects of Mobile Phone Radiation on Brain: A questionnaire based study. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 8(7):867-867.

Occipital Emissary Foramina in Human Adult Skull and Their Clinical Implications. A Subashri, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 96Subashri, A., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2016. Occipital Emis- sary Foramina in Human Adult Skull and Their Clinical Implications. Research Journal of Phar- macy and Technology, 9(6):716-716.

Neuroglobin is up-regulated by and protects neurons from hypoxic-ischemic injury. Y Sun, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. the National Academy of SciencesSun, Y. 2001. Neuroglobin is up-regulated by and protects neurons from hypoxic-ischemic injury. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, pages 15306-15311.

Educational Research-iPad System vs Textbook System. E P Thejeswar, M S Thenmozhi, Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology. 88Thejeswar, E. P., Thenmozhi, M. S. 2015. Edu- cational Research-iPad System vs Textbook Sys- tem. Research Journal of Pharmacy and Technology, 8(8):1158-1158.

Presynaptic Biogenesis Requires Axonal Transport of Lysosome-Related Vesicles. neuron. A Vukoja, Vukoja, A. 2018. Presynaptic Biogenesis Requires Axonal Transport of Lysosome-Related Vesicles. neuron, pages 1216-1232.

Orexins: A Newly Discovered Family of Hypothalamic Regulators of Food Intake. Nutrition Reviews. G Wolf, Wolf, G. 2009. Orexins: A Newly Discovered Family of Hypothalamic Regulators of Food Intake. Nutri- tion Reviews, pages 172-173.

Systematic discovery of regulated and conserved alternative exons in the mammalian brain reveals NMD is modulating chromatin regulators. Q Yan, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Yan, Q. 2015. Systematic discovery of regulated and conserved alternative exons in the mammalian brain reveals NMD is modulating chromatin regu- lators. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- ences, pages 3445-3450.