# Pharmacological and pharmacognostical aspect of Prosopis juliflora: A review

CorpusID: 228973335
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Pharmacological and pharmacognostical aspect of Prosopis juliflora: A review


Nidhi Yadav 
A C Rana 

Rana AC Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Kurukshetra University
136119KurukshetraHaryanaIndia


Kurukshetra University
136119KurukshetraHaryana, India

Pharmacological and pharmacognostical aspect of Prosopis juliflora: A review

Cross Ref World Journal of Advanced Research and Reviews
202001Publication history: Received on 22 June 2020; revised on 12 October 2020; accepted on 16 October 2020 Corresponding author: (REVIEW ARTICLE) 37AlkaloidsCytotoxicInvasiveMesquitePharmacological activitiesProsopis juliflora
Prosopis juliflora also called as mesquite or Velayati babul, found all over the world specially in semiarid and arid areas. It is a competitive weed and has been declared as noxious in several countries. WHO found that herbal medicines are used traditionally for the treatment of diseases, nearly 80% of the population utilize plants due to their less side effects and easy availability as compared to allopathic systems of medicine. Prosopis juliflora belongs to family Leguminosae and also has an effective role as traditional medicine. Every part of this species contains a large number of phytoconstituents mainly flavonoids, alkaloids, tannins, phenolics, terpenes and saponins. The plant possesses some pharmacological activity like antibacterial, anti-pustule, antitumor, larvicidal, anthelminthic, antimicrobial, antirheumatic, anti-inflammatory, antifungal, antioxidant, antimalarial activities. Despite of its various uses, it is a serious invasive weed and is cytotoxic in nature. Due to ingestion of Prosopis juliflora pods, a neurological disorder "Cara-torta" is most common in the ruminant animals like goats which directly affect mitochondria of nerve cell. So, this article is an aggregate of all the details and information of Prosopis juliflora plant published in different books and journals.

## Introduction

Prosopis juliflora is one of the most invasive species of India and the world, which belongs to the family Leguminosae and subfamily Mimosoideae and has 44 species across the world [1,2].Traditionally, P. juliflora is utilized for curing diarrhea, cold, dysentery, flu, inflammation, measles, hoarseness, sore throat and for the curing and healing of wounds [3]. Woods of P. juliflora species used as a source of charcoal and activated carbon and also in the manufacturing of paperboard and fiber for paper and hardboard industries. P. juliflora is also used as pods for animal feed and the flowers are used by bees for honey production [4,5,6]. It is a competitive weed and also called as a noxious weed in several countries because the tree dries out the soil and compete with every plant, especially grasses in the dry areas [1,7]. Drought tolerant genes have been identified in P. juliflora using expressed sequence tags and these genes are used as drought tolerance genes in various transgenic crops or plants [8]. Medicinal uses of P. juliflora have been demonstrated in many studies and the extracts of different parts of P. juliflora possess numerous pharmacological activities such as antimicrobial, antioxidant, antimalarial, larvicidal, insecticidal, antitumor, anthelmintic, antiemetic and cholinesterase inhibiting activity [9]. From ethnopharmacological studies, it was found that P. juliflora is used as an astringent, in rheumatism and as remedies against scorpion stings and snakes bite [10]. The plant is also a rich source of phytoconstituents, especially alkaloids, saponins and flavonoids. The pharmacological and biological activities signify the importance of this plant as a possible candidate for deriving phytomedicines [11].


### Morphology

P. juliflora is either in the form of tree or shrub of various sizes. It is mostly xerophilous, spiny, armed and aculeate. The glands are present at the joint of leaflets and pinne. The legume is straw-yellow or brown in colour (8-29 cm long, 9-17 mm wide, 4-8 mm thick) after drying and straight with apex which is curved inward and sometimes falcate, compressed, linear, stipulate, rectangular to subquadrate. Plant has spines that are 0.5-5 cm long, not on every part, solitary or paired [14,15].


#### Tree form and size

Tree size and form vary from species to species and also depend on genetic and environmental influences. P. juliflora normally reaches a maximum height of 12 m, but can also reach up to 20 m under favorable condition.


#### Seeds

They are epigeous in germination. The cotyledons are fleshy and are first seed leaves that also exist after the first true leaves have formed, they are green or pale green in colour [15].


#### Wood

The woods of P. juliflora are diffusely porous in its gross structure and are (bark) pale brown in colour when present in dried form. At microscopic level P. juliflora contain fibers (48%), vessels (18%), rays (18%) and axial parenchyma (16%) [13].


#### Leaves

They are bipinnate in nature and have nodes, petiole and rachis (5-20 cm) long. The leaves are medium to large, 10-20 cm long. Leaflets are 8-18 mm long, either elliptic-oblong, linear-oblong or ovate in shape, with pointed apex. Glands are sessile with an apical pore, cuculiform and they are present at the junction of pinnae or the junction of leaflets [14].


#### Flowers

Flowers are long, spike like inflorescence known as racemes and are cylindrical in shape. They are yellow to yellowwhite in colour. Inflorescences (9.5-16.5 cm) equal in length to the leaves, or slightly longer or slightly shorter with 237-344 number of flowers. Flowers are sterile, actinomorphic, pentamerous and hermaphrodite in nature. Inflorescence contains various parts like calyx, corolla, pistils, petals, stamen and pedicel [15].


#### Fruit

This species also belongs to the Leguminosae family because of the arrangement of different parts of fruit. The fruit is an indehiscent legume and has incurved apex, with or without parallel margins. The edges of the fruit have no parallel margins with 16-28 cm length, 14-18 mm width and 6-10 mm thickness. The pods which we called fruit are green in colour when immature and yellow when they are fully mature in nature. They are flattened to subquadrate in section and acuminate and stipitate, compressed to sub-compressed and sub-moniliform.

Other Prosopis species are also used as diuretic and treat ocular and hepatic problems [18]. Prosopis Africana (leaves, bark twigs, roots) is used to treat dermatitis, bronchitis, tooth decay, malaria, stomach cramps and dysentery. In some areas, it is also used to treat sore throat, tooth decay and heal wounds and cuts [19]. Prosopis farcta in Iran is used traditionally for treating cardiac pain and angina pectoris [20]. Prosopis cineraria is used for curing earache, leprosy, dyspepsia, leukoderma, asthma, dysentery etc. [21].


## Phytochemistry

The air-dried leaves of P. juliflora, also known as Velayati Kikar were evaluated for phytoconstituents that are alkaloids, flavonoids, phenols, saponins and tannins [22]. Anti-bacterial, anticancer, anti-inflammatory and antiviral are some pharmacological activities shown only by alkaloids and saponin. P. juliflora or we can say it as mesquite, its different parts such as pods, flowers, leaves, stem and seeds contain a large class of metabolites. Pods and leaves contain a large amount of phytoconstituents as compared to other different parts of P. juliflora [3].

In the year 2012 Singh perform the phytochemical analysis on leaves, pod, flower, root and stem of P. juliflora and found the presence of various phytochemicals in varying concentrations in different parts. Phytochemical analysis revealed that the pods and leaf show the presence of alkaloids, steroids, terpenoids, flavonoids, tannins and phenolics. The flower extract shows the presence of alkaloids, steroids, terpenoids, flavonoids and phenolics. Also stem shows minimum concentration of compounds like phenolics, terpenes, flavonoids and steroids, while roots extracts show the presence of phenolics, tannins, flavonoids, steroids, alkaloids, terpenes and saponin. Phlobatannin and cardiac glycoside are absent in all parts of the plant, whereas saponin is only found in roots [23].

Extraction is the initial step of various phytochemical screening or for the isolation of phytoconstituents. Different solvents are used in increasing order of polarity for better extraction of all secondary metabolites i.e. petroleum ether, benzene, chloroform, ethyl-acetate, ethanol and water. Here, petroleum ether is least polar and water is most polar solvent [24]. 


## 11.

Enterolignan Precursor((-)lariciresinol) Plant growth inhibitor [37] The metabolites like shikimic acid metabolites ((-)-lariciresinol, phenylpropanoids) and piperidine alkaloids (secojuliprosopinal) from P. juliflora with allelopathic properties result from two major biosynthetic pathways i.e. shikimic acid pathway and acetic acid or polyketide metabolic pathway through the lysine amino acid pathway [38]. Leaves of P. juliflora contain a high number of alkaloids such as juliflorine, julifloricine, julifloridine, juliprosinene, juliprosine, juliprosopine and mesquitol24 and phenolic derivatives [39]. Some chemicals like syringin, (-)-lariciresinol, L-tryptophan, juliprosopine, juliprosine, and juliprosopinal are water soluble and released into its space through the leaves by rain water [40]. The chemical composition of all phytoconstituents and their concentration are not same in all parts but difference is noticed from parts to parts or organ to organ within the developmental cycle [41]. Bark of P. juliflora contains quercetin, 4,7-dimethylether, kaempferol 4-O-methylether, retusin, L-mannopyranoside which exhibit antifungal activity. It also contains 3-oxo-juliprosopine, secojuliprosopinal which shows anti-inflammatory activity. Different parts other than leaves and bark like pods, heartwood, flower, roots also contain some constituents which also have some biological activity [9]. 


### Wood

The woody biomass contains several constituents and can be classified into cellulose, hemicellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and extractives with levels 40-45%, 25-30%, 11-28% and 3-15% respectively [42].


### Fruit

The pulp contains 56% of the total weight of the fruit. Sucrose (45%) is the very soluble constituent of pulp representing 90% of all soluble sugar present. Other reducing sugars also present that are glucose, fructose, inositol, raffinose and xylose etc [43,44].


### Leaves

In leaves essential amino acid (AA) are maximum but low S-containing AA are present. Alkaloids, tannins, flavonoids, polyphenols and chemical constituents are also present. The constituents of the leaves can be classified into nitrogen free extract, basic extractives and mineral elements. Basic extractives present in the leaves are protein (26.3%), fiber (24.8%), extract (8.5%), ash (1.4%) and mineral elements such as micronutrients and macronutrients [45,46]. Table 4 Phytochemicals present in the extracts obtained from various parts of P. juliflora [23]. "+" low concentration, "++" moderate concentration, "+++" high concentration, "-"absent
O C H 3 O C H 3 O CH 3 OH OH

## Pharmacological activity

P. juliflora showed antibacterial activity against strains of E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Shigella sonnei and other phytopathogenic agents [27]. Furthermore, investigated that Juliflorine possesses immuno-modulating activity when assayed in rabbits using Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA) containing Listeria hemolysin (antigen), administered intramuscularly in various concentration and dose dependent immune response was observed [47]. Choudhary et al., demonstrated the acetylcholinesterase inhibitory potential in juliflorine alkaloid isolated from P. juliflora [48]. Also, pollen of juliflora species is an important source of flavonoids, which are considered as natural antioxidants [49]. The in-vitro antiplasmodial activity was studied in ethanolic extract of numerous south Indian medicinal plants against Plasmodium falciparum and found that flower, leaf and bark extracts of P. juliflora showed IC50 values of more than 100 µg/ml [50]. Due to its better antioxidant activity, it is also useful in controlling inflammatory diseases, cancer and diabetes [51].


## Figure 1

Pharmacological Activities of P. juliflora


### Antibacterial activity

P. juliflora contains a large number of alkaloids in various parts that were tested for their antibacterial activity using disc diffusion technique on some gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial strains. The extract of leaves of P. juliflora showed better activity as compared to other plant parts. Klebsiella was found to more susceptible bacteria then Acinetobacter and Alcaligin [33]. Also, a dose-dependent inhibitory activitiy was observed in concentration range of 50 mg/ml to 300 mg/ml and results demonstrated that the extract showed good inhibitory activity against all the bacterial strains like Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Klebsiella pneumonia, M. luteus, S. aureus, Bacillus subtilis and Salmonella typhimurium [52]. Similarly, well-diffusion test was carried out for P. juliflora methanolic extract on Gram-positive bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus sp. and Streptococcus sp.) and Gramnegative bacteria (E. coli and Klebsiella sp.) by Raghavendra et al. to study the inhibitory action of the extract on various bacteria. Widest zone of inhibition was showed by green leaves (22 and 19 mm zone of inhibition) as compared to dry leaves (22 and 19 mm zone of inhibition). The study findings concluded that gram-positive bacteria are more affected than gram-negative bacteria. Also, methanol extract of green leaves of P. juliflora was more effective as compared to dry leaves [24].


### Antimalarial activity

Due to the development of resistance to some antimalarial drugs that are used to treat malaria and fever, numerous plants have been examined for in-vitro antiplasmodial activity which are used traditionally to treat malaria. According to a study by Simonsen et al., P juliflora ethanolic extracts from flower and fruit showed an IC50 value of 24 µg/ml and posses good antiplasmodial activity [53]. In another study, in-vivo antimalarial potential has also been evaluated in the formate salts of julifloridine and juliprosopine isolated from P. juliflora and compared with chloroquine. Juliprosopine was found to be more potent at 2 mg/kg as compared to chloroquine at 50 mg/kg [54]. 


### Anti-tumor activity


### Larvicidal activity

Yadav et al. evaluated extracts of different plants to facilitate the development of highly effective extract for mosquito control. Leaves of P. juliflora, Malvastrum coromandelianum, Vernonia cinerea and Hyptis suaveolens were collected and evaluated for larvicidal activity in different solvents like methanol, isopropanol, dimethyl sulfoxide, acetone and water. Vernonia cinerea in acetone showed maximum activity followed by P. juliflora in methanolic solution [56]. Also, in another study, acetone extract of Vernonia cinerea and isopropanol extract of Callistemon viminalis were found to be most effective against Aedes albopictus larva with LC50 value of 64.5 ppm 71.34 ppm respectively. P. juliflora acetone extract was also found to be effective oviposition-deterrent for the control of Aedes albopictus mosquito at 100 ppm [57]. Results showed that the ethanolic extract of leaves is more effective in anthelmintic activity than the roots extract whereas equally effective when compared with synthetic drug Albendazole. The presence of saponins, condensed tannins and alkaloids in the extract are the main causes of anthelmintic activity. Thus, these phytoconstituents can be a favorable source for veterinary drug development to cure nematode infection [58].


### Anthelmintic activity


### Antifungal activity

Antifungal potential in P. juliflora was investigated by Raghavendra et al. using poisoned food technique against fungus Alternaria alternata (cause brown spot of tobacco) in different solvents (petroleum ether, chloroform, benzene, ethanol, methanol and aqueous). Methanol and ethanol extracts showed maximum antifungal property among all other solvent extracts. For isolation of alkaloids, methanol extract was further fractionated and compared with synthetic fungicides (blitox, captan, dithane M-45 and thiram) for antifungal activity at a minimum inhibitory concentration of 1000 ppm. The alkaloid extract at 1000 ppm showed better fungicidal activity and was effective at a low dose as compared to synthetic fungicides [59]. Dale, in his work studied that P. juliflora contain a majority of alkaloids with various biological activities that was active against a wide range of seed-borne fungi. Alkaloid extract of P. juliflora was amended with all the chemical fungicides at 1.5 g/L and 1 g/L. The combination of chemical fungicides amended with alkaloid extract showed highly significant antifungal activity compared to chemical fungicides tested alone at the particular dosage. Finally, the result recommended that the extract reduce the dose of chemical fungicides and increase the inhibition of seed mycoflora efficiently [60].


### Antimicrobial activity

P. juliflora crude extracts, alkaloid-enriched fraction and isolated alkaloid was explained by dos santos et al. that was evaluated for antimicrobial potential by in-vitro methods. In 1999, Satish et al. described the potential use to combat microorganisms in crop plants and Caceres et al., studied the treatment of gonorrhea by using tincture of P. juliflora. For that plant material was macerated in 50% alcohol and the tincture tested for in-vitro activity by measuring the inhibition zone. The leaf extract or tincture showed 9.6 mm of inhibition which was maximum and most active against Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Isolated from symptomatic patient) [61]. Besides the studies on microorganisms that affect humans, Satish et al. found that antibacterial property was only found in the aqueous extracts of P. juliflora, Lawsonia inermis and Oxalis corniculata. P. juliflora leaves have antibacterial activity against various Xanthomonas sp. (inhibition zone of 18-23 mm) comparable to bacterimycin and streptocycline and manage diseases in several crops [62]. In 2013, dos santos et al. described in-vitro antimicrobial activity to evaluate pods of P. juliflora as feed additives for ruminants which contain alkaloid enriched fraction for study. Chloroform extract of P. juliflora pods contains alkaloids which have invitro antimicrobial activity against Micrococcus luteus (MIC = 25 µg/ml), Staphylococcus aureus (MIC = 50 µg/ml) and Streptococcus mutans (MIC = 50 µg/ ml) and gas production have been evaluated with monensin as the positive control.

The results showed that extract produces less gas during fermentation in ruminants as compared to monensin [32].


### Antioxidant activity

It is observed that flavonoids and phenolic compounds are significantly important for describing antioxidant properties of various plant pollens. The compounds with phenolic hydroxy group have antioxidant property specially, the compounds with dihydroxy at 30th and 40th position of the B ring of flavonoid compounds [63]. P. juliflora honeybee collected pollen has higher antioxidant properties than Amaranthus hybridus pollen [64]. Antioxidant activity was seen by Prasad et al. in aqueous leaf extract of P. juliflora using rat liver enzymes. It was found that when the rats are fed-up with 5% aqueous extract, it showed protective activity against hepatotoxicity induced by S. aureus [65]. Furthermore, Sirmah et al. did an experiment to check whether P. juliflora extract (heartwood) could be used as a source of antioxidant compounds for food, cosmetics or for pharmaceutical application. Results concluded that presence of flavonoids (4-Omethyl-gallocatechin) and (-)-mesquitol as the main secondary metabolite in P. juliflora extract are a good source of anioxidant compound [35].


### Antipyretic activity

Ethanolic extract of P. juliflora reveals the presence of major phytoconstituents like flavonoids, alkaloids, anthraquinones, quinines, tannins, Leucoanthocyanidin, and Ellagic acid glycosides, were tested for brewer's yeast induced hyperthermia in rats. The extract has been explored as potential and effective antipyretic activity at different tested dose level. Gopinath 


### Antipustule activity

Pimple eradication is the hot core and important task for research in the cosmetic sector. They occur due to growth of Staphylococcus species whose biomass swells and develops as a pimple. Acetone extract of P. juliflora have anti-pustule activity which inhibit staphylococcus sp. that was explained by using well diffusion method. Rajadurai et al., found the minimum inhibitory concentration of acetone extract of P. juliflora and it was 0.75 mg/ml. FTIR was done to confirm the functional group and growth curve analysis was done for the determination of inhibitory action of acetone extract. The extract when used with synthetic creams increase the anti-pustule activity because with the extract the activity was increased and chances of skin blackening, itching of skin and damage of tissue due to synthetic creams are decreased [68].


### Antigiardial and Amoebicidal activity

Giardiasis is caused due to parasitic gastro-intestinal diseases and affected 200 million people globally. Giardia lamblia is considered as one of the main causatives means of diarrhoea in both children and adults. Leaves of P. juliflora that are extracted (Petroleum ether and methanol) were taken and tests were performed at different concentrations. The highest effective concentration of P. juliflora petroleum ether extract against Giardia lamblia was 1000 ppm with mortality of 78.91% after 72 hours and the same extract show lowest antigiardial activity in 24 hours with 1000 ppm concentration have mortality rate of 38.55 %. While 312.5 ppm of metronidazole was given 83.42% mortality after 72 hours. After malaria and schistosomiasis, Entamoeba histolytica stood at third position in the world in causing lethal infection. Although it is asymptomatic in nearly 90% of cases, the symptoms of amoebiasis are hemorrhagic colitis and amoebic liver abscess which affect 50 million people all over the world. The highest effective concentration of P. juliflora methanol extract against Entamoeba histolytica was 1000 ppm with mortality of 71.97% after 72 hours. While 125 ppm concentration in petroleum ether extract is the lowest antiamoebic concentration with 31.88 % mortality in 24 hours. Also, 312.5 ppm of metronidazole gave 78.01% mortality after 72 hours. It has been concluded by Garbi et al., that the petroleum extract of P. juliflora leaves in both cases was better than the metronidazole which has been demonstrated to have side effects [69].


### Cholinesterase inhibitory activity

Choudhary et al. investigated that P. juliflora contains alkaloids such as juliflorine which inhibit acetylcholinesterase and butyryl cholinesterase in non-competitive manner with IC50 value 0.42 and 0.12 µM and Ki values 0.4 and 0.1 µM respectively. It was also confirmed by molecular docking in which the alkaloid interacts with the active site of acetylcholinesterase and it also blocks calcium channels. It was confirmed by human neutrophils viability assay which make juliflorine as an interesting alkaloid for Alzheimer diseases. Juliflorine also showed dose dependent (30-500 µg/ml) spasmolytic and calcium channel blocking activity in isolated jejunum of rabbit [48].


### Anti-inflammatory activity

The study was designed by Choudhary and Nagori, to phytochemically screen the anti-inflammatory potency of the ethanolic extract of P. juliflora leaves (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg) against carrageenan induced paw edema in rats. The phytochemical screening showed that flavonoids, saponins, carbohydrates, cardiac glycosides, tannins, and alkaloids are present in ethanolic extract of P. juliflora leaves. The oral median lethal dose (LD) of ethanolic extract was found to be 3807.9 mg/kg and > 5000 mg/kg in mice and rats respectively. The extract of P. juliflora shows highest activity at a dose of 400 mg/kg at which paw edema is attenuated. This study has been supported the traditional belief that P. juliflora used in the management of inflammations [70].


## Toxicity studies

Toxicity refers to the harmful interaction between chemicals and biological systems. A toxicant is any substance that has harmful effects on a living system. P. juliflora or mesquite or algarroba parts are used by both animals as well as by human beings due to their beneficial effects. But sometimes due to consumption, intoxication is seen in animals, mainly in ruminant animals (in USA, Peru, Brazil). Mesquite is a very common plant in dry areas and easily available but the reports showed that it also causes animal poisoning due to the consumption of pods [71]. A disease known as "Caratorta" is most common in the ruminant animals specially in goats and cattle. In this the lateral deviation of the head occurs due to cranial nerve dysfunction, degeneration and disappearance of neurons in the trigeminal motor nucleus which perform to keep food in the mouth during mastication. This disease occurs only in those animals which eat P. juliflora pods for 8 months or more [29,71]. Also, other clinical signs during rumination are seen like dysphagia, incoordination of chewing movements, atrophy, dysphagia and profuse salivation of the masseter muscle in animals, ruminal atony, anemia, submandibular edema and progressive weight loss [72]. All the symptoms result in degradation of brain flora like neuromuscular alteration, histologic lesions like spongiosis, gliosis, the loss of Nissl granules, fine vacuolation of the perikaryon of neurons from trigeminal motor nuclei and finally which results in the degeneration and disappearance of neuronal cells in the trigeminal motor nucleus [72,73].

A toxicity study was performed by Silva et al. on P. juliflora plant which leads to the isolation, purification, identification of juliprosopina and juliprosinene from the mixture of alkaloids. The study shows that piperidine alkaloids show toxicity in laboratory animals because they act directly on neural cells causing intracellular impairments, principally to mitochondria. Neural cell cultures technique was used to understand the main cellular alterations seen in "cara torta" disease and the mechanism of action of piperidine alkaloids which is the main neurotoxic compound in P. juliflora leaves and pods. This study showed that autophagy shows protective mechanisms for neural cells against programmed cell death started by mitochondrial damage [74].

P. juliflora also induces glial cell activation, cytotoxicity and NO production and this was explained by using rat astrocyte culture medium. The culture was treated with the total alkaloid extract of P. juliflora leaves and its chromatographic fractions to understand the direct effect of these metabolites and the toxicity. LDH activity and MTT test was done to reveal that TAE and other alkaloids fractions in culture medium were cytotoxic to astrocytes or vice versa [75].

To understand neurotoxicity and mechanism of action of juliprosopine alkaloid in isolated mitochondria of rat, potential toxicity study of P. juliflora was done by Mailoi et al. evaluation of different concentration (5-25 µM) of extract revealed that juliprosine mostly affect the membrane potential of neuronal cells, stimulate respiration (10-25 µM) and also effect ATP production in high concentration (15 and 25 µM). The result explained that cell death, dysfunction of cell and neurotoxicity occur due to uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation, which reduced ATP production in neuronal cells [76].

Mani et al., studied acute toxicity, in which animals were observed for toxicity for 72 hours by administering the P. juliflora extract orally at doses ranging from 50-500 mg/kg and there were no toxic symptoms seen below dose level of 200 mg/kg. Also, subacute toxicity study shows that there is no change in the parameters like hematological, biochemical, renal and liver function parameters when dose of 200 mg/kg were given for 30 days or more. All the parameters were same in experimental animals on 31st day when animals are sacrificed and blood and serum samples were analyzed for various biochemical parameters. These results showed that ethanolic extract of P. juliflora is nontoxic and the concentration was further used for long term in-vivo studies for various pharmacological activity [77]. 


## Patents of


## Conclusion

From the above review, it is concluded that P. juliflora contain various medicinal properties. It is used traditionally by people to complete their needs as mentioned in various literatures. P. juliflora has been proved to be effective as anthelmintic, antioxidant, antipyretic, cytotoxicity effect, antigiardial, amoebicidal, anti pustule activity and many more. It is versatile and widely applicable in the food, cosmetic, pharmaceutical, agricultural and renewable energy industries. It also provides benefit for the progress in several fields of science and technology. "Cara torta" is the diseases caused by excess eating of pods of P. juliflora is characterized by neuro-muscular alterations like emaciation, muscular atrophy of the masseter muscles, spongiosis, neuronal degeneration, and gliosis. Also, it was clear from literature that autophagy plays an important protective mechanism for neural cells against programmed cell death started by mitochondrial damage. The presence of bioactive metabolites in this plant can be used in development of new pharmaceuticals that address largely unmet therapeutic needs in our society.


## Compliance with ethical standards


## Disclosure of conflict of interest

There is no conflict of interest.


Approximately 60 anticancer drugs were derived from different plants; mainly contain vinblastine, vincristine and vinorelbine which are sold in the market. Mani et al. studied in vitro anti-tumor potential in alkaloids present in leaves extract of P. juliflora. The extracts were assayed in different concentration (10 to 100 µg/ml) using MTT based cytotoxicity assay, which was done after 24, 48 and 72 hours exposure of T-cell leukemia (Molt-4) (1×106 cells/ml medium) and also assayed on mitogen-stimulated T-lymphocyte cultures derived from the venous blood of healthy volunteers. It was found that extract exhibits high toxicity towards the cancerous cells as compared to normal cells i.e. 72.65 % and 46.51 % cytotoxicity for cancerous and normal cells respectively. The study findings further demonstrated that cytotoxicity against T-cell leukemia depends on time and dose with a lack of genotoxicity[55].


A lot of animals in tropical regions are died due to nematode infection and synthetic anthelmintics are not capable of curing the infection. P. juliflora is a plant which is easily available in harsh environmental conditions and is fast growing and drought resistant. In the year 2011, Rechab et al. demonstrated anthelmintic activity in the ethanolic extract of both leaf and root of P. juliflora and further compared with standard drug Albendazole.

## Table 2
2Chemical structure of various constituents in Prosopis juliflora with pharmacological activityS. no. 
Classification/ 
Compound 

Compound 
Biological 
activity 

Ref. 

1. 
Alkaloid 
(Julifloridine) 

O 
H 

N 
H 

C 
H 3 
OH 

Not specified 
[25-26] 

2. 
N-methyl 
julifloridine 

N 

O 
H 

C 
H 3 

CH 3 

OH 

Not specified 
[25-26] 

3. 
Juliprosopine 
Anti-leishmanial 
Activity, 
Anti-
dermatophytic 
activity, 
Antibacterial 
activity 

[27-32] 

4. 
Juliprosine 
Antibacterial 
agent, 
Antimalarial 
activity, 
Antifungal activity, 
DNA-
binding 
activity 

[31-33] 

N 

N 
H 

O 
H 

C 
H 3 

N 
H 

O 
H 

C 
H 3 

N 
H 

N 

+ 

N 
H 

O 
H 

C 
H 3 

O 
H 

C 
H 3 

Cl 

-


## Table 3
3Plant metabolites (in gram) extracted by using various solvents from dry plant material[23].Solvent → 
Plant part ↓ 

Hexane 
Chloroform 
Acetone 
Ethanol 
Water 
Total 

Leaf 
1.31 
2.85 
0.96 
5.63 
4.97 
15.72 

Stem 
0.82 
1.51 
0.68 
3.08 
2.48 
7.92 

Pod 
1.05 
2.23 
0.72 
5.55 
5.84 
15.30 

Flower 
0.95 
2.62 
0.77 
5.04 
4.30 
13.68 

Root 
0.74 
1.79 
0.56 
4.04 
3.35 
10.48 




et al. utilized the extract of P. juliflora in two concentrations i.e.250 and 300 mg/kg p.o. to 
study antipyretic action of P. juliflora and compared them with standard paracetamol (150 mg/kg p.o. in WFI). Rectal 
temperature was noted at 2,3,4 hours intervals and significant decrease in rectal temperature was observed indicating 
antipyretic poetical of P. juliflora [66]. 

5.10. Antiemetic activity 

Ul Hasan et al. studied methanolic extract of leaves of P. juliflora and extract of some other plants (Adenanthera pavonina, 
Peltophorum roxburghii, Prosopis cineraria) for antiemetic activity and compared with chlorpromazine. Copper sulphate 
(50 mg/kg, p.o) was used as an emesis inducer in male chicks of four days age. The result was concluded by calculating 
mean decrease in number of retching in control, test and standard group. The decrease in emesis due to extracts of 
various plants (Adenanthera pavonina, Peltophorum roxburghii, Prosopis cineraria and P. juliflora) was compared with 
controls and the standard and it was found that among all extracts, P. juliflora showed maximum antiemetic activity of 
76.64% and minimum by chlorpromazine that reduced retches by 32.71% [67]. 



Prosopis julifloraS.No. 
Patent number 
Title 
Date 
Ref. 

1 
WO2019193109A1 
Cosmetic composition comprising a 
polysaccharide, surfactants and 
fragments of one or more plants 

10/10/2019 
[78] 

2 
BR102012030155A2 
Additive Based on alkaloid extract of 
mesquite pods (Prosopis juliflora) in 
feeds, using as ruminal fermentation 
modifier for the improvement of 
animal performance and mitigation 
of greenhouse 
gas emissions. 

23/07/2013 
[79] 

3 
BR102017006458-1 A2 
Cosmetic compositions 
containing Prosopis juliflora extracts 

30/10/2018 
[80] 

4 

WO2007029271A2 

Glutathione-s-transferase gene from 
Prosopis juliflora confers abiotic 
stress tolerance in plants 

15/03/2007 
[81] 

5 
WO2011009184A1 
Use of Prosopis juliflora for producing 
a water-based, xanthan gum-like 
polysaccharide polymer 

27/01/2011 
[82] 
6 
US5,824,312 
Sunscreen agents from natural 
sources 

20/10/1998 
[83] 

7 
BR 102016020554A2 
Froze 
milk 
derivative 
using 
vegetable hemicellulose 

02/05/2018 
[84] 

8 
US 8,298,991 B2 
Method for 
controlling 
undesired 
Mimosaceae 
vegetation 

30/10/2012 
[85] 

9 
4,849,337 
Assaying allergen specific IgE levels 
with fluorogenic enzyme labeled 
antibody. 

18/07/1989 
[86] 

10 
US2898260A 
Fiber board and process of 
making same from desert shrubs 

04/08/1959 
[87] 

11 
BRPI1107317A2 
Food composition, nutritional bar, 
and food composition production 
process comprehending 
melipone pollen 

12/12/2017 
[88] 

12 
US 8,372,989 B2 
Polypeptides 
and 
biosynthetic 
pathways for the production of 
Stereroisomers of monatin and its 
precursors 

07/05/2013 
[89] 

13 
US 2008/0138496 A1 
Preparation 
of 
Smoke 
Extract 

12/06/2008 
[90] 

14 
WO 2009/021661 Al 
Composition for the prophylaxis and 
treatment of osteoporosis 

19/02/2009 
[91] 

15 
WO 2012/112518 Al 
Interfering 
RNAs that 
promote root growth 

23/08/2012 
[92] 

16 
BRPI1106864A2 
Topical and oral photo-protective 
formulations containing Brazilian 
vegetable extracts and/or oils 

19/07/2016 
[93] 


AcknowledgmentsThe authors would like to acknowledge Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra for supporting this work.
A monograph of the genus prosopis (leguminosae subfam. mimosoideae). A Burkart, Journal of Arnold Arboretum. 574Burkart A. A monograph of the genus prosopis (leguminosae subfam. mimosoideae). Journal of Arnold Arboretum. 1976; 57(4): 219-249.

Prosopis juliflora. J Patil, I J Kuppast, Kma Kumar, K G Kishan, Research Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics. 845958Patil J, Kuppast IJ, Kumar KMA, Kishan KG. Prosopis juliflora, Research Journal of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics. 2016; 8(4): 5958.

Phytochemical analyses of various parts of Prosopis juliflora. P Khandelwal, R A Sharma, M Agarwal, Mintage Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Sciences. 51Khandelwal P, Sharma RA, Agarwal M. Phytochemical analyses of various parts of Prosopis juliflora. Mintage Journal of Pharmaceutical and Medical Sciences. 2016; 5(1): 16-18.

Prosopis juliflora (SW) DC: Potential for bioremediation and bioeconomy. Mnv Prasad, J C Tewari, Bioremediation and Bioeconomy. Elsevier IncPrasad MNV, Tewari JC. Prosopis juliflora (SW) DC: Potential for bioremediation and bioeconomy. Bioremediation and Bioeconomy, (Elsevier Inc.). 2016; 49-76.

Prosopis pods as human food, with special reference to Kenya. S K Choge, N M Pasiecznik, M Harvey, J Wright, S Z Awan, Water SA. 333Choge SK, Pasiecznik NM, Harvey M, Wright J, Awan SZ, et al. Prosopis pods as human food, with special reference to Kenya. Water SA. 2017; 33(3): 419-424.

Production of activated carbon from prosopis (Prosopis juliflora). R Kailappan, L Gothandapani, R Viswanathan, Bioresource Technology. 753Kailappan R, Gothandapani L, Viswanathan R. Production of activated carbon from prosopis (Prosopis juliflora). Bioresource Technology. 2000; 75(3): 241-243.

Genetic selection and improvement of hard wood tree species for fuelwood production on sodic soil with particular reference to Prosopis juliflora. V L Goel, H M Behl, Biomass and Bioenergy. 201Goel VL, Behl HM. Genetic selection and improvement of hard wood tree species for fuelwood production on sodic soil with particular reference to Prosopis juliflora. Biomass and Bioenergy. 2001; 20(1): 9-15.

Review on Pharmacological potentials of Prosopis juliflora. M D Ukande, S Shaikh, K Murthy, R Shete, Journal of Drug Delivery Therapeutics. 94-sUkande MD, Shaikh S, Murthy K, Shete R. Review on Pharmacological potentials of Prosopis juliflora. Journal of Drug Delivery Therapeutics. 2019; 9(4-s): 755-760.

Pharmacological potentials of phenolic compounds from Prosopis spp. -A review. H Dahms, P Sethuraman, Journal of Coastal Life Medicine. 211Dahms H, Sethuraman P. Pharmacological potentials of phenolic compounds from Prosopis spp. -A review. Journal of Coastal Life Medicine. 2015; 2(11): 918-924.

Phytochemical investigation of Prosopis juliflora DCI Flavonoids and free sugars. G M Wassel, A M Rizk, Abdel-Bary Ef, 22Qualitas Plantarum et Materiae VegetabilesWassel GM, Rizk AM, Abdel-Bary EF. Phytochemical investigation of Prosopis juliflora DCI Flavonoids and free sugars. Qualitas Plantarum et Materiae Vegetabiles. 1972; 22(1): 119-121.

Phytochemical analyses of Prosopis juliflora Swartz DC. M Ibrahim, M Nadir, Ali A Ahmad, V U Rasheed, M , Pakistan Journal of Botany. 456Ibrahim M, Nadir M, Ali A, Ahmad VU, Rasheed M. Phytochemical analyses of Prosopis juliflora Swartz DC. Pakistan Journal of Botany. 2013; 45(6): 2101-2104.

Managing Prosopis juliflora (Vilazati Babul). Food and agriculture organisation. J C Tewari, Pjc Harris, L N Harsh, K Ladoret, N M Pasiecznik, Tewari JC, Harris PJC, Harsh LN, Ladoret K, Pasiecznik NM. Managing Prosopis juliflora (Vilazati Babul). Food and agriculture organisation. 2000; 1-20.

Prosopis: A global assessment of the biogeography, benefits, impacts and management of one of the world's worst woody invasive plant taxa. R T Shackleton, Le Maitre, D C Pasiecznik, N M Richardson, D M , AoB Plants. 6Shackleton RT, Le Maitre DC, Pasiecznik NM, Richardson DM. Prosopis: A global assessment of the biogeography, benefits, impacts and management of one of the world's worst woody invasive plant taxa. AoB Plants. 2014; 6: 1-18.

Some biological characteristics that foster the invasion of Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC. at Middle Awash Rift Valley Area, north-eastern Ethiopia. H Shiferaw, D Teketay, S Nemomissa, F Assefa, Journal of Arid Environments. 582Shiferaw H, Teketay D, Nemomissa S, Assefa F. Some biological characteristics that foster the invasion of Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC. at Middle Awash Rift Valley Area, north-eastern Ethiopia. Journal of Arid Environments. 2004; 58(2): 135-154.

Prosopis juliflora: A review. P N Dave, J Bhandari, International Journal of Chemical Studies. 13Dave PN, Bhandari J. Prosopis juliflora: A review. International Journal of Chemical Studies. 2013; 1(3): 181-196.

The'Prosopis juliflora'-'Prosopis pallida'complex: a monograph. Forest Trees and Livelihoods. N Pasiecznik, P Felker, P Harris, L Harsh, G Cruz, 12Pasiecznik N, Felker P, Harris P, Harsh L, Cruz G, et al. The'Prosopis juliflora'-'Prosopis pallida'complex: a monograph. Forest Trees and Livelihoods. 2002; 12: 229-229.

Properties of Prosopis juliflora and Its Potential Uses in Asal Areas of Kenya. D Shitanda, K Mukonyi, M Kagiri, M Gichua, L Simiyu, Science and Technology. 151Journal of AgricultureShitanda D, Mukonyi K, Kagiri M, Gichua M, Simiyu L. Properties of Prosopis juliflora and Its Potential Uses in Asal Areas of Kenya. Journal of Agriculture, Science and Technology. 2013; 15(1), 15-27.

Investigation of the effects of Prosopis farcta plant extract on Rat's aorta. K Asadollahi, N Abassi, N Afshar, M Alipour, P Asadollahi, Journal of Medicinal Plants Research. 42Asadollahi K, Abassi N, Afshar N, Alipour M, Asadollahi P. Investigation of the effects of Prosopis farcta plant extract on Rat's aorta. Journal of Medicinal Plants Research. 2010; 4(2): 142-147.

Some engineering properties of Prosopis africana (Okpeye) seeds. F U Asoiro, O A Nwoke, G I Ezenne, Journal of Agricultural Engineering and Technology. 212Asoiro FU, Nwoke OA, Ezenne GI. Some engineering properties of Prosopis africana (Okpeye) seeds. Journal of Agricultural Engineering and Technology. 2013; 21(2): 66-79.

Medicinal folk recipes used as traditional phytotherapies in district. S K Marwat, F U Rehman, Pakistan Journal of Botany. 433Marwat SK, Rehman FU. Medicinal folk recipes used as traditional phytotherapies in district Dera Ismail Khan, KPK, Pakistan. Pakistan Journal of Botany. 2011; 43(3): 1453-1462.

Review on Prosopis cineraria: A potential herb of Thar desert. A Garg, S K Mittal, Drug Invention Today. 51Garg A, Mittal SK. Review on Prosopis cineraria: A potential herb of Thar desert. Drug Invention Today. 2013; 5(1): 60-65.

Pharmacology and Therapeutic Application of Prosopis juliflora: A Review. K Preeti, S R Avatar, A Mala, Journal of Plant Sciences. 34234Preeti K, Avatar SR, Mala A. Pharmacology and Therapeutic Application of Prosopis juliflora: A Review, Journal of Plant Sciences. 2015; 3(4): 234.

Phytochemical analysis of different parts of Prosopis juliflora. S Singh, International Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 43Singh S. Phytochemical analysis of different parts of Prosopis juliflora. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Research. 2012; 4(3): 59-61.

Alkaloids isolated from leaves of Prosopis juliflora against Xanthomonas pathovars. Archives of Phytopatholology and Plant Protection. M P Raghavendra, S Satish, K A Raveesha, 42Raghavendra MP, Satish S, Raveesha KA. Alkaloids isolated from leaves of Prosopis juliflora against Xanthomonas pathovars. Archives of Phytopatholology and Plant Protection. 2009; 42(11): 1033-1041.

The absolute configuration of julifloridine. V U Ahmad, S Qazi, Zeitschrift Für Naturforschung B. 385660Ahmad VU, Qazi S. The absolute configuration of julifloridine. Zeitschrift Für Naturforschung B. 1983; 38(5): 660.

New alkaloids from Prosopis juliflora DC. Ahmad Vu, A Basha, W Haque, Zeitschrift für Naturforschung B. 333Ahmad VU, Basha A and Haque W. New alkaloids from Prosopis juliflora DC. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung B. 1978; 33(3): 347-348.

Alkaloids from the leaves of Prosopis juliflora. Ahmad Vu, A Sultana, S Qazi, Journal of Natural Products. 523Ahmad VU, Sultana A, Qazi S. Alkaloids from the leaves of Prosopis juliflora. Journal of Natural Products. 1989; 52(3): 497-501.

A terpenoid diketone from the leaves of Prosopis juliflora. Uddin Ahmad, V Sultana, A , Phytochemistry. 281Uddin Ahmad V, Sultana A. A terpenoid diketone from the leaves of Prosopis juliflora, Phytochemistry. 1989; 28(1): 278-279.

Isolamento biomonitorado de alcalóides tóxicos de Prosopis juliflora (algaroba). I M Tabosa, L J Cluintans-Júnior, F V Pamplona, R N Almeida, Evl Cunha, Da, Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia. 1Tabosa IM, Cluintans-Júnior LJ, Pamplona FV, Almeida RN, Cunha EVL da, et al. Isolamento biomonitorado de alcalóides tóxicos de Prosopis juliflora (algaroba). Revista Brasileira de Farmacognosia. 2000; (1): 9-10.

Biologically active alkaloids and a free radical scavenger from Prosopis species. A Tapia, G Egly Feresin, D Bustos, L Astudillo, C Theoduloz, Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 711-2Tapia A, Egly Feresin G, Bustos D, Astudillo L, Theoduloz C, et al. Biologically active alkaloids and a free radical scavenger from Prosopis species. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2000; 71(1-2): 241-246.

Antiparasitic and antimicrobial indolizidines from the leaves of Prosopis glandulosa var. glandulosa. A A Rahman, V Samoylenko, M R Jacob, R Sahu, S K Jain, Planta Medica. 7714Rahman AA, Samoylenko V, Jacob MR, Sahu R, Jain SK, et al. Antiparasitic and antimicrobial indolizidines from the leaves of Prosopis glandulosa var. glandulosa. Planta Medica. 2011; 77(14): 1639-1643.

Antibacterial activity of the alkaloidenriched extract from Prosopis juliflora pods and its influence on in Vitro ruminal digestion. E T Santos, Mla Pereira, Cfpg Da Silva, L C Souza-Neta, R Geris, International Journal Molecular Sciences. 144dos Santos ET, Pereira MLA, da Silva CFPG, Souza-Neta LC, Geris R, et al. Antibacterial activity of the alkaloid- enriched extract from Prosopis juliflora pods and its influence on in Vitro ruminal digestion. International Journal Molecular Sciences. 2013; 14(4): 8496-8516.

Antibacterial properties of Alkaloid rich fractions obtained from various parts of Prosopis juliflora. Shachi Singh, Skv Swapnil, International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research. 23Shachi Singh, Swapnil SKV. Antibacterial properties of Alkaloid rich fractions obtained from various parts of Prosopis juliflora. International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research. 2011; 2(3): 114-120.

Growth inhibitory alkaloids from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. H Nakano, E Nakajima, S Hiradate, Y Fujii, K Yamada, Phytochemistry. 655Nakano H, Nakajima E, Hiradate S, Fujii Y, Yamada K, et al. Growth inhibitory alkaloids from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. Phytochemistry. 2004; 65(5): 587-591.

Potential antioxidant compounds from different parts of Prosopis juliflora. P Sirmah, F Mburu, K Iaych, S Dumarçay, P Gérardin, Journal of Tropical Forest Sciences. 232Sirmah P, Mburu F, Iaych K, Dumarçay S, Gérardin P. Potential antioxidant compounds from different parts of Prosopis juliflora. Journal of Tropical Forest Sciences. 2011; 23(2): 187-195.

A growth-inhibitory substance exuded from freezedried mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. Plant Growth Regulation. H Nakano, Y Fujii, T Suzuki, K Yamada, S Kosemura, 33Nakano H, Fujii Y, Suzuki T, Yamada K, Kosemura S, et al. A growth-inhibitory substance exuded from freeze- dried mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. Plant Growth Regulation. 2011; 33(3): 165-168.

Isolation and identification of plant growth inhibitors as candidate(s) for allelopathic substance(s) from aqueous leachate from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. Plant Growth Regulation. H Nakano, Y Fujii, K Yamada, S Kosemura, S Yamamura, 37Nakano H, Fujii Y, Yamada K, Kosemura S, Yamamura S, et al. Isolation and identification of plant growth inhibitors as candidate(s) for allelopathic substance(s) from aqueous leachate from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC.) leaves. Plant Growth Regulation. 2002; 37(2): 113-117.

Prosopis juliflora ( SW ) DC. An invasive species at the Brazilian Caatinga : phytochemical, pharmacological, toxicological and technological overview. G Azevedo, D B Damasceno, R B Giordani, Phytochemistry Reviews. 17Azevedo G, Damasceno DB, & Giordani RB, Prosopis juliflora ( SW ) DC. An invasive species at the Brazilian Caatinga : phytochemical, pharmacological, toxicological and technological overview. Phytochemistry Reviews. 2017; 17: 309-331.

Proximate composition and biological activity of Chilean Prosopis species. L Astudillo, G Schmeda-Hirschmann, J P Herrera, M Cortés, Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 805Astudillo L, Schmeda-Hirschmann G, Herrera JP, Cortés M. Proximate composition and biological activity of Chilean Prosopis species. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 2000; 80(5): 567-573.

Medicinal natural products: a biosynthetic approach. P M Dewick, John Wiley & SonsDewick PM. Medicinal natural products: a biosynthetic approach, (John Wiley & Sons). 2002.

Molecular modes of action of defensive secondary metabolites. M Wink, O Schimmer, Annual Plant Reviews online. Wink M, Schimmer O. Molecular modes of action of defensive secondary metabolites. Annual Plant Reviews online. 2018; 21-161.

The Role of Prosopis in Wasteland Development. V J Patel, V Safaya, Jivrajbhai Patel Agrofor Center. Patel VJ, Safaya V. The Role of Prosopis in Wasteland Development. Jivrajbhai Patel Agrofor Center, Surendrabag, Gujarat, India. 1986.

Contribución al estudio de la composición química de los frutos maduros del algarrobo. III Jornadas Peruanas Fitoquímica. G Cruz, B Del Re, Amado R , 122Cruz G, Del Re B, Amado R. Contribución al estudio de la composición química de los frutos maduros del algarrobo. III Jornadas Peruanas Fitoquímica. 1987; 122.

Composición química de la algarroba peruana (Prosopis sp.). G Sáenz, J A Serra, I Escriche, Proc. 2nd Int. Carob Symp. Generalitat Valenciana. 2nd Int. Carob Symp. Generalitat ValencianaValencia, SpainSáenz G, Serra JA, Escriche I. Composición química de la algarroba peruana (Prosopis sp.). In: Proc. 2nd Int. Carob Symp. Generalitat Valenciana, Valencia, Spain. 1987; 419-427.

Effects of irrigation on Prosopis juliflora and soil properties of an alkali soil. G Singh, I P Abrol, S S Cheema, International Tree Crops Journal. 62-3Singh G, Abrol IP, Cheema SS. Effects of irrigation on Prosopis juliflora and soil properties of an alkali soil. International Tree Crops Journal. 1990; 6(2-3): 81-99.

Chemical analysis of some desert trees. B M Sharma, Proceedings. International Society for Tropical Ecology. 1248Sharma BM. Chemical analysis of some desert trees. In: Proceedings. International Society for Tropical Ecology. 1968; (1): 248.

Immunomodulating effect of preliminary report. A Ahmad, K A Khan, V Ahmad, Immunology. 8Ahmad A, Khan KA, Ahmad V. Immunomodulating effect of preliminary report. Immunology. 1992; (8): 189-193.

Juliflorine: A potent natural peripheral anionicsite-binding inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase with calcium-channel blocking potential, a leading candidate for Alzheimer Õ s disease therapy. M I Choudhary, S A Nawaz, M K Azim, M N Ghayur, M A Lodhi, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communication. 332Choudhary MI, Nawaz SA, Azim MK, Ghayur MN, Lodhi MA, et al. Juliflorine: A potent natural peripheral anionic- site-binding inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase with calcium-channel blocking potential, a leading candidate for Alzheimer Õ s disease therapy, Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communication. 2005; 332: 1171-1179.

Antioxidant activity of polyphenolic extract of monofloral honeybee-collected pollen from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora, Leguminosae). N Almaraz-Abarca, M Da Graça Campos, J A Ávila-Reyes, N Naranjo-Jiménez, Herrera Corral, J , 20Journal of Food Composition and AnalalysisAlmaraz-Abarca N, da Graça Campos M, Ávila-Reyes JA, Naranjo-Jiménez N, Herrera Corral J, et al. Antioxidant activity of polyphenolic extract of monofloral honeybee-collected pollen from mesquite (Prosopis juliflora, Leguminosae). Journal of Food Composition and Analalysis. 2007; 20(2): 119-124.

In vitro antiplasmodial activity of ethanolic extracts of South Indian medicinal plants against Plasmodium falciparum. S Ravikumar, S J Inbaneson, P Suganthi, Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Diseases. 23Ravikumar S, Inbaneson SJ, Suganthi P. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of ethanolic extracts of South Indian medicinal plants against Plasmodium falciparum. Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Diseases. 2012; 2(3): 180-183.

Antioxidant from natural source. R Madhusudana, R Jagadeeshwar, K Ashok, S Jhillu, V R Kondapuram, 116716US PatMadhusudana R, Jagadeeshwar R, Ashok K, Jhillu S, Kondapuram VR. Antioxidant from natural source, US Pat 2004; 0116716.

Investigation of Phytochemical Profile and Antibacterial Potential of Ethanolic Leaf Extract of Prosopis juliflora DC. M Sathiya, K Muthuchelian, Ethnobotanical Leaflets. 12Sathiya M, Muthuchelian K. Investigation of Phytochemical Profile and Antibacterial Potential of Ethanolic Leaf Extract of Prosopis juliflora DC. Ethnobotanical Leaflets. 2008; 12: 1240-1245.

In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity. H T Simonsen, J B Nordskjold, U W Smitt, U Nyman, P Palpu, Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 742Simonsen HT, Nordskjold JB, Smitt UW, Nyman U, Palpu P, et al. In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 2001; 74(2): 195-204.

In vivo antimalarial extracts and constituents of Prosopis juliflora (Fabaceae). R Batista, C C Santana, A V Azevedo-Santos, A M Suarez-Fontes, J L Ferraz, A A De, Journal of Functional Foods. 44Batista R, Santana CC, Azevedo-Santos AV, Suarez-Fontes AM, Ferraz JL de AA, et al. In vivo antimalarial extracts and constituents of Prosopis juliflora (Fabaceae). Journal of Functional Foods. 2018; 44: 74-78.

Anti-tumor potential of total alkaloid extract of Prosopis juliflora DC. leaves against Molt-4 cells in vitro. S Mani, M Krishnaswamy, African Journal of Biotechnology. 1044Mani S, Krishnaswamy M. Anti-tumor potential of total alkaloid extract of Prosopis juliflora DC. leaves against Molt-4 cells in vitro. African Journal of Biotechnology. 2011; 10(44): 8881-8888.

Screening of some weeds for larvicidal activity against Aedes albopictus, A vector of dengue and chikungunya. Jornal of Vector Borne Diseases. R Yadav, S N Tikar, A K Sharma, V Tyagi, D Sukumaran, 52Yadav R, Tikar SN, Sharma AK, Tyagi V, Sukumaran D, et al. Screening of some weeds for larvicidal activity against Aedes albopictus, A vector of dengue and chikungunya. Jornal of Vector Borne Diseases. 2015; 52(1): 88-94.

Differential larval toxicity and oviposition altering activity of some indigenous plant extracts against dengue and Chikungunya vector Aedes albopictus. R Yadav, V Tyagi, S N Tikar, A K Sharma, M J Mendki, Journal of Arthropod-Borne Diseases. 82Yadav R, Tyagi V, Tikar SN, Sharma AK, Mendki MJ, et al. Differential larval toxicity and oviposition altering activity of some indigenous plant extracts against dengue and Chikungunya vector Aedes albopictus. Journal of Arthropod-Borne Diseases. 2014; 8(2): 174-185.

Phytochemical and In vitro anthelmintic studies of Prosopis juliflora (sw.) dc (fabaceae) extracts against Haemonchus contortus, an ovine nematode. JKUAT annual scientific conference proceedings. S O Rechab, P G Kareru, H L Kutima, G C Nyaga, F K Njonge, Rechab SO, Kareru PG, Kutima HL, Nyaga GC, Njonge FK, et al. Phytochemical and In vitro anthelmintic studies of Prosopis juliflora (sw.) dc (fabaceae) extracts against Haemonchus contortus, an ovine nematode. JKUAT annual scientific conference proceedings. 2011; 173-178.

Alkaloid extracts of Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC. (Mimosaceae) against Alternaria alternate. M P Raghavendra, S Satish, K A Raveesha, Journal of Biopesticides. 21Raghavendra MP, Satish S, Raveesha KA. Alkaloid extracts of Prosopis juliflora (Sw.) DC. (Mimosaceae) against Alternaria alternate. Journal of Biopesticides. 2009; 2(1): 56-59.

Factors Affecting the Translocation of Herbicides in Mesquite (Prosopis juliflora). D W Young, Young DW. Factors Affecting the Translocation of Herbicides in Mesquite (Prosopis juliflora). 1950.

Antigonorrhoeal activity of plants used in Guatemala for the treatment of sexually transmitted diseases. A Cáceres, H Menéndez, E Méndez, E Cohobón, B E Samayoa, Journal of Ethnopharmacologyl. 482Cáceres A, Menéndez H, Méndez E, Cohobón E, Samayoa BE, et al. Antigonorrhoeal activity of plants used in Guatemala for the treatment of sexually transmitted diseases. Journal of Ethnopharmacologyl. 1995; 48(2): 85- 88.

Antibacterial activity of plant extracts on phytopathogenic Xanthomonas campestris pathovars. S Satish, K A Raveesha, G R Janardhana, Letter in Applied Microbiology. 282Satish S, Raveesha KA, Janardhana GR. Antibacterial activity of plant extracts on phytopathogenic Xanthomonas campestris pathovars. Letter in Applied Microbiology. 1999; 28(2): 145-147.

Antioxidant activities of baicalin, green tea polyphenols and alizarin in vitro and in vivo. Z Jian, S Xun, Journal of Nutrition and Environmemtal Medicine. 72Jian Z, Xun S. Antioxidant activities of baicalin, green tea polyphenols and alizarin in vitro and in vivo. Journal of Nutrition and Environmemtal Medicine. 1997; 7(2): 79-89.

Screening of Phenolics and Flavonoids for Antioxidant Activity. Antioxidant Food Supplements in Human Health. C Rice-Evans, Rice-Evans C. Screening of Phenolics and Flavonoids for Antioxidant Activity. Antioxidant Food Supplements in Human Health. 1999; 239-253.

Protective effects of Prosopis juliflora against Staphylococcus aureus induced hepatotoxicity in rats. O H Prasad, Navya A, D Vasu, T Chiranjeevi, M Bhaskar, International Journal of Pharmceutical and Biomedical Research. 23Prasad OH, Navya a, Vasu D, Chiranjeevi T, Bhaskar M, et al. Protective effects of Prosopis juliflora against Staphylococcus aureus induced hepatotoxicity in rats. International Journal of Pharmceutical and Biomedical Research. 2011; 2(3): 172-178.

To evaluate the antipyretic activity of Prosopis juliflora ethanolic extract in brewer's yeast induced hyperthermia in rats. S M Gopinath, J M Reddy, K S Dayanand, A Shankar, Journal of Biotechnolology and Biosafety. Gopinath SM, Reddy JM, Dayanand KS, Shankar A. To evaluate the antipyretic activity of Prosopis juliflora ethanolic extract in brewer's yeast induced hyperthermia in rats. Journal of Biotechnolology and Biosafety. 2013; 28-32.

Anti-Emetic activity of some leguminous plants. Ul Hasan, M M Azhar, I Muzammil, S Ahmed, S Ahmed, S W , Pakistan Journal of Botany. 441Ul Hasan MM, Azhar I, Muzammil S, Ahmed S, Ahmed SW. Anti-Emetic activity of some leguminous plants. Pakistan Journal of Botany. 2012; 44(1): 389-391.

Screening of anti-pustule plant metabolites from Prosopis juliflora and their combined anti-pustule activity with synthetic pimple creams. Rajadurai Jesudoss, R P Lakshmipraba, S Gnanasaraswathi, M Ganesh Kumar, S , Praveen Kumar Tg, Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2Rajadurai Jesudoss RP, Lakshmipraba S, Gnanasaraswathi M, Ganesh kumar S, Praveen kumar TG. Screening of anti-pustule plant metabolites from Prosopis juliflora and their combined anti-pustule activity with synthetic pimple creams. Journal of Chemical and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2014; (2): 145-150.

Amoebicidal and Cytotoxic activity of the plant Prosopis juliflora leave extracts. A S Kabbashi, M I Garbi, E E Osman, M M Dahab, W S Koko, Meriti Research Journal of Biochemistry and Bioinformatics. 22Kabbashi AS, Garbi MI, Osman EE, Dahab MM, Koko WS, et al. Antigiardial, Amoebicidal and Cytotoxic activity of the plant Prosopis juliflora leave extracts. Meriti Research Journal of Biochemistry and Bioinformatics. 2015; 2(2): 2-8.

Oral Prosopis juliflora treatment ameliorates inflammatory responses against carrageenan induced paw edema in rats. P K Choudhary, B P Nagori, Journal of Scientific and Innovative Research. 25Choudhary PK, Nagori BP. Oral Prosopis juliflora treatment ameliorates inflammatory responses against carrageenan induced paw edema in rats. Journal of Scientific and Innovative Research. 2013; 2(5): 888-892.

Intoxicação espontânea por vagens de Prosopis juliflora (Leg. Mimosoideae) em bovinos no Estado de Pernambuco. Acl Câmara, A Costa N De, F Riet-Correa, Jab Afonso, Afm Dantas, Pesquisa Veterinaria Brasileira. 293Câmara ACL, Costa N de A, Riet-Correa F, Afonso JAB, Dantas AFM, et al. Intoxicação espontânea por vagens de Prosopis juliflora (Leg. Mimosoideae) em bovinos no Estado de Pernambuco. Pesquisa Veterinaria Brasileira. 2009; 29(3): 233-240.

Neurohistologic and ultrastructural lesions in cattle experimentally intoxicated with the plant Prosopis juliflora. I M Tabosa, F Riet-Correa, S S Barros, B A Summers, Svd Simões, Veterinary Pathology. 435Tabosa IM, Riet-Correa F, Barros SS, Summers BA, Simões SVD, et al. Neurohistologic and ultrastructural lesions in cattle experimentally intoxicated with the plant Prosopis juliflora. Veterinary Pathology. 2006; 43(5): 695-701.

Neurotoxicity of Prosopis juliflora: from Natural Poisoning to Mechanism of Action of Its Piperidine Alkaloids. Vda Da Silva, Amm Da Silva, Jhc Silva, S L Costa, Neurotoxicity Research. 344da Silva VDA, da Silva AMM, e Silva JHC, Costa SL. (2018). Neurotoxicity of Prosopis juliflora: from Natural Poisoning to Mechanism of Action of Its Piperidine Alkaloids. Neurotoxicity Research. 2018; 34(4): 878-888.

Juliprosopine and Juliprosine from Prosopis juliflora Leaves Induce Mitochondrial Damage and Cytoplasmic Vacuolation on Cocultured Glial Cells and Neurons. Vda Silva, Bps Pitanga, R P Nascimento, C S Souza, Plc Coelho, Chemical Research in Toxicology. 24Silva VDA, Pitanga BPS, Nascimento RP, Souza CS, Coelho PLC, et al. Juliprosopine and Juliprosine from Prosopis juliflora Leaves Induce Mitochondrial Damage and Cytoplasmic Vacuolation on Cocultured Glial Cells and Neurons. Chemical Research in Toxicology. 2013; 24: 1810-1820.

Alkaloids from Prosopis juliflora leaves induce glial activation, cytotoxicity and stimulate NO production. Amm Silva, A R Silva, A M Pinheiro, Srvb Freitas, Vda Silva, Toxicon. 495Silva AMM, Silva AR, Pinheiro AM, Freitas SRVB, Silva VDA, et al. Alkaloids from Prosopis juliflora leaves induce glial activation, cytotoxicity and stimulate NO production. Toxicon. 2007; 49(5): 601-614.

Mechanism for the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation by juliprosopine on rat brain mitochondria. M A Maioli, Decv Lemos, M Guelfi, Hcd Medeiros, F Riet-Correa, Toxicon. 608Maioli MA, Lemos DECV, Guelfi M, Medeiros HCD, Riet-Correa F, et al. Mechanism for the uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation by juliprosopine on rat brain mitochondria. Toxicon. 2012; 60(8): 1355-1362.

Phytochemical and Pharmacological Analysis of Ethanolic Extracts of Prosopis juliflora. P Mani, Sw.). World Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 69Mani P. Phytochemical and Pharmacological Analysis of Ethanolic Extracts of Prosopis juliflora (Sw.). World Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. 2017; 6(9): 2059-2069.

Cosmetic composition comprising a polysaccharide, surfactants and fragments of one or more. R Royale, WO2019193109A1Royale R. Cosmetic composition comprising a polysaccharide, surfactants and fragments of one or more. WIPO/PCT No. WO2019193109A1. 2019.

Additive Based on alkaloid extract of mesquite pods (Prosopis juliflora) in feeds, using as ruminal fermentation modifier for the improvement of animal performance and mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. Brazil patent No. BR102012030155A2. Mla Pereira, R Batista, Pereira MLA, Batista R. Additive Based on alkaloid extract of mesquite pods (Prosopis juliflora) in feeds, using as ruminal fermentation modifier for the improvement of animal performance and mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions. Brazil patent No. BR102012030155A2. 2013.

Cosmetic composition containing Prosopis juliflora extracts, Brazil Patent No. BR102017006458-1. D O Norte, Norte DO. Cosmetic composition containing Prosopis juliflora extracts, Brazil Patent No. BR102017006458-1. 2018.

Glutathione-S-transferase gene from Prosopis juliflora confers abiotic stress tolerance in plants. A Parida, S George, WO2007029271A2Parida A, George S. Glutathione-S-transferase gene from Prosopis juliflora confers abiotic stress tolerance in plants. WIPO/PCT No. WO2007029271A2. 2010.

Use of Prosopis juliflora for producing a waterbased, xanthan gum-like polysaccharide polymer. E Q Buzanelli, M T Fabi, Jfb Silva, Da, Ljs Rocha, L P Buzanelli, WO2011009184A1Buzanelli EQ, Fabi MT, Silva JFB Da, Rocha LJS, Buzanelli LP, et al. Use of Prosopis juliflora for producing a water- based, xanthan gum-like polysaccharide polymer. WIPO/PCT No. WO2011009184A1. 2011.

Sunscreen agents from natural sources. E C Unger, T P Mccreery, U.S. Patent No. US5. 824312Unger EC, McCreery TP. Sunscreen agents from natural sources. U.S. Patent No. US5, 824,312. 1998.

Frozen milk derivative using vegetable hemicelluloses. Brazil Patent No. BR102016020554A2. I Maria, S Gomes, J B Frederico, Maria I, Gomes S, Frederico JB. Frozen milk derivative using vegetable hemicelluloses. Brazil Patent No. BR102016020554A2. 2018.

Method for controlling undesired mimosoideae vegetation. R Turner, E Castner, U.S. Patent No. US. 8Turner R, Castner E. Method for controlling undesired mimosoideae vegetation. U.S. Patent No. US. 2012; 8, 298, 991 B2.

Assaying allergen specific IgE levels with fluorogenic enzyme labeled antibody. E Calenoff, R M Jones, Y-G Tsay, J R Scott, US Pat. 4337Calenoff E, Jones RM, Tsay Y-G, Scott JR. Assaying allergen specific IgE levels with fluorogenic enzyme labeled antibody. US Pat. 1989; 4, 849, 337.

Fiber board and process of making same from desert shrubs. Jft Berliner, U.S. Patent No. US2898260ABerliner JFT. Fiber board and process of making same from desert shrubs. U.S. Patent No. US2898260A. 1959.

Food composition, nutritional bar, and food composition production process comprehending melipone pollen. Brazil Patent No. BRPI1107317A2. B S Antonio, F Maria, Ana L , Antonio BS, Maria F, Ana L. Food composition, nutritional bar, and food composition production process comprehending melipone pollen. Brazil Patent No. BRPI1107317A2. 2017.

Polypeptides and biosynthetic pathways for the production of stereoisomers of monatin and their precursors. B J Brazeau, M L Souza, De, S J Gort, P M Hicks, S R Kollmann, U.S. Patent No. US. 8Brazeau BJ, Souza ML De, Gort SJ, Hicks PM, Kollmann SR, et al. Polypeptides and biosynthetic pathways for the production of stereoisomers of monatin and their precursors. U.S. Patent No. US. 2008; 8, 372, 989 B2.

Preparation of smoke extract. K Plaschke, US 2008/0138496 A1Plaschke K. Preparation of smoke extract. US Pat US 2008/0138496 A1. 2008.

Composition for the prophylaxis and treatment of osteoporosis. F Lang, O Nasir, Lang F, Nasir O. Composition for the prophylaxis and treatment of osteoporosis. WIPO/PCT No. WO 2009/021661 Al. 2009.

Interfering rnas that promote root growth. X Huang, T Mcneill, M Schweiner, P Wittich, Huang X, Mcneill T, Schweiner M, Wittich P. Interfering rnas that promote root growth. WIPO/PCT No. WO 2012/112518 Al. 2012.

Topical and oral photoprotective formulations containing Brazilian vegetable extracts and / or oils. Brazil Patent No. BRPI1106864A2. C Caneschi, H Polonini, M Brandão, N Raposo, Caneschi C, Polonini H, Brandão M, Raposo N. Topical and oral photoprotective formulations containing Brazilian vegetable extracts and / or oils. Brazil Patent No. BRPI1106864A2. 2016.