# Efficacy and safety of urate-lowering therapy in people with kidney impairment: a GCAN-initiated literature review

CorpusID: 231765187
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7871f27213f3156fb40f76eb5d355b83afbee7f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e7871f27213f3156fb40f76eb5d355b83afbee7f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Efficacy and safety of urate-lowering therapy in people with kidney impairment: a GCAN-initiated literature review


Hamish Farquhar 
Department of Medicine
University of Otago
ChristchurchNew Zealand

Ana B Vargas-Santos 
Department of Internal Medicine
Rio de Janeiro State University
Rio de JaneiroBrazil

Huai Leng Pisaniello 
Discipline of Medicine
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
The University of Adelaide
4 PrimaCareAdelaide, Fall RiverSouth Australia, MAAustralia

Mark Fisher 
Catherine Hill 
Discipline of Medicine
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
The University of Adelaide
4 PrimaCareAdelaide, Fall RiverSouth Australia, MAAustralia

Angelo L Gaffo 
Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology
University of Alabama
Birmingham

Department of Medicine
Birmingham VA Medical Center
BirminghamALUSA

University of Otago Christchurch
PO Box 43458140ChristchurchNew Zealand

Lisa K Stamp 
Department of Medicine
University of Otago
ChristchurchNew Zealand

Efficacy and safety of urate-lowering therapy in people with kidney impairment: a GCAN-initiated literature review
10.1093/rap/rkaa073Review
Objectives. The aim was to evaluate the efficacy, defined as achieving target serum urate <6.0 mg/dl, and safety of urate-lowering therapies (ULTs) for people with gout and chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages 3-5.Methods. PubMed, The Cochrane Library and EMBASE were searched from 1 January 1959 to 31January 2018 for studies that enrolled people with gout, who had an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) or creatinine clearance (CrCl) of <60 ml/min and exposure to allopurinol, febuxostat, probenecid, benzbromarone, lesinurad or pegloticase. All study designs other than case reports were included, except for people on dialysis, for whom we did include case reports.

## Introduction

Gout is common in patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD). A systematic review and meta-analysis of epidemiological studies of adults with gout found that 24% had CKD stage 3 or greater (95% CI: 19, 28%) [1]. The prevalence of gout also increases as renal function declines, as demonstrated by a study of an agestandardized prevalence of gout of 2.9% among adults with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) !90 ml/min and 24% among those with eGFR <60 ml/min [2]. This reciprocal increase is explained by the fact that two-thirds of urate excretion occurs through the kidneys and by the detrimental effects of hyperuricaemia on the kidneys, from stimulation of oxidative stress and activation of the renin-angiotensin system to interstitial inflammation and fibrosis [3].

Clinicians managing gout need to be mindful of how therapies for gout might influence or be influenced by kidney function. For instance, oxypurinol (the active metabolite of allopurinol) is excreted by the kidneys, resulting in higher plasma oxypurinol concentrations as kidney function declines. Uricosuric drugs also depend on renal filtration to provide their effect through the blockage of ion transporters in the renal tubules; therefore, they lose efficacy in advanced kidney disease. Treatment of gout is frequently suboptimal, and this is particularly so in people with concomitant CKD, primarily owing to concerns over adverse effects and efficacy of medications used in the management of gout [4]. For example, it is common practice to limit the allopurinol dose based on creatinine clearance (CrCl), although this approach results in <50% of patients reaching the serum urate (SU) target. Such adherence to renal-based dosing has never been proved to reduce the risk of severe adverse reactions to allopurinol, and there is increasing evidence that allopurinol can be increased safely beyond 'renal-based doses' in patients with CKD [5,6]. Similar uncertainties exist for most urate-lowering therapies (ULTs) in gout.

The aim of this paper is to review the current literature on the safety and efficacy of ULTs used in the management of gout in people with CKD stages 3-5, in order to prioritize key areas for research in the management of gout in this high-need patient population.


## Methods


## Search strategy

PubMed, The Cochrane Library and EMBASE were searched from 1 January 1959 to 27 June 2017 and with a second search from 28 June 2017 to 31 January 2018 to capture any additional papers published during the main review phase. ULTs included were those currently approved for use in gout, including allopurinol, febuxostat, probenecid, benzbromarone, lesinurad and pegloticase. The specific search terms are detailed in Supplementary Table S1, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online. Literature searches on terms linking gout and ULT and dialysis and CKD with ULT were performed separately and subsequently merged.


## Study selection

Studies were included if they enrolled people with gout, with an eGFR or CrCl of <60 ml/min, and exposure to the ULT of interest. All study designs other than case reports were included, with two exceptions: patients on dialysis, where case reports were considered, owing to the paucity of studies in these patients; and given that there are no randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome (AHS)/drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, we included the large AHS studies, which also enrolled people without gout.

Studies were excluded from final abstraction if they were not available in English, primarily included people without gout (for example, asymptomatic hyperuricaemia), if information on CrCl/eGFR was not reported, if patients with gout and eGFR of <60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 were not enrolled, if they were letters, opinion articles or review articles, animal studies and basic science or purely laboratory-based studies.


## Data extraction

Data were extracted from published reports and online supplementary material using an extraction form on an Excel spreadsheet. For assessing efficacy of the ULT of interest, the main outcome was the proportion of study participants who achieved the target SU level of <6.0 mg/dl stratified by renal function. When studies assessed more than one ULT, only the patients receiving the therapy of interest were analysed in the relevant sections of this review. Other data extracted were the study design, renal function exclusion criteria, the maximum dose of ULT allowed and dose given, and the number of participants according to renal function category. For safety, any reported adverse event data stratified by renal function were collected. Two authors independently assessed studies for inclusion and extracted data (L.K.S. and H.F. for allopurinol; A.L.G. and A.B.V.-S. for all other drugs). Discrepancies were resolved by discussion. Risk of bias was not assessed formally.


## Data synthesis

Owing to methodological diversity, data are presented by structured tabulation with a qualitative summary.


## Results

The flowcharts of study selection for allopurinol, febuxostat, probenecid, benzbromarone, lenisurad and pegloticase are shown in Supplementary Figs S1-S6, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online. There were 36 reports with an analysis of efficacy and/or safety based upon renal function: allopurinol (n ¼ 12), Hamish Farquhar et al.

febuxostat (n ¼ 10), probenecid (n ¼ 3), benzbromarone (n ¼ 5), lesinurad (n ¼ 5) and pegloticase (n ¼ 1). There were 108 reports that involved people with gout and eGFR <60 ml/min but did not contain any analysis on efficacy and/or safety based upon renal function: allopurinol (n ¼ 84), febuxostat (n ¼ 14), benzbromarone (n ¼ 1), lesinurad (n ¼ 3) and pegloticase (n ¼ 6). For probenecid, six studies were excluded because they reported having evaluated subjects with renal dysfunction but used old methods to define renal function (decreased urea clearance, elevated non-protein nitrogen), making appropriate comparison across other studies impossible [7][8][9][10][11][12].


## Allopurinol

Studies with analysis based on renal function Table 1 summarizes the main characteristics of the 12 articles that reported the efficacy of allopurinol stratified by renal function. These articles reported data from 12 different studies. Six of these studies were RCTs. Seven of the 12 studies excluded participants with more severe degrees of renal dysfunction, most commonly those with eGFR of <30 ml/min. Seven studies specified a maximum allowable dose of allopurinol, and the dosing was variable between studies. These 12 studies included a total of 21 068 participants who had data for serum urate stratified by renal function. Most but not all studies reported renal function in such a way as to allow grouping of participants into categories of renal function.

The percentage of participants achieving target SU of <6.0 mg/dl varied depending on renal function: for participants with eGFR !60 ml/min, the values ranged between 23.3 and 75%, for eGFR of 30-<60 ml/min, the values ranged between 20.2 and 76.4%, and for eGFR <30 ml/min, the values ranged between 18.8 and 64.3% (Table 1). Only 4 of the 12 studies reported adverse events according to renal function. The rates of adverse events were not found to differ according to renal function (Table 2).


## Studies without analysis based upon renal function

There were 84 articles reporting data from 83 different studies that included participants with varying degrees of renal impairment but did not have an analysis of efficacy and/or safety according to renal function. A summary of the characteristics of these studies is shown in Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.

Allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome and chronic kidney disease CKD has long been recognized as one risk factor for severe allopurinol-related adverse reactions [46]. In the largest case series of AHS to date, 182/376 (48.4%) had renal impairment [47]. However, AHS can occur in people with normal renal function, indicating that other factors must be involved. For example, concomitant diuretic administration has been associated with AHS [48,49]. Allopurinol starting dose and the presence of HLA-B*5801 have more recently been identified as important risk factors for AHS. However, the interaction between the identified risk factors, particularly allopurinol starting dose, renal impairment and HLA-B*5801, appears to be important in increasing the risk (Table 3).

A key challenge is that most of the large cohorts of patients used to examine risk factors for AHS have included people with gout in addition to those treated for other conditions, including asymptomatic hyperuricaemia. It has been suggested that asymptomatic hyperuricaemia itself is associated with an increased risk of AHS [odds ratio (OR) 2.08 (95% CI: 1.94-2.24)] and an increased risk of death from AHS [OR 2.32 (95% CI: 1.79-3.01)] [52].


## Febuxostat


## Studies with analysis based on renal function

The main characteristics of the 10 studies that reported febuxostat efficacy based on renal function are summarized in Table 1. There were only three RCTs [13,14,30]. Although APEX (Allopurinol Placebo-Controlled Efficacy Study of Febuxostat) and CONFIRMS were already fully described in Table 1, the study by Chohan et al. [18] was included for adding partial data from the FACT (Febuxostat Versus Allopurinol Controlled Trial) stratified by renal function. There was one case report of a patient on dialysis [28]. The 10 studies included >2700 subjects with gout using febuxostat, with !920 of them having eGFR of <60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 . Five additional studies included [57][58][59][60][61] reported supplementary analysis on data from studies already described.

The percentage of study participants achieving target SU of <6.0 mg/dl varied depending on the febuxostat dose, rather than renal function. Considering the 10 studies, only 1 RCT and 1 observational study presented safety analysis based on renal function. There was no obvious difference in adverse events according to renal function ( Table 2).


## Studies without analysis based upon renal function

A summary of the characteristics of the 14 studies identified that included participants with CKD but did not report efficacy and/or safety data based on renal function is shown in Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.


## Probenecid


## Studies with analysis based on renal function

The main characteristics of the three studies included are described in Table 1; all of them provided efficacy data based on renal function. Only one was an RCT [31], which compared the uricosuric effects of probenecid and zoxazolamine use over 3 days. Among the 10 participants who used probenecid at a dose of 1.5 g/ day, one study participant had CKD, with a CrCl of 59.5 ml/min. Within the short study period, his SU fell from 10.7 to 7.9 mg/dl, which was a significant reduction, despite not reaching the SU target of <6 mg/dl.      [16] Seventeen deaths occurred during study period: 4/88 CrCl > 60, 7/71 CrCl 30-<60, 6/24 CrCl <30. The type and number of SAEs were as expected and were similar between groups b . White (2018) (CARES) [17] Primary endpoint (composite endpoint of cardiovascular death, non-fatal MI, non-fatal stroke, urgent revascularization) and cardiovascular mortality by renal function group, for subjects taking allopurinol: eCLcr !90/60-89/30-59: 7.5%/7.5%/13% and 1.3%/1.5%/4.8%. Becker (2015) (LASSO) [19] TEAEs occurred at similar instances in categories divided by baseline renal function c . Overall rate of TEAE possibly related to allopurinol 10.7%. Most common TEAEs possibly related to allopurinol, occurring in patients on <300, 300 and >300 mg categories were alanine aminotransferase increase (2.0, 1.1 and 2.0%), diarrhoea (1.2, 1.1 and 2.0%) and rash (2.0, 0.8 and 0.3%). Serious AEs occurred in 2.9%, none considered to be related to allopurinol. FEBUXOSTAT Becker (2010) (CONFIRMS) [14] Overall, 56.7 and 54.2% of subjects taking febuxostat 40 and 80 mg, respectively, experienced at least one AE. The AE rate in subjects with mild or moderate renal impairment was 56% (268/479) among subjects taking febuxostat 40 mg and 54% (270/503) among those taking febuxostat 80 mg. Overall serious AE rate was 2.5 and 3.7% for febuxostat 40 and 80 mg, respectively. The most frequently reported AEs in subjects with renal impairment were the same as those reported for all subjects. Rates of diarrhoea were higher among subjects with moderate renal impairment receiving febuxostat (8-10%), compared with subjects with moderate renal impairment receiving allopurinol (7%). Quilis (2015) [26] Febuxostat was discontinued in 11 (20%) patients (in 3 cases owing to skin reactions), but it did not differ regarding eGFR subgroups. b PROBENECID Pui (2013) [33] 8/42 patients (19%) with eGFR !50 ml/min and 2/15 patients (13%) with eGFR <50 ml/min presented AEs attributed to probenecid, leading to discontinuation of use in 7 of them: gastrointestinal side effects (3), headache (2), rashes (2), painful tongue (1), mouth ulcers (1) and urolithiasis (1) (this patient had a history of kidney stones, and the calculus was not analysed for its composition). LESINURAD Hagerty (2011) [39] Tolerability and safety of lesinurad were similar in patients with normal and impaired renal function. b Dalbeth (2015) [40] (CRYSTAL) Cr elevation !1.5Â:

. CrCl !90 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 5.4%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 7.1% . CrCl 60-<90 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 7.3%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 15.6% . CrCl 30-<60 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 0%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 4.5% Any adverse event:

. CrCl !90 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 89.2%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 88.1% . CrCl 60-<90 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 68.3%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 77.8% . CrCl 30-<60 ml/min: FBXþLESU200 ¼ 92.9%; FBXþLESU400 ¼ 81.8% Saag (2015) [41] (CLEAR 1/CLEAR 2) Cr elevation !1.5Â:

. CrCl !90 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 5.5%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 13.7% . CrCl 60-<90 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 6.0%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 18.5% . CrCl 30-<60 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 6.8%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 12.9% Any adverse event:

. CrCl !90 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 73.6%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 77.6% . CrCl 60-<90 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 68.9%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 79.8% . CrCl 30-<60 ml/min: AlloþLESU200 ¼ 85.1%; AlloþLESU400 ¼ 81.4%  [4, 21-23, 25, 28, 36] do not report adverse events. Studies [13, 15, 18, 20, 24, 27, 29-31, 34, 37, 38, 42, 43] do not report adverse events according to renal function. References [32,35] reported that there were no adverse events. b Statement made by authors. c Statement made by authors. Raw data relating to TEAEs according to renal function were not published.    The two observational studies included were more recent. The first study evaluated the pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic effects of adding probenecid to allopurinol in 20 participants over 18 weeks: 4/5 subjects with eGFR of <50 ml/min reached an SU of <5 mg/dl, and all of the 15 subjects with eGFR of !50 ml/min achieved an SU of <5 mg/dl [32]. The second study described efficacy and tolerability of probenecid in 57 participants (15 with CKD) over 36 months: 36 and 45% of subjects with eGFR of >50 and 30-50 ml/min, respectively, reached the SU target of <6 mg/dl, but none of the 4 participants with eGFR of <30 ml/min achieved it [33]. In a single study that reported adverse events according to renal function, they were less common among subjects with an eGFR of <50 ml/min, but the small sample size did not allow us to come to a definitive conclusion [33] (Table 2).


## Benzbromarone

Studies with analysis based on renal function Table 1 summarizes the main characteristics of the five studies that reported the efficacy of benzbromarone based upon renal function, of which only one was an RCT. These five studies included a total of 191 participants, but the variability in patients grouping or outcome reporting made a combined analysis impossible.

Given that most studies reported the efficacy as the mean final SU level compared with the mean baseline SU level, it was not possible to determine the percentage of patients who achieved an SU of <6 mg/dl according to the renal function. In the study with the largest sample of benzbromarone users, Stamp et al. [38] concluded that there was no statistically significant difference in the number of patients who achieved an SU of <6.0 mg/dl based on eGFR. None of the included studies reported adverse events according to renal function (Table 2).


## Study without analysis based upon renal function

The main characteristics of the only study identified that included participants with CKD taking benzbromarone but did not have an analysis of efficacy and/or safety according to renal function are summarized in Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.


## Lesinurad

Studies with analysis based on renal function Table 1 summarizes the main characteristics of the five studies that reported the efficacy of lesinurad based upon renal function. All of these studies excluded subjects with an eGFR of <30 ml/min. Hagerty et al. [39] reported two phase 2b studies, which were the only studies in Table 1 to evaluate lesinurad in monotherapy and at doses >400 mg/day, with a maximum lesinurad daily dose of 600 mg. CLEAR (Combining Lesinurad with Allopurinol Standard of Care in Inadequate Responders) 1 and CLEAR 2 were RCTs comparing allopurinol monotherapy and the combination of allopurinol and two doses of lesinurad. They were reported individually as full papers in 2017 [42,43], but the efficacy data analysed according to the renal function were described in more detail in an ACR abstract in 2015 [41]. The CRYSTAL (Combination Treatment Study in Subjects with Subcutaneous Tophaceous Gout with Lesinurad and Febuxostat) study compared febuxostat in monotherapy with the combination of febuxostat with two lesinurad doses for subjects with tophaceous gout, and the primary efficacy endpoint was an SU of <5 mg/dl, whereas the other studies considered an SU level of <6 mg/dl. The results from the CRYSTAL study based on renal function were reported in a conference abstract [40], and the full-text article was published in 2017 without the detailed data on renal function [62]. These five studies included a total of 1343 participants, with !194 subjects presenting eGFR of 30-<60 ml/min.

Only three articles reported safety according to renal function, and results indicate a similar safety profile in patients with normal or mildly impaired renal function; an increased frequency of adverse events was seen in groups using higher doses of lesinurad (400 mg/day), regardless of kidney function ( Table 2).


## Studies without analysis based upon renal function

Two studies included participants with varying degrees of renal impairment but did not analyse efficacy and/or safety based on renal function. A summary of the characteristics of these studies is shown in Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.


## Pegloticase


## Studies with analysis based on renal function

The main characteristics of the only study that reported efficacy data based on renal function are presented in Table 1. The study was a post hoc subgroup analysis of two RCTs and their open-label extension study, including 211 patients with varying degrees of renal dysfunction [44]. The efficacy endpoint was an SU of <6 mg/dl for 80% of the time during months 3 and 6. Overall, there did not appear to be significant differences in efficacy based on renal function. Gout flare and infusion reactions were the most commonly reported adverse events, and there were no differences in the pegloticase safety profile according to renal function ( Table 2).


## Studies without analysis based upon renal function

Six identified studies included participants with CKD but did not have efficacy and/or safety analyses according to renal function. The main characteristics of these studies are summarized in Supplementary Table S2, available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.


## Discussion

This systematic review found that there is a paucity of data, particularly studies with appropriate methodological quality, on ULTs for subjects with gout and CKD.

Hamish Farquhar et al.

There are more data for allopurinol than for the other ULTs, but there was substantial variability in study design, and quantitative meta-analysis was not appropriate. Despite the large number of studies on allopurinol, only 12 studies analysed participants stratified by renal function. Pre-specified and actual doses of allopurinol prescribed were variable, with many studies specifying a maximum dose of 300 mg/day; a dose currently known to be insufficient for most people with gout to achieve the SU target. It is disappointing that given the paucity of data, even when many studies enrolled participants with an eGFR of <60 ml/min/1.73 m 2 , the results were not analysed based on renal function. The results of this review do not provide enough data to support or refute current recommendations in guidelines regarding the dosing of ULTs based on renal function [63].

Older uricosurics, such as probenecid and benzbromarone, have scant evidence, largely generated at a time when reporting based on CKD categories was not standardized. There was response in an important proportion of patients, but the safety signals (more concerning for benzbromarone than for probenecid) were difficult to analyse based on kidney function because of lack of stratification on this variable in all but one study with probenecid.

With the newer ULTs, such as febuxostat and lesinurad, the phase 3 clinical trials for US Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency approval have typically excluded people with severely impaired kidney function (eGFR of <30 ml/min/1.73 m 2 ). Thus, data in this group of people with difficult-to-treat gout are most limited and rely on post-marketing case series and investigator-led studies.

One of the strengths of this study is that it focused on a clearly defined group of people with gout. Many studies of allopurinol and other urate-lowering agents involve participants who receive them for indications other than gout, such as asymptomatic hyperuricaemia. It is difficult to draw conclusions from such studies about the efficacy and safety of allopurinol when used for gout. This is particularly important given that there is some evidence that people with asymptomatic hyperuricaemia treated with allopurinol might be at increased risk of AHS [52].

Limitations of this review include the inability to undertake a meta-analysis of the efficacy of ULTs in individuals with gout and CKD. We did not include people with renal transplants, and our conclusions do not apply to that specific population. We did not include other outcome measures for efficacy, such as a reduction in the size or number of tophi or a decrease in gout flares, both of which occur secondarily to achieving the SU target. Another limitation was the restriction of the searches to the English language, especially considering that benzbromarone is not approved in the USA and many other English-speaking countries, but is used in other non-English-speaking countries. However, this limitation does not seem to yield a significant loss of potentially includable manuscripts. Risk of bias of the included studies was not assessed formally. Few of the included studies aimed specifically to address the issue of efficacy and safety of ULT according to different levels of renal function. In addition, variability in the design of the included studies and diverse methods for reporting outcome data for serum urate limit the conclusions that can be drawn from these studies as a whole, and a formal risk of bias assessment would not alter this.

In conclusion, this is a comprehensive systematic review highlighting the paucity of efficacy and safety data for ULT use to treat gout in the context of CKD. Considering that this association is frequent and permeated by clinical concerns mainly related to safety, such as drug toxicity and polypharmacy interaction, it is crucial that current and future studies include patients with CKD and report results stratified by renal function. Currently, clinicians treating gout in patients with CKD and major professional societies do not have evidence to make informed recommendations on management of this population.


## Supplementary data

Supplementary data are available at Rheumatology Advances in Practice online.


stage 3 or 4 CKD had no clinically meaningful changes in renal function with 6 months of pegloticase therapy. Likewise, no changes in renal function were observed in patients who participated in the long-term open-label extension study for a total mean period of 1.5 years of pegloticase therapy. b Gout flares and infusion reactions were the two most common AEs. b There were no differences in the pegloticase safety profile based on CKD stage. b AE: adverse event; AHS: allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome; Allo: allopurinol; APEX: Allopurinol Placebo-Controlled Efficacy Study of Febuxostat; CARES: Cardiovascular Safety of Febuxostat and Allopurinol in Patients with Gout and Cardiovascular Morbidities trial; CKD: chronic kidney disease; CLEAR: Combining Lesinurad with Allopurinol Standard of Care in Inadequate Responders; CONFIRMS: Urate-Lowering Efficacy and Safety of Febuxostat in the Treatment of the Hyperuricaemia of Gout; Cr: creatinine; CrCl: creatinine clearance (in millilitres per minute); CRYSTAL: Combination Treatment Study in Subjects with Subcutaneous Tophaceous Gout with Lesinurad and Febuxostat; eGFR: estimated glomerular filtration rate (in millilitres per minute); FACT: Febuxostat Versus Allopurinol Controlled Trial; FAST: Febuxostat versus Allopurinol Streamlined Trial; FBX: febuxostat; LASSO: Long-term Allopurinol Safety Study Evaluating Outcomes in Gout Patients; LESU: lesinurad; MI: myocardial infarction; SAE: serious adverse event; TEAE: treatment emergent adverse event. a References


S.D. 7.6) in people with SCAR vs 2.7 (S.D. 3.3) in tolerant controls (P <

## TABLE 1
1Studies reporting efficacy of urate-lowering therapies based on renal functionFirst author (year) (trial 
name) 

Design 
Renal function ex-
clusion criteria 
eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 

or creatinine (mg/dl) 

Maximum ULT dose 
according to 

protocol (mg/day) 
Actual or mean dose 
(mg/day) 
Number of participants by eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 
(% with SU of 

<6 mg/dl) a 

Total n 

!90 

60-<90 

30-<60 

<30 

ALLOPURINOL 

Schumacher (2008) 
(APEX) [13] 

RCT 

Cr >2.0 

mg/dl 
Cr 1.5 mg/dl: 300 
Cr 1.5-2 mg/dl: 100 

300: n 
¼ 258 

100: n 
¼ 10 

Cr 1.5 mg/dl: n 

¼ 258 (23.3) 

Cr 1.5-2.0 mg/dl: n 

¼ 10 0 

268 
(22.4) 

Becker (2010) 
(CONFIRMS) [14] 

RCT 

eCLcr <30 

eCLcr l 
! 60: 300 
eCLcr <60: 

200 

300: n 
¼ 610 

200: n 
¼ 145 

255 
(41.7) 

365 
(46.3) 

136 
(31.6) 

0 

755 
(42.1) 

Jennings (2014) (FAST) 
[15] 

RCT (baseline data of 
first 400 
participants) 

eGFR <30 

900 

200 at baseline, 300 in 
144 who were 
uptitrated b 

332 
(64.8) 

68 
(58.8) 

0 

400 
(63.8) 

Stamp (2017) [16] 

RCT (post hoc analy-
sis of refs 3 and 4 in 
Supplementary 

Table S2, available 

at Rheumatology 
Advances in 
Practice online) 

None 

900 

CrCl >60: 

460 

CrCl 30-<60: 365 
CrCl <30: 

250 

88 
(75) 

71 
(76.4) 

24 
(64.3) 

183 

White (2018) (CARES) 
[17] 

RCT 

eCLcr < 

30 

eCLcr l 
! 60: 600 
eCLcr l < 
60: 400 
200 21.8%, 300 
44.6%, 400 25.2%, 

500 4.3%, 600 
4.1% 

228 

1231 

1631 

0 

3090 
(75) 

Chohan (2012) (FACT/ 
APEX/CONFIRMS) 

[18] c 

Post hoc analysis of 
RCTs 

As per refs [13, 14]. 
FACT: Cr >1.5 

mg/ 

dl or CrCl <50 

300 

100: n 
¼ 2, 200: 

n 
¼ 32, 300: n 

¼ 40 

2 
(50) 

18 
(50) 

54 
(44.4) 

0 

7 6 
(74 analysed) 
(45.9) 

Becker (2015) (LASSO) 
[19] 

Open label 

CrCl <30 

Local guidelines 

14.4%: <300 
65.4%: 300 
20.2%: >300 

813 
(32) 

654 
(39) 

257 
(41) 

6 

1732 
(35.9) 

Bowie (1967) [20] 

Open label 

Not specified 

Not specified 

342 

n 
¼ 14. Mean CrCl 37 
(66.7% based on average uric acid 1-6 months) 

14 
(66.7) 

Doogue (2016) [21] 

Observational 

All HD 

100 

100 

0 

0 

0 

5 (HD) 

5 

Fuldeore (2011) [4] 

Retrospective 

Dialysis 

Not specified 

CKD0/1: 268.93 
CKD2: 261.63 
CKD3: 248.08 
CKD4: 241.54 

1855 
(25.6) 

826 
(23.3) 

312 
(20.2) 

129 
(18.8) 

3122 

Hatoum (2014) [22] d 

Retrospective 

Not specified 

Not specified 

184.9 

1038 
(29.1) 

4437 
(31.3) 

5053 
(30.6) 

920 
(28.1) 

10 119 
(29.2) 

Hmar (2015) [23] e 

Audit of medical 
records 

Not specified 

Not specified 

211 (range 25-600) 

Not clear 

465 
(0.27) 

322 
(0.39) 

126 
(0.38) 

1304 

FEBUXOSTAT 
Schumacher (2008) 

(APEX) [13] 

RCT 

Cr >2.0 

mg/dl 

240 

80 mg n 

¼ 267 

120 mg n 

¼ 269 

240 mg n 

¼ 134 
Last 3 monthly SU <6.0 

mg/dl 

Cr 1.5 mg/dl (n 
¼ 640): 80 mg (48.2) 

j 120 mg (65.9) 

j 240 mg (69.0) 

Cr 1.5-2.0 mg/dl (n 

¼ 25): 80 mg (44.4) 

j 120 mg (45.4) 

j 240 mg (60.0) 

670 

Becker (2010) 
(CONFIRMS) [14] 

RCT 

eCLcr <30 

80 

40 mg n 

¼ 757 

80 mg n 

¼ 756 

531 
40 mg (37.4) 
80 mg (58.1) 

716 
40 mg (52.1) 
80 mg (71.7) 

266 
40 mg (43.1) 
80 mg (71.3) 

0 

1513 

Chohan (2011) [24] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

Not specified 

100 

20 mg n 

¼ 3 

40 mg n 

¼ 4 

60 mg n 

¼ 1 

80 mg n 

¼ 3 

100 mg n 

¼ 1 
Withdrawn n 

¼ 1 

1 (100) 
80 mg: 1/1 

3 (66.6) 
40 mg: 1/1 
60 mg: 1/1 
80 mg: 0/1 

5 (66.6) 
40 mg: 0/1 
80 mg: 1/1 
100 mg: 1/1 
SU unknown for two 
patients: Fbx 0 mg 

and 40 mg 

4 (100) 
20 mg: 3/3 
40 mg: 1/1 

13 

(continued) 

Hamish Farquhar et al. 


## TABLE 1
1ContinuedUrate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment https://academic.oup.com/rheumapFirst author (year) (trial 
name) 

Design 
Renal function ex-
clusion criteria 
eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 

or creatinine (mg/dl) 

Maximum ULT dose 
according to 

protocol (mg/day) 
Actual or mean dose 
(mg/day) 
Number of participants by eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 
(% with SU of 

<6 mg/dl) a 

Total n 

!90 

60-<90 

30-<60 

<30 

Chohan (2012) (FACT/ 
APEX/CONFIRMS) 

[18] 

Post hoc analysis of 
RCTs 
(female subjects in-
cluded in three 
RCTs: FACT, 
APEX and 
CONFIRMS) 

FACT: Cr >1.5 

mg/dl 

or CrCl < 

50 

APEX: Cr >2.0 

mg/dl 

CONFIRMS: CrCl <30 

240 

40 mg n 

¼ 35 

80 mg n 

¼ 74 

120 mg n 

¼ 21 

240 mg n 

¼ 7 

10 (90.0) 
40 mg: 1/2 
80 mg: 7/7 
120 mg: 1/1 
240 mg: 0/0 

43 (83.7) 
40 mg: 8/10 
80 mg: 21/25 
120 mg: 4/5 
240 mg: 3/3 

84 (72.6) 
40 mg: 10/23 
80 mg: 35/42 
120 mg: 12/15 
240 mg: 4/4 

137 

Son (2015) [25] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

Not specified 

Not specified 

Not specified 

0 

0 

13 (CrCl <45) 
SU (mg/dl) 
baseline: 8.8 6 

1.9 

6 months: 5.6 6 

2.1 
12 (6 on dialysis) 
SU (mg/dl): 
CKD4 

baseline: 8.9 6 

2.8 

6 months: 6.7 6 

4.4 

CKD5: 

baseline: 7.2 6 

0.7 

6 months: 4.9 6 

2.2 

25 

Quilis (2015) [26] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

Not specified 

80 

Not specified 

41 
(77.5) 

14 
(83.3) 

55 

Lim (2016) [27] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

Not specified 

160 

Not specified 

0 

0 

0 

294 
HD: n 
¼ 32 

PD: n 
¼ 17 
Mean SU (mg/dl): 

baseline 9.61 6 

2.18 

3 months 
4.97 6 

1.84 

12 months 
4.98 6 

2.33 

294 
(224 with gout) 

Frassetto (2016) [28] 

Case report 

N/A 

80 

80 

0 

0 

0 

1 HD (100) 
SU (mg/dl): 
Baseline: 10.8 
Increased HD: 5.4 
Increased 
HDþFbx80 mg: 

<1.5 

1 

Juge (2017) [29] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

CrCl >30 

120 

40-120 

0 

0 

0 

CKD4 n 
¼ 60 

CKD5 n 
¼ 13 

(67.1) 

73 

Gunawardhana 

(2018) [30] 

RCT, multicentre, pla-
cebo-controlled, 

double-blind 

eGFR <30 

or 

!60 

80 

40 mg IR n 

¼ 37 

40 mg XR n 

¼ 39 

80 mg IR n 

¼ 37 

80 mg XR n 

¼ 38 

0 

0 

189 
40 mg IR (32.4) 
40 mg XR (53.8) 
80 mg IR (59.5) 
80 mg XR (55.3) 

0 

189 

PROBENECID 

Rivera (1961) [31] 

RCT 
(probenecid vs zoxa-
zolamine for 

3 days) 

None 

1500 

1500 

6 
(83) 

3 
(100) 

1 
0 

0 

7 

Stocker (2011) [32] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

None 

2000 

250-2000 
5 patients with CrCl <50: 

80% achieved SU <5 

mg/dl 

15 patients with CrCl 
!50: 100% achieved SU <5 

mg/dl 

20 

Pui (2013) [33] 

None 

Not specified 

Mean: 1150 
42 patients with eGFR >50 

(36) 

11 patients with eGFR 30-50 (45) 

4 
0 

57 

(continued) 



## TABLE 1
1ContinuedFirst author (year) (trial 
name) 

Design 
Renal function ex-
clusion criteria 
eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 

or creatinine (mg/dl) 

Maximum ULT dose 
according to 

protocol (mg/day) 
Actual or mean dose 
(mg/day) 
Number of participants by eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 
(% with SU of 

<6 mg/dl) a 

Total n 

!90 

60-<90 

30-<60 

<30 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

BENZBROMARONE 

Perez-Ruiz (1999) [34] 

RCT 

CrCl <20 

or >80 

200 

103 6 
23 (100-150) 

17 (94.1) 
CrCl: 54.5 6 
17.5 -benzbromarone users at the lowest range of CrCl had higher baseline SU and 

needed higher doses of benzbromarone 

17 

Kumar (2005) [35] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

None 

100 

100 

0 

1 

4 

1 

6 

(33.3) 

Fujimori (2011) [36] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

Normal kidney func-
tion or CKD stages 
1-2 

200 

12.5-200 

0 

0 

32 

3: 
2 CKD4 (!50) 
1 CKD5 0 

35 (31 had gout) 

eGFR 46.2 6 

11.5 

SU (mg/dl) 
Baseline 8.5 6 

0.9 

After benzbromarone 6.1 6 

0.8 

Oh (2011) [37] 

Study without inde-
pendent compari-

son group 

eGFR 
!60 or <15 

100 

47.5 6 
29.1 (25-100) 

0 

0 

Baseline eGFR 38.4 6 

8.3 (70) 

20 

Stamp (2016) [38] 

Survey 

None 

200 

25-200 
(median 
¼ 100) 

35 

55 

22 

117 

eGFR 50.3 6 

22.8 (62.6) 

There was no statistically significant difference in the number of patients who achieved SU 
<6.0 
mg/dl based on eGFR. However, at each eGFR, numerically, more people on benzbro-

marone achieved SU <6.0 
mg/dl compared with Allo and probenecid 

LESINURAD 

Hagerty (2011) [39] 
Two phase 2b studies Severe renal 

impairment 

600 

200-600 mg 
Median SU reduction with the 400 mg dose: 

Monotherapy: 
Normal renal function: 32% 
Mild to moderate renal impairment: 28% 
Combination with Allo: 
Normal renal function: 21% 
Mild to moderate renal impairment: 25% 

0 

331 

Dalbeth (2015) 
(CRYSTAL) [40] 

RCT 

CrCl <30 

400 

200 mg n 

¼ 103 

400 mg n 

¼ 106 

76 
FbxþLesu200 (73) 
FbxþLesu400 (76.9) 

83 
FbxþLesu200 (65.8) 
FbxþLesu400(73.3) 

50 
FbxþLesu200 (64.3) 
FbxþLesu400 

(59.1) 

0 

209 

Saag (2015) 
(CLEAR 1/CLEAR 2) [41] 

Combined analyses 
from two RCTs 

CrCl <30 

400 

200 mg n 

¼ 394 

400 mg n 

¼ 395 

318 
AlloþLesu200 (59.7) 
AlloþLesu400 (62.9) 

328 
AlloþLesu200 (61.5) 
AlloþLesu400 (67.1) 

143 
AlloþLesu200 (52.7) 
AlloþLesu400 

(53.6) 

0 

789 

Saag (2017) 
(CLEAR 1) [42] 

RCT 

CrCl <30 

400 

200 mg n 

¼ 200 

400 mg n 

¼ 200 

159 
AlloþLesu200: 83 
AlloþLesu400: 76 

155 
AlloþLesu200: 72 
AlloþLesu400: 83 

86 
AlloþLesu200: 45 
AlloþLesu400: 41 

At month 6: 
AlloþLesu200 16% 

> 

Allo 

AlloþLesu400 21% 

> 

Allo 

0 

400 

At month 6: 
AlloþLesu200 20% > 

Allo 

AlloþLesu400 24% > 

Allo 

(continued) 

Hamish Farquhar et al. 


## TABLE 1
1Continued Allo: allopurinol; APEX: Allopurinol Placebo-Controlled Efficacy Study of Febuxostat; CARES: Cardiovascular Safety of Febuxostat and Allopurinol in Patients with Gout and Cardiovascular Morbidities trial; CKD: chronic kidney disease; CLEAR: Combining Lesinurad with Allopurinol Standard of Care in Inadequate Responders; CONFIRMS: Urate-Lowering Efficacy and Safety of Febuxostat in the Treatment of the Hyperuricaemia of Gout; Cr: creatinine; CrCl: creatinine clearance; eCLcr: estimated creatinine clearance; CRYSTAL: Combination Treatment Study in Subjects with Subcutaneous Tophaceous Gout with Lesinurad and Febuxostat; eGFR: glomerular filtration rate; ESRD: end-stage renal disease; FACT: Febuxostat Versus Allopurinol Controlled Trial; FAST: Febuxostat versus Allopurinol Streamlined Trial; Fbx: febuxostat; HD: haemodialysis; IR: immediate release; LASSO: Long-term Allopurinol Safety Study Evaluating Outcomes in Gout Patients; Lesu: lesinurad; N/A: not applicable; PD: peritoneal dialysis; q2wk, every 2 weeks; q4wk, every 4 weeks; RCT: randomized controlled trial; SU: serum urate; ULT: urate-lowering therapy; XR: extended release. a contained data from the FACT study [45] stratified by renal function that was not reported in the original paper. d 17 199 people were prescribed allopurinol initially. Numbers of subjects included per renal function category are according to 11 488 that had baseline renal function reported. 10 119 had at least one serum urate and were analysed for achieving serum urate goal within 6 months. Numbers in brackets indicate the percentage achieving serum urate goal within 6 months, according to renal function category.Numbers in brackets for this paper correspond to mean urate concentration (in millimoles per litre).First author (year) (trial 
name) 

Design 
Renal function ex-
clusion criteria 
eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 

or creatinine (mg/dl) 

Maximum ULT dose 
according to 

protocol (mg/day) 
Actual or mean dose 
(mg/day) 
Number of participants by eGFR/CrCl (ml/min) 
(% with SU of 

<6 mg/dl) a 

Total n 

!90 

60-<90 

30-<60 

<30 

Bardin (2017) 
(CLEAR 2) [43] 

RCT 

CrCl <30 

400 

200 mg n 

¼ 204 

400 mg n 

¼ 199 

165 
AlloþLesu200: 80 
AlloþLesu400: 85 

180 
AlloþLesu200: 95 
AlloþLesu400: 85 

58 
AlloþLesu200: 29 
AlloþLesu400: 29 
At month 6: 
AlloþLesu200 34% 

> 

Allo 

AlloþLesu400 41% 

> 

Allo 

0 

403 

At month 6: 
AlloþLesu200 33% > 

Allo 

AlloþLesu400 42% > 

Allo 

PEGLOTICASE 

Yood (2014) 
[GOUT1 (C0405) and 
GOUT2 (C0406)] [44] 

Post hoc subgroup 
analysis of two 
RCTs (phase 3) and 
their open-label ex-
tension study 

Renal dialysis 

8 mg q2wk 

Patients with CKD3 or 

4: 

8 mg q2wk n 

¼ 42 

8 mg q4wk n 

¼ 41 

Placebo n 

¼ 20 

34 
(32) 

74 
(23) 

80 
(35) 

23 
(39) 

211 

When available. b 

Median. c 
Included because it 

e 

Urate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment 

https://academic.oup.com/rheumap 


## TABLE 2
2Adverse events, stratified by renal function, in studies that report efficacy according to renal function aFirst author (year) 
(trial name) 

Notable findings 

ALLOPURINOL maintenance dose 
Becker (2010) 
(CONFIRMS) [14] 

Overall, 57.3% of subjects taking allopurinol experienced at least AE. The AE rate in subjects with mild or moderate 
renal impairment was 289/501 (57.7%). Overall, 7% of patients taking allopurinol developed a rash and one sub-
ject experienced a severe desquamating eruption. Overall serious AE rate 4.1% for all allopurinol users. 
Stamp (2017) 


Hamish Farquhar et al.

## TABLE 3
3Studies addressing associations between allopurinol dose, kidney function and allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome/drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptomsFirst author 
(year) 

Proportion of sub-

jects with gout 

Initial allopurinol 
dose (mg/day) 
Data related to CrCl/eGFR (ml/min) 

Data related to HLA-

B*5801 

Results related to di-
uretic use 

Stamp (2012) 
[50] 

100% 

Mean 183.5 6 

14 for 

cases and 
112.2 6 
6.3 for 
controls 
Odds of AHS increased as starting dose cor-
rected for GFR increased, for the highest 
quintile, OR 23.2 (P < 

0.01) 

NR 

48% of cases were taking 
diuretics. Risk of diuretic 

use not able to be 
estimated. 

Kim (2013) 
[51] 

10.1% of allopurinol 
initiators 

HR for >300 

mg vs low 

dose 
1.30 (95% CI: 0.31, 
5.36) 
5.9% of allopurinol initiators had CKD. CKD 
unadjusted HR 0.72 (95% CI: 0.18, 2.97) 

NR 

Unadjusted HR for diuretic 

use 2.10 (95% CI: 1.10, 
4.01). Multivariable HR 
1.49 (95% CI: 0.77, 2.90) 

Yang (2015) 
[52] 
NR. 49.5% of new allo-
purinol users in 2011 
had asymptomatic 
hyperuricaemia 

>100 
mg/day vs 

100 mg day OR 
1.27 (95% CI: 1.18, 
1.37) 
OR with renal disease vs without 1.49 (95% 
CI: 1.38, 1.61) 

NR 

OR for allopurinol hyper-
sensitivity with thiazide 

use 1.02 (95% CI: 0.78, 
1.32) 

Chung (2015) 
[53] 


https://academic.oup.com/rheumap
Urate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment https://academic.oup.com/rheumap
AcknowledgementsWe are grateful to the Gout and Crystal Arthritis Network (GCAN) for catalysing this project and providing support. The GCAN is supported at arm's length by unrestricted by grants from pharma companies; in the last 12 months, grants were provided by Horizon and AstraZeneca and LG. The authors would like to acknowledge the invaluable contribution of Carolyn Holmes, from the University of Alabama at Birmingham Lister Hill Library for her assistance with the literature searches needed for this systematic review.Funding: No specific funding was received from any bodies in the public, commercial or not-for-profit sectors to carry out the work described in this article.Disclosure statement: The authors have declared no conflicts of interest.Data availability statementData are available upon reasonable request by any qualified researchers who engage in rigorous, independent scientific research, and will be provided following review and approval of a research proposal and Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) and execution of a Data Sharing Agreement (DSA). All data relevant to the study are included in the article.Urate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment https://academic.oup.com/rheumap
Gout and risk of chronic kidney disease and nephrolithiasis: metaanalysis of observational studies. M Roughley, J Belcher, C Mallen, E Roddy, Arthritis Res Ther. 1790Roughley M, Belcher J, Mallen C, Roddy E. Gout and risk of chronic kidney disease and nephrolithiasis: meta- analysis of observational studies. Arthritis Res Ther 2015;17:90.

Reduced glomerular function and prevalence of gout: NHANES 2009-10. E Krishnan, PLoS One. 750046Krishnan E. Reduced glomerular function and prevalence of gout: NHANES 2009-10. PLoS One 2012;7:e50046.

Why focus on uric acid. R Johnson, Curr Med Res Opin. 31Johnson R. Why focus on uric acid? Curr Med Res Opin 2015;31:3-7.

Chronic kidney disease in gout in a managed care setting. M J Fuldeore, A A Riedel, V Zarotsky, BMC Nephrol. 1236Fuldeore MJ, Riedel AA, Zarotsky V et al. Chronic kidney disease in gout in a managed care setting. BMC Nephrol 2011;12:36.

A randomised controlled trial of the efficacy and safety of allopurinol dose escalation to achieve target serum urate in people with gout. L Stamp, P Chapman, M Barclay, Ann Rheum Dis. 76Stamp L, Chapman P, Barclay M et al. A randomised controlled trial of the efficacy and safety of allopurinol dose escalation to achieve target serum urate in people with gout. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:1522-8.

Allopurinol dose escalation to achieve serum urate below 6 mg/dL: an open label extension study. L Stamp, P Chapman, M Barclay, Ann Rheum Dis. 76Stamp L, Chapman P, Barclay M et al. Allopurinol dose escalation to achieve serum urate below 6 mg/dL: an open label extension study. Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76: 2065-70.

Therapeutic value of probenecid. L Pascale, A Dubin, W Hoffman, J Am Med Assoc. 149Pascale L, Dubin A, Hoffman W. Therapeutic value of probenecid. J Am Med Assoc 1952;149:1188-94.

Studies on the effect of probenecid (benemid) in gout. R Mason, Ann Rheum Dis. 13Mason R. Studies on the effect of probenecid (benemid) in gout. Ann Rheum Dis 1954;13:120-30.

Gout: six-year follow-up on probenecid therapy. E Bartels, G Matossian, Arthritis Rheum. 2Bartels E, Matossian G. Gout: six-year follow-up on pro- benecid therapy. Arthritis Rheum 1959;2:193-202.

4-Hydroxypytazolo (3,4-d) pyrimidine (HPP) in the treatment of gout: preliminary observations. A P Hall, V P Holloway, J T Scott, Ann Rheum Dis. 23Hall AP, Holloway VP, Scott JT. 4-Hydroxypytazolo (3,4- d) pyrimidine (HPP) in the treatment of gout: preliminary observations. Ann Rheum Dis 1964;23:439-46.

Probenecid, nephrotic syndrome, and renal failure. J Scott, P O&apos;brien, Ann Rheum Dis. 27Scott J, O'Brien P. Probenecid, nephrotic syndrome, and renal failure. Ann Rheum Dis 1968;27:249-52.

Association of hyperuricaemia and gout with hyperparathyroidism. J Scott, A Dixon, E Bywaters, Br Med J. 1Scott J, Dixon A, Bywaters E. Association of hyperuricaemia and gout with hyperparathyroidism. Br Med J 1964;1:1070-3.

Effects of febuxostat versus allopurinol and placebo in reducing serum urate in subjects with hyperuricaemia and gout: a 28-week, phase III, randomized, doubleblind, parallel-group trial. H Schumacher, M Becker, R Wortmann, Arthritis Care Res. 59Schumacher H, Becker M, Wortmann R et al. Effects of febuxostat versus allopurinol and placebo in reducing serum urate in subjects with hyperuricaemia and gout: a 28-week, phase III, randomized, double- blind, parallel-group trial. Arthritis Care Res 2008;59: 1540-8.

The uratelowering efficacy and safety of febuxostat in the treatment of the hyperuricaemia of gout: the CONFIRMS trial. M Becker, H R Schumacher, L Espinoza, Arthritis Res Ther. 1263Becker M, Schumacher HR, Espinoza L et al. The urate- lowering efficacy and safety of febuxostat in the treat- ment of the hyperuricaemia of gout: the CONFIRMS trial. Arthritis Res Ther 2010;12:R63.

Up-titration of allopurinol in patients with gout. C G Jennings, I S Mackenzie, R Flynn, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 44Jennings CG, Mackenzie IS, Flynn R et al. Up-titration of allopurinol in patients with gout. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2014;44:25-30.

The effect of kidney function on the urate lowering effect and safety of increasing allopurinol above doses based on creatinine clearance: a post hoc analysis of a randomized controlled trial. L K Stamp, P T Chapman, M Barclay, Arthritis Res Ther. 19283Stamp LK, Chapman PT, Barclay M et al. The effect of kidney function on the urate lowering effect and safety of increasing allopurinol above doses based on creatinine clearance: a post hoc analysis of a randomized controlled trial. Arthritis Res Ther 2017;19:283.

Cardiovascular safety of febuxostat or allopurinol in patients with gout. W White, K Saag, M Becker, N Engl J Med. 378White W, Saag K, Becker M et al. Cardiovascular safety of febuxostat or allopurinol in patients with gout. N Engl J Med 2018;378:1200-10.

Women with gout: efficacy and safety of uratelowering with febuxostat and allopurinol. S Chohan, M Becker, P Macdonald, S Chefo, R Jackson, Arthritis Car Res. 64Chohan S, Becker M, MacDonald P, Chefo S, Jackson R. Women with gout: efficacy and safety of urate- lowering with febuxostat and allopurinol. Arthritis Car Res 2012;64:256-61.

An open-label, 6-month study of allopurinol safety in gout: The LASSO study. M Becker, D Fitz-Patrick, H Choi, Semin Arthritis Rheum. 45Becker M, Fitz-Patrick D, Choi H et al. An open-label, 6- month study of allopurinol safety in gout: The LASSO study. Semin Arthritis Rheum 2015;45: 174-83.

Allopurinol in treatment of patients with gout and chronic renal failure. E A Bowie, H A Simmonds, J D North, N Z Med J. 66Bowie EA, Simmonds HA, North JD. Allopurinol in treatment of patients with gout and chronic renal failure. N Z Med J 1967;66:606-11.

The pharmacokinetics of oxypurinol in patients treated with hemodialysis and allopurinol. M Doogue, D Wright, N Cross, Arthritis Rheum. 68Doogue M, Wright D, Cross N et al. The pharmacokinetics of oxypurinol in patients treated with hemodialysis and allopurinol. Arthritis Rheum 2016;68: 4183-4.

Achieving serum urate goal: a comparative effectiveness study between allopurinol and febuxostat. H Hatoum, D Khanna, S J Lin, Postgrad Med. 126Hatoum H, Khanna D, Lin SJ et al. Achieving serum urate goal: a comparative effectiveness study between allopurinol and febuxostat. Postgrad Med 2014;126: 65-75.

Understanding and improving the use of allopurinol in a teaching hospital. R C Hmar, D R Kannangara, S N Ramasamy, Intern Med J. 45Hmar RC, Kannangara DR, Ramasamy SN et al. Understanding and improving the use of allopurinol in a teaching hospital. Intern Med J 2015;45:383-90.

Safety and efficacy of febuxostat treatment in subjects with gout and severe allopurinol adverse reactions. S Chohan, M Becker, J Rheumatol. 38Chohan S, Becker M. Safety and efficacy of febuxostat treatment in subjects with gout and severe allopurinol adverse reactions. J Rheumatol 2011;38:1957-9.

Febuxostat may be usefully utilized for allopurinolrefractory hyperuricemia in gout treatment of dialysis patients or those in stage 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD). C N Son, H J Jeong, J M Kim, H S Kim, S H Kim, Ann Rheum Dis. 74538Son CN, Jeong HJ, Kim JM, Kim HS, Kim SH. Febuxostat may be usefully utilized for allopurinol- refractory hyperuricemia in gout treatment of dialysis patients or those in stage 4 chronic kidney disease (CKD). Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:538.

Febuxostat appears effective and safe in gout patients with severe chronic kidney disease. N Quilis, S Gil, André , M Vela, P Pascual, E , Ann Rheum Dis. 74Quilis N, Gil S, André s M, Vela P, Pascual E. Febuxostat appears effective and safe in gout patients with severe chronic kidney disease . Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:542-3.

Febuxostat in hyperuricemic patients with advanced CKD. D Lim, J Oh, S Ahn, Am J Kidney Dis. 68Lim D, Oh J, Ahn S et al. Febuxostat in hyperuricemic patients with advanced CKD. Am J Kidney Dis 2016;68: 819-21.

Febuxostat and increased dialysis as a treatment for severe tophaceous gout in a hemodialysis patient. L A Frassetto, S Gibson, 10.1155/2016/9106935Case Rep Nephrol. Frassetto LA, Gibson S. Febuxostat and increased dialysis as a treatment for severe tophaceous gout in a hemodialysis patient. Case Rep Nephrol 2016;2016: doi: 10.1155/2016/9106935.

Efficacy and safety of febuxostat in 73 gouty patients with stage 4/5 chronic kidney disease: a retrospective study of 10 centers. P A Juge, M E Truchetet, E Pillebout, Joint Bone Spine. 84Juge PA, Truchetet ME, Pillebout E et al. Efficacy and safety of febuxostat in 73 gouty patients with stage 4/5 chronic kidney disease: a retrospective study of 10 centers. Joint Bone Spine 2017;84:595-8.

Efficacy and safety of febuxostat extended release and immediate release in patients with gout and moderate renal impairment: phase II placebo-controlled study. L Gunawardhana, M Becker, A Whelton, Arthritis Res Ther. 2099Gunawardhana L, Becker M, Whelton A et al. Efficacy and safety of febuxostat extended release and immediate release in patients with gout and moderate renal impairment: phase II placebo-controlled study. Arthritis Res Ther 2018;20:99.

Uricosuric effects of probenecid and zoxazolamine in gout. A comparative study. J Rivera, Arch Intern Med. 108Rivera J. Uricosuric effects of probenecid and zoxazolamine in gout. A comparative study. Arch Intern Med 1961;108:512-8.

Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interaction between allopurinol and probenecid in patients with gout. S L Stocker, G G Graham, A J Mclachlan, K M Williams, R O Day, J Rheumatol. 38Stocker SL, Graham GG, McLachlan AJ, Williams KM, Day RO. Pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic interaction between allopurinol and probenecid in patients with gout. J Rheumatol 2011;38:904-10.

Efficacy and tolerability of probenecid as urate-lowering therapy in gout; clinical experience in high-prevalence population. K Pui, P Gow, N Dalbeth, J Rheumatol. 40Pui K, Gow P, Dalbeth N. Efficacy and tolerability of probenecid as urate-lowering therapy in gout; clinical ex- perience in high-prevalence population. J Rheumatol 2013;40:872-6.

Treatment of chronic gout in patients with renal function Hamish Farquhar et al. impairment: an open, randomised, actively controlled study. F Perez-Ruiz, M Calaabozo, J Fernardez-Lopez, J Clin Rheumatol. 5Perez-Ruiz F, Calaabozo M, Fernardez-Lopez J et al. Treatment of chronic gout in patients with renal function Hamish Farquhar et al. impairment: an open, randomised, actively controlled study. J Clin Rheumatol 1999;5:49-55.

Benzbromarone therapy in management of refractory gout. S Kumar, J Ng, P Gow, NZ Med J. 118Kumar S, Ng J, Gow P. Benzbromarone therapy in management of refractory gout. NZ Med J 2005;118: 37-42.

Efficacy of benzbromarone in hyperuricemic patients associated with chronic kidney disease. S Fujimori, K Ooyama, H Ooyama, H Moromizato, Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 30Fujimori S, Ooyama K, Ooyama H, Moromizato H. Efficacy of benzbromarone in hyperuricemic patients associated with chronic kidney disease. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 2011;30:1035-8.

Efficacy of combined treatment with allopurinol and benzbromarone in gout patients with chronic renal impairment. J Oh, S Choi, Koo B , Arthritis Rheum. 63401SupplOh J, Choi S, Koo B et al. Efficacy of combined treatment with allopurinol and benzbromarone in gout patients with chronic renal impairment. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63(Suppl):S401.

The safety and efficacy of benzbromarone in gout in Aotearoa New Zealand. L Stamp, J Haslett, C Frampton, Int Med J. 46Stamp L, Haslett J, Frampton C et al. The safety and efficacy of benzbromarone in gout in Aotearoa New Zealand. Int Med J 2016;46:1075-80.

Pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of lesinurad, a novel URAT1 inhibitor, in individuals with mild to moderate renal impairment. D Hagerty, B Kerr, Z Shen, Arthritis Rheum. 63402SupplHagerty D, Kerr B, Shen Z et al. Pharmacokinetics, efficacy and safety of lesinurad, a novel URAT1 inhibitor, in individuals with mild to moderate renal impairment. Arthritis Rheum 2011;63(Suppl):S402.

Lesinurad, a novel selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with febuxostat, in patients with tophaceous gout: the crystal phase III clinical trial. N Dalbeth, G Jones, R Terkeltaub, Ann Rheum Dis. 74778Dalbeth N, Jones G, Terkeltaub R et al. Lesinurad, a novel selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with febuxostat, in patients with tophaceous gout: the crystal phase III clinical trial. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:778.

Lesinurad, a selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with allopurinol: Results from a phase iii study in gout patients having an inadequate response to standard of care (CLEAR 1). K Saag, D Fitz-Patrick, J Kopicko, Ann Rheum Dis. 74540Saag K, Fitz-Patrick D, Kopicko J et al. Lesinurad, a selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with allopurinol: Results from a phase iii study in gout patients having an inadequate response to standard of care (CLEAR 1). Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:540.

Lesinurad combined with allopurinol: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in gout subjects with inadequate response to standard of care allopurinol (a USbased study). K Saag, D Fitz-Patrick, J Kopicko, Arthritis Rheum. 69Saag K, Fitz-Patrick D, Kopicko J et al. Lesinurad combined with allopurinol: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study in gout subjects with inade- quate response to standard of care allopurinol (a US- based study). Arthritis Rheum 2017;69:203-12.

Lesinurad in combination with allopurinol: a randomised, doubleblind, placebo-controlled study in patients with gout with inadequate response to standard of care (the multinational CLEAR 2 study). T Bardin, R Keenan, P Khanna, Ann Rheum Dis. 76Bardin T, Keenan R, Khanna P et al. Lesinurad in combination with allopurinol: a randomised, double- blind, placebo-controlled study in patients with gout with inadequate response to standard of care (the multina- tional CLEAR 2 study). Ann Rheum Dis 2017;76:811-20.

Effect of pegloticase on renal function in patients with chronic kidney disease: a post hoc subgroup analysis of 2 randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 clinical trials. R Yood, F Ottery, W Irish, M Wolfson, BMC Res Notes. 754Yood R, Ottery F, Irish W, Wolfson M. Effect of pegloticase on renal function in patients with chronic kidney disease: a post hoc subgroup analysis of 2 randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 clinical trials. BMC Res Notes 2014;7:54.

Febuxostat compared with allopurinol in patients with hyperuricaemia and gout. M Becker, H R Schumacher, R Wortmann, N Engl J Med. 353Becker M, Schumacher HR, Wortmann R et al. Febuxostat compared with allopurinol in patients with hyperuricaemia and gout. N Engl J Med 2005;353: 2450-61.

Allopurinol hypersensitivity: investigating the cause and minimizing the risk. L Stamp, R Day, J Yun, Nat Rev Rheum. 12Stamp L, Day R, Yun J. Allopurinol hypersensitivity: investigating the cause and minimizing the risk. Nat Rev Rheum 2016;12:235-42.

Allopurinol hypersensitivity: a systematic review of all published cases. S Ramasamy, C Korb-Wells, D Kannangara, Drug Saf. 36Ramasamy S, Korb-Wells C, Kannangara D et al. Allopurinol hypersensitivity: a systematic review of all published cases, 1950-2012. Drug Saf 2013;36:953-80.

Severe allopurinol hypersensitivity. J Young, R Boswell, A Nies, Arch Int Med. 134Young J, Boswell R, Nies A. Severe allopurinol hypersensitivity. Arch Int Med 1974;134:553-8.

Severe allopurinol toxicity. Description and guidelines for prevention in patients with renal insufficiency. K Hande, R Noone, W Stone, Am J Med. 76Hande K, Noone R, Stone W. Severe allopurinol toxicity. Description and guidelines for prevention in patients with renal insufficiency. Am J Med 1984;76:47-56.

Starting dose is a risk factor for allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome. A proposed safe starting dose of allopurinol. L Stamp, W Taylor, P Jones, Arthritis Rheum. 64Stamp L, Taylor W, Jones P et al. Starting dose is a risk factor for allopurinol hypersensitivity syndrome. A proposed safe starting dose of allopurinol. Arthritis Rheum 2012;64:2529-36.

Severe cutaneous reactions requiring hospitalization in allopurinol initiators: a population-based cohort study. S Kim, C Newcomb, D Margolis, J Roy, S Hennessy, Arthritis Care Res. 65Kim S, Newcomb C, Margolis D, Roy J, Hennessy S. Severe cutaneous reactions requiring hospitalization in allopurinol initiators: a population-based cohort study. Arthritis Care Res 2013;65:578-84.

Allopurinol use and risk of fatal hypersensitivity reactions; a nationwide population-based study in Taiwan. C-Y Yang, C-H Chen, S-T Deng, JAMA Int Med. 175Yang C-Y, Chen C-H, Deng S-T et al. Allopurinol use and risk of fatal hypersensitivity reactions; a nationwide population-based study in Taiwan. JAMA Int Med 2015; 175:1550-7.

Insights into the poor prognosis of allopurinol-induced severe cutaneous adverse reactions: the impact of renal insufficiency, high plasma levels of oxypurinol and granulysin. W-H Chung, Chang W-C Stocker, S , Ann Rheum Dis. 74Chung W-H, Chang W-C, Stocker S et al. Insights into the poor prognosis of allopurinol-induced severe cutane- ous adverse reactions: the impact of renal insufficiency, high plasma levels of oxypurinol and granulysin. Ann Rheum Dis 2015;74:2157-64.

Impact of the HLA-B58:01 allele and renal impairment on allopurinol-induced cutaneous adverse reactions. C Ng, Y Yeh, C Wang, J Invest Dermatol. 136Ng C, Yeh Y, Wang C et al. Impact of the HLA-B58:01 allele and renal impairment on allopurinol-induced cuta- neous adverse reactions. J Invest Dermatol 2016;136: 1373-81.

Racial/ethnic variation and risk factors for allopurinol-associated severe cutaneous adverse reactions: a cohort study. S F Keller, N Lu, K G Blumenthal, Ann Rheum Dis. 77Keller SF, Lu N, Blumenthal KG et al. Racial/ethnic variation and risk factors for allopurinol-associated se- vere cutaneous adverse reactions: a cohort study. Ann Rheum Dis 2018;77:1187-94.

Examining the use of allopurinol: perspectives from recent drug injury relief applications. C H Huang, M P Chu, W W Chen, J Formos Med Assoc. 118Huang CH, Chu MP, Chen WW. Examining the use of allopurinol: perspectives from recent drug injury relief applications. J Formos Med Assoc 2019;118:371-7.

Treating hyperuricemia of gout: safety and efficacy of febuxostat and allopurinol in older versus younger subjects. M Becker, P Macdonald, B Hunt, L Gunawardhana, Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 30Becker M, MacDonald P, Hunt B, Gunawardhana L. Treating hyperuricemia of gout: safety and efficacy of febuxostat and allopurinol in older versus younger subjects. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 2011; 30:1011-7.

African American patients with gout: efficacy and safety of febuxostat vs allopurinol. A F Wells, P A Macdonald, S Chefo, R L Jackson, BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 1315Wells AF, MacDonald PA, Chefo S, Jackson RL. African American patients with gout: efficacy and safety of febuxostat vs allopurinol. BMC Musculoskelet Disord 2012;13:15.

The efficacy and safety of febuxostat for urate lowering in gout patients !65 years of age. R L Jackson, B Hunt, P A Macdonald, BMC Geriatrics. 1211Jackson RL, Hunt B, MacDonald PA. The efficacy and safety of febuxostat for urate lowering in gout patients !65 years of age. BMC Geriatrics 2012;12:11.

Diabetes and gout: efficacy and safety of febuxostat and allopurinol. M Becker, P A Macdonald, B Hunt, R Jackson, Diabetes Obes Metab. 15Becker M, MacDonald PA, Hunt B, Jackson R. Diabetes and gout: efficacy and safety of febuxostat and allopurinol. Diabetes Obes Metab 2013;15:1049-55.

Effect of prophylaxis on gout flares after the initiation of uratelowering therapy: analysis of data from three phase III trials. R Wortmann, P Macdonald, B Hunt, R Jackson, Clin Ther. 32Wortmann R, MacDonald P, Hunt B, Jackson R. Effect of prophylaxis on gout flares after the initiation of urate- lowering therapy: analysis of data from three phase III tri- als. Clin Ther 2010;32:2386-97.

Lesinurad, a selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with febuxostat in patients with tophaceous gout. N Dalbeth, G Jones, R Terkeltaub, Arthritis Rheum. 69Dalbeth N, Jones G, Terkeltaub R et al. Lesinurad, a selective uric acid reabsorption inhibitor, in combination with febuxostat in patients with tophaceous gout. Arthritis Rheum 2017;69:1903-13.

American College of Rheumatology guideline for the management of gout. J Fitzgerald, N Dalbeth, T Mikuls, Arthritis Care Res. 72FitzGerald J, Dalbeth N, Mikuls T et al. 2020 American College of Rheumatology guideline for the management of gout. Arthritis Care Res 2020;72:744-60.

Urate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment. Urate-lowering therapy in kidney impairment https://academic.oup.com/rheumap