# A Review of J Ohio, on " Anaesthetics in Dental Practice."

CorpusID: 232189919
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cfa734fda52dd747649f346b60ee759b4f32bdc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0cfa734fda52dd747649f346b60ee759b4f32bdc)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review of J Ohio, on " Anaesthetics in Dental Practice."


M.DC Reeve 
PITTSBURGS J Hayes 
P A 
A Review of J Ohio, on " Anaesthetics in Dental Practice."



edge and experience as well as sound advice to leave anaestheticsalone, and turn the use of them over to the M. D's.

But as we find even in the present age of progress, too many in both the dental and medical professions and especially in the latter, who are quite thoroughly educated without being learned, or possessing very little learning or knowledge, it is important that we discriminate in the investigation of science between the mere opinions, or the dogmas of those who asswne to be our educators and guardians of the truths pertaining to the science. Some men possess a jealousy of the knowledge of others and of other professions of a kindred nature without being conscious of the fact. I will not say that this seems to be the case with Dr. Reeve as I might be liable to the charge of doing him injustice, but will allow his own language in his premises to represent him -" As I am decidedly opposed to the administration of chloroform and ether, by dentists, I will commence by disclaiming any dispo sition to consider the paper or the subject in any other spirit than that of science." The author is here referring to an article that appears in the September number of the Dental Register, from the pen of J. E. Harris, M D., D.D.S., but as he dwells in his remarks very little upon the article, we shall only deem it our duty to treat of the thoughts that he advances in his article under the influence of the genial rays of the science to which he is so devoted.

As the doctor refuses to " consider the subject in any other spirit than that of science " it may not be amiss to remind our learned friend that " science embraces those branches of knowl edge which give a positive statement of truths as found in the nature of things," and that when we investigate science, we are after truths and not mere opinions or dogmas. Now, I propose to show that this educator of the dental pro fession and benefactor of the public, like many other M.D's who assume to know and to have superior knowledge, is somewhat faulty in the first principles of the science, to the defence of which he has devoted the article in question. In so doing, I shall not call in question his success as a surgeon.

In the first place, the M.D. does not appear to have a clear conception or knowledge of what constitutes anaesthesia, and con sequently, is unable to distinguish between an anaesthetic and an asphyxiating agent and hence (I submit), is incompetent either to select or administer an anaesthetic. For if a certain or definite condition be necessary for a safe and painless surgical operation, it is very important that the person who undertakes to put the patient in that condition, should know definitely what that condi tion is, as well as to know in what respect it differs from other conditions to which it bears some resemblance, but which is known to be injurious and dangerous. It is, and must be admitted that this very desirable condition is the one in which the forces and functions of life, are in continu ance under modification. This modification may be induced by suitable na rcotics or by free oxygen or by both whereby an absence of sensation is attained. The force of life or that out of which vital force, is generated, is free oxygen. This is found abund antly in the atmosphere, and is in fact the only element that will support combustion or sustain either vegetable or animal life. Therefore, it is the all important element in your anaesthetic, and without which you cannot have an anaesthetic, nor can you produce anaesthesia. Any agency that does not contain/ree oxygen when administered, can only produce asphyxia, and if continued death. It does not matter what your agency is, if it does not have sufficient/ree oxygen to sustain life it can not produce anaesthesia, but will inevitably produce asphyxia, and if continuously administered, death. And yet Dr. Reeve calls nitrous oxide gas an anaesthetic, and commends it to the use of the dental profession ; when he should know that it has not a particle of free oxygen in it and that it can only produce asphxia which always does such violence to the laws of nature no matter whether it be produced under water, in the mines, or by giving exclusively nitrous oxide gas, olyphiant gas, carbonic acid gas, nitrogen gas, or chloroform, or ether, or any thing else that does not contain sufficient free oxygen to sustain life, that great injury to the nervous and phyiscal constitution must inevitably be the result. Therefore, as the eminent Dr. Richardson said in one of his lectures " the use of nitrous oxide gas should be prohibited by law." While insensibility is an attribute of asphyxia as well as of anaesthesia, yet they are radically different and diametrically oppo site in their tendencies and results. The former may be properly designated as " the first step in at death's door," while the latter is the happy state of insensibility with the continuance of the forces and functions of life under modification. If chloroform, ether, nitrous oxide gas or any thing else that does not contain free oxygen be given without admitting the air by which free oxygen is supplied, nothing but asphyxia and death can be the result. Hence, he who can not recognize the radical difference between the conditions known properly as anaesthesia, syncope, and paral ysis, should not be permitted to administer an anaesthetic, no matter whether he be an M.D., or a D.D.S.

But why is Dr. Reeve so ".decidedly opposed to the admin istration of such anaesthetics as chloroform and ether by dentists?" Is it because they have less acquaintance with the so-called anaes thetics or know less of the science of anaesthesia than physicians ? To which profession is the credit due for the discovery and intro duction of the most of the pain obtunding agencies that are used to-day? Dr. H. Wells, a well-known dentist, who discovered that insensibility to pain could be produced by the use of nitrous oxide gas, was the first to give to the notion its practical embodi ment by the extraction of a tooth without pain. Dr. Morton, a former pupil of Dr. Wells, who discovered that aerated ether could produce auaeesthesia, was the first to introduce its use as a pain obtunding agency in the painless extraction of teeth. For tooth-drawing chloric ether was first employed in this country by Dr. Jacob Bell, and Dr. Sansom, an English writer says: (page 259 "Sansom on Chloroform.") "Since the introduction of chloroform that agent has been employed almost exclusively in this country as an anaesthetic in dental operations." But when these agencies were first introduced a terrible remonstrance was presented by mauy of the M. D's at the use of these dangerous elements and then as now they were the accusers of the dental profession for the using of agencies of which they know nothing.

As Dr. J. E. Harris, in the paper on which Dr. Reeve bases some of his remarks, properly and correctly, intimates that the main reason why the general impression is extant that " it is more dangerous to administer anaesthetics for dental operations than for general surgery," and that more deaths have occurred in the dental chair than on the gynaecological chair or table, " is the great difference in the sequel to a death under the hands of a general surgeon and a death under the hands of a dentist or oral surgeon." If a physician loses a patient from the use of the socalled anaesthetics, there is first usually a better opportunity to cover up or conceal the real cause of the death, and no doubt thousands of deaths, that have been caused by the improper prep aration and administration of anaesthetics and were in reality deaths from mal-practice, have never been reported. The cause of death having been assigned to the nature of the severe opera tion, or to the peculiar diseased condition of the patient. If the death occurs during the administration of the anaesthetic and previous to commencing the surgical operation, there is usually an effort to find a diseased condition of the heart, the lungs, or the brain, and of course that is not difficult to find, and the phys ician is relieved of a suit at court for mal-practice, and the odium that might otherwise rest upon him in his community. He has several influential friends in his own profession and usually of his own school (physicians are not generally jealous of each other as dentists are of their brethren,) who sympathize with him and are anxious to come to his rescue. He suggests to them that an autopsy be held with the consent of the friends of the deceased and that they should conduct the same, and that they can either find clots of blood in the heart and assign that as an evidence of valvular disease of that organ, or find the lungs diseased or a con gested condition of the brain, the arteries contracted and evidence of embolism, and announces the one or the other of these as the cause of the death. Yet, who does not know that even a dead ox will have clots of blood in the heart, and that even alcohol, much more so ether or chloroform, will produce a congested con dition of the brain, contract the arteries and cause evidence of embolism.

But if a death occurs in a dental chair during the administra tion of an anaesthetic and operation, it is difficult to create the impression that the nature of the operation was such that the patient might have died any hour, that the disease was of such a severe nature that the patient died from the effects of the surgery. Then again-it is to be regretted-his brother dentists don't feel the necessity of coming to his rescue. In fact, many of them would rather see him suffer, as that might slightly increase their practice and yearly income. And the physicians too often say, he had no business to give the anaesthetic. He should have called in a physician. No autopsy is held, and the dentist, no matter how much better qualified he may be to administer an anaesthetic than the physician, is left alone to bear the burden of the unfortu nate occurrence. No man, either in the dental or medical pro fession, who has been an observer of these incidents but that knows that I am relating the facts. The curse of this wide spread impression not only lays at the door of the medical pro fession, but also with the dental profession, and the time has come when this fatal error must be corrected and the odium wiped from the garments of the dental pro fession. In order to verify these statements I may be pardoned for an allusion to personal observations, experience and knowledge of both the medical and dental professions as to their qualifica tions respectively to the successful use of anaesthetics, and the socalled anaesthetics. During the past two years, I have had the pleasure of conferring with many physicians, and dentists much more frequently than physicians, upon the science of anaesthesia and anaesthetics which has afforded me an opportunity of acquiring a knowledge of the attainments, experience and qualifications of men in both the professions as pertaining to the science and use of anaesthetics. While I have found many in both professions who have extensively read and studied the science, and have had a great deal of experience in the use of pain obtunding agents ; yet, I have ascertained that there is no other science pertaining to the healing art, that is so little understood as the science of anaesthesia. Though there are only about 20,000 dentists in the United States to 100,000 physicians, yet, the dentists have occa sion to administer anaesthetics, and as a consequence the dentists are pressed into the service and become more deeply interested.

They are forced to read up and study the science of anaesthesia and the effects of the agencies employed. While very many of the physicians administer on an average scarcely once a month or once a year, and some not at all. True, many of the surgeons in the hospitals and colleges and a few outside, have quite an ex tensive experience in the use of anaesthetics; but many of these even have given very little attention to cause and effect or the fundamental principles of the science. Others by the careful study of cause and effect, and skill in diagnosing conditions and causes of conditions, have become quite successful in the produc tion of anaesthesia, but these are exceptions to the general run of the medical practitioners. On the other hand, it is quite different with men in the dental profession. You can scarcely find a dentist but that has occasion to use anaesthetics. There is a very great demand and he must supply the demand or lose practice. Therefore, he eagerly casts about for the best, safest and most con venient agent to produce insensibility to pain. This accounts, in part at least, for the dentists having discovered and brought into use nearly all the pain obtunding agencies that are in use at the present time. Yet, in the face of these facts, Dr. Reeve says: "Certainly anaesthetics are administered for general surgical purposes hundreds of times for once in dental practice, and if so then the relative number of deaths under tooth-drawing is enormously large." Is there another physician in all this enlight ened land that could be induced to make a similar declaration ? To put the most charitable construction upon this wild dogmatic assertion, it must be presumed that the doctor's acquaintance with the relative duties of both the professions must be very limited indeed.

Again, in proof that " anaesthetics are more dangerous in dental practice than in general surgery," he refers to the statistic reports of the relative causes of deaths as pertains to the nature of the operations from the use of chloroform in anaesthesia, as given by Dr. Sansom and by the Committee of the Royal Medico-Chirurgical Society. But even this the Doctor fails to report accurately. Instead of eight cases of death when teeth were either removed or to be removed out of 107 deaths of all surgical operations, he gives eight cases of death out of one hundred as reported by Dr. Sansom, and instead of twelve cases of death from anaesthesia while teeth were extracted, out of 109 deaths from all surgical operations, he gives twelve cases of death out of 107 as given by the Committee of R. M. S., yet, these reports, instead of substantiating the Doctor's extravagant statement only condemn it. It will be borne in mind that the reports only give a certain number of administrations, out of which so many deaths occurred. It is certainly a very low estimate to place the half of those administrations for the painless extraction of teeth which should give the half of the mortality in either report, but instead of half the mortality, we have about one-tenth laid at the door of the dental profession and nine-tenths at the door of the medical profession. Therefore, from these or any other reports, it is not true that more deaths have occurred in the dental chair than at the hands of the general surgeons. But it is true, that when a death does occur in the dental chair, instead of a post-mortum ex amination and an effort to cover up the real cause of the death, as is the case usually when the death occurs at the hands of the general surgeon ; the coroner is called in to investigate the cause and testimony of so-called experts, usually from the medical pro fession, is heard from the witness stand, who are there, not in defense of the dentist, as they from their standpoint usually have some misgivings and distrust toward the dentist as he might have called them to do this work; but they are there, summoned by the coroner to assist him in pointing out the real cause of the death, and they seldom fail to put it where it belongs. Then the report is published in all the local and distant secular papers, and the medical and dental journals pick it up from these with their constructions and comments. But how different when a death occurs in general surgery. The autopsy, the medical society, the medical and dental journals, all favor the unfortunate physician. Usually it is quieted and does not reach the journals, frequently does not even get into the local medical society. Thus thousands of deaths, no doubt, caused from the miserable manner of prepar ing and administering anaesthetics, have never been reported and do not appear in the mortality reports from the use of anaes thetics. Now, I submit, whether this is justice alike to both pro fessions and whether it is not high time that a new leaf be turned, and that the dental profession shall demand the same protection from society and the respective professions as is accorded to the medical profession. The dentist of to-day is not a gunsmith, a blacksmith, or a barber, but has the honor of belonging to the most progressive profession oi the age.. His education and experi ence in special surgery and knowledge of the science of anaesthesia and experience in the use of anaesthetics entitle him to equal rank with the M. D,, equal honor and protection from society and the laws of our country. In fact many physicians recognize the worth of the dentist's qualifications in the administration of anaesthetics, and in critical cases prefer the assistance of their dentist in the use of anaesthetics to that of the medical practitioner, notwithstanding the earnest protests of our noted surgeon of Dayton. In still further proof of these facts, may I be permitted to state that during the past ten years in the line of my duties I have admin istered anaesthetic chiefly for the extraction of teeth to nearly 9000 persons, without causing a death, or producing paralysis of the functions of life, or asphyxia, and with but a very few cases of nausea. Moreover, from the many who are now using the best process, apparatus, etc., (mostly dentists) it would be a low esti mate to put the number of administrations by dentists at 60,000, without having a single death during the administration or oper ation. I refer to the number of administrations without causing a death, not only to verify these statements but to disprove another absurd statement which, however, the Doctor is not alone in making, namely, that in consequence of " the particular nerve involved in the dental operation, the acute pain caused by injuries to it and the powerful effect of sudden impressions upon its branches, upon the great and vital processes of respiration and circulation, by sudden impressions upon this nerve more than any other is that inhibition of the heart's action brought about, which is sudden death." And that as " anaesthesia for tooth-drawing is likely to be incomplete and will pretty certainly be so, if the operator is also the administrator," and that a " state of partial anaesthesia is therefore one of special danger, and especially so if the pain produced is at once sudden and sharp," and that "such reflex actions are increased under chloroform."

Now, I admit that the anaesthesia is not usually as profound, nor should it be, for the removal of teeth as for most other surgical operations, and for this reason : that if the patient loses the power to control the muscles pertaining to the oral cavity, and a tooth ora root should happen to slip from the forceps, which will occur sometimes in the hands of the most skillful, it is liable to enter the oesophagus or larynx and cause trouble. But, if the patient be allowed to control these muscles though he may be unconscious and insensible to pain, he will expel the tooth. But, I deny most emphatically that the reflex actions are increased under partial chloroform narcosis. This is most certainly one of the most misleading fallacies taught. Does chloroform or any other narcotic make sensation more acute? Is it not a funda mental law of anaesthesia that sensation diminishes as narcosis increases? And that the diminution of sensation does not increase vasco-motor activity, but on the contrary has a tendency to retard? The inhibition of the heart's action can only be brought about by the suspension of the circulation of nervovital fluid, or animo-electricity in the inhibitory nerve, as that is the motive power of the heart's action. This suspension can only be produced by concussion and revulsion, the result of which is the cessation of the functions of life. This concussion or sudden arrestation of nerve circulation, may be produced by a sudden action of the intellect as by fright or the sudden breaking of very sad news, or it may be produced by an external agent such as the sudden introduction of an over volume of electricity, or by sudden production of very severe pain, or a sudden introduc tion of an over percentage of a powerful narcotic. But, if sensation diminishes as narcosis increases, there certainly will be less severe and less sudden pain in partial anaesthesia than in case of no anaesthesia. In other words, there must be less liability to concussion or shock in partial narcosis than when chloroform has not been given at all. This is inevitable, and forcibly demon strates the fallacy of the theory advanced by such theorists. Therefore, partial anaesthesia by the use of aerated chloroform, aerated ether, or any other suitable narcotic preparation, does not enhance the dangers to life from the operation, but on the con trary diminishes the dangers. However, if the administrator of the anaesthetic neglects to describe its sensations in the periphery, in the fingers, hands, knees, and body, the patient may mistake these for the approach of death and be so frightened as to pro duce concussion, or sudden arrestation of the circulation of animoelectricity or nervo-vital fluid in the inhibitory nerve and death may be the result. But the result is not due to the partial narcosis but mainly to the neglect of the administrator and more directly to the fright. Yet in complete or profound anaesthesia the patient passes through the very same experience and therefore partial anaesthesia can not be more dangerous from that cause, than profound anaesthesia, and there must be less danger from the operation with partial narcosis than without any narcosis.

Again, we have only to call attention to Dr. Reeve's own language to show that he does not understand what he is talking about. He says : "Far more important than all, however, is the fact that the induction of ancesthesia for tooth-drawing is likely to be incomplete." Does the Doctor not know that the word anaes thesia represents condition ? Ancesthetics are inducted to produce the condition known as anaesthesia. This is not a lapsus lingua or slip of the pen, but a deliberate statement from an assumed educator of the dental profession. Other statements equally intelligent may receive attention in a future article, as well as the paper to which the Doctor refers in his caution against the use of ether by the dental profession.