# "Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review" Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review

CorpusID: 233689379
 
tags: #Business, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81c5b5b844e86c08dd2afb098197a8726abf18cd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81c5b5b844e86c08dd2afb098197a8726abf18cd)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

"Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review" Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review
2021

Dinara Kalmakova 
Yuriy Bilan 
Aknur Zhidebekkyzy 
Rimma Sagiyeva 
"Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review" Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review

Problems and Perspectives in Management
Dinara Kalmakova (Republic of Kazakhstan; Czech Republic; Republic of Kazakhstan; Republic of Kazakhstan191202110.21511/ppm.19(1).2021.29Received on: 26th of November, 2020 Accepted on: 8th of March, 2021AUTHORS Dinara Kalmakova/rid/O-5481-2017 ARTICLE INFO RELEASED ON Friday, 19 March 2021 RECEIVED ON Thursday, 26 November 2020 ACCEPTED ON Monday, 08 March 2021 LICENSE This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License JOURNAL "Problems and Perspectives in Management" ISSN PRINT 1727-7051 PUBLISHER LLC "Consulting Publishing Company "Business Perspectives" FOUNDER LLC "Consulting Publishing Company "Business Perspectives" NUMBER OF REFERENCES 66 NUMBER OF FIGURES 9 NUMBER OF TABLES 5 340
2021). Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review.AbstractInnovations play an important role in achieving competitiveness and long-term economic growth at all levels of the economic hierarchy. More recently, the role of sustainability-oriented innovation in achieving economic growth has become equally important. However, there is a scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations. The existence of such scientific debate, as well as the absence of citation-based systematic literature reviews, became a prerequisite for conducting a comparative literature review of research on the effective commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The purpose of the study is to conduct a comparative review and analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The analysis was conducted on the basis of a citation-based systematic literature review method. The results show that sustainable innovation research is more focused on the relationship between commercialization and firm performance. In the field of conventional innovations, research trends have shifted from studying the impact of technology transfer office (TTO) size, staffing, compensation practices to how strategic factors affect the efficiency of commercialization. In the area of sustainability-oriented innovation, the issues of the strategic orientation impact cause the most sustained interest, while managerial concerns and the stringency of environmental regulations have been actively explored in the past few years. It was revealed that the commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovations is characterized by so called sustainability-oriented criteria. A distinctive output criterion for commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovation is the improvement of the firm's image. In addition, content analysis identified possible research directions to be investigated.

## INTRODUCTION

From investors' point of view, there is a discussion about the advantages of integrating sustainability criteria in the investment decision-making process, as well as the profitability degree of such integration (Clark et al., 2014). In a research review by Camilleri (2017), some authors failed to prove the existence of a positive relationship between the practice of sustainability-oriented innovation and the economic performance of a firm. Some studies conversely prove the existence of a positive relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and company's efficiency (Bekmezci, 2015;Kneipp et al., 2019; Aguilera-Caracuel & Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013). Thus, the existing scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, as well as the lack of a comparative analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, caused the need for a comparative review and analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of these two kinds of innovations.

Moreover, the relevance of this study is driven by the following important gaps in previous systematic literature reviews : 1) none of the studies focused on commercialization performance indicators and methods for its evaluation; 2) none of the studies conducted a detailed content analysis of the most cited and relevant publications.

This study attempts to fill these gaps.

The purpose of this comparative review is to examine scientific groundwork on the effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovation versus conventional innovation that is not sustainability-oriented. The objectives of the comparative literature review are: 1) to identify and compare trends in the development of research directions on the problems of effective commercialization of innovations; 2) clarify and compare the most relevant research areas that cause the utmost scientific interest in the chosen topic; 3) identify distinctive features inherent in commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations; and 4) define future research directions.


## LITERATURE REVIEW

As part of this study, a citation-based systematic literature review was conducted on the efficiency of commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The literature review was guided by the methodological approach applied in Ahmad et al. (2020).

The citation counts of research papers have been extracted from the Web of Science database. Web of Science is the largest reference and quoted database of peer-reviewed literature (Zhidebekkyzy et al., 2019;Meho & Yang, 2007;Falagas et al., 2008), and a standard tool for much of the world's citation research.

A step-by-step article selection process is as follows: , none of them conducted a citation-based content analysis. In addition, most literature reviews analyze a relatively small number of articles, using 28 to 48 publications as the research object. This paper reviews 128 and 44 studies in the area of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, respectively. For a more detailed analysis of previous literature reviews see Table 1. In this regard, this literature review is aimed at making a certain contribution to the existing theoretical framework in the field of innovative development.

Regarding the efficiency of commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, only one literature review was found (Golicic & Smith, 2013). This study contains a systematic literature review, but does not conduct a citation-based content analysis.


## CONTENT ANALYSIS OF THE MOST CITED PAPERS

This section provides content analysis of the most cited papers in the area of commercialization efficiency of conventional (20 papers) and sustainability-oriented innovations (10 papers). The main purpose here is to identify common and distinctive features of conventional and sustainable innovation research. These features are going to be defined by detecting current research directions, trends in research areas, the methodology applied, systematizing research data and input-output approaches.

For content analysis, the most cited and the most relevant papers were selected. The relevance of the paper was determined by analyzing the abstract. Also, only empirical papers were selected for content analysis. Literature reviews were excluded. A list of articles selected for content analysis can be found in Appendix A. Table 2 provides comparative thematic analysis of conventional and sustainable innovation research. Major attention was paid to the factors affecting the commercialization efficiency of both types of innovations. In comparison with thematic focus of conventional innovation research, papers in the field of sustainability-oriented innovation are more focused on the relationship between commercialization and firm performance.


### Thematic analysis

In addition, trends in the development of research areas were identified. In the field of conventional innovations, the impact of organizational resources and mechanisms on commercialization efficiency is of constant interest. Since 2002, at least one study in the above-mentioned area has been published annually. Research on the measurement process is of increasing scientific interest. There is also a steadily growing interest in how strategic orientation affects the commercialization efficiency. Topics such as the impact of public and venture financial resources, legislative factors and human resources, as well as the impact of open innovations, despite their significance, cause insufficient scientific interest. Trends in the study of influencing factors are shown in Figure 1. Prior to 2008, research on the impact of technology transfer office (TTO) size, staffing, compensation practices on commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations was common. Since 2017, it has become common to study the impact of intermediary structures, university-industry collaboration on the efficiency of commercialization.

In the area of sustainability-oriented innovations, the impact of strategic orientation causes the most stable interest over the entire period of publication activity ( Figure 2). 


## Conventional innovation Sustainability-oriented innovation


## Influencing factors (11 and 5 papers, respectively)

Measurement scheme (process) 7 papers Relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and firm performance 5 papers Commercialization strategy 3 papers


### Overview of the methods used

The choice of the research methodology is an important issue for any researcher. A comparative overview of methods used is presented in Table 3.

There is a concentration of research methods in the field of conventional innovations, in particular, regression analysis and Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) are mainly used. In the field of sustainability-oriented innovations, a combination of various research methods is employed.  •Managerial concern for green issues •Stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels Note: Remaining four papers on conventional innovations apply the following methods: Exploratory factor analysis, Input-Output model, Importance-Perfomance analysis + Confirmatory factor analysis, Approach based on the potential for technology transfer.


### Characteristics of the data used

A comparative review of the data used is presented in Table 4. There is a difference in research objects in two compared themes: in case of conventional innovations, main research objects are the university/technology transfer office, company and country/region. The issues of sustainability-oriented innovations are studied only on the company level. The time periods for data used also differ. The remaining countries studied that are not shown in Table 4 represent a minority and include OECD countries, Germany, Belgium, South Korea, Netherlands, Zambia, Australia. The minority of research objects include interview/survey, project, patent.


### Approaches to inputs and outputs

This section describes approaches to inputs that reflect costs and outputs reflecting performance indicators. When measuring the commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations, macro-, micro-, original, and intermediary approaches are mainly used. The approaches were defined based on the measurement level. In other words, macro-approach (MacroA) means that the assessment is made at the state or regional level, micro-approach (MicroA) implies the company or firm level, original approach (OA) evaluates efficiency at the level of university as the primary source of innovation, and intermediary approach (IA) considers the level of commercialization or technology transfer office as an intermediary structure. Figure 3 reflects the distribution of input and output approaches used in research on conventional innovations.

Regarding the commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, the classification of approaches was based on the study by Golicic and Smith (2013). They identify a number of input approaches, among which the production-oriented approach (POA) is one of the most common in the studies analyzed in the current literature review. Also, such   Figure 4 presents the distribution of input approaches used in research on sustainability-oriented innovation. The most common approach is the production-oriented approach (POA): 30% of the articles applied production indicators as an input parameter. The generalized approach (GA) involves using index indicators as an input, whereas the organizational approach (OA) considers various organizational mechanisms.

With regard to outputs, the classification of approaches described in Golicic and Smith (2013) was also applied. They classified the output parameters depending on whether the performance indicators are market-based (market-based approach, MBA), operational (operational-based approach, OBA) or accounting (accounting-based approach, ABA). Besides, the aggregate approach (AA) was highlighted. AA includes not only economic efficiency, but also quality efficiency, innovation efficiency, environmental and social efficiency. Figure 5 shows the distribution of output approaches. 


### Generalization of the main statements

The most studied topic in the field of conventional and sustainable innovation is the factors affecting the commercialization efficiency of innovations. Also, in the field of sustainable innovation, a lot of attention is paid to studying the relationship between the practice of sustainable innovation and firm efficiency.

Regarding the trends in the development of research areas, the measurement process and the impact of strategic orientation are of increasing scientific interest. The impact of state and venture financial resources, legislative factors, human resources, as well as the impact of open innovation have not been sufficiently studied.

In terms of factors affecting the commercialization efficiency, research trends have shifted from the level of TTO (size, staffing, compensation practices) to a more strategic level -the interaction between universities and industry.

In the field of sustainable innovation, the impact of strategic orientation is of constant interest. The influence of managerial concern for green issues and the stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels are of increasing scientific interest.

Regression analysis and Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) are two most common research methods in the field of conventional innovation. For sustainable innovation research area, there is no preferred research method. Commercialization efficiency of conventional innovation is mainly evaluated by the example of research objects such as university/technology transfer office, company and country/region, while company is the only research object for the issues of sustainability-oriented innovations.

Most of the research in the field of conventional innovations was conducted using a company and a university as an example (40% and 30%, respectively). 30 % of studies in the area of sustainable innovation applied production indicators as an input parameter. As for the output parameter, half of the research on sustainable innovation applied accounting-based indicators.


## DISCUSSION

Answering the research questions stated in the introduction, an attempt was to discuss the main findings.

1) Identify and compare trends in the development of research directions on the problems of effective commercialization of innovations.

In research on the commercialization of conventional and sustainable innovations, there is a shift in trends towards a more active study of the impact of strategic orientation on the commercialization efficiency. Indeed, to achieve effective commercialization, it is necessary to realize the importance of the role of innovation processes at the strategic level. In addition to the factor of strategic orientation, the impact of the managerial concern for green issues, the stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels on the company's performance are of increasing scientific interest. In other words, it is important for companies to assess the impact of both strategic orientation and institutional incentives on the commercialization efficiency of sustainable innovations.

2) Clarify and compare the most relevant research areas that cause the utmost scientific interest in the chosen topic.

The most relevant research area in the field of commercialization of sustainable innovations is the relationship between the practice of sustainable innovation and firm efficiency. The fact that commercialization efficiency of sustainable innovations is studied exclusively at the company level suggests that companies first need to know how the practice of sustainable innovations affects their economic efficiency.

3) Identify distinctive features inherent in commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations.

Commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations is evaluated at the macro-level, micro-level (company level), and university level. Therefore, efficiency is characterized by indicators inherent in each of these levels. Below are the main input and output parameters that character-ize commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations at the macro-, micro-and university levels (Figures 6-8).

When evaluating commercialization efficiency at the company level, along with internal factors, increasing attention is paid to the influence of exter-nal factors, such as open innovation activities and government support.

Unlike conventional innovations, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovations is characterized not only by economic indicators, but also by so called sustainability-oriented      (Figure 9). Distinctive output criteria for sustainability-oriented innovation is the improvement of firm image. Moreover, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovation is influenced by regulatory factors such as the stringency of environmental regulation, environmental governance and normative levels.

Regarding the comparison of the results of the current review with the results of previous stud-ies, Kirchberger and Pohl (2016) found that research trends in the field of factors of effective commercialization have shifted from a strategic orientation to the level of intermediary structures. The current review came to the opposite conclusion. However, there is a limitation in the review of Kirchberger and Pohl (2016): an analysis of studies published up to 2013 was carried out. The current review analyzes articles published up to 2020.


## CONCLUSION

This study contributes to a better understanding of the scientific groundwork of the effective commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovation. Research results show that the most relevant research areas are influencing factors, measurement process and the relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and firm performance. Besides, stable interest is caused by topics such as the impact of organizational resources, strategic orientation on the commercialization efficiency, whereas the impact of state and venture financial resources, legislative factors, human resources and open innovations cause insufficient scientific interest.

Regarding the commercialization efficiency indicators, they vary depending on the level of the economic hierarchy. In addition, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovation is characterized by so called sustainability-oriented criteria, among which the most distinctive output criteria is the improvement of firm image. Commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovations is influenced, among other things, by regulatory factors such as stringency of environmental regulation, environmental governance and normative levels.

The content analysis of the most relevant research areas identified possible areas for future research that need to be explored. It would be interesting to know the impact of factors such as legislation in the field of commercialization and intellectual property protection, industry differences, time-to-market and speed to market on commercialization efficiency of innovations. In addition, research in the field of post-IPO performance of firms holding university licenses, the reasons for the success and failure of commercialization in individual cases, the impact of sustainability-oriented innovation practices at the macro-level is of future interest. 


## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS


Nowadays, innovation plays an increasingly fundamental role in competitiveness at all levels of the economic hierarchy (Kaihua & Mingting, 2014; Secundo et al., 2016; Bayadilova et al., 2020; Kordonska, 2019; Marszałek-Kawa & Siemiątkowski, 2020; Popova et al., 2019). Along with conventional innovations, the importance of sustainability-oriented innovations is also increasing with the growing significance of sustainable development issues (Rajnoha et al., 2019; Atkociuniene & Mikalauskiene, 2019; Krawiec & Noga, 2017). However, R&D expenditures, knowledge and new technologies embodied in innovations can contribute to economic development only if they are effectively commercialized (Siegel et al., 2004; Min et al., 2019; Voropai et al., 2019; Kuchukova et al., 2020). As for sustainability-oriented innovations, there is a scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of such kind of innovations.

## Figure 2 .
2Trends in the development of sustainability-oriented innovation research

## Figure 1 .
1Trends in the development of conventional innovation research

## Figure 3 .
3Distribution of approaches to inputs and outputs on the commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations were identified as: generalized approach (GA); organizational approach (OA); intensity-oriented approach (IOA); institutional approach (IA); managerial approach (MA); and collaborative approach (CA).

## Figure 4 .Figure 5 .
45Distribution Distribution of output approaches used in studies on the commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations

## Figure 6 .
6Commercialization efficiency indicators at the macro level

## Figure 7 .
7Commercialization efficiency indicators at the company level

## Figure 8 .
8Commercialization efficiency indicators at the university level Inputs • Boundary spanning activities • Reward system for faculty involvement • Flexible university policies • Venture capital munificence • Federal and industry funding Outputs • Number of start-up companies formed • Number of initial public offering (IPO) companies to which a university had licensed a technology • The amount of royalties received • University share of patents

## Figure 9 .
9Commercialization efficiency indicators for sustainability-oriented innovation Inputs • Reusability/recyclability • Centrality of environmental innovation to firm strategy Outputs • Less energy consumption and carbon emission intensity • Growth rate of manufacturing industry's low-carbon transformation rate • Market share of low-carbon products • Improvement of firm image criteria

## Table 1 .
1Comparison of keywords, number of articles and type of literature review Source: Compiled by the authors.Authors 
Article selection criteria (keywords used in the search process) 
Number of 
papers 
Type of a literature 
review 
Conventional innovations 

Current study 
Commercialization effect* 
128 
SLR 
Commercialization efficiency 
Siegel & Phan, 2005 
No criteria provided 
39 
TLS 
Bozeman, 2000 
No criteria provided 
NP 
TLS 
Bozeman et al., 2014 
No criteria provided 
48 
TLS 

Wit-de Vries et al., 2019 

'University -business', 'university -industry' "academic engagement" 
and "research partnership" 
35 
SLR 
'collaborat*', 'cooperation*', 'partnership*', 'engage*', 'relation* 
'research' 'alliance*' 
Siegel et al., 2007 
No criteria provided 
28 
TLS 
Kirchberger & Pohl, 2016 
'technology commercialization' or 'technology transfer' 
140 
SLR 

Sustainability-oriented innovations 

Current study 
sustainab* innovation commercialization 
44 
SLR 
sustainab* innovation effect 

Golicic & Smith, 2013 

sustainability, performance, social responsibility, corporate 
responsibility, environmental management, green, sustainable 
practices, lean, reverse logistics, closed-loop supply chain, 
occupational health, occupational safety, efficiency, effectiveness + 
references from prior meta-analyses and reviews 

77 
SLR 

Note: SLR: systematic literature review; TLS: traditional literature survey; and NP: not provided. 


## Table 2 .
2Comparative thematic analysis of conventional and sustainable innovation research Source: Compiled by the authors.

## Table 3 .
3A comparative overview of the methods used Source: Compiled by the authors.Conventional innovation 
Sustainability-oriented innovation 

Method 
Number of 
studies 
Method 
Number of 
studies 

Regression analysis 
5 
Questionnaire survey method + Regression 
analysis 
2 

Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) 
3 
Panel estimation techniques + Sensitivity analysis 
1 
DEA combined with regression analysis 
2 
Heckman two-step selection model 
1 

Structured, in-person interviews 
1 
Matched-pairs analysis + Multiple and moderated 
regression analysis 
1 

Exploratory study based on in-depth interviews + 
regression analysis 
1 
Multinomial endogenous treatment effects model 
1 

Questionnaire + Regression analysis 
1 
Event study methodology + Cross-sectional 
analysis 
1 

Cox proportional hazard duration models+ Logistic 
and Tobit regression 
1 
Factor analysis + DEA-Tobit two-stage method 
1 

Structural equation modeling 
1 
Questionnaire + Structural equation modeling 
1 

Case study 
1 
Questionnaire + Exploratory factor analysis + 
Regression analysis 
1 



## Table 4 .## INTRODUCTION

From investors' point of view, there is a discussion about the advantages of integrating sustainability criteria in the investment decision-making process, as well as the profitability degree of such integration (Clark et al., 2014). In a research review by Camilleri (2017), some authors failed to prove the existence of a positive relationship between the practice of sustainability-oriented innovation and the economic performance of a firm. Some studies conversely prove the existence of a positive relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and company's efficiency (Bekmezci, 2015;Kneipp et al., 2019; Aguilera-Caracuel & Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013). Thus, the existing scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, as well as the lack of a comparative analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, caused the need for a comparative review and analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of these two kinds of innovations.

Moreover, the relevance of this study is driven by the following important gaps in previous systematic literature reviews : 1) none of the studies focused on commercialization performance indicators and methods for its evaluation; 2) none of the studies conducted a detailed content analysis of the most cited and relevant publications.

This study attempts to fill these gaps.

The purpose of this comparative review is to examine scientific groundwork on the effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovation versus conventional innovation that is not sustainability-oriented. The objectives of the comparative literature review are: 1) to identify and compare trends in the development of research directions on the problems of effective commercialization of innovations; 2) clarify and compare the most relevant research areas that cause the utmost scientific interest in the chosen topic; 3) identify distinctive features inherent in commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations; and 4) define future research directions.


## LITERATURE REVIEW

As part of this study, a citation-based systematic literature review was conducted on the efficiency of commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The literature review was guided by the methodological approach applied in Ahmad et al. (2020).

The citation counts of research papers have been extracted from the Web of Science database. Web of Science is the largest reference and quoted database of peer-reviewed literature (Zhidebekkyzy et al., 2019;Meho & Yang, 2007;Falagas et al., 2008), and a standard tool for much of the world's citation research.

A step-by-step article selection process is as follows: , none of them conducted a citation-based content analysis. In addition, most literature reviews analyze a relatively small number of articles, using 28 to 48 publications as the research object. This paper reviews 128 and 44 studies in the area of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, respectively. For a more detailed analysis of previous literature reviews see Table 1. In this regard, this literature review is aimed at making a certain contribution to the existing theoretical framework in the field of innovative development.

Regarding the efficiency of commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, only one literature review was found (Golicic & Smith, 2013). This study contains a systematic literature review, but does not conduct a citation-based content analysis.


## CONTENT ANALYSIS OF THE MOST CITED PAPERS

This section provides content analysis of the most cited papers in the area of commercialization efficiency of conventional (20 papers) and sustainability-oriented innovations (10 papers). The main purpose here is to identify common and distinctive features of conventional and sustainable innovation research. These features are going to be defined by detecting current research directions, trends in research areas, the methodology applied, systematizing research data and input-output approaches.

For content analysis, the most cited and the most relevant papers were selected. The relevance of the paper was determined by analyzing the abstract. Also, only empirical papers were selected for content analysis. Literature reviews were excluded. A list of articles selected for content analysis can be found in Appendix A. Table 2 provides comparative thematic analysis of conventional and sustainable innovation research. Major attention was paid to the factors affecting the commercialization efficiency of both types of innovations. In comparison with thematic focus of conventional innovation research, papers in the field of sustainability-oriented innovation are more focused on the relationship between commercialization and firm performance.


### Thematic analysis

In addition, trends in the development of research areas were identified. In the field of conventional innovations, the impact of organizational resources and mechanisms on commercialization efficiency is of constant interest. Since 2002, at least one study in the above-mentioned area has been published annually. Research on the measurement process is of increasing scientific interest. There is also a steadily growing interest in how strategic orientation affects the commercialization efficiency. Topics such as the impact of public and venture financial resources, legislative factors and human resources, as well as the impact of open innovations, despite their significance, cause insufficient scientific interest. Trends in the study of influencing factors are shown in Figure 1. Prior to 2008, research on the impact of technology transfer office (TTO) size, staffing, compensation practices on commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations was common. Since 2017, it has become common to study the impact of intermediary structures, university-industry collaboration on the efficiency of commercialization.

In the area of sustainability-oriented innovations, the impact of strategic orientation causes the most stable interest over the entire period of publication activity ( Figure 2). 


## Conventional innovation Sustainability-oriented innovation


## Influencing factors (11 and 5 papers, respectively)

Measurement scheme (process) 7 papers Relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and firm performance 5 papers Commercialization strategy 3 papers


### Overview of the methods used

The choice of the research methodology is an important issue for any researcher. A comparative overview of methods used is presented in Table 3.

There is a concentration of research methods in the field of conventional innovations, in particular, regression analysis and Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) are mainly used. In the field of sustainability-oriented innovations, a combination of various research methods is employed.  •Managerial concern for green issues •Stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels Note: Remaining four papers on conventional innovations apply the following methods: Exploratory factor analysis, Input-Output model, Importance-Perfomance analysis + Confirmatory factor analysis, Approach based on the potential for technology transfer.


### Characteristics of the data used

A comparative review of the data used is presented in Table 4. There is a difference in research objects in two compared themes: in case of conventional innovations, main research objects are the university/technology transfer office, company and country/region. The issues of sustainability-oriented innovations are studied only on the company level. The time periods for data used also differ. The remaining countries studied that are not shown in Table 4 represent a minority and include OECD countries, Germany, Belgium, South Korea, Netherlands, Zambia, Australia. The minority of research objects include interview/survey, project, patent.


### Approaches to inputs and outputs

This section describes approaches to inputs that reflect costs and outputs reflecting performance indicators. When measuring the commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations, macro-, micro-, original, and intermediary approaches are mainly used. The approaches were defined based on the measurement level. In other words, macro-approach (MacroA) means that the assessment is made at the state or regional level, micro-approach (MicroA) implies the company or firm level, original approach (OA) evaluates efficiency at the level of university as the primary source of innovation, and intermediary approach (IA) considers the level of commercialization or technology transfer office as an intermediary structure. Figure 3 reflects the distribution of input and output approaches used in research on conventional innovations.

Regarding the commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, the classification of approaches was based on the study by Golicic and Smith (2013). They identify a number of input approaches, among which the production-oriented approach (POA) is one of the most common in the studies analyzed in the current literature review. Also, such   Figure 4 presents the distribution of input approaches used in research on sustainability-oriented innovation. The most common approach is the production-oriented approach (POA): 30% of the articles applied production indicators as an input parameter. The generalized approach (GA) involves using index indicators as an input, whereas the organizational approach (OA) considers various organizational mechanisms.

With regard to outputs, the classification of approaches described in Golicic and Smith (2013) was also applied. They classified the output parameters depending on whether the performance indicators are market-based (market-based approach, MBA), operational (operational-based approach, OBA) or accounting (accounting-based approach, ABA). Besides, the aggregate approach (AA) was highlighted. AA includes not only economic efficiency, but also quality efficiency, innovation efficiency, environmental and social efficiency. Figure 5 shows the distribution of output approaches. 


### Generalization of the main statements

The most studied topic in the field of conventional and sustainable innovation is the factors affecting the commercialization efficiency of innovations. Also, in the field of sustainable innovation, a lot of attention is paid to studying the relationship between the practice of sustainable innovation and firm efficiency.

Regarding the trends in the development of research areas, the measurement process and the impact of strategic orientation are of increasing scientific interest. The impact of state and venture financial resources, legislative factors, human resources, as well as the impact of open innovation have not been sufficiently studied.

In terms of factors affecting the commercialization efficiency, research trends have shifted from the level of TTO (size, staffing, compensation practices) to a more strategic level -the interaction between universities and industry.

In the field of sustainable innovation, the impact of strategic orientation is of constant interest. The influence of managerial concern for green issues and the stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels are of increasing scientific interest.

Regression analysis and Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) are two most common research methods in the field of conventional innovation. For sustainable innovation research area, there is no preferred research method. Commercialization efficiency of conventional innovation is mainly evaluated by the example of research objects such as university/technology transfer office, company and country/region, while company is the only research object for the issues of sustainability-oriented innovations.

Most of the research in the field of conventional innovations was conducted using a company and a university as an example (40% and 30%, respectively). 30 % of studies in the area of sustainable innovation applied production indicators as an input parameter. As for the output parameter, half of the research on sustainable innovation applied accounting-based indicators.


## DISCUSSION

Answering the research questions stated in the introduction, an attempt was to discuss the main findings.

1) Identify and compare trends in the development of research directions on the problems of effective commercialization of innovations.

In research on the commercialization of conventional and sustainable innovations, there is a shift in trends towards a more active study of the impact of strategic orientation on the commercialization efficiency. Indeed, to achieve effective commercialization, it is necessary to realize the importance of the role of innovation processes at the strategic level. In addition to the factor of strategic orientation, the impact of the managerial concern for green issues, the stringency of environmental regulations and normative levels on the company's performance are of increasing scientific interest. In other words, it is important for companies to assess the impact of both strategic orientation and institutional incentives on the commercialization efficiency of sustainable innovations.

2) Clarify and compare the most relevant research areas that cause the utmost scientific interest in the chosen topic.

The most relevant research area in the field of commercialization of sustainable innovations is the relationship between the practice of sustainable innovation and firm efficiency. The fact that commercialization efficiency of sustainable innovations is studied exclusively at the company level suggests that companies first need to know how the practice of sustainable innovations affects their economic efficiency.

3) Identify distinctive features inherent in commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations.

Commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations is evaluated at the macro-level, micro-level (company level), and university level. Therefore, efficiency is characterized by indicators inherent in each of these levels. Below are the main input and output parameters that character-ize commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations at the macro-, micro-and university levels (Figures 6-8).

When evaluating commercialization efficiency at the company level, along with internal factors, increasing attention is paid to the influence of exter-nal factors, such as open innovation activities and government support.

Unlike conventional innovations, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovations is characterized not only by economic indicators, but also by so called sustainability-oriented      (Figure 9). Distinctive output criteria for sustainability-oriented innovation is the improvement of firm image. Moreover, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovation is influenced by regulatory factors such as the stringency of environmental regulation, environmental governance and normative levels.

Regarding the comparison of the results of the current review with the results of previous stud-ies, Kirchberger and Pohl (2016) found that research trends in the field of factors of effective commercialization have shifted from a strategic orientation to the level of intermediary structures. The current review came to the opposite conclusion. However, there is a limitation in the review of Kirchberger and Pohl (2016): an analysis of studies published up to 2013 was carried out. The current review analyzes articles published up to 2020.


## CONCLUSION

This study contributes to a better understanding of the scientific groundwork of the effective commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovation. Research results show that the most relevant research areas are influencing factors, measurement process and the relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and firm performance. Besides, stable interest is caused by topics such as the impact of organizational resources, strategic orientation on the commercialization efficiency, whereas the impact of state and venture financial resources, legislative factors, human resources and open innovations cause insufficient scientific interest.

Regarding the commercialization efficiency indicators, they vary depending on the level of the economic hierarchy. In addition, commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovation is characterized by so called sustainability-oriented criteria, among which the most distinctive output criteria is the improvement of firm image. Commercialization efficiency of sustainability-oriented innovations is influenced, among other things, by regulatory factors such as stringency of environmental regulation, environmental governance and normative levels.

The content analysis of the most relevant research areas identified possible areas for future research that need to be explored. It would be interesting to know the impact of factors such as legislation in the field of commercialization and intellectual property protection, industry differences, time-to-market and speed to market on commercialization efficiency of innovations. In addition, research in the field of post-IPO performance of firms holding university licenses, the reasons for the success and failure of commercialization in individual cases, the impact of sustainability-oriented innovation practices at the macro-level is of future interest. 


## AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS


Nowadays, innovation plays an increasingly fundamental role in competitiveness at all levels of the economic hierarchy (Kaihua & Mingting, 2014; Secundo et al., 2016; Bayadilova et al., 2020; Kordonska, 2019; Marszałek-Kawa & Siemiątkowski, 2020; Popova et al., 2019). Along with conventional innovations, the importance of sustainability-oriented innovations is also increasing with the growing significance of sustainable development issues (Rajnoha et al., 2019; Atkociuniene & Mikalauskiene, 2019; Krawiec & Noga, 2017). However, R&D expenditures, knowledge and new technologies embodied in innovations can contribute to economic development only if they are effectively commercialized (Siegel et al., 2004; Min et al., 2019; Voropai et al., 2019; Kuchukova et al., 2020). As for sustainability-oriented innovations, there is a scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of such kind of innovations.

## Figure 2 .
2Trends in the development of sustainability-oriented innovation research

## Figure 1 .
1Trends in the development of conventional innovation research

## Figure 3 .
3Distribution of approaches to inputs and outputs on the commercialization efficiency of conventional innovations were identified as: generalized approach (GA); organizational approach (OA); intensity-oriented approach (IOA); institutional approach (IA); managerial approach (MA); and collaborative approach (CA).

## Figure 4 .Figure 5 .
45Distribution Distribution of output approaches used in studies on the commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations

## Figure 6 .
6Commercialization efficiency indicators at the macro level

## Figure 7 .
7Commercialization efficiency indicators at the company level

## Figure 8 .
8Commercialization efficiency indicators at the university level Inputs • Boundary spanning activities • Reward system for faculty involvement • Flexible university policies • Venture capital munificence • Federal and industry funding Outputs • Number of start-up companies formed • Number of initial public offering (IPO) companies to which a university had licensed a technology • The amount of royalties received • University share of patents

## Figure 9 .
9Commercialization efficiency indicators for sustainability-oriented innovation Inputs • Reusability/recyclability • Centrality of environmental innovation to firm strategy Outputs • Less energy consumption and carbon emission intensity • Growth rate of manufacturing industry's low-carbon transformation rate • Market share of low-carbon products • Improvement of firm image criteria

## Table 1 .
1Comparison of keywords, number of articles and type of literature review Source: Compiled by the authors.Authors 
Article selection criteria (keywords used in the search process) 
Number of 
papers 
Type of a literature 
review 
Conventional innovations 

Current study 
Commercialization effect* 
128 
SLR 
Commercialization efficiency 
Siegel & Phan, 2005 
No criteria provided 
39 
TLS 
Bozeman, 2000 
No criteria provided 
NP 
TLS 
Bozeman et al., 2014 
No criteria provided 
48 
TLS 

Wit-de Vries et al., 2019 

'University -business', 'university -industry' "academic engagement" 
and "research partnership" 
35 
SLR 
'collaborat*', 'cooperation*', 'partnership*', 'engage*', 'relation* 
'research' 'alliance*' 
Siegel et al., 2007 
No criteria provided 
28 
TLS 
Kirchberger & Pohl, 2016 
'technology commercialization' or 'technology transfer' 
140 
SLR 

Sustainability-oriented innovations 

Current study 
sustainab* innovation commercialization 
44 
SLR 
sustainab* innovation effect 

Golicic & Smith, 2013 

sustainability, performance, social responsibility, corporate 
responsibility, environmental management, green, sustainable 
practices, lean, reverse logistics, closed-loop supply chain, 
occupational health, occupational safety, efficiency, effectiveness + 
references from prior meta-analyses and reviews 

77 
SLR 

Note: SLR: systematic literature review; TLS: traditional literature survey; and NP: not provided. 


## Table 2 .
2Comparative thematic analysis of conventional and sustainable innovation research Source: Compiled by the authors.

## Table 3 .
3A comparative overview of the methods used Source: Compiled by the authors.Conventional innovation 
Sustainability-oriented innovation 

Method 
Number of 
studies 
Method 
Number of 
studies 

Regression analysis 
5 
Questionnaire survey method + Regression 
analysis 
2 

Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) 
3 
Panel estimation techniques + Sensitivity analysis 
1 
DEA combined with regression analysis 
2 
Heckman two-step selection model 
1 

Structured, in-person interviews 
1 
Matched-pairs analysis + Multiple and moderated 
regression analysis 
1 

Exploratory study based on in-depth interviews + 
regression analysis 
1 
Multinomial endogenous treatment effects model 
1 

Questionnaire + Regression analysis 
1 
Event study methodology + Cross-sectional 
analysis 
1 

Cox proportional hazard duration models+ Logistic 
and Tobit regression 
1 
Factor analysis + DEA-Tobit two-stage method 
1 

Structural equation modeling 
1 
Questionnaire + Structural equation modeling 
1 

Case study 
1 
Questionnaire + Exploratory factor analysis + 
Regression analysis 
1 



## Table 4 .
4A comparative review of the data used Source: Compiled by the authors.Country 
Number of studies 
Research 
object 
Number of studies 
Time 
period 
Number of studies 
conventional sustainable 
conventional sustainable 
conventional sustainable 

USA 
9 
2 

University/ 
Technology 
transfer office 

6 (30%) 
-
T < 5 
2 
4 

China 
3 
2 
Company 
5 (25%) 
10 (100%) 
5 ≤T ≤10 
5 
-

Taiwan 
3 
1 
Country/ 
region 
3 (15%) 
-
T > 10 
4 
1 




Conceptualization: Dinara Kalmakova, Yuriy Bilan, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy, Rimma Sagiyeva. Formal analysis: Dinara Kalmakova, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy. Investigation: Dinara Kalmakova, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy. Methodology: Aknur Zhidebekkyzy, Rimma Sagiyeva. Project administration: Yuriy Bilan, Rimma Sagiyeva. Resources: Dinara Kalmakova, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy. Supervision: Dinara Kalmakova, Rimma Sagiyeva. Visualization: Dinara Kalmakova, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy. Writing -original draft: Dinara Kalmakova, Yuriy Bilan, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy, Rimma Sagiyeva. Writing -review & editing: Dinara Kalmakova, Aknur Zhidebekkyzy. 333-350. https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0048-7333(02)00103-8 23. Golicic, S. L., & Smith, C. D. (2013). A meta-analysis of environmentally sustainable supply chain management practices and firm performance. Journal of Supply Chain Management, 49(2), 78-95. https://doi.org/10.1111/ jscm.12006 24. Guan, J., & Chen, K. (2010). Measuring the innovation production process: A cross-region empirical study of China's high-tech innovations. Technovation, 30(5-6), 348-358. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. technovation.2010.02.001 25. Guan, J., & Chen, K. (2012). Modeling the relative efficiency of national innovation systems. Research Policy, 41(1), 102-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2011.07.001 26. Ho, M., Liu, J., Lu, W.-M., & Huang, C.-C. (2014). A new perspective to explore the technology transfer efficiencies in US universities. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 39(2), 247-275. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10961-013-9298-7
Problems and Perspectives in Management, Volume 19, Issue 1, 2021 http://dx.doi.org/10.21511/ppm.19(1).2021.29
APPENDIX A
Green Innovation and Financial Performance: An Institutional Approach. J Aguilera-Caracuel, N Ortizde-Mandojana, 10.1177/1086026613507931Organization and Environment. 264Aguilera-Caracuel, J., & Ortiz- de-Mandojana, N. (2013). Green Innovation and Financial Perfor- mance: An Institutional Approach. Organization and Environment, 26(4), 365-385. https://doi. org/10.1177/1086026613507931

Banking Sector Performance, Profitability, And Efficiency: A Citation-Based Systematic Literature Review. N Ahmad, A Naveed, S Ahmad, I Butt, 10.1111/joes.12346Journal of Economic Surveys. 341Ahmad, N., Naveed, A., Ahmad, S., & Butt, I. (2020). Banking Sector Performance, Profitability, And Efficiency: A Citation-Based Sys- tematic Literature Review. Journal of Economic Surveys, 34(1), 18-218. https://doi.org/10.1111/joes.12346

Firm environmental performance under scrutiny: The role of strategic and organizational orientations. L Ardito, R M Dangelico, 10.1002/csr.1470Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmental Management. 254Ardito, L., & Dangelico, R. M. (2018). Firm environmental performance under scrutiny: The role of strategic and organizational orientations. Corporate Social Responsibility and Environmen- tal Management, 25(4), 426-440. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.1470

Knowledge Management Influence on Implementing Sustainable Development Means in the Organization. Z O Atkociuniene, A Mikalauskiene, Transformations in Business & Economics. 183C (48C)Atkociuniene, Z. O., & Mika- lauskiene, A. (2019). Knowl- edge Management Influence on Implementing Sustainable Development Means in the Organization. Transformations in Business & Economics, 18, (3C (48C)), 546-564. https://search. proquest.com/openview/11b8600e e748c21187ad120f87b92079/1?pq- origsite=gscholar&cbl=1936346

The effectiveness of innovative infrastructure: The case of Kazakhstan. B M Bayadilova, A D Nassyrkhanov, E B Tlessova, L Z Parimbekova, M K Tolymgozhinova, T K Kuangaliyeva, 10.12776/QIP.V24I1.1406Quality Innovation Prosperity. 241Bayadilova, B. M., Nassyrkhanov, A. D., Tlessova, E. B., Parim- bekova, L. Z., Tolymgozhinova, M. K., & Kuangaliyeva, T. K. (2020). The effectiveness of innova- tive infrastructure: The case of Kazakhstan. Quality Innovation Prosperity, 24(1), 69-87. https:// doi.org/10.12776/QIP.V24I1.1406

Companies' Profitable Way of Fulfilling Duties towards Humanity and Environment by Sustainable Innovation. M Bekmezci, 10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.04.884Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences. 181Bekmezci, M. (2015). Compa- nies' Profitable Way of Fulfilling Duties towards Humanity and Environment by Sustainable In- novation. Procedia -Social and Behavioral Sciences, 181(May), 228-240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. sbspro.2015.04.884

Innovation performance and influencing factors of lowcarbon technological innovation under the global value chain: A case of Chinese manufacturing industry. K Bi, P Huang, X Wang, 10.1016/j.tech-fore.2016.07.024Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 111Bi, K., Huang, P., & Wang, X. (2016). Innovation performance and influencing factors of low- carbon technological innovation under the global value chain: A case of Chinese manufacturing industry. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 111, 275-284. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tech- fore.2016.07.024

Technology transfer and public policy: a review of research and theory. B Bozeman, 10.1016/S0048-7333Research Policy. 294-5Bozeman, B. (2000). Technol- ogy transfer and public policy: a review of research and theory. Research Policy, 29(4-5), 627-655. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0048- 7333(99)00093-1

The evolving state-of-theart in technology transfer research: Revisiting the contingent effectiveness model. B Bozeman, H Rimes, J Youtie, 10.1016/j.respol.2014.06.008Research Policy. 441Bozeman, B., Rimes, H., & Youtie, J. (2015). The evolving state-of-the- art in technology transfer research: Revisiting the contingent effective- ness model. Research Policy, 44(1), 34-49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. respol.2014.06.008

. M Brettel, F Heinemann, A Engelen, S Neubauer, Brettel, M., Heinemann, F., En- gelen, A., & Neubauer, S. (2011).

Cross-Functional Integration of R&D, Marketing, and Manufacturing in Radical and Incremental Product Innovations and Its Effects on Project Effectiveness and Efficiency. 10.1111/j.1540-5885.2011.00795.xJournal of Product Innovation Management. 282Cross-Functional Integration of R&D, Marketing, and Manufactur- ing in Radical and Incremental Product Innovations and Its Effects on Project Effectiveness and Efficiency. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 28(2), 251-269. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1540-5885.2011.00795.x

Public demonstration projects and field trials: Accelerating commercialisation of sustainable technology in solar photovoltaics. J Brown, C Hendry, 10.1016/j.en-pol.2009.01.040Energy Policy. 377Brown, J., & Hendry, C. (2009). Public demonstration projects and field trials: Accelerating commercialisation of sustainable technology in solar photovoltaics. Energy Policy, 37(7), 2560-2573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.en- pol.2009.01.040

Corporate sustainability and responsibility: creating value for business, society and the environment. M A Camilleri, 10.1186/s41180-017-0016-5Asian Journal of Sustainability and Social Responsibility. 21Camilleri, M. A. (2017). Corporate sustainability and responsibility: creating value for business, society and the environment. Asian Jour- nal of Sustainability and Social Re- sponsibility, 2(1), 59-74. https://doi. org/10.1186/s41180-017-0016-5

Technology commercialization, incubator and venture capital, and new venture performance. C J Chen, 10.1016/j.jbusres.2008.01.003Journal of Business Research. 621Chen, C. J. (2009). Technology commercialization, incubator and venture capital, and new venture performance. Journal of Business Research, 62(1), 93-103. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2008.01.003

Measuring the efficiency of China's regional Innovation systems: Application of network data envelopment analysis (DEA). K Chen, J Guan, doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2010.49747915Journal of Business Ethics. Chen, Y. S., Lai, S. B., & Wen, C. T.463Regional StudiesChen, K., & Guan, J. (2012). Measuring the efficiency of China's regional Innovation systems: Application of network data envel- opment analysis (DEA). Regional Studies, 46(3), 355-377. https:// doi.org/10.1080/00343404.2010.4 97479 15. Chen, Y. S., Lai, S. B., & Wen, C. T. (2006). The influence of green innovation performance on corporate advantage in Taiwan. Journal of Business Ethics, 67(4), 331-339. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10551-006-9025-5

When is open innovation beneficial? The role of strategic orientation. C C J Cheng, E K R E Huizingh, 10.1111/jpim.12148Journal of Product Innovation Management. 316Cheng, C. C. J., & Huizingh, E. K. R. E. (2014). When is open innovation beneficial? The role of strategic orientation. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 31(6), 1235-1253. https://doi. org/10.1111/jpim.12148

From the Stockholder to the Stakeholder: How Sustainability Can Drive Financial Outperformance. G L Clark, A Feiner, M Viehs, 10.2139/ssrn.2508281SSRN Electronic Journal. Clark, G. L., Feiner, A., & Viehs, M. (2014). From the Stockholder to the Stakeholder: How Sus- tainability Can Drive Financial Outperformance. SSRN Elec- tronic Journal, March. https://doi. org/10.2139/ssrn.2508281

Macro, meso and micro perspectives of technology transfer. J A Cunningham, P Reilly, 10.1007/s10961-018-9658-4Journal of Technology Transfer. 433Cunningham, J. A., & O'Reilly, P. (2018). Macro, meso and micro perspectives of technology trans- fer. Journal of Technology Transfer, 43(3), 545-557. https://doi. org/10.1007/s10961-018-9658-4

Motivation, Methodology, and Phenomenology of Institutional Nihilism in the SEE Countries. V Draskovic, M Draskovic, S Bilan, Montenegrin Journal of Economics. 152Draskovic, V., Draskovic, M., & Bilan, S. (2019). Motivation, Methodology, and Phenomenol- ogy of Institutional Nihilism in the SEE Countries. Montenegrin Journal of Economics, 15(2), 7-14. https://ideas.repec.org/a/mje/mje- jnl/v15y2019i27-14.html

Formal and Informal vs. Alternative Institutions. V Draskovic, R Jovovic, D Streimikiene, S Bilan, Montenegrin Journal of Economics. 162Draskovic, V., Jovovic, R., Strei- mikiene, D., & Bilan, S. (2020). Formal and Informal vs. Alterna- tive Institutions. Montenegrin Journal of Economics, 16(2), 193-201. https://www.readcube. com/articles/10.14254%2F1800- 5845%2F2020.16-2.15

Comparison of PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar: strengths and weaknesses. M E Falagas, E I Pitsouni, G A Malietzis, G Pappas, 10.1096/fj.07-9492lsfThe FASEB Journal. 222Falagas, M. E., Pitsouni, E. I., Ma- lietzis, G. A., & Pappas, G. (2008). Comparison of PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, and Google Scholar: strengths and weak- nesses. The FASEB Journal, 22(2), 338-342. https://doi.org/10.1096/ fj.07-9492lsf

The product market and the market for "ideas": Commercialization strategies for technology entrepreneurs. J S Gans, S Stern, Research Policy. 322Gans, J. S., & Stern, S. (2003). The product market and the market for "ideas": Commercialization strategies for technology entre- preneurs. Research Policy, 32(2),

Doing well by doing good: A study of university-industry interactions, innovationess and firm performance in sustainabilityoriented Australian SMEs. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. J Jones, G Corral De Zubielqui, 10.1016/j.techfore.2016.07.036123Jones, J., & Corral de Zubielqui, G. (2017). Doing well by doing good: A study of university-industry in- teractions, innovationess and firm performance in sustainability- oriented Australian SMEs. Tech- nological Forecasting and Social Change, 123, 262-270. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.07.036

Staged efficiency and its determinants of regional innovation systems: A two-step analytical procedure. C Kaihua, K Mingting, 10.1007/s00168-014-0604-6Annals of Regional Science. 522Kaihua, C., & Mingting, K. (2014). Staged efficiency and its deter- minants of regional innovation systems: A two-step analytical procedure. Annals of Regional Science, 52(2), 627-657. https://doi. org/10.1007/s00168-014-0604-6

Determinants of successful technology commercialization: Implication for Korean Government-sponsored SMEs. J Kang, S Gwon, S Kim, K Cho, 10.1080/19761597.2013.810947Asian Journal of Technology Innovation. 211Kang, J., Gwon, S., Kim, S., & Cho, K. (2013). Determinants of successful technology commer- cialization: Implication for Korean Government-sponsored SMEs. Asian Journal of Technology Inno- vation, 21(1), 72-85. https://doi.or g/10.1080/19761597.2013.810947

Technology commercialization: a literature review of success factors and antecedents across different contexts. M A Kirchberger, L Pohl, 10.1007/s10961-016-9486-3The Journal of Technology Transfer. 415Kirchberger, M. A., & Pohl, L. (2016). Technology commercial- ization: a literature review of suc- cess factors and antecedents across different contexts. The Journal of Technology Transfer, 41(5), 1077- 1112. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10961-016-9486-3

Sustainable innovation practices and their relationship with the performance of industrial companies. J M Kneipp, C M Gomes, R S Bichueti, K Frizzo, A P Perlin, 10.1108/rege-01-2018-0005Revista de Gestão. 262Kneipp, J. M., Gomes, C. M., Bichueti, R. S., Frizzo, K., & Perlin, A. P. (2019). Sustainable innova- tion practices and their relation- ship with the performance of industrial companies. Revista de Gestão, 26(2), 94-111. https://doi. org/10.1108/rege-01-2018-0005

The relationship between knowledge transfer, top management team composition, and performance: The case of science-based entrepreneurial firms. M Knockaert, D Ucbasaran, M Wright, B Clarysse, 10.1111/j.1540-6520.2010.00405.xEntrepreneurship: Theory and Practice. 35Knockaert, M., Ucbasaran, D., Wright, M., & Clarysse, B. (2011). The relationship be- tween knowledge transfer, top management team composition, and performance: The case of science-based entrepreneurial firms. Entrepreneurship: Theory and Practice, 35(4), 777-803. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540- 6520.2010.00405.x

Ireland's competitiveness performance: challenges and prospects. A Kordonska, 10.12775/TIS.2019.006Tor un International Studies. 112Kordonska, A. (2019). Ireland's competitiveness performance: challenges and prospects. Tor un International Studies, 1(12), 89- 107. http://dx.doi.org/10.12775/ TIS.2019.006

Finansirovanie innovatsii v Respublike Kazakhstan: perezagruzka podkhodov i mekhanizmov. N K Kuchukova, D T Kalmakova, A G Mukusheva, F A Omarova, Financing innovation in the Republic of Kazakhstan: rebooting approaches and mechanismsKuchukova, N. K., Kalmakova, D. T., Mukusheva, A. G., & Oma- rova, F. A. (2020). Finansirovanie innovatsii v Respublike Kazakh- stan: perezagruzka podkhodov i mekhanizmov [Financing innovation in the Republic of Kazakhstan: rebooting approaches and mechanisms].

. 10.26577/be.2020.v132.i2.04Vestnik KazNU. Seriya ekonomicheskaya -KazNU Bulletin. Economic series. 1322Vestnik KazNU. Seriya ekonomicheskaya -KazNU Bulletin. Economic series, 132(2), 34-44. https://doi.org/10.26577/ be.2020.v132.i2.04

Conceptualizing creative economy. M Krawiec, M Noga, 10.12775/TSM.2017.010Torun International Studies. 110Krawiec, M., & Noga, M. (2017). Conceptualizing creative economy. Torun International Studies, 1(10), 127-137. http://dx.doi. org/10.12775/TSM.2017.010

Government as entrepreneur: Evaluating the commercialization success of SBIR projects. A N Link, J T Scott, 10.1016/j.respol.2010.02.006Research Policy. 395Link, A. N., & Scott, J. T. (2010). Government as entrepreneur: Evaluating the commercialization success of SBIR projects. Research Policy, 39(5), 589-601. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.respol.2010.02.006

An empirical study of commercialization performance on nanoproducts. C Lo, C Wang, P.-Y Chien, C.-W Hung, 32TechnovationLo, C., Wang, C., Chien, P.-Y., & Hung, C.-W. (2012). An empiri- cal study of commercialization performance on nanoproducts. Technovation, 32(3), 168-178.

. 10.1016/j.techno-vation.2011.08.005https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techno- vation.2011.08.005

Effect of sustainability-oriented innovation practices on the overall organisational performance: An empirical examination. Total Quality Management & Business Excellence. M Maletič, D Maletič, J J Dahlgaard, S M Dahlgaard-Park, B Gomišček, 10.1080/14783363.2015.106476727Maletič, M., Maletič, D., Dahl- gaard, J. J., Dahlgaard-Park, S. M., & Gomišček, B. (2016). Effect of sustainability-oriented innovation practices on the overall organisa- tional performance: An empirical examination. Total Quality Man- agement & Business Excellence, 27(9-10), 1171-1190. https://doi.or g/10.1080/14783363.2015.1064767

Adoption and Impacts of Sustainable Agricultural Practices on Maize Yields and Incomes: Evidence from Rural Zambia. J Manda, A D Alene, C Gardebroek, M Kassie, G Tembo, 10.1111/1477-9552.12127Journal of Agricultural Economics. 671Manda, J., Alene, A. D., Garde- broek, C., Kassie, M., & Tembo, G. (2016). Adoption and Impacts of Sustainable Agricultural Practices on Maize Yields and Incomes: Evidence from Rural Zambia. Journal of Agricultural Econom- ics, 67(1), 130-153. https://doi. org/10.1111/1477-9552.12127

The Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals at the Local Level. The Case of the Districts of Kuyavian-Pomeranian Province. J Marszałek-Kawa, P Siemiątkowski, 10.30525/2256-0742/2020-6-2-1-8Baltic Journal of Economic Studies. 62Marszałek-Kawa, J., & Siemiąt- kowski, P. (2020). The Implemen- tation of the Sustainable Develop- ment Goals at the Local Level. The Case of the Districts of Kuyavian- Pomeranian Province. Baltic Jour- nal of Economic Studies, 6(2), 1-8. https://doi.org/10.30525/2256- 0742/2020-6-2-1-8

Impact of data sources on citation counts and rankings of LIS faculty: Web of science versus Scopus and Google scholar. L I Meho, K Yang, 10.1002/asi.20677Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology. 5813Meho, L. I., & Yang, K. (2007). Impact of data sources on cita- tion counts and rankings of LIS faculty: Web of science versus Scopus and Google scholar. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technol- ogy, 58(13), 2105-2125. https://doi. org/10.1002/asi.20677

Commercialization of transferred public technologies. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. J W Min, N S Vonortas, Y J Kim, 10.1016/j.techfore1383Min, J. W., Vonortas, N. S., & Kim, Y. J. (2019). Commercialization of transferred public technologies. Technological Forecasting and So- cial Change, 138(September 2018), 10-20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. techfore.2018.10.003

Strategic orientations and new product commercialization: Mediator, moderator, and interplay. J Mu, C A Di Benedetto, 10.1111/j.1467-9310.2011.00650.xR&D Management. 414Mu, J., & Di Benedetto, C. A. (2011). Strategic orientations and new product commercialization: Mediator, moderator, and inter- play. R&D Management, 41(4), 337-359. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1467-9310.2011.00650.x

Knowledge management in human resource management: Foreign-owned subsidiaries. J Poór, T Juhász, R Machová, A Bencsik, S Bilan, practices in four CEE countriesPoór, J., Juhász, T., Machová, R., Bencsik, A., & Bilan, S. (2018). Knowledge management in human resource management: Foreign-owned subsidiaries' practices in four CEE countries.

. Problems and Perspectives in Management. 1912021Problems and Perspectives in Management, Volume 19, Issue 1, 2021

. 10.21511/ppm.19(1).2021.29http://dx.doi.org/10.21511/ppm.19(1).2021.29

. 10.14254/2071-8330Journal of International Studies. 113Journal of International Stud- ies, 11(3), 295-308. https://doi. org/10.14254/2071-8330.

Value Formation of Innovative Product: From Idea to Commercialization. L Popova, I Maslova, I Korostelkina, E Dedkova, B Maslov, 10.1007/978-3-030-02351-5_38Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. Springer International Publishing850Popova, L., Maslova, I., Korostel- kina, I., Dedkova, E., & Maslov, B. (2019). Value Formation of Innovative Product: From Idea to Commercialization. Digital Science. DSIC18 2018. Advances in Intelligent Systems and Com- puting, 850, 331-338. Springer International Publishing. https:// doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-02351- 5_38

University start-up formation and technology licensing with firms that go public: A resource-based view of academic entrepreneurship. J B Powers, P P Mcdougall, 10.1016/j.jbus-vent.2003.12.008Journal of Business Venturing. 203Powers, J. B., & McDougall, P. P. (2005). University start-up formation and technology licens- ing with firms that go public: A resource-based view of academic entrepreneurship. Journal of Busi- ness Venturing, 20(3), 291-311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbus- vent.2003.12.008

Transformations in Strategic Business Planning in the Context of Sustainability and Business Goals Setting. R Rajnoha, P Lesnikova, R Stefko, J Schmidtova, I Formanek, Transformations in Business & Economics. 82Rajnoha, R., Lesnikova, P., Stefko, R., Schmidtova, J., Formanek, I. (2019). Transformations in Strategic Business Planning in the Context of Sustainability and Busi- ness Goals Setting. Transforma- tions in Business & Economics, 8(2 (47)), 44-66.

The Impact of Regulation-Driven Environmental Innovation on Innovation Success and Firm Performance. Industry and Innovation. K Rennings, C Rammer, 10.1080/13662716.2011.56102718Rennings, K., & Rammer, C. (2011). The Impact of Regulation- Driven Environmental Innovation on Innovation Success and Firm Performance. Industry and Innova- tion, 18(3), 255-283. https://doi.or g/10.1080/13662716.2011.561027

The economic impact of licensed commercialized inventions originating in university research. D Roessner, J Bond, S Okubo, M Planting, 10.1016/j.respol.2012.04.015Research Policy. 421Roessner, D., Bond, J., Okubo, S., & Planting, M. (2013). The economic impact of licensed com- mercialized inventions originating in university research. Research Policy, 42(1), 23-34. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.respol.2012.04.015

The drivers of efficient knowledge transfer performance: Evidence from British universities. F Rossi, 10.1093/cje/bex054Cambridge Journal of Economics. 423Rossi, F. (2018). The drivers of efficient knowledge transfer per- formance: Evidence from British universities. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 42(3), 729-755. https:// doi.org/10.1093/cje/bex054

Measuring university technology transfer efficiency: a maturity level approach. G Secundo, C De Beer, G Passiante, 10.1108/MBE-03-2016-001820Measuring Business ExcellenceSecundo, G., De Beer, C., & Passi- ante, G. (2016). Measuring univer- sity technology transfer efficiency: a maturity level approach. Measur- ing Business Excellence, 20(3), 42-54. https://doi.org/10.1108/ MBE-03-2016-0018

Selling University Technology: Patterns from MIT. S Shane, 10.1287/mnsc.48.1.122.14281Management Science. 481Shane, S. (2002). Selling Univer- sity Technology: Patterns from MIT. Management Science, 48(1), 122-137. https://doi.org/10.1287/ mnsc.48.1.122.14281

Encouraging university entrepreneurship? The effect of the Bayh-Dole Act on university patenting in the United States. S Shane, 10.1016/S0883-9026Journal of Business Venturing. 191Shane, S. (2004). Encouraging university entrepreneurship? The effect of the Bayh-Dole Act on university patenting in the United States. Journal of Busi- ness Venturing, 19(1), 127-151. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0883- 9026(02)00114-3

Analyzing the effectiveness of university technology transfer: implications for entrepreneurship education. D S Siegel, P H Phan, 10.1016/S1048-4736Emerald Group Publishing LimitedBingleySiegel, D. S., & Phan, P. H. (2005). Analyzing the effectiveness of university technology transfer: implications for entrepreneur- ship education. Bingley: Emer- ald Group Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1048- 4736(05)16001-9

Technology transfer offices and commercialization of university intellectual property: Performance and policy implications. D S Siegel, R Veugelers, M Wright, 10.1093/oxrep/grm036Oxford Review of Economic Policy. 234Siegel, D. S., Veugelers, R., & Wright, M. (2007). Technology transfer offices and commercial- ization of university intellectual property: Performance and policy implications. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 23(4), 640-660. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/ grm036

Toward a model of the effective transfer of scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: Qualitative evidence from the commercialization of university technologies. D S Siegel, D A Waldman, L E Atwater, A N Link, 10.1016/j.jengtecmanJournal of Engineering and Technology Management -JET-M. 211-26Siegel, D. S., Waldman, D. A., Atwater, L. E., & Link, A. N. (2004). Toward a model of the effective transfer of scientific knowledge from academicians to practitioners: Qualitative evidence from the commercialization of university technologies. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management -JET-M, 21(1-2), 115-142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. jengtecman.2003.12.006

Why university inventions rarely produce income? Bottlenecks in university technology transfer. P M Swamidass, V Vulasa, 10.1007/s10961-008-9097-8Journal of Technology Transfer. 344Swamidass, P. M., & Vulasa, V. (2009). Why university inventions rarely produce income? Bottle- necks in university technology transfer. Journal of Technology Transfer, 34(4), 343-363. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10961-008- 9097-8

. M Tang, G Walsh, D Lerner, M A Fitza, Q Li, Tang, M., Walsh, G., Lerner, D., Fitza, M. A., & Li, Q. (2018).

Green Innovation, Managerial Concern and Firm Performance: An Empirical Study. 10.1002/bse.1981Business Strategy and the Environment. 271Green Innovation, Managerial Concern and Firm Performance: An Empirical Study. Business Strat- egy and the Environment, 27(1), 39-51. https://doi.org/10.1002/ bse.1981

Growth and productive efficiency of university intellectual property licensing. J G Thursby, S Kemp, 10.1016/S0048-7333Research Policy. 311Thursby, J. G., & Kemp, S. (2002). Growth and productive efficiency of university intellectual property licensing. Research Policy, 31(1), 109-124. https://doi.org/10.1016/ S0048-7333(00)00160-8

Measuring the performance of university technology transfer using meta data approach: the case of Dutch universities. T Vinig, D Lips, 10.1007/s10961-014-9389-0Journal of Technology Transfer. 406Vinig, T., & Lips, D. (2015). Mea- suring the performance of univer- sity technology transfer using meta data approach: the case of Dutch universities. Journal of Technology Transfer, 40(6), 1034-1049. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s10961-014-9389- 0

Increasing competitiveness of higher education in Ukraine through value co-creation strategy. O Voropai, K Pichyk, N Chala, 10.14254/2071-789X.2019/12-4/14Economics and Sociology. 124Voropai, O., Pichyk, K., & Chala, N. (2019). Increasing com- petitiveness of higher educa- tion in Ukraine through value co-creation strategy. Economics and Sociology, 12(4), 228-240. https://doi.org/10.14254/2071- 789X.2019/12-4/14

The role of corporate sustainability performance for economic performance: A firm-level analysis of moderation effects. M Wagner, 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.02.017Ecological Economics. 697Wagner, M. (2010). The role of corporate sustainability perfor- mance for economic performance: A firm-level analysis of modera- tion effects. Ecological Econom- ics, 69(7), 1553-1560. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.02.017

Innovation Nirvana or Innovation Wasteland? Identifying commercialization strategies for small and medium renewable energy enterprises. P R Walsh, 10.1016/j.technova-tion.2011.09.00232TechnovationWalsh, P. R. (2012). Innovation Nirvana or Innovation Wasteland? Identifying commercialization strategies for small and medium renewable energy enterprises. Technovation, 32(1), 32-42. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.technova- tion.2011.09.002

Knowledge transfer in university-industry research partnerships: A review. E W Wit-De Vries, W A Dolfsma, H J Windt, M P Gerkema, 10.1007/s10961-018-9660-xTechnology Transfer. 444Wit-de Vries, E. W., Dolfsma, W. A., Windt, H. J., & Gerkema, M. P. (2019). Knowledge transfer in university-industry research partnerships: A review. The Jour- nal of Technology Transfer, 44(4), 1236-1255. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10961-018-9660-x

Impact of Environmental Performance on Firm Value for Sustainable Investment: Evidence from Large US Firms. Business Strategy and the Environment. P L Yadav, S H Han, J J Rho, 10.1002/bse.188325Yadav, P. L., Han, S. H., & Rho, J. J. (2016). Impact of Environ- mental Performance on Firm Value for Sustainable Investment: Evidence from Large US Firms. Business Strategy and the Environ- ment, 25(6), 402-420. https://doi. org/10.1002/bse.1883

. A Zhidebekkyzy, S Kupeshova, A Yesmurzayeva, Zhidebekkyzy, A., Kupeshova, S., & Yesmurzayeva, A. (2019).

Project Management in Nanotechnology: A Systematic Literature Review. 10.14254/1800-5845/2019.15-3.17Montenegrin Journal of Economics. 15Project Management in Nanotech- nology: A Systematic Literature Review. Montenegrin Journal of Economics, 15, 227-244. https://doi. org/10.14254/1800-5845/2019.15- 3.17