# molecules Beneficial Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Female Reproductive Disorders: A Review

CorpusID: 234743401
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e9aa525adcf46c2a6eab849e4cb803811c0b876](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e9aa525adcf46c2a6eab849e4cb803811c0b876)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

molecules Beneficial Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Female Reproductive Disorders: A Review


Datu Agasi 
Mohd Kamal 
Department of Biomedical Sciences and Therapeutics
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences
Universiti Malaysia Sabah
88400Kota KinabaluMalaysia

Norizam Salamt 
Siti Sarah 
Mohamad Zaid 
Department of Environment
Faculty of Forestry and Environment
Universiti Putra Malaysia
Serdang 43400Malaysia

Mohd Helmy Mokhtar 

Department of Physiology
Faculty of Medicine
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia
56000Kuala LumpurMalaysia

molecules Beneficial Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Female Reproductive Disorders: A Review
10.3390/molecules26092675Review
Citation: Kamal, D.A.M.; Salamt, N.; Zaid, S.S.M.; Mokhtar, M.H.

## Introduction

Tea is originated from East Asia and has become the most widely consumed beverage worldwide after water [1]. Green tea, black tea and oolong tea are harvested from the same Camellia sinensis plant but possess different properties (Table 1). Green tea accounts for 20% of the total tea consumption worldwide and is the primary beverage consumed daily in Asian countries [2], including Japan [3], China [4] and Korea [5]. Green tea is consumed in an average of three cups and as high as 10 cups per day [6]. According to a human adverse event data, the observed safe level for green tea is 704 mg of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (ECGC)/day, which is approximately 880 mL of brewed green tea daily [7]. Table 1. Different properties of green tea, oolong tea and black tea.


## Properties


## Green Tea Oolong Tea Black Tea

Consumption [8] 20% <2% 75%

Main consumer [8] Asian Asian European and North Americans Preparation [9] Non-fermented Semi-fermented Fully fermented

Characteristics [9] Green colourRetain almost all original polyphenol contents Combine freshness of green tea and the fragrance of black tea

Reddish black colour, mellow flavour, low bitterness and astringency Chemical Profile

Caffeine (mg/g) [10] 34.86 ± 4.32 19.67 ± 2.95 28.54 ± 3.68

Total catechins (mg/g) [11] 105.85 ± 35.69 86.91 ± 23. 54 10.18 ± 6.68

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) (mg/g) [10][11][12] 18. 10 Freshly plucked tea leaves are steamed or pan-fried immediately during green tea production. This step is essential to the inactivation of polyphenol oxidase and native microflora that eventually inhibit the aerobic oxidation of tea catechins during tea fermentation [14]. Prolonged fermentation process decreases the antioxidant capacity and the levels of monomeric catechins and simple phenolic acids [14]. Thus, a non-fermentation process in green tea production contributes to its green colour (hence the name), high polyphenol content and better radical-quenching ability compared with that of black tea [15,16].

Phenolic compounds of green tea, such as catechins, act as natural antioxidants and constitute 6-16% of its dry leaves [17]. The four major green tea catechins include (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), (-)-epigallocatechin (EGC), (-)-epicatechin-3-gallate (ECG) and (-)-epicatechin (EC) [18]. Catechins possess excellent antioxidant properties and superior to glutathione, vitamin C and flavonoids [19]. These catechins neutralise free radicals and facilitate the detoxification of enzymes, such as catalase, glutathione peroxidase and glutathione reductase [20,21]. Numerous studies showed the various beneficial effects of green tea extract and its catechins on health, including high antioxidant [22], osteoprotective [23], neuroprotective [24], anti-cancer [25,26], anti-hyperlipidaemia [27] and anti-diabetic [28] effects, and that green tea extract and its catechins improve fertility in humans and animals [18].

The daily consumption of green tea has positive effects on the male and female reproductive systems. A meta-analysis study demonstrated that at least seven cups of green tea per day could effectively prevent prostate cancer [25]. Studies in lead-induced rats treated with green tea extracts showed improved male fertility, as indicated by significant increases in sperm count, motility and testosterone level relative to those in the control group. This effect may be due to the ability of green tea to inhibit the absorption and promote the excretion of heavy metals [29]. Meanwhile, the effect of green tea on the female reproductive system is demonstrated by a decrease in ovarian cancer risk among southern Chinese women who regularly drink green tea [30]. This finding is further supported by the shrinkage of total fibroid volume and reduced fibroid-specific symptom severity in women with symptomatic fibroids after 4 months of supplementation with 800 mg of green tea extract [31]. A high content of EGCG inhibits the proliferation of leiomyoma tumour (fibroid tumour) and induce apoptosis [32].

Green tea is a popular beverage with a wide range of ready-to-drink packs and supplements in the forms of tablets and capsules. Information on its health benefits, especially on the reproductive system, offers prospects of natural complementary treatments. However, the review of green tea's health benefits on female reproductive disorders, including polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), endometriosis and dysmenorrhea, remains scarce. Therefore, this review aims to analyse studies related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on selected female reproductive disorders.


## Methodology

A literature search was performed to identify and map out relevant and pertinent articles related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on female reproductive disorders. Peer-reviewed and full-text English articles were collected in a time frame from as early as 1960 to January 2021 from electronic databases, including Scopus, MEDLINE via EBSCOhost and Google Scholar. The following set of keywords was used: (1) Green tea or catechin and (2) PCOS or Endometriosis or Dysmenorrhea. The literature search was further supplemented by referencing related review articles and scientific reports found from the search results.


## Beneficial Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Female Reproductive Disorders

In this section, the beneficial effects of green tea or its derivatives epigallocatechin-3gallate are discussed according to their effects on selected female reproductive disorders. A total of 13 articles were discussed, comprising seven articles related to endometriosis, four articles associated with PCOS and two articles about dysmenorrhea. The beneficial effects of green tea or its derivatives, such as EGCG, were discussed, including effects against (a) endometriosis (b) PCOS and (c) dysmenorrhea ( Figure 1). 


### Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Endometriosis

Endometriosis is a chronic disorder characterised by the implantation of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity [33]. It affects adolescents and reproductiveaged women and is commonly associated with chronic pelvic pain and infertility [34]. EGCG, the most abundant component found in green tea, has a beneficial effect against endometriosis.

In this review, we found seven studies exploring the effect of EGCG against endome- 


### Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Endometriosis

Endometriosis is a chronic disorder characterised by the implantation of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity [33]. It affects adolescents and reproductive-aged women and is commonly associated with chronic pelvic pain and infertility [34]. EGCG, the most abundant component found in green tea, has a beneficial effect against endometriosis.

In this review, we found seven studies exploring the effect of EGCG against endometriosis (Table 2: in vivo studies, and Table 3: in vitro studies). These studies utilised animal models of endometriosis, which involved an endometrium transplanted into an animal; the endometrium tissues were derived either from an endometriosis patient or from an animal endometrium. The studies reported the positive effects of EGCG on the endometrium, mainly those exerted by anti-angiogenic, anti-fibrotic, anti-proliferative and proapoptotic mechanisms. The anti-proliferative effect of EGCG against endometriosis was reported in most of the studies. EGCG causes regression in the development of endometriosis lesions assessed by size, number, volume, weight and cell proliferation [33,[35][36][37][38]. Figure 2 illustrates a simplified version of the mechanism related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis.

The anti-angiogenic properties of EGCG were reported in five studies [33,[35][36][37]39]. Xu et al. [33] transplanted eutopic endometria from stage III endometriosis patients into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) mice. In this study, the mice are treated either with 20 mg/kg/day vitamin E as antioxidant control, 50 mg/kg EGCG or saline intraperitoneally for 3 weeks. Treatment with EGCG but not vitamin E reduced the level of angiogenesis in endometriotic lesions and its adjacent tissues, as indicated by the weak staining of CD34 and cytokeratin; they also reported decreases in microvessel size and density and down-regulation of mRNA for angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A), further demonstrating the anti-angiogenic effect of EGCG. However, no changes were observed in hypoxia-inducible factor 1, alpha subunit (HIF1A) expression, suggesting that green tea EGCG has an anti-angiogenic effect in endometriosis, specifically through VEGF suppression [33]. Another study utilised both tissues from human with stage III endometriosis and mouse endometrial tissues transplanted into SCID mice. In this study, treatment with EGCG at 50 mg/kg through the intraperitoneal route again showing inhibition of angiogenesis mainly through the reduction of microvessel formation and down-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C) and tyrosine kinase receptor VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) expression [39]. In the in vitro part of this study, 10-50 µM EGCG inhibited VEGF-C/VEGFR-2 signalling through c-JUN, interferong, matrix metalloproteinase-9 and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand, which are the three pathways for endothelial proliferation, inflammatory response and mobility [39].

The anti-angiogenic properties of EGCG were demonstrated in another study utilising in vivo and in vitro methods [37]. In this study, endometrium and ovarian follicles transplanted into dorsal skinfold chamber models of Syrian golden hamsters. Treatment with 65 mg/kg EGCG selectively inhibited angiogenesis and the blood perfusion of endometriotic lesions without affecting blood vessel development in the ovarian follicles. These are indicated by a significantly reduced number and density of microvessels development and decreased centerline red blood cell velocity and volumetric blood flow within the endometriotic lesions but not in ovarian follicles. In the in vitro part of this study, 40 µM EGCG suppressed estrogen-stimulated activation, proliferation and VEGF expression of endometrial cells in isolated hamster endometrial cells [37]. Green tea EGCG has poor bioavailability [40]. Hence, a study utilised the prodrug of EGCG (EGCG octaacetate) to enhance the stability and bioavailability of EGCG. In this study, EGCG octaacetate resulted in a significantly lower degree of staining of CD31 and αSMA (angiogenic marker) compared with the EGCG group [36]. Hetero-transplants of eutopic endometrium from patients with stage III endometriosis into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) mice

In the EGCG treated group: Endometriotic lesions were smaller than control. The glandular epithelium was smaller and eccentrically distributed. Angiogenesis in lesions and adjacent tissues was under-developed, and microvessel size and density were smaller than the control. mRNA for angiogenic vascular endothelial growth factor-A was significantly down-regulated. No change in mRNA level of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and alpha subunit. Apoptosis in the lesions was obvious. Nuclear factor-kappa B and mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 mRNA levels were up-regulated. No differences were observed in all parameters with vitamin E treatment.

EGCG suppresses the development of experimental endometriosis through the anti-angiogenic mechanism.

[33]  The decitabine group had a higher rate than the EGCG group, and the EGCG group had a higher rate than the control group. DNA methylation status of E-cadherin promoter region:

The control group had a higher level than the EGCG group, and the EGCG group had a higher level than the decitabine group.

EGCG may inhibit the growth of the endometrial lesion, affect the expression of E-cadherin and reduce the status of DNA methylation of the E-cadherin promoter region. EGCG exerts anti-fibrotic effects against endometriosis in in vivo and in vitro settings [41]. In this study, the endometriosis model of mice treated with EGCG at 50 mg/kg/day for 14 days showed inhibited fibrosis, which was indicated by the weak Sirius red and Masson trichrome staining. Endometrial and endometriotic stromal cells cultured and treated with 50 or 100 µM EGCG showed inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion. EGCG suppressed the expression of αSMA, Col-I, CTGF and FN mRNAs (fibrotic marker) in endometriotic and endometrial stromal cells and attenuated the cell-mediated contraction of collagen gels at 8, 12 and 24 h. Moreover, EGCG inhibited the TGF-β1-stimulated activation of MAPK, and Smad signalling pathways further elucidated the mechanism of the anti-fibrotic effect of EGCG against endometriosis [41].

The proapoptotic feature of EGCG has been demonstrated in three studies which reported an increase in apoptotic activity in endometriosis cells after EGCG treatment [33,35,36]. Xu et al. [33] assessed the apoptotic activity of endometriosis in an endometriosis mouse model upon 50 mg/kg EGCG treatment through terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labelling (TUNEL) assay and discovered apoptosis in the lesions was more prominent compared with that in the control group. They found that the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) and mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 (MAPK1) mRNA levels (apoptosis marker) were elevated after EGCG treatment [33]. Endometriosis animal and in vitro studies that used TUNEL assays showed an increase in the level of apoptosis after treatment with 20 and 100 mg/kg EGCG orally and 40, 80 and 100 µM for the primary cultures of human endometrial epithelial cells of patients with endometriosis. Another study used the prodrug of EGCG (EGCG octaacetate) and found through TUNEL assay, that the number of apoptotic cells in the pro-EGCG group was significantly higher than that in the EGCG group [36].

EGCG exerts a beneficial effect against endometriosis. However, no study involving humans has explored the effect of green tea or EGCG on endometriosis. Further investigation may explore the relation of green tea or EGCG in patients with endometriosis to discover the beneficial effects of EGCG on humans. 


### Effects of Green Tea Catechins on PCOS

PCOS is a combination of complex reproductive, endocrine and metabolic syndrome [42]. Approximately 6-10% (defined by 1990 NIH criteria) of reproductive women have been affected by PCOS, and the incidence rates doubled according to Rotterdam or An- 


### Effects of Green Tea Catechins on PCOS

PCOS is a combination of complex reproductive, endocrine and metabolic syndrome [42]. Approximately 6-10% (defined by 1990 NIH criteria) of reproductive women have been affected by PCOS, and the incidence rates doubled according to Rotterdam or Androgen Excess-PCOS Society criteria [43]. Currently, PCOS has no definite treatment, symptomatic treatment alone is being implemented [44]. Green tea and its derivatives, catechins, have beneficial health effects against PCOS. We found three clinical trials and one animal study exploring the effect of green tea or its derivative catechin against PCOS ( Table 4). Most of these studies showed the positive health effects against PCOS, suggesting that green tea is a supplement for currently available drugs for PCOS.

One of the factors that may increase the risk of developing PCOS in women is obesity [45]. Even 5-10% weight loss alleviates many PCOS features [42]. A clinical trial involving overweight and obese PCOS women who consumed green tea tablets (unspecified dose) showed a significant reduction in body weight compared with women in the placebo group [46]. Reduction in body weight was observed in PCOS-induced rats after treatment with hydro-alcoholic green tea extract through intraperitoneal injection [47]. However, no change in BMI and body weight was recorded in two clinical trials involving green tea tablets and PCOS women [48,49].

Chronic low-grade inflammation is a pathogenesis of PCOS [50]. Despite that green tea has anti-inflammatory properties [51], a clinical trial involving PCOS women who consumed 500 mg of green tea tablet, reported no significant difference among the levels of inflammatory marker TNF-α, IL-6 and hs-CRP [48]. Therefore, more studies should be carried out to prove the anti-inflammatory effect of green tea against PCOS.

The National Institutes of Health and Androgen Excess and PCOS Society consider hyperandrogenism one of the must-have criteria for diagnosing PCOS [45]. Green tea or its derivatives inhibits the increase in testosterone level in PCOS women [46] or PCOS-induced animals [47]. However, Chan et al. did not find any difference in testosterone, SHBG, free androgen, androstenedione, DHEA-S, FSH and LH levels between the green tea treatment group and placebo group in obese PCOS women [49].

Nearly half of women diagnosed with PCOS have insulin-resistant hyperinsulinism [52]. Green tea or its derivatives normalise hyperinsulinism in PCOS. A clinical trial recorded a significant reduction in fasting insulin on overweight and obese PCOS women after green tea tablet treatment [46]. However, Chan et al. found no change in fasting insulin, fasting glucose, 2 h post-load glucose and fasting G:I ratio in obese PCOS women who consumed capsules containing 2% freeze-dried tea powder for 3 months [49]. In the animal PCOS model, the study on the rat model found no difference in fasting insulin level, but significant reductions in fasting glucose and HOMA-calculated insulin resistance were recorded [47].

PCOS is the leading cause of anovulatory infertility in women [42]. In the PCOS animal model, green tea treatment improved ovulation and follicle progression and inhibited cyst formation. This result was assessed on the basis of the increment in the number of follicles and corpus luteum and reduced number of cystic follicles [47].

This section summarises and critically analyses the effects of green tea and catechins against PCOS. Many discrepancies were recorded among clinical trials and animal studies with regard to these effects. More studies are needed to explore the conclusive effect of green tea on PCOS. Studies discovering the mechanism of green tea effect against PCOS remains limited. Overall, green tea has beneficial effects against PCOS. 


### Effects of Green Tea Catechins on Dysmenorrhea

Dysmenorrhea refers as the occurrence of painful cramps of uterine origin during menstruation [53]. It has two types: primary dysmenorrhea, which refers to pain without any evidence of pathology [54], and secondary dysmenorrhea, which is caused by specific pelvic pathological conditions, such as adenomyosis, fibroids and endometriosis [55]. The prevalence of dysmenorrhea in reproductive age women ranges from 16.8% to 81% [56].

Green tea and EGCG have effects against dysmenorrhea (Table 5). A cross-sectional study involving 1183 reproductive-age women in Shanghai, China, found that the consumption of green tea is associated with a low prevalence of dysmenorrhea. Furthermore, this study reported a stronger relationship of green tea intake in moderate-to-severe dysmenorrhea than in mild dysmenorrhea. However, the exact amount and duration for green tea intake are not discovered in this study. This study examined the relation of consumption of caffeinated beverages (coffee) with dysmenorrhea to explore whether caffeine in tea was responsible for the relief of dysmenorrhea. The results showed that coffee was positively related to the severity of dysmenorrhea, suggesting that caffeine in tea might not be responsible for the effect against dysmenorrhea [57].

Another study treated mice with 1 mg/kg tamoxifen to induce adenomyosis [58]. The result showed that the induction of adenomyosis resulted in progressive generalised hyperalgesia. The amplitude and frequency of uterine contractions were elevated, contributing to dysmenorrhea. Elevated plasma corticosterone levels indicated stress level. Treatment with 5 and 50 mg of EGCG alleviated generalised hyperalgesia and reduced plasma corticosterone levels. In addition, EGCG reduced uterine contractility and suppressed myometrial infiltration. These results suggested that EGCG have effects against dysmenorrhea [58].

The cross-sectional study discussed above provided the relation between green tea intake and lowered prevalence of dysmenorrhea, whereas the animal study showed that the EGCG compound found in green tea alleviates dysmenorrhea. However, no mechanistic study has explored the possible molecular pathway of green tea's beneficial effect against dysmenorrhea. Consumption of green tea was associated with a lower prevalence of dysmenorrhea. The relationship was stronger in moderate-to-severe dysmenorrhea than in mild dysmenorrhea.

Consumptions of green tea was associated with lower prevalence of dysmenorrhoea.

[57] 


## Conclusions

Green tea or its derivative EGCG possesses health benefits and effects against endometriosis, PCOS and dysmenorrhea according to human and animal studies. However, no clinical trial has been conducted to translate the excellent findings of green tea benefits in the animal endometriosis model. Future studies may focus on green tea benefit on PCOS and dysmenorrhea to elucidate the discrepancy recorded among current studies.  Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study, due to the study is a review of currently available literature.


## Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.


## Data Availability Statement:

The data presented in this study are available on request from the corresponding author.

## Figure 1 .
1Beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and dysmenorrhea.

## Figure 1 .
1Beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis, polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and dysmenorrhea.

## Figure 2 .
2Mechanism related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis.

## Figure 2 .
2Mechanism related to the beneficial effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis.

## Author
Contributions: Conceptualization, D.A.M.K., N.S, S.S.M.Z. and M.H.M.; methodology, M.H.M. and D.A.M.K.; writing-original draft preparation, D.A.M.K. and N.S.; Illustration, M.H.M., writing-review and editing, M.H.M. and S.S.M.Z.; supervision, M.H.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

## Funding:
This research was funded by Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (Geran Universiti Penyelidikan (GUP); grant number GUP-2018-146).

## Table 2 .
2In vivo studies found related to the effects of green tea catechins on endometriosis.Treatment 
Treatment Duration 
Type of Study 
Findings 
Conclusion 
References 

1. 50 mg/kg/day green tea 
Epigallocatechin-3-gallate 
(EGCG) 
2. 20 mg/kg/day vitamin E 
3. Saline 
via intraperitoneal injection 

Daily 
for 2 weeks. 




1. 50 mg/kg/day EGCG 2. 20 mg/kg/day vitamin E 3. Saline via intraperitoneal injection Daily for 3 weeks 1. Hetero-transplants of eutopic endometrium from patients with stage III endometriosis into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) ovariectomised mice 2. Mouse endometrial tissues transplanted into SCID mice EGCG inhibited microvessel development in endometriotic implants.EGCG suppressed vascular endothelial growth factor C (VEGF-C) and tyrosine kinase receptor VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR2) expression. EGCG down-regulated VEGFC/VEGFR2 signalling through c-JUN, interferon-γ, matrix metalloproteinase 9 and chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand. No differences were observed in all parameters with vitamin E treatment.1. EGCG 50 mg/kg/day 2. 200 mL PBS (vehicle) via intraperitoneal injectionDaily for 14 days 1. Hetero-transplants of endometrium from patients with endometriosis into severely compromised immunodeficient (SCID) ovariectomised mice Significant lower scores for both Sirius red and Masson trichrome staining in EGCG treated mice. Significant lower score human CD10 staining in untreated mice than in treated mice.EGCG inhibited angiogenesis 
and suppressed 
VEGFC/VEGFR2 expression and 
signalling pathway. 

[39] 

EGCG inhibits fibrosis in 
endometriosis 
[41] 

1. 20 mg/kg EGCG 
2. 100 mg/ 
kg EGCG 
3. Resveratrol 10 mg/kg 
4. Resveratrol 
25 mg/kg 
Via oral route 

Daily for 4 weeks 

Transplantation of mouse uterine 
horns to the mouse bowel 
mesentery to induce 
endometriotic-like lesions in a 
BALB/c mouse model 

EGCG and resveratrol significantly reduced the number 
and volume of endometriotic lesions. 
EGCG and resveratrol significantly diminished cell 
proliferation, reduced vascular density and increased 
apoptosis within the lesions. 

EGCG treatment inhibits the 
development and reduces the 
size of endometriotic lesions by 
reducing cell proliferation and 
increasing apoptotic activity. 


## Table 2 .
2Cont.Treatment 
Treatment Duration 
Type of Study 
Findings 
Conclusion 
References 

1. 50 mg/kg pro-EGCG (EGCG 
octaacetate). 
2. 50 mg/kg EGCG 
3. 20 mg/kg Vitamin E 
via intraperitoneal injection 

Daily for 4 weeks 

Transplantation of endometrial 
tissues from transgenic luciferase 
expressing (CMV-Luc) mice into 
non-luminescent NOD-SCID 
mice 

EGCG and pro-EGCG significantly decreased 
endometrial implant growth from the 2nd week to the 
4th week. 
EGCG and pro-EGCG significantly reduced lesion size 
and weight, inhibited functional and structural 
microvessels in the lesions and enhanced apoptosis. 
Inhibition by pro-EGCG in all the angiogenesis 
parameters was significantly greater than that by EGCG. 
Pro-EGCG had better bioavailability and greater 
antioxidation and anti-angiogenesis capacities than 
EGCG. 
No differences were observed in all parameters with 
vitamin E treatment. 

Pro-EGCG significantly inhibited 
the development, growth, and 
angiogenesis of experimental 
endometriosis in mice with 
greater efficacy, better 
bioavailability, and greater 
anti-oxidation and 
anti-angiogenesis 
capacities than EGCG. 

[36] 

1. 65 mg/kg EGCG 
2. 200 mL 
DMSO (vehicle) 
intraperitoneally 

Daily for 14 days 

Transplantation of endometrium 
and ovarian follicles to Syrian 
golden hamster dorsal skinfold 
chamber model 

EGCG group had significant reduction in the number 
and density of microvessels development within the 
endometriotic lesions but not in ovarian follicles. 
EGCG group decreased in centerline red blood cell 
velocity and volumetric blood flow within the 
endometriotic lesions but not in ovarian follicles. 
EGCG treatment induced the regression of 
endometriotic lesions. 

EGCG prevents the 
establishment of new 
endometriotic lesions. 

[37] 

1. 8.333 mg/mL EGCG 
2. 0.3 µg/µL decitabine 
3. Saline 
Route: intraperitoneal 

Once in 2 days for 16 days 

Hetero-transplants of human 
endometrium into BALB/c 
female nude mice 

Ectopic lesion growth: 
Increased from 4th to 16th day in the control group, 
Increased in the 0-8th day and decreased in the 8-16th 
day in the EGCG and decitabine group. 
Positive expression rate of E-cadherin: 


## Table 3 .
3In vitro studies found related to the effects of green tea on endometriosis.Treatment 
Treatment Duration 
Type of Cell 
Findings 
Conclusion 
References 

1. EGCG (10-50 µM) 
2. Vitamin E (20 µM), 
4 h 
Human microvascular 
endothelial cells 

EGCG suppressed VEGF-C expression 
and reduced VEGFR-2 and ERK 
activation. 

EGCG inhibited angiogenesis 
and suppressed 
VEGFC/VEGFR2 expression 
and signalling pathway 

[39] 

1. EGCG 50 or 100 µM 
2. N-acetyl-L-cysteine 5 or 
100 µM 

8-24 h 
Endometrial and 
endometriotic stromal cells 

EGCG significantly inhibited cell 
proliferation, migration and invasion. 
EGCG significantly decreased the 
TGF-β1-dependent increase in the 
mRNA expression of αSMA, Col-I, 
CTGF and FN mRNAs (fibrotic marker). 
EGCG significantly attenuated the 
cell-mediated contraction of collagen 
gels at 8, 12 and 24 h. 
EGCG inhibited TGF-β1-stimulated 
activation of MAPK and Smad signalling 
pathways. 

EGCG inhibits fibrosis in 
endometriosis 
[41] 

1. EGCG (0, 20, 40, 80 and 
100 µM) 
2. Resveratrol (0, 25, 50 and 
100 µM) 

24 h 

Primary cultures of human 
endometrial epithelial cells 
from patient with 
endometriosis 

Reduction in cell proliferation and 
increase in apoptosis. 

EGCG treatment inhibits the 
development of 
endometriotic lesions by 
reducing cell proliferation 
and increasing apoptotic 
activity. 

[35] 

1. 40 µM EGCG. 
2. 1 µM 17β-estradiol 
3. 40 µM EGCG + 1 µM 
17β-estradiol 

Isolated hamster endometrial 
stromal and glandular cells 

EGCG suppressed E2-stimulated 
activation, proliferation and VEGF 
expression of endometrial cells. 

EGCG prevents the 
establishment of new 
endometriotic lesions. 

[37] 


## Table 4 .
4Studies found related to the effects of green tea catechins on PCOS. fasting cholesterol, fasting HDL and LDL cholesterol levels between the treatment and placebo groups. Small but significant increase in triglyceride level in the treatment group after 3 months.Green tea supplementation did not significantly reduce body weight in obese women with PCOS, nor did it alter the glucose or lipid metabolism.Significant decrease in the levels of LH and testosterone but no significant change in FSH level. Significant reduction in fasting glucose level. No changes in the level of insulin. Significant decrease in the HOMA-calculated insulin resistance. Significant decrease in body weight. Increase in the number of follicles and corpus luteum and reduced number of cystic follicles.Treatment 
Treatment Duration 
Type of Study 
Findings 
Conclusion 
References 

1. Green tea tablet with 
unspecified dose 
2. Placebo-capsules filled with 
wheat flour 

Daily for 12 weeks 

Randomized 
double-blind clinical trial on 60 
overweight and obese PCOS 
Women aged between 20 to 
40 years old 

Significant reduction in weight and fasting insulin 
and testosterone levels in the green tea treated 
group compared with the placebo group. 

The consumption of green tea by 
overweight and obese women 
suffering from PCOS leads to 
weight loss, a decrease in fasting 
insulin, and a decrease in the 
level of free testosterone. 

[46] 

1. Tablets equivalent to 500 mg 
green tea (C. Sinensis L.) leaf 
powder 
2. Placebo-tablet corn starch 

Daily for 45 days 

Randomized 
double-blind placebo-controlled 
trial on 45 PCOS women aged 
18-55 years with BMI range from 
20-35 kg/m 2 

No change found in height, 
weight, BMI, WC, HC, waist-to-hip ratio or body fat 
between the treated and placebo groups. 
Significant reduction in weight, BMI, WC and body 
fat percentage after 45 days in the treated group. 
No significant difference in inflammatory marker 
TNF-α, IL-6 and hs-CRP levels. 
Significant positive correlations of nonsignificant 
decrease in the levels of IL-6 after reduction in body 
weight, BMI, waist circumference, hip circumference 
and body fat 
percentage was reported in the treated group. 

Consumption of green tea tablets 
did not cause any effect on 
inflammation biomarkers in 
PCOS 
women. However, it may be 
effective as a complementary 
treatment for weight control in 
PCOS women. 

[48] 

1. Capsules containing 2% 
freeze-dried tea powder, 
equivalent to 540 mg 
epigallocatechin-3-gallate. 
2. Placebo capsule-unspecified 

Daily for three months 

Randomized placebo-controlled 
trial on obese PCOS 
Women aged from 25-40 Years 
with BMI more than 28 kg/m 2 

No significant difference in body weight, BMI and 
body fat content between treatment and placebo 
group. 
No significant difference in testosterone, SHBG, free 
androgen, androstenedione, DHEA-S, FSH and LH 
levels between treatment and placebo group. 
No significant difference in fasting insulin, fasting 
glucose, 2 h post-load glucose, fasting G:I ratio, 
fasting leptin, [49] 

1. 50,100 and 200 mg/kg body 
weight of hydro-alcoholic green 
tea extract 
2. Saline 

Intraperitoneally daily for 
10 days 

Adult female Wistar rats treated 
with estradiol valerate to induce 
PCOS 

Green tea consumption causes 
modulating gonadotropin levels, 
reducing insulin resistance, 
losing rats' weights and 
improving the ovarian 
morphology. 


## Table 5 .
5Studies found related to the effects of green tea catechins on dysmenorrhea.Treatment 
Treatment Duration 
Type of Study 
Findings 
Conclusion 
References 

Green tea intake 
Not specified 

A cross-sectional study 
involving reproductive age 
women in Shanghai, China. 


Acknowledgments:The authors would like to express their gratitude to Khidhir Kamil for the guidance in illustrating the figures.Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Tea polyphenols and their roles in cancer prevention and chemotherapy. D Chen, Q P Dou, 10.3390/ijms9071196Int. J. Mol. Sci. 9Chen, D.; Dou, Q.P. Tea polyphenols and their roles in cancer prevention and chemotherapy. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2008, 9, 1196-1206. [CrossRef]

Antioxidants of the Beverage Tea in Promotion of Human Health. I A Siddiqui, F Afaq, V M Adhami, N Ahmad, H Mukhtar, 10.1089/152308604773934323Antioxid. Redox Signal. 6PubMedSiddiqui, I.A.; Afaq, F.; Adhami, V.M.; Ahmad, N.; Mukhtar, H. Antioxidants of the Beverage Tea in Promotion of Human Health. Antioxid. Redox Signal. 2004, 6, 571-582. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Green tea and coffee consumption is inversely associated with depressive symptoms in a Japanese working population. N M Pham, A Nanri, K Kurotani, K Kuwahara, A Kume, M Sato, H Hayabuchi, T Mizoue, 10.1017/S1368980013000360Public Health Nutr. 17PubMedPham, N.M.; Nanri, A.; Kurotani, K.; Kuwahara, K.; Kume, A.; Sato, M.; Hayabuchi, H.; Mizoue, T. Green tea and coffee consumption is inversely associated with depressive symptoms in a Japanese working population. Public Health Nutr. 2014, 17, 625-633. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Tea consumption and depressive symptoms in older people in rural China. L Feng, Z Yan, B Sun, C Cai, H Jiang, E H Kua, T P Ng, C Qiu, 10.1111/jgs.12496J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 61PubMedFeng, L.; Yan, Z.; Sun, B.; Cai, C.; Jiang, H.; Kua, E.H.; Ng, T.P.; Qiu, C. Tea consumption and depressive symptoms in older people in rural China. J. Am. Geriatr. Soc. 2013, 61, 1943-1947. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Estimated daily intake of phenolics and antioxidants from green tea consumption in the Korean diet. B H Lee, T G Nam, N Y Park, O K Chun, S I Koo, D O Kim, 10.3109/09637486.2016.1153612Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 67PubMedLee, B.H.; Nam, T.G.; Park, N.Y.; Chun, O.K.; Koo, S.I.; Kim, D.O. Estimated daily intake of phenolics and antioxidants from green tea consumption in the Korean diet. Int. J. Food Sci. Nutr. 2016, 67, 344-352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Effect of increased tea consumption on oxidative DNA damage among smokers: A randomized controlled study. I A Hakim, R B Harris, S Brown, H H Chow, S Wiseman, S Agarwal, W Talbot, 10.1093/jn/133.10.3303SJ. Nutr. 133Hakim, I.A.; Harris, R.B.; Brown, S.; Chow, H.H.; Wiseman, S.; Agarwal, S.; Talbot, W. Effect of increased tea consumption on oxidative DNA damage among smokers: A randomized controlled study. J. Nutr. 2003, 133, 3303s-3309s. [CrossRef]

The safety of green tea and green tea extract consumption in adults -Results of a systematic review. J Hu, D Webster, J Cao, A Shao, 10.1016/j.yrtph.2018.03.019Regul. Toxicol. Pharm. 95Hu, J.; Webster, D.; Cao, J.; Shao, A. The safety of green tea and green tea extract consumption in adults -Results of a systematic review. Regul. Toxicol. Pharm. 2018, 95, 412-433. [CrossRef]

Chemistry and Biological Activities of Processed Camellia sinensis Teas: A Comprehensive Review. L Zhang, C.-T Ho, J Zhou, J S Santos, L Armstrong, D Granato, 10.1111/1541-4337.12479Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18PubMedZhang, L.; Ho, C.-T.; Zhou, J.; Santos, J.S.; Armstrong, L.; Granato, D. Chemistry and Biological Activities of Processed Camellia sinensis Teas: A Comprehensive Review. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 2019, 18, 1474-1495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Antioxidant and antibacterial properties of green, black, and herbal teas of Camellia sinensis. E W C Chan, E Y Soh, P P Tie, Y P Law, 10.4103/0974-8490.89748Pharmacogn. Res. 3PubMedChan, E.W.C.; Soh, E.Y.; Tie, P.P.; Law, Y.P. Antioxidant and antibacterial properties of green, black, and herbal teas of Camellia sinensis. Pharmacogn. Res. 2011, 3, 266-272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Comparison of ten major constituents in seven types of processed tea using HPLC-DAD-MS followed by principal component and hierarchical cluster analysis. T Yi, L Zhu, W.-L Peng, X.-C He, H.-L Chen, J Li, T Yu, Z.-T Liang, Z.-Z Zhao, H.-B Chen, 10.1016/j.lwt.2015.01.003LWT Food Sci. Technol. 62Yi, T.; Zhu, L.; Peng, W.-L.; He, X.-C.; Chen, H.-L.; Li, J.; Yu, T.; Liang, Z.-T.; Zhao, Z.-Z.; Chen, H.-B. Comparison of ten major constituents in seven types of processed tea using HPLC-DAD-MS followed by principal component and hierarchical cluster analysis. LWT Food Sci. Technol. 2015, 62, 194-201. [CrossRef]

Comparison of catechins and volatile compounds among different types of tea using high performance liquid chromatograph and gas chromatograph mass spectrometer. K Wang, F Liu, Z Liu, J Huang, Z Xu, Y Li, J Chen, Y Gong, X Yang, 10.1111/j.1365-2621.2011.02629.xInt. J. Food Sci. Technol. 46Wang, K.; Liu, F.; Liu, Z.; Huang, J.; Xu, Z.; Li, Y.; Chen, J.; Gong, Y.; Yang, X. Comparison of catechins and volatile compounds among different types of tea using high performance liquid chromatograph and gas chromatograph mass spectrometer. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2011, 46, 1406-1412. [CrossRef]

Comparative analysis of tea catechins and theaflavins by high-performance liquid chromatography and capillary electrophoresis. B L Lee, C N Ong, 10.1016/S0021-9673(00)00215-6J. Chromatogr. A. 881Lee, B.L.; Ong, C.N. Comparative analysis of tea catechins and theaflavins by high-performance liquid chromatography and capillary electrophoresis. J. Chromatogr. A 2000, 881, 439-447. [CrossRef]

Analysis of free amino acids in Chinese teas and flower of tea plant by high performance liquid chromatography combined with solid-phase extraction. L Wang, R Xu, B Hu, W Li, Y Sun, Y Tu, X Zeng, 10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.05.063Food Chem. 123Wang, L.; Xu, R.; Hu, B.; Li, W.; Sun, Y.; Tu, Y.; Zeng, X. Analysis of free amino acids in Chinese teas and flower of tea plant by high performance liquid chromatography combined with solid-phase extraction. Food Chem. 2010, 123, 1259-1266. [CrossRef]

Changes in antioxidant phytochemicals and volatile composition of Camellia sinensis by oxidation during tea fermentation. Y Kim, K L Goodner, J.-D Park, J Choi, S T Talcott, 10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.05.012Food Chem. 129Kim, Y.; Goodner, K.L.; Park, J.-D.; Choi, J.; Talcott, S.T. Changes in antioxidant phytochemicals and volatile composition of Camellia sinensis by oxidation during tea fermentation. Food Chem. 2011, 129, 1331-1342. [CrossRef]

Green tea (Camellia sinensis): Chemistry, traditional, medicinal uses and its pharmacological activities -A review. V Chopade, A Phatak, A Upaganlawar, A Tankar, Pharmacogn. Rev. 2Chopade, V.; Phatak, A.; Upaganlawar, A.; Tankar, A. Green tea (Camellia sinensis): Chemistry, traditional, medicinal uses and its pharmacological activities -A review. Pharmacogn. Rev. 2008, 2, 157-162.

Inhibition of Carcinogenesis by Tea. C S Yang, P Maliakal, X Meng, 10.1146/annurev.pharmtox.42.082101.154309Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 42Yang, C.S.; Maliakal, P.; Meng, X. Inhibition of Carcinogenesis by Tea. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2002, 42, 25-54. [CrossRef]

Isolation and analysis of GTPs by HPLC. Anal. Lab. -Beijing-1999. O Zhu, Z Chen, 18Zhu, O.; Chen, Z. Isolation and analysis of GTPs by HPLC. Anal. Lab. -Beijing-1999, 18, 70-72.

Green tea extract and reproduction: A review. E3. O O Idowu, 10.18685/EJMR(6)1_EJMR-17-011J. Med. Res. 6Idowu, O.O. Green tea extract and reproduction: A review. E3 J. Med. Res. 2017, 6, 001-006. [CrossRef]

Antioxidant properties of catechins: Comparison with other antioxidants. M Grzesik, K Naparło, G Bartosz, I Sadowska-Bartosz, 10.1016/j.foodchem.2017.08.117Food Chem. PubMedGrzesik, M.; Naparło, K.; Bartosz, G.; Sadowska-Bartosz, I. Antioxidant properties of catechins: Comparison with other antioxidants. Food Chem. 2018, 241, 480-492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Medicinal and therapeutic potentialities of tea (Camellia sinensis L.)-A review. A B Sharangi, 10.1016/j.foodres.2009.01.007Food Res. Int. 42Sharangi, A.B. Medicinal and therapeutic potentialities of tea (Camellia sinensis L.)-A review. Food Res. Int. 2009, 42, 529-535. [CrossRef]

Tea catechins prevent the development of atherosclerosis in apoprotein E-deficient mice. Y Miura, T Chiba, I Tomita, H Koizumi, S Miura, K Umegaki, Y Hara, M Ikeda, T Tomita, 10.1093/jn/131.1.27J. Nutr. 131PubMedMiura, Y.; Chiba, T.; Tomita, I.; Koizumi, H.; Miura, S.; Umegaki, K.; Hara, Y.; Ikeda, M.; Tomita, T. Tea catechins prevent the development of atherosclerosis in apoprotein E-deficient mice. J. Nutr. 2001, 131, 27-32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Phytochemical Composition and Antioxidant Capacity of 30 Chinese Teas. G.-Y Tang, C.-N Zhao, X.-Y Xu, R.-Y Gan, S.-Y Cao, Q Liu, A Shang, Q.-Q Mao, H.-B Li, 10.3390/antiox8060180Antioxidants. 8180PubMedTang, G.-Y.; Zhao, C.-N.; Xu, X.-Y.; Gan, R.-Y.; Cao, S.-Y.; Liu, Q.; Shang, A.; Mao, Q.-Q.; Li, H.-B. Phytochemical Composition and Antioxidant Capacity of 30 Chinese Teas. Antioxidants 2019, 8, 180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Osteoprotective Roles of Green Tea Catechins. H.-T Huang, T.-L Cheng, S.-Y Lin, C.-J Ho, J Y Chyu, R.-S Yang, C.-H Chen, C.-L Shen, 10.3390/antiox9111136Antioxidants. 2020PubMedHuang, H.-T.; Cheng, T.-L.; Lin, S.-Y.; Ho, C.-J.; Chyu, J.Y.; Yang, R.-S.; Chen, C.-H.; Shen, C.-L. Osteoprotective Roles of Green Tea Catechins. Antioxidants 2020, 9, 1136. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Function of Green Tea Catechins in the Brain: Epigallocatechin Gallate and its Metabolites. M Pervin, K Unno, A Takagaki, M Isemura, Y Nakamura, 10.3390/ijms20153630Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20PubMedPervin, M.; Unno, K.; Takagaki, A.; Isemura, M.; Nakamura, Y. Function of Green Tea Catechins in the Brain: Epigallocatechin Gallate and its Metabolites. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 3630. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Green tea and the risk of prostate cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Y Guo, F Zhi, P Chen, K Zhao, H Xiang, Q Mao, X Wang, X Zhang, 10.1097/MD.000000000000642696e6426. [CrossRefGuo, Y.; Zhi, F.; Chen, P.; Zhao, K.; Xiang, H.; Mao, Q.; Wang, X.; Zhang, X. Green tea and the risk of prostate cancer: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Medicine 2017, 96, e6426. [CrossRef]

Reactive oxygen species production triggers green tea-induced anti-leukaemic effects on acute promyelocytic leukaemia model. C O Torello, R N Shiraishi, F I Della Via, T C L Castro, A L Longhini, I Santos, A L Bombeiro, C L A Silva, M L S Queiroz, E M Rego, 10.1016/j.canlet.2017.11.006Cancer Lett. 414Torello, C.O.; Shiraishi, R.N.; Della Via, F.I.; Castro, T.C.L.; Longhini, A.L.; Santos, I.; Bombeiro, A.L.; Silva, C.L.A.; Queiroz, M.L.S.; Rego, E.M.; et al. Reactive oxygen species production triggers green tea-induced anti-leukaemic effects on acute promyelocytic leukaemia model. Cancer Lett 2018, 414, 116-126. [CrossRef]

Anti-Hyperlipidemia and Anti-obesity Properties of Garcinia atroviridis and Camellia sinensis Extracts in High-Fat Diet Mice. A Kongchian, N Keawboonlert, T Boonrak, S Lookyee, K Buasri, N Surongkul, J Tangpong, 10.48048/wjst.2020.10717Walailak J. Sci. Technol. (WJST). 17Kongchian, A.; Keawboonlert, N.; Boonrak, T.; Lookyee, S.; Buasri, K.; Surongkul, N.; Tangpong, J. Anti-Hyperlipidemia and Anti-obesity Properties of Garcinia atroviridis and Camellia sinensis Extracts in High-Fat Diet Mice. Walailak J. Sci. Technol. (WJST) 2020, 17, 1126-1138. [CrossRef]

Inhibition of the facilitative sugar transporters (GLUTs) by tea extracts and catechins. D Ni, Z Ai, D Munoz-Sandoval, R Suresh, P R Ellis, C Yuqiong, P A Sharp, P J Butterworth, Z Yu, C P Corpe, 10.1096/fj.202000057RRFASEB J. 2020Ni, D.; Ai, Z.; Munoz-Sandoval, D.; Suresh, R.; Ellis, P.R.; Yuqiong, C.; Sharp, P.A.; Butterworth, P.J.; Yu, Z.; Corpe, C.P. Inhibition of the facilitative sugar transporters (GLUTs) by tea extracts and catechins. FASEB J. 2020, 34, 9995-10010. [CrossRef]

Survey of the detoxification effect of green tea extract on the reproductive system in rats exposed to lead acetate. N Sha&apos;sqªbani, S Miraj, M Rafieian-Kohpayei, A Namjoo, 10.4103/2277-9175.161582Adv. Biomed. Res. Sha'SQªbani, N.; Miraj, S.; Rafieian-kohpayei, M.; Namjoo, A. Survey of the detoxification effect of green tea extract on the reproductive system in rats exposed to lead acetate. Adv. Biomed. Res. 2015, 4, 155. [CrossRef]

Tea consumption reduces ovarian cancer risk. A H Lee, D Su, M Pasalich, C W Binns, 10.1016/j.canep.2012.10.003Cancer Epidemiol. 37Lee, A.H.; Su, D.; Pasalich, M.; Binns, C.W. Tea consumption reduces ovarian cancer risk. Cancer Epidemiol. 2013, 37, 54-59. [CrossRef]

Treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids with green tea extract: A pilot randomized controlled clinical study. E Roshdy, V Rajaratnam, S Maitra, M Sabry, A S A Allah, A Al-Hendy, 10.2147/IJWH.S41021Int J. Womens Health. 5PubMedRoshdy, E.; Rajaratnam, V.; Maitra, S.; Sabry, M.; Allah, A.S.A.; Al-Hendy, A. Treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids with green tea extract: A pilot randomized controlled clinical study. Int J. Womens Health 2013, 5, 477-486. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Green tea extract inhibits proliferation of uterine leiomyoma cells in vitro and in nude mice. D Zhang, M Al-Hendy, G Richard-Davis, V Montgomery-Rice, C Sharan, V Rajaratnam, A Khurana, A Al-Hendy, 10.1016/j.ajog.2009.10.885Am. J. Obs. Gynecol. 202e9. [CrossRef. PubMedZhang, D.; Al-Hendy, M.; Richard-Davis, G.; Montgomery-Rice, V.; Sharan, C.; Rajaratnam, V.; Khurana, A.; Al-Hendy, A. Green tea extract inhibits proliferation of uterine leiomyoma cells in vitro and in nude mice. Am. J. Obs. Gynecol. 2010, 202, 289.e1-289.e9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Anti-angiogenic effects of green tea catechin on an experimental endometriosis mouse model. H Xu, W T Lui, C Y Chu, P S Ng, C C Wang, M S Rogers, 10.1093/humrep/den417Hum. Reprod. (Oxf. Engl. 24Xu, H.; Lui, W.T.; Chu, C.Y.; Ng, P.S.; Wang, C.C.; Rogers, M.S. Anti-angiogenic effects of green tea catechin on an experimental endometriosis mouse model. Hum. Reprod. (Oxf. Engl. ) 2009, 24, 608-618. [CrossRef]

Endometriosis: Epidemiology, Diagnosis and Clinical Management. P Parasar, P Ozcan, K L Terry, 10.1007/s13669-017-0187-1Curr. Obs. Gynecol. Rep. 6PubMedParasar, P.; Ozcan, P.; Terry, K.L. Endometriosis: Epidemiology, Diagnosis and Clinical Management. Curr. Obs. Gynecol. Rep. 2017, 6, 34-41. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Natural therapies assessment for the treatment of endometriosis. A G Ricci, C N Olivares, M A Bilotas, J I Bastón, J J Singla, G F Meresman, R I Barañao, 10.1093/humrep/des369Hum. Reprod. 28Ricci, A.G.; Olivares, C.N.; Bilotas, M.A.; Bastón, J.I.; Singla, J.J.; Meresman, G.F.; Barañao, R.I. Natural therapies assessment for the treatment of endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. 2012, 28, 178-188. [CrossRef]

Prodrug of green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (Pro-EGCG) as a potent anti-angiogenesis agent for endometriosis in mice. C C Wang, H Xu, G C Man, T Zhang, K O Chu, C Y Chu, J T Cheng, G Li, Y X He, L Qin, 10.1007/s10456-012-9299-4Angiogenesis. 16Wang, C.C.; Xu, H.; Man, G.C.; Zhang, T.; Chu, K.O.; Chu, C.Y.; Cheng, J.T.; Li, G.; He, Y.X.; Qin, L.; et al. Prodrug of green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (Pro-EGCG) as a potent anti-angiogenesis agent for endometriosis in mice. Angiogenesis 2013, 16, 59-69. [CrossRef]

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits estrogen-induced activation of endometrial cells in vitro and causes regression of endometriotic lesions in vivo. M W Laschke, C Schwender, C Scheuer, B Vollmar, M D Menger, 10.1093/humrep/den245Hum. Reprod. 23PubMedLaschke, M.W.; Schwender, C.; Scheuer, C.; Vollmar, B.; Menger, M.D. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits estrogen-induced activation of endometrial cells in vitro and causes regression of endometriotic lesions in vivo. Hum. Reprod. 2008, 23, 2308-2318. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Effect of epigallocatechin-3-gallate on the status of DNA methylation of E-cadherin promoter region on endometriosis mouse. Q.-H Guan, W.-J Shi, L.-S Zhou, A.-L Tao, L Li, 10.1111/jog.14358J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Res. 46PubMedGuan, Q.-H.; Shi, W.-J.; Zhou, L.-S.; Tao, A.-L.; Li, L. Effect of epigallocatechin-3-gallate on the status of DNA methylation of E-cadherin promoter region on endometriosis mouse. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Res. 2020, 46, 2076-2083. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits angiogenesis and suppresses vascular endothelial growth factor C/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 expression and signaling in experimental endometriosis in vivo. H Xu, C M Becker, W T Lui, C Y Chu, T N Davis, A L Kung, A E Birsner, R J Amato, G C Wai Man, C C Wang, 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.07.008Fertil. Steril. 96Xu, H.; Becker, C.M.; Lui, W.T.; Chu, C.Y.; Davis, T.N.; Kung, A.L.; Birsner, A.E.; D'Amato, R.J.; Wai Man, G.C.; Wang, C.C. Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate inhibits angiogenesis and suppresses vascular endothelial growth factor C/vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 expression and signaling in experimental endometriosis in vivo. Fertil. Steril. 2011, 96, 1021-1028. [CrossRef]

Bioavailability enhancement of EGCG by structural modification and nano-delivery: A review. W Dai, C Ruan, Y Zhang, J Wang, J Han, Z Shao, Y Sun, J Liang, 10.1016/j.jff.2019.103732J. Funct. Foods. 65103732Dai, W.; Ruan, C.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, J.; Han, J.; Shao, Z.; Sun, Y.; Liang, J. Bioavailability enhancement of EGCG by structural modification and nano-delivery: A review. J. Funct. Foods 2020, 65, 103732. [CrossRef]

Antifibrotic properties of epigallocatechin-3-gallate in endometriosis. S Matsuzaki, C Darcha, 10.1093/humrep/deu123Hum. Reprod. (Oxf. Engl.). 29Matsuzaki, S.; Darcha, C. Antifibrotic properties of epigallocatechin-3-gallate in endometriosis. Hum. Reprod. (Oxf. Engl.) 2014, 29, 1677-1687. [CrossRef]

Polycystic ovary syndrome: A complex condition with psychological, reproductive and metabolic manifestations that impacts on health across the lifespan. H Teede, A Deeks, L Moran, 10.1186/1741-7015-8-41BMC Med. 841Teede, H.; Deeks, A.; Moran, L. Polycystic ovary syndrome: A complex condition with psychological, reproductive and metabolic manifestations that impacts on health across the lifespan. BMC Med. 2010, 8, 41. [CrossRef]

Scientific Statement on the Diagnostic Criteria, Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Molecular Genetics of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. D A Dumesic, S E Oberfield, E Stener-Victorin, J C Marshall, J S Laven, R S Legro, 10.1210/er.2015-1018Endocr. Rev. 36Dumesic, D.A.; Oberfield, S.E.; Stener-Victorin, E.; Marshall, J.C.; Laven, J.S.; Legro, R.S. Scientific Statement on the Diagnostic Criteria, Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Molecular Genetics of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Endocr. Rev. 2015, 36, 487-525. [CrossRef]

Can Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome be cured? Unfolding the Concept of Secondary Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome!. S S Khadilkar, 10.1007/s13224-019-01253-zJ. Obstet. Gynecol. India. 69Khadilkar, S.S. Can Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome be cured? Unfolding the Concept of Secondary Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome! J. Obstet. Gynecol. India 2019, 69, 297-302. [CrossRef]

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. C R Mccartney, J Marshall, 10.1056/NEJMcp1514916N. Engl. J. Med. 375McCartney, C.R.; Marshall, J.C. Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016, 375, 54-64. [CrossRef]

Effect of green tea on metabolic and hormonal aspect of polycystic ovarian syndrome in overweight and obese women suffering from polycystic ovarian syndrome: A clinical trial. H G Tehrani, M Allahdadian, F Zarre, H Ranjbar, F Allahdadian, 10.4103/jehp.jehp_67_156Tehrani, H.G.; Allahdadian, M.; Zarre, F.; Ranjbar, H.; Allahdadian, F. Effect of green tea on metabolic and hormonal aspect of polycystic ovarian syndrome in overweight and obese women suffering from polycystic ovarian syndrome: A clinical trial. J. Educ. Health Promot. 2017, 6, 36. [CrossRef]

The Effect of Green Tea Extract on Reproductive Improvement in Estradiol Valerate-Induced Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome in Rat. H Ghafurniyan, M Azarnia, M Nabiuni, L Karimzadeh, Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 14PubMedGhafurniyan, H.; Azarnia, M.; Nabiuni, M.; Karimzadeh, L. The Effect of Green Tea Extract on Reproductive Improvement in Estradiol Valerate-Induced Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome in Rat. Iran. J. Pharm. Res. 2015, 14, 1215-1233. [PubMed]

The Impact of Green Tea Supplementation on Anthropometric Indices and Inflammatory Cytokines in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. E Mombaini, S Jafarirad, D Husain, M H Haghighizadeh, P Padfar, 10.1002/ptr.5795Phytother. Res. PTR. 31PubMedMombaini, E.; Jafarirad, S.; Husain, D.; Haghighizadeh, M.H.; Padfar, P. The Impact of Green Tea Supplementation on Anthropo- metric Indices and Inflammatory Cytokines in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Phytother. Res. PTR 2017, 31, 747-754. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Effects of Chinese green tea on weight, and hormonal and biochemical profiles in obese patients with polycystic ovary syndrome-a randomized placebo-controlled trial. C C Chan, M W Koo, E H Ng, O S Tang, W S Yeung, P C Ho, 10.1016/j.jsgi.2005.10.006J. Soc. Gynecol. Investig. 13Chan, C.C.; Koo, M.W.; Ng, E.H.; Tang, O.S.; Yeung, W.S.; Ho, P.C. Effects of Chinese green tea on weight, and hormonal and biochemical profiles in obese patients with polycystic ovary syndrome-a randomized placebo-controlled trial. J. Soc. Gynecol. Investig. 2006, 13, 63-68. [CrossRef]

The Emerging Role of Chronic Low-Grade Inflammation in the Pathophysiology of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. S Shorakae, H Teede, B De Courten, G Lambert, J Boyle, L J Moran, 10.1055/s-0035-1556568Semin. Reprod. Med. 33PubMedShorakae, S.; Teede, H.; de Courten, B.; Lambert, G.; Boyle, J.; Moran, L.J. The Emerging Role of Chronic Low-Grade Inflammation in the Pathophysiology of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Semin. Reprod. Med. 2015, 33, 257-269. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Anti-inflammatory Action of Green Tea. T Ohishi, S Goto, P Monira, M Isemura, Y Nakamura, 10.2174/1871523015666160915154443Anti-Inflamm. Anti-Allergy Agents Med. Chem. 15PubMedOhishi, T.; Goto, S.; Monira, P.; Isemura, M.; Nakamura, Y. Anti-inflammatory Action of Green Tea. Anti-Inflamm. Anti-Allergy Agents Med. Chem. 2016, 15, 74-90. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

The Pathogenesis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS): The Hypothesis of PCOS as Functional Ovarian Hyperandrogenism Revisited. R L Rosenfield, D A Ehrmann, 10.1210/er.2015-1104Endocr. Rev. 37PubMedRosenfield, R.L.; Ehrmann, D.A. The Pathogenesis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS): The Hypothesis of PCOS as Functional Ovarian Hyperandrogenism Revisited. Endocr. Rev. 2016, 37, 467-520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Dysmenorrhea and related disorders. M Bernardi, L Lazzeri, F Perelli, F M Reis, F Petraglia, 10.12688/f1000research.11682.1PubMedBernardi, M.; Lazzeri, L.; Perelli, F.; Reis, F.M.; Petraglia, F. Dysmenorrhea and related disorders. F1000Reserch 2017, 6, 1645. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

345-Primary Dysmenorrhea Consensus Guideline. M Burnett, M Lemyre, No, 10.1016/j.jogc.2016.12.023J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Can. JOGC. 39Burnett, M.; Lemyre, M. No. 345-Primary Dysmenorrhea Consensus Guideline. J. Obstet. Gynaecol. Can. JOGC 2017, 39, 585-595. [CrossRef]

Diagnosis and initial management of dysmenorrhea. A S Osayande, S Mehulic, Am. Fam. Physician. 89Osayande, A.S.; Mehulic, S. Diagnosis and initial management of dysmenorrhea. Am. Fam. Physician 2014, 89, 341-346.

WHO systematic review of prevalence of chronic pelvic pain: A neglected reproductive health morbidity. P Latthe, M Latthe, L Say, M Gülmezoglu, K S Khan, 10.1186/1471-2458-6-177BMC Public Health. 6Latthe, P.; Latthe, M.; Say, L.; Gülmezoglu, M.; Khan, K.S. WHO systematic review of prevalence of chronic pelvic pain: A neglected reproductive health morbidity. BMC Public Health 2006, 6, 177. [CrossRef]

Association of tea drinking and dysmenorrhoea among reproductive-age women in. X Zhang, R Zhang, D Chen, R Huang, Y Tian, P Zhang, J Zhang, 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-026643A cross-sectional study. Shanghai, China9Zhang, X.; Zhang, R.; Chen, D.; Huang, R.; Tian, Y.; Zhang, P.; Zhang, J. Association of tea drinking and dysmenorrhoea among reproductive-age women in Shanghai, China (2013-2015): A cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2019, 9, e026643. [CrossRef]

Epigallocatechin-3-gallate reduces myometrial infiltration, uterine hyperactivity, and stress levels and alleviates generalized hyperalgesia in mice induced with adenomyosis. Y Chen, B Zhu, H Zhang, X Liu, S.-W Guo, 10.1177/1933719113488455Reprod. Sci. 20PubMedChen, Y.; Zhu, B.; Zhang, H.; Liu, X.; Guo, S.-W. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate reduces myometrial infiltration, uterine hyperactivity, and stress levels and alleviates generalized hyperalgesia in mice induced with adenomyosis. Reprod. Sci. 2013, 20, 1478-1491. [CrossRef] [PubMed]