# Condom Use Consistency and Associated Factors Among College Student Men Who Have Sex with Men from Seven Colleges in Changsha City: A Cross-Sectional Survey

CorpusID: 235196773
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54a70ad28bdde5c68b094c465a922a7d632f300d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54a70ad28bdde5c68b094c465a922a7d632f300d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Condom Use Consistency and Associated Factors Among College Student Men Who Have Sex with Men from Seven Colleges in Changsha City: A Cross-Sectional Survey


Honghong Wang 
Xiangya School of Nursing
Central South University
410000Changsha City

Hunan Province
People's Republic of China

Simin Yu 
Xiangya School of Nursing
Central South University
410000Changsha City

Hunan Province
People's Republic of China

Wendy Cross 
School of Health
Federation University
3806BerwickVictoriaAustralia

Louisa Lam 
School of Health
Federation University
3806BerwickVictoriaAustralia

Biswajit Banik 
School of Health
Federation University
3806BerwickVictoriaAustralia

Kaili Zhang 
School of Nursing
Xuzhou Medical University
Jiangsu Province221004Xuzhou CityPeople's Republic of China

Condom Use Consistency and Associated Factors Among College Student Men Who Have Sex with Men from Seven Colleges in Changsha City: A Cross-Sectional Survey
10.2147/HIV.S305932O R I G I N A L R E S E A R C H *These authors contributed equally to this workcollege student men who have sex with mencondom use consistencysexual behaviorssex education
Background:College student men who have sex with men (MSM) are at high risk for HIV infection due to multiple social and behavioral factors. Consistent condom use is nationally advocated for HIV prevention. This study explored the sexual behaviors and factors associated with condom use consistency in the past six months among college student MSM from seven colleges in Hunan Province, China. Methods: A cross-sectional survey was conducted from September 2017 to March 2018. Condom use consistency, sexual behaviors, HIV testing performance, substance use, and alcohol consumption were examined using researcher-created questionnaires. Condom use self-efficacy and HIV-related knowledge were assessed using the Condom Use Self-Efficacy Scale and the unified National AIDS Sentinel Surveillance Questionnaire. Univariate and multivariate logistic regressions were used. P <0.05 was considered significant. Results: In the 214 respondents, the rate of consistent condom use was 56% (n = 119) during the past six months. Participants who were studying at first-tier universities (odds ratio [OR]: 2.522, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.255-5.067) and had higher scores for condom use self-efficacy (OR: 2.617, 95% CI: 1.462-4.685) were more likely to report consistent condom use than the others. The risk factor was having suspicious symptoms of sexually transmitted diseases (OR: 0.357, 95% CI: 0.163-0.780). Conclusion: Numerous students were at high risk of HIV infection with inconsistent condom use. Comprehensive and specific topics about safe sex education from parents and peers should be offered on campuses in China. Keywords: college student men who have sex with men, condom use consistency, sexual behaviors, sex education

## Introduction

According to statistics from the Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS, 38.0 million people were living with HIV, and 1.7 million people were newly infected with HIV globally in 2019. 1 In China, 131,000 new cases of AIDS were reported, and over 958,000 people were living with HIV by the end of October 2019. 2 According to global data, the alarming prevalence of HIV acquisition was 26 times higher among men who have sex with men (MSM) than among all adults in 2019. 1 In 2018, MSM accounted for an estimated 17% of new HIV infections globally. 3 Student MSM, an alarming subgroup of MSM, increased HIV prevalence in China. In recent years, approximately 3000 HIV cases every year have comprised young students aged 15-24 years, and male students have accounted for 80% of the infections. 4 Male-to-male sexual transmission is the most common transmission route. 5 The rate of male-tomale sexual transmission among young students increased from 58.5% in 2008 to 81.6% in 2014. 6 Similarly, the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reported that new HIV infections among college students increased by 35% annually from 2011 to 2015, with student MSM accounting for 82%. 7 Data from 2015 to 2017 in Nanjing, China, showed that among 156 HIVpositive college students, 154 (98.7%) were men, and 148 male students (96.1%) were infected through sexual intercourse with men. 8 The rapid increase in HIV prevalence highlights college student MSM as a high-risk and extremely vulnerable population.

Compared with female students in college, male students, particularly MSM, are more open about sexual attitudes. 9 They are more likely to engage in high-risk sexual behaviors, including inconsistent condom use with casual sex partners, having commercial sex, and/or having multiple sex partners. 10,11 Several common HIV-related risk factors have been reported among young MSM. These factors include inconsistent condom use, 12,14 having multiple sex partners, 12 one-night stand behavior, 13 having sex with HIV-positive partners, 12,14 using drugs or alcohol before or during sex, 15 and gay app use. 16 Similarly, college male students tend to have vague HIV prevention knowledge, 9 are less likely to use HIV prevention services, and/or barely participate in HIV and sexually transmitted disease (STD) testing. 14,17 Therefore, for college student MSM, the inconsistency of condom use is a main risk factor in the transmission of HIV. [18][19][20] A meta-analysis in 2015 revealed that 65.2% of Chinese student MSM had unprotected anal intercourse (UAI) in the past six months. However, the rate of student MSM who reported using condoms in their last homosexual anal intercourse was only 57.5%. 18 Similarly, a study conducted in three northern regions of China in 2018 reported that 41.1% of college student MSM used condoms inconsistently in the past six months. 19 Therefore, an investigation on consistent condom use and an exploration of the associated factors related to high-risk sexual behavior can help in decision making to reduce new HIV infections among college student MSM.

Before this study was conducted, some measures for HIV prevention were implemented for the benefit of college students. However, the effect was not significant. To regulate health education on HIV/AIDS prevention in schools, the Chinese government has issued several policies, including the "Notice on Strengthening Health Education on AIDS Prevention in Schools," which was jointly issued by the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health in 2002, 20 and the "Basic Knowledge on HIV/AIDS Prevention for Youth," which was jointly issued by the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Education in May 2007. 21 In 2015, the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Health jointly issued a document on HIV prevention, which included establishing a school AIDS epidemic notification system, improving the coverage and relevance of AIDS prevention education in schools, and strengthening Voluntary Counseling and Testing (VCT) services and interventions for behaviors. 22 In 2019, the Ministry of Education and the National Health and Family Planning Commission jointly issued the "Notice on Further Strengthening HIV/ AIDS Prevention Education in Schools in the New Era," which emphasized that each school should carry out health education suitable for the physical and mental characteristics of adolescents and strengthen health education according to different educational stages. 23 However, a large percentage of schools does not put the policy into practice: nearly half of the schools have not effectively implemented the policy requirements, such as not incorporating HIV/AIDS prevention health education into school teaching plans, not distributing HIV/AIDS prevention health education-related promotional materials to new students during their medical checkups, and not equipping libraries or reading rooms with HIV/AIDS prevention science books for students to read. 24 A previous study conducted in Hunan Province in 2017 among 1431 male undergraduate students, among whom 49 (3.42%) were MSM students, showed that 1068 (74.6%; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 72.4-76.0) used HIV prevention education services provided by colleges/universities, including publicity materials/billboards and lectures, but only 105 (7.3%) male students underwent HIV testing. 9 What was worse, young students often had misconceptions about HIV/AIDS, such as HIV/AIDS being distant from campus and having nothing to do with them. They wrongly believed that "he is my classmate, so he is safe" and that "we have known each other for a long time, and I believe he is HIV negative." 5 Young students in college are becoming more and more independent in study and life, and they make their own decisions in time management, https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932


## DovePress

HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13 recreational activities, and making friends. The limitations imposed by their parents and schools gradually fade away as they leave home and are away from their parents compared with the previous stages of their lives. Moreover, young students are always curious about the world, and many of them pursue physical and psychological stimulations, which makes them neglect the prevention and control of HIV infection. 5,24 Therefore, there are precise measurements needed to be taken to provide proper sex education to college student MSM to help them learn to protect themselves.

Lowering new HIV infections among college student MSM is a public health priority, and consistent condom use is a core component of prevention efforts in China and around the world. Research interest in student MSM, a group with a high risk of HIV infection, has been recently renewed. However, little research has examined condom use consistency and risky sexual behaviors, specifically among college student MSM. Thus, this study aimed to explore condom use consistency and associated factors among college student MSM in China and to provide evidence for the further design of HIV prevention programs.


## Materials and Methods


## Study Design and Participants

The survey was conducted in a local gay-friendly community-based organization (CBO) and in an HIV consulting room at a university in Changsha City. The CBO is located at the third level of a community health center in a wellconcealed position and is supervised by the CDC of Hunan Province. It was founded in 2008 and has excellent experience in consulting and testing for HIV. In the past 11 years, the CBO has undertaken approximately 70% of the testing tasks for MSM in Hunan Province. In 2017, an HIV consulting room was established at Central South University, which is supervised by the Yuelu District CDC of Changsha City and the Campus Hospital of a university.

Changsha is the capital city of Hunan Province, Southeast China, with an area of 211,829 km 2 and a population of approximately 8.39 million. Changsha City is also the center of higher education in Hunan Province, with numerous college students from all districts of China and, therefore, a sizable number of student MSM. Changsha City is famous for its wealthy media and entertainment industries, with dozens of gay clubs, dance halls, and karaoke halls.

Snowball sampling instead of probability sampling was used to recruit college MSM for two reasons. First, college MSM tend not to report their MSM identity in the general survey because of social discrimination towards MSM. In our previous study of 1431 male college students, 49 reported that they were MSM and sexually active. 9 Second, MSM are a hard-to-reach population who often hide and are reluctant to reveal that they are MSM or details about their sex life. Participant recruitment was conducted using two approaches. First, potential participants were sent posts through Blued, which is a social app for making gay friends, and WeChat, which is a Chinese social app for communication, social media, and other purposes, to invite them to the CBO or the HIV consulting room on campus. Second, people who usually went to the CBO or the HIV consulting room on campus for testing and met the inclusion criteria were invited to participate. Two well-trained researchers briefed these students about the purpose of the study, methodology, confidentiality, and compensation (a package of condoms and lubricants valued at approximately 50 RMB) for the time and transportation expenses of the participants. After their consent was obtained, the participants scanned a QR code given by the researchers, which led them to an online survey homepage supported by Wenjuanxing Company, a company that helps with online survey collection. The participants completed the survey within approximately 20-30 min. All participants were provided with free HIV consultations and rapid HIV testing after the completion of the survey. The study was conducted between September 2017 and March 2018.

The target population of this study was male college students, 16 years old and above, who had had at least one male partner in the past six months. The seven colleges in Hunan Province have diverse students from different areas. The sample size was calculated using the formula n=
μ 2 α = 2 π 1À π ð Þ δ 2 .
The following calculation was used to determine the sample size: α = 0.05, where δ is the allowable error assumed to be 3%, and π is the consistent condom use rate of 0.21. 25 The final sample size was 222 after allowing for 10% invalid questionnaires.


## Variables and Measurements

Condom use consistency, sexual behaviors, HIV testing performance, substance use, and alcohol consumption were examined using researcher-created questionnaires. Condom use self-efficacy and HIV-related knowledge were assessed using the Condom Use Self-Efficacy Scale and the unified National AIDS Sentinel Surveillance Questionnaire. After suggestions from experts (Professor Xianhong Li and Professor Lloyd A. Goldsamt), CBO staff, and several college student MSM, the overall questionnaire was finalized. The final version of the questionnaire included 62 questions in seven areas: (a) demographic characteristics, (b) HIV knowledge, (c) sexual behaviors, (d) HIV testing performance, (e) substance use and alcohol consumption, (f) condom use self-efficacy, and (g) condom use consistency in the past six months.


## Demographic Characteristics

Demographic characteristics included age, ethnicity, school type, grade, study area, monthly living expenses, and sexual orientation.


## HIV Knowledge

HIV-related knowledge was assessed using the eight-item national AIDS sentinel surveillance questionnaire. The questionnaire was developed based on the unified national AIDS sentinel surveillance questionnaire designed specifically for university students. 26 Through a yes/no/uncertain format for each item, only the correct response was scored one point. Participants having a total score of six or higher were recognized as having "sufficient knowledge;" otherwise, they were regarded as having "insufficient knowledge." The internal reliability (KR-20) of this questionnaire was 0.64.


## Sexual Behaviors

The sexual behaviors of the participants were assessed by inquiring about their age during their first insert sex experience, which included anal sex, oral sex, and virgin sex; age during the first time they had sex with a man; the role they usually play when having homosexual sex; the number of male sex partners in the past six months; whether they exchanged sex for money or preferred the services of sex-to-pay boys in the past six months; frequency of casual sexual encounters in the past six months; whether they had regular partners in the past six months; places where they usually find male sex partners; and whether they preferred someone who was a student or an older MSM who had left school or was employed.


## HIV Testing Performance

The participants were asked about their number and frequency of HIV testing and the date of their last test. The participants with no prior HIV testing were asked about their reasons for not undergoing testing and whether they had ever suspicious STD symptoms.


## Substance Use and Alcohol Consumption

The participants were asked whether they had consumed alcohol or used substances, such as alkyl nitrites ("poppers"), ketamine, cocaine, opium, morphine, crack cocaine, and marijuana, in the past six months. They were also asked how many times they used substances or alcohol before or during sex.


## Condom Use Self-Efficacy

Condom use self-efficacy is defined as a person's confidence in their ability to use condoms. 27 The Condom Use Self-Efficacy Scale, which was developed for the Chinese MSM population and previously used for MSM in Sichuan Province, was used in this study. 28 The eight-item scale (Cronbach's α = 0.838, Spearman-Brown = 0.778) was used to assess the judgment or belief about whether they could decide to use condoms in a virtual situation of their upcoming sexual activities and their ability to communicate and negotiate condom use with sex partners in various situations. The participants defined each item in a confident/unconfident/uncertain format. For each item, "confident," "uncertain," and "unconfident" were given scores of two, one, and zero, respectively. A composite score was obtained by summing the scores of each item. A score higher than the median indicated confidence in condom use.


## Condom Use Consistency

The participants were evaluated for their condom use consistency by inquiring about their overall condom use frequency during the past six months, specifically their condom use frequency with regular partners, commercial sex partners, and casual sex partners. Furthermore, they were asked whether they used condoms during their last anal sex; if their answer was "no," the reasons for not doing so were asked.


## Ethical Considerations

Ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board of Xiangya Nursing School, Central South University (Changsha, China). Essential information about the study, including the purpose and procedures of the study, the benefits and risks of the participants, and their right to decline participation in the study, was explained by the investigators. Therefore, the completion of the questionnaire was considered to provide consent for participation in the study. All data were encrypted and kept by a dedicated person to ensure data confidentiality.


## Statistical Analysis

Descriptive analysis was conducted for all variables. Logistic regression analysis was performed to identify the factors associated with condom use consistency in the past six months. Independent variables found to have statistical significance in the univariate regression analysis were screened and entered into the final multivariate regression model. Data management and analysis were performed using SPSS 25.0 software. 29 Statistical tests were two-sided, and a p-value of < 0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance.


## Results


## Sociodemographic Characteristics of the Participants

In total, 222 questionnaires were collected through the survey, eight of which did not contain responses to the key variables. Therefore, 214 valid questionnaires were included in the analysis. 


## Substance Use and Alcohol Consumption

In summary, 30 participants (14%) reported substance use in the past six months. Rush popper (n = 29, 96.7%) and marijuana (n = 1, 3.3%) were mostly used. Twenty-one participants reported at least one time male-to-male sex after using substances. Nearly half of the students (104, 48.6%) reported alcohol consumption, and nine students had male-to-male sex at least once after drinking alcohol.


## Condom Use Self-Efficacy

The average score of the eight items of the Condom Use Self-Efficacy Scale was 13.65 (SD = 3.37, 95% CI: 13. Among the eight confident/unconfident/uncertain format items, the two items "I am able to discuss condom use with any of my sex partners" and "I can advise to use condoms even when I'm not sure whether my sex partner likes using it or not" were answered with "confident" by 88.3% (n = 189) and 90.2% (n = 193) of the students, respectively. However, the two other items, "I can insist on using condoms even when I advise to use condoms and my sex partner gets angry" and "I can insist on using condoms when my sex partner is drunk," were mostly answered with "not sure" and "not confident" at 24.3% (n = 52) and 36.7% (n = 79), respectively.


## Sexual Behaviors

The students' age at first sex was 11-23 years. Most (n = 202, 94.4%) of them had their first sex with a male. Regarding the sex role they usually played, 49 participants (22.9%) preferred to be "0" (docile, bottom) only, 32 (15.0%) preferred to be "1" (assertive, top) only, and the rest of the participants reported playing both "0" and "1." Among the participants, 112 students (52.3%) had only one sex partner in the past six months, 90 (41.9%) had two to five male partners, and 12 (5.8%) had more than six male sex partners. The most popular approach to finding a male sex partner was via mobile dating apps (n = 204, 95.3%) (Figure 1). Four, five, and three students reported having one-, two-, and three-time group sex in the past six months, respectively. When they were asked whether they preferred their sex partners to be a student or someone who was employed or left school, half of them (n = 108, 50.5%) preferred students, and 90 (42.1%) reported having no preference and being solely reliant on their feelings (Table 2).


## Condom Use Consistency

Regarding the overall frequency of condom use in the past six months, 26 (12.2%) students claimed that they never or rarely used condoms, 18 (8.4%) sometimes used condoms, 51 (23.8%) often used condoms, and 119 (55.6%) used condoms every time. The participants who used condoms every time were considered to be using condoms consistently. Fifty-one (23.8%) students reported that they had not used condoms the last time they had sex with a male sex partner. Only one student had had a commercial sex partner in the past six months, and he did not use condoms every time. Furthermore, 95 (44.4%) students had one-night stand/casual sexual encounters, 58 (61.1%) of whom used condoms every time, and 12 (12.6%) never used condoms. Among the participants, 121 (56.5%) had regular sex partners. Regarding the frequency of condom use with regular partners in the past six months, 70 (32.7%) students used condoms every time, 39 (18.2%) used condoms inconsistently, and 12 (5.6%) never used condoms with regular sex partners. Five students reported having female partners and using condoms every time to avoid pregnancy in the past six months.


## Factors Associated with Condom Use Consistency in the Past Six Months

In the univariate analysis, four factors were found to be significantly associated with condom use consistency during anal sex in the past six months (P < 0.05). 


## Discussion

This cross-sectional study is one of the few studies that has explored the factors associated with condom use frequency in the past six months among college student MSM in China. Risky sexual behaviors were commonly identified in this study. Higher education institutions and high condom use self-efficacy were associated with consistent condom use in this sample population.

In this study, condom use consistency (n = 119, 56%) when having anal sex with males in the past six months was higher than that in a similar young group in Guangzhou City in a previous meta-analysis in 2015 (34.8%), 18 which had an overall rate of condom use consistency in the past six months of 52.05%, 30 and in a recent study in three northern regions in China in 2018 (41.1%). 19 The rate was also higher than that in international data. In Nigeria, condom use consistency in the past six months in young MSM was 53.0%. 31 One possible reason for the difference is that the basic HIV control and prevention measures had made progress in China over the years, including issuing basic HIV knowledge for the young, 21 establishing a school HIV/AIDS epidemic notification system, improving the coverage and pertinence of HIV/AIDS prevention education in schools, and strengthening VCT services and interventions for behaviors. 22 However, occasional condom use cannot play its full protection role, especially when having sex with an HIV-positive partner. Therefore, developing an HIV prevention program for consistent condom use is important for college student MSM.

Condom use consistency with regular partners was quite low (n = 70, 32.7%). This finding is supported by previous studies showing that when regular sex partners are involved, young MSM are likely to have condomless anal sex in China [32][33][34][35][36] and developed countries, such as Sweden 37 and New Zealand. 38 Particularly, a study among college student MSM in Beijing reported that believing in unnecessary condom use with a regular sex partner is a significant predictor of UAI. 36 Similarly, in Hong Kong, the percentage of young MSM who reported consistent condom use during recent anal sex encounters was 39.8% with regular partners and 54.2% with non-regular partners. 17 Sexual roles, trust, chasing romantic symbolic meanings, and "safety negotiation" traps may contribute to a decreased level of cautiousness, leading to unprotected anal sex with regular partners. 39  In the current study, the participants with high condom use self-efficacy were likely to report condom use consistency in the past six months, consistent with previous studies. 32,40,41 Furthermore, in different exceptional circumstances, especially if the sex partner becomes angry at the request for condom use and when the sex partner is intoxicated, the rates of having confidence in consistent condom use markedly decreased at 75.7% (n = 162) and 81.8% (n = 175), respectively. This finding shows that the willingness to use condoms might be affected if their partners became unconscious due to alcohol or illicit drug use in this sample. Further studies can explore consistent condom use in these exceptional circumstances, developing improved strategies for safe sex practices and effective ways to negotiate safe sex practice. In addition, condom problems or errors, such as breakage, slippage, late application, and early removal, are common among MSM, 42 which could reduce the protective value of condoms. Problems that could occur in condom use in this sample were not explored; further studies could fill this gap.

Studying in first-tier colleges is a main factor in consistent condom use. Condom use consistency is associated with good educational background. 37,38,[43][44][45] As welleducated MSM may have high levels of exposure to HIV/AIDS-related information, 45 student MSM in first-tier colleges are likely to receive good educational resources and comprehensive HIV-related knowledge.

Surprisingly, multivariate logistic regression results showed that MSM with suspected STD symptoms might perform inconsistent condom use (OR: 0.322, 95% CI: 0.117-0.889) in the past six months. This finding is contrary to a previous study. 46 There are several possible explanations for this result. First, the question about suspicious STD was Have you ever had symptoms of a suspected STD (e. g, burning sensation when urinating, abnormal urethral discharge, itching, ulcers, or abnormal growths in the genitals or anus)?

And the question about the consistency of condom use was restricted to the past six months. The MSM who had symptoms of STD may have recovered before this investigation. This means that they did not have suspected STD symptoms during the investigation of the consistency of condom use in the last six months. Second, MSM with suspected STD symptoms might have given up on themselves and decided to enjoy condomless sex to the fullest. Third, this could be a limitation of the cross-sectional study design, which restricted the assessment of the causality of the statistically significant associations with condom use consistency. It is possible that their condomless 


## DovePress


## 565

sex with their sex partners contributed to their STD infection.

In this study, although the basic HIV knowledge of most participants (n = 204, 95.3%) was considered "sufficient," college student MSM still engaged in risky sexual behaviors and inconsistent condom use. Thus, knowledge and behavior were inconsistent among college student MSM. These results are consistent with those from a meta-analysis in China. 19 This phenomenon may be caused by the limitations of sex education in China, both from parents and schools. Sex-related topics are considered sensitive, embarrassing, and highly private in China. 47,48 Therefore, most parents are not equipped to introduce sex education or HIV prevention education to their children. When students enter college from high school, they face a new living environment and are easily tempted or pushed to perform risky sex practices without self-protection awareness or supervision from parents and teachers. Although safe sex is encouraged, and theories or concepts are most frequently mentioned, strategies for proper condom use, insisting condom use when a sex partner gets upset about using it, and ensuring safety when intoxicated are not discussed in China. If students want additional information on sex topics, they often rely on the internet for answers, where they could be misled by false information that may show that using condoms is not cool or is embarrassing. Therefore, students can be aware of the importance of safe sex but prefer not to use condoms for various reasons. Data from 13 states in the United States showed that HIV-related education could reduce sexual risk behaviors among all students, especially among student MSM. 49 In the United States, parent-based sex education could increase adolescent engagement in HIV testing and condom use. 50 However, even in developed countries, such as the United States, sex education led by parents is not common, as one-third of young MSM had never discussed sex topics with their parents. 50 Tailored sex education by parents could increase the likelihood of HIV testing among student MSM. 50 Therefore, sex education led by parents is an issue that requires attention from both developed and developing countries. Parents should pay attention to their children's sex education and be actively involved in it, especially parents whose children are MSM. Student MSM are especially vulnerable to stigma and discrimination, which includes possible rejection by schools and families, being gossiped about, being considered to have mental disorders, and loss of employment. 47,48,51 They need support and guidance from their parents more than their classmates. They may also have extreme ideas when they suffer from stigma or discrimination, such as the irrational and blind attachment to so-called love (e. g, "I know from whom I got infected with HIV, but I love him. …. I'm willing to die with him"), pessimistic view on HIV infection and prevention (e. g, "As the infection is bound to happen sooner or later, perhaps the sooner you get it, the sooner you can get rid of it"), and the wild sense of selfimposed sexual liberation (e. g, "I just want to enjoy my sexual freedom without any restrictions or condoms"). 52 Sexual communication with parents can be a protective factor in safe sex among young adolescents. 53 Therefore, parental sex education is imperative, especially before students enter college. In China, children often live with their parents and are supervised by family discipline before they go to college. Once they leave home, they need to make arrangements for themselves and make decisions by themselves, which can be dangerous for those who lack self-protection awareness and family supervision. Further studies can determine how parental sex education affects the sexual behaviors of college student MSM and explore useful strategies for safe sex among them. The introduction of basic HIV information and general sex education by parents or schools and specific strategies for safe sex practices can contribute to healthy sexual behaviors.

Although basic sexual information (e. g, reproductive biology) is always available to the general population in Chinese colleges, it has yet to cater to individual sex education for general students, especially homosexual students. In the United States, student MSM found that sex education materials designed for the general population are not pertinent to their needs. 44 Data from this study showed that sexual health education for college student MSM was insufficient. Specific evidence-based sex education and safe sex practices should be delivered by acknowledging the appropriate needs of college student MSM and their expectations. 9 Education on sex information and HIV prevention should focus on safe sex strategies in the context of exceptional circumstances as mentioned above (e. g, under the influence of illicit drugs and alcohol and in a specific issue, such as relationship, power hierarchy, negotiation, etc.). HIV testing, treatment, and prognosis should not be limited to the routes and conditions of transmission. 


## Limitations

This study has several limitations. First, the sample population might not fully represent the overall college student MSM in Changsha City or the general college student MSM population, given that those who were not actively socially connected to the gay community or an app user were not involved. Second, in distributing the questionnaires, the participants' self-reported behaviors could lead to recall and social desirability biases, especially regarding data on risky sex and drug use. The participants who have had an HIV test could be more likely to recall risky behaviors than those who were not tested. Thus, most questions were limited to the past six months of experience to minimize recall bias. Furthermore, the cross-sectional study design has inherent limitations in assessing the causality of the statistically significant associations with condom use consistency. Longitudinal studies are required to investigate the causality between STD and condom use consistency in college student MSM. Further studies with representative samples can provide significant evidence of safe sex strategies for college student MSM.


## Conclusion

Although condom use consistency was relatively high among Chinese college student MSM in this sample, the number of those engaged in risky sexual behaviors was even higher. It is important to develop an HIV prevention program for consistent condom use for college student MSM to help them be more aware of selfprotection and wise in safe sex decision making and to provide them with tailored sex education targeting the specific issues of MSM students. Moreover, HIV knowledge should not be limited to the routes and conditions of transmission. HIV testing, treatment, and prognosis need to be strengthened in the HIV prevention system. Safe sex strategies in the context of exceptional circumstances should also be developed. To help achieve this goal, parents should be engaged in the sex education of their children, particularly before they go to college.


## Data Sharing Statement

The datasets used and/or analyzed in the current study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.


## Ethics Approval and Consent to Participate

## - 20 -
2014.10, median = 15.0, P 25 = 12.52, P 75 = 15.92).


HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13 https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932 DovePress 561

## Figure 1
1Preferable ways to find male sexual partners (N=214, multiple choices). HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13 https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932 DovePress 563


https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932 DovePress HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13


https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932 DovePress HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13

## Table 1
1Demographic Characteristics of College Student MSM (N = 214)Item 
Category 
Number 
Percent (%) 

Age (years) 
16-18 
15 
7.0 

19-21 
148 
69.2 

22-24 
49 
22.9 

> 24 
2 
0.9 

Ethnicity 
Han 
196 
91.6 

Others 
18 
8.4 

Area of residence 
Urban area 
109 
50.9 

Rural area 
105 
49.1 

School type 
Vocational college 
52 
24.3 

Third-tier universities 
8 
3.7 

Second-tier universities 
33 
15.4 

First-tier universities 
121 
56.5 

Grade 
Freshman 
49 
22.9 

Sophomore 
59 
27.6 

Junior 
53 
24.8 

Senior and above 
53 
24.8 

Profession 
Medical-related fields 
25 
11.7 

Non-medical fields 
189 
88.3 

Living expenses per month (RMB) 
≤ 1000 
28 
13.1 

1001-2000 
156 
72.9 

2001-3000 
20 
9.3 

> 3000 
10 
4.7 

Sexual orientation 
Homosexual 
170 
79.4 

Bisexual 
40 
18.7 

Unclear 
4 
1.90 




These factors included school type (first-tier college vs vocational college, odds ratio [OR]: 2.129; 95% CI: 1.101-4.119), student type (undergraduate students vs junior college student, OR: 1.910, 95% CI: 1.305-3.525), suspicious STD symptoms (yes vs no, OR: 0.384, 95% CI: 0.183-0.807), and condom use self-efficacy scores (≥15 vs <15, OR: 2.481, 95% CI: 1.422-4.328). These four variables were inserted into the multivariate logistic regression analysis. In the multivariate logistic regression, only three factors were found to be significantly associated with condom use consistency in the past six months: participants from first-tier colleges (OR: 2.522, 95% CI: 1.255-5.607), high scores in condom use self-efficacy (OR: 2.617, 95% CI: 1.462-4.685), and suspicious STD symptoms (OR: 0.322, 95% CI: 0.117--0.889) (Table 3).

## Table 2
2Sexual Behaviors Among College Student MSM (N=214)Character 
Numbers of 

Students, n (%) 

Age at first sex (years) 

< 16 
13 (6.1%) 

16-18 
115 (53.7%) 
> 18 
86 (40.2%) 

Gender of first sex partner 
Female 
12 (5.6%) 

Male 
202 (94.4%) 

Sexual roles with male partners 

Only "0" (docile, bottom) 
49 (22.9%) 
Only "1" (assertive, top) 
32 (15.0%) 

Both "0" and "1" 
133 (62.1%) 

Numbers of sex partners in the past six 

months 

1 
112 (52.3%) 
≥ 2 
102 (47.7%) 

Condom use in the past six months 
Never/barely 
18 (8.4%) 

Barely 
8 (3.7%) 

Sometimes 
18 (8.4%) 
Often 
51 (23.8%) 

Every time 
119 (55.6%) 

Condom use in their last anal sex 

Yes 
163 (76.2%) 

No 
52 (23.8%) 

Commercial sex in the past six months 

No 
213 (99.5%) 
Yes 
1 (0.5%) 

One-night stand/casual sex in the past six 
months 

No 
119 (55.6%) 

Yes 
95 (44.4%) 

Number of times of one-night stand/casual 

sex in the past six months (N=95) 
1 
40 (42.1%) 

2-4 
36 (37.9%) 

≥ 5 
19 (20.0%) 

Condom use with one-night stand/casual 

partners in the past six months (N = 95) 
Never 
12 (12.6%) 

Barely 
2 (2.1%) 

Sometimes 
3 (3.2%) 
Often 
20 (21.0%) 

Every time 
58 (61.1%) 

(Continued) 



## Table 2 (
2Continued).Character 
Numbers of 

Students, n (%) 

Regular sex partners in the past six months 

No 
93 (43.5%) 
Yes 
121 (56.5%) 

Condom use with regular partners in the past 
six months (N = 121) 

Never 
12 (9.9%) 

Barely 
11 (9.1%) 
Sometimes 
8 (6.6%) 

Often 
20 (16.5%) 

Every time 
70 (57.9%) 

Female partners in the past six months 

No 
209 (97.7%) 
Yes 
5 (2.3%) 

Preferable male sex partners 
Student MSM 
108 (50.5%) 

MSM who were employed or had left school 16 (7.5%) 

No preference 
90 (42.0%) 



## Table 3
3Logistic Regression of Condom Use Frequency in the Past Six Months (N = 214, 0 = Inconsistent Condom Use; 1 = Consistent Condom Use)Variable 
Category 
Univariate Logistic 

Regression 

Multivariate Logistic 

Regression 

OR (95% CI) 
P 
OR (95% CI) 
P 

School type 
Vocational college 
Ref 

Second/third-tier universities NS 
NS 

First-tier universities 
2.129 (1.101-4.119) 
0.025 
2.522 (1.255-5.067) 
0.009 

Student type 
Junior college student 
Ref 

Undergraduate student 
1.910 (1.305-3.525) 
0.039 
-

Suspected STD symptoms 
No 
Ref 

Yes 
0.384 (0.183-0.807) 
0.012 
0.357 (0.163-0.780) 
0.01 

Scores of self-efficacy of condom use <15 
Ref 

≥15 
2.481 (1.422-4.328) 
0.001 
2.617 (1.462-4.685) 
0.0.01 

Note: -Variables were not included in the multivariate analysis. 
Abbreviations: Ref, reference; OR, odds ratio; CI, confidence interval; NS, not significant in the analysis. 


AcknowledgmentsThe authors gratefully acknowledge the school hospital and the CBO, called Zuo A Cai Hong, for their assistance in the recruitment and for providing places for investigation. The authors thank all the participants for their involvement in this study.Author ContributionsAll authors made a significant contribution to the work reported, whether that is in the conception, study design, execution, acquisition of data, analysis, and interpretation, or in all these areas; took part in drafting, revising, or critically reviewing the article; gave final approval of the version to be published; have agreed on the journal to which the article has been submitted; and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.FundingThis study was supported by the Philosophy and Social Science Foundation of Hunan Province (Grant No. 16YBA365). The funding body had no role in the design of the study, in the collection, analysis, and interpretation of data, and in writing the manuscript.DisclosureThe authors declare that they have no competing interests.This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Ethical approval was obtained from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Xiangya Nursing School, Central South University (Changsha, China). Essential information about the study, including its purpose and procedures, the benefits and risks for participants, and their right to decline participation in the study were clearly explained to the participants. As for participants who were between 16 to 18 years old, the parental informed consent was waived by the IRB. There were mainly three reasons for the waiver. First, this study is consistent with the minimal risk ethical standard. Second, people aged 16 and above have the partial capacity for civil conduct. Third, with their intelligence and comprehension, students in this sample can fully understand the purpose, the procedures, the benefits, and the risks of this study. Thus, they can independently decide to participate in this study or not.HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative CareDovepressPublish your work in this journalHIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care is an international, peerreviewed open-access journal focusing on advances in research in HIV, its clinical progression and management options including antiviral treatment, palliative care and public healthcare policies to control viral spread. The manuscript management system is completely online and includes a very quick and fair peer-review system, which is all easy to use. Visit http://www.dovepress.com/testimonials.php to read real quotes from published authors.
Global HIV & AIDS statistics -2020 fact sheet. Unaids Data, UNAIDS Data. Global HIV & AIDS statistics -2020 fact sheet. Available from: https://www.unaids.org/en/resources/fact-sheet. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. New progress in the fight against AIDS in China in 2019. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. New progress in the fight against AIDS in China in 2019. Available from: http://www. nhc.gov.cn/jkj/s3586/201911/c2388ce70bdd404ea6dfcd886591784d. shtml. Accessed April 20, 2021.

. Unaids Data, UNAIDS Data 2019. Available from: https://www.unaids.org/en/ resources/documents/2019/2019-UNAIDS-data. Accessed April 20, 2021.

About 3000 new cases of AIDS are reported each year among young students aged 15 to 24 years old. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. About 3000 new cases of AIDS are reported each year among young students aged 15 to 24 years old. Available from: http://www.chinanews.com/gn/2019/ 07-31/8913131.shtml. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Situation and strategy of AIDS prevention and control in Chinese schools. Z Y Wu, Chin J Sch Health. 3611Wu ZY. Situation and strategy of AIDS prevention and control in Chinese schools. Chin J Sch Health. 2015;36(11):1604-1605.

The health and family planning commission answered questions on dengue fever prevention and control and special action against surrogacy. The health and family planning commission answered questions on dengue fever prevention and control and special action against surrogacy. Available from: http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2015-04/10/ content_2844813.htm. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Young students infected with HIV increased by 35% annually; 80% of them were MSM. Tencent News, Tencent News. Young students infected with HIV increased by 35% annually; 80% of them were MSM. Available from: http://edu.qq. com/a/20151130/008864.htm. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Epidemiological characteristics of HIV infection among college students in Nanjing, China: a cross-sectional survey. W Li, J Chu, Z Zhu, 10.1136/bmjopen-2019-035889BMJ Open. 10535889Li W, Chu J, Zhu Z, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of HIV infection among college students in Nanjing, China: a cross-sectional survey. BMJ Open. 2020;10(5):e035889. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019- 035889

Sexual attitudes, sexual behaviors, and use of HIV prevention services among male undergraduate students in Hunan, China: a cross-sectional survey. H Xu, J Xie, Z Xiao, 10.1186/s12889-019-6570-2BMC Public Health. 191250Xu H, Xie J, Xiao Z, et al. Sexual attitudes, sexual behaviors, and use of HIV prevention services among male undergraduate students in Hunan, China: a cross-sectional survey. BMC Public Health. 2019;19 (1):250. doi:10.1186/s12889-019-6570-2

Determinants of risky sexual behavior and condom use among college students in China. X Sun, X Liu, Y Shi, Y Wang, P Wang, C Chang, 10.1080/09540121.2012.748875AIDS Care. 256Sun X, Liu X, Shi Y, Wang Y, Wang P, Chang C. Determinants of risky sexual behavior and condom use among college students in China. AIDS Care. 2013;25(6):775-783. doi:10.1080/09540121.2012.748875

The characterization of sexual behavior in Chinese male university students who have sex with other men: a Cross-Sectional Study. L Cong, M Ono-Kihara, G Xu, 10.1186/1471-2458-8-250BMC Public Health. 81250Cong L, Ono-Kihara M, Xu G, et al. The characterization of sexual behavior in Chinese male university students who have sex with other men: a Cross-Sectional Study. BMC Public Health. 2008;8(1):250. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-250

Condom effectiveness for HIV prevention by consistency of use among men who have sex with men in the United States. D K Smith, J H Herbst, X Zhang, C E Rose, 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000461J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 683Smith DK, Herbst JH, Zhang X, Rose CE. Condom effectiveness for HIV prevention by consistency of use among men who have sex with men in the United States. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2015;68 (3):337-344. doi:10.1097/QAI.0000000000000461

One-night-stand behavior and associated factors among young men who have sex with men in Wuhan, China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. Y X Mao, C C Xiao, T Wang, S Y Li, H Yan, 10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2017.06.01138Mao YX, Xiao CC, Wang T, Li SY, Yan H. One-night-stand behavior and associated factors among young men who have sex with men in Wuhan, China. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2017;38 (6):746-749. doi:10.3760/cma.j.issn.0254-6450.2017.06.011

Incidence of HIV infection and sexually transmitted infections and related risk factors among very young men who have sex with men. R Garofalo, A L Hotton, L M Kuhns, B Gratzer, B Mustanski, 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000933doi:10.1097/ QAI.0000000000000933J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 721Garofalo R, Hotton AL, Kuhns LM, Gratzer B, Mustanski B. Incidence of HIV infection and sexually transmitted infections and related risk factors among very young men who have sex with men. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016;72(1):79-86. doi:10.1097/ QAI.0000000000000933

High substance use and HIV risk behavior among young Argentine men who have sex with men. I C Balan, T Frasca, M A Pando, 10.1007/s10461-017-1987-zAIDS Behav. 224Balan IC, Frasca T, Pando MA, et al. High substance use and HIV risk behavior among young Argentine men who have sex with men. AIDS Behav. 2018;22(4):1373-1382. doi:10.1007/s10461-017-1987-z

Sexual risk behaviors among apps-using young men who have sex with men in Hong Kong. T E Yeo, Y L Ng, 10.1080/09540121.2015.1093597AIDS Care. 283Yeo TE, Ng YL. Sexual risk behaviors among apps-using young men who have sex with men in Hong Kong. AIDS Care. 2016;28 (3):314-318. doi:10.1080/09540121.2015.1093597

HIV infection rates and risk behavior among young men undergoing community-based testing in San Diego. M Hoenigl, A Chaillon, S R Morris, S J Little, 10.1038/srep25927Sci Rep. 6125927Hoenigl M, Chaillon A, Morris SR, Little SJ. HIV infection rates and risk behavior among young men undergoing community-based test- ing in San Diego. Sci Rep. 2016;6(1):25927. doi:10.1038/srep25927

Prevalence of high-risk behaviors in the transmission of HIV among high school and college student MSM in China: a meta-analysis. Z Yang, Z Huang, Z Dong, S Zhang, J Han, Jin M , 10.1186/s12889-015-2614-4BMC Public Health. 1511272Yang Z, Huang Z, Dong Z, Zhang S, Han J, Jin M. Prevalence of high-risk behaviors in the transmission of HIV among high school and college student MSM in China: a meta-analysis. BMC Public Health. 2015;15(1):1272. doi:10.1186/s12889-015-2614-4

Factors associated with unprotected anal intercourse among male students who have sex with men in three northern regions of China. D C Zhang, Z Y Wu, S R Scott, 10.1097/CM9.0000000000000311Chin Med J. 13214Zhang DC, Wu ZY, Scott SR. Factors associated with unprotected anal intercourse among male students who have sex with men in three northern regions of China. Chin Med J. 2019;132 (14):1639-1644. doi:10.1097/CM9.0000000000000311

Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Notice on strengthening health education on AIDS prevention in schools. Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Notice on strengthening health education on AIDS prevention in schools. Available from: http://www.moe.gov.cn/s78/A17/twys_left/moe_943/ moe_945/s3285/201006/t20100603_88666.html. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Basic knowledge on HIV/AIDS prevention for youthMinistry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Basic knowledge on HIV/AIDS prevention for youth. Available from: http://old.moe.gov.cn//publicfiles/business/htmlfiles/moe/s3285/ 201001/xxgk_81038.html. Accessed April 20, 2021.

University HIV reporting mechanism will be established in China in 2015. Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of ChinaMinistry of Education of the People's Republic of China. University HIV reporting mechanism will be established in China in 2015. Available from: http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xxgk/moe_1777/moe_ 1779/201510/t20151019_214246.html. Accessed May 7, 2021.

Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Notice on further strengthening HIV/AIDS prevention education in schools in the new era. Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China. Notice on further strengthening HIV/AIDS prevention education in schools in the new era. Available from: http://www.moe.gov.cn/jyb_xwfb/gzdt_gzdt/ s5987/201910/t20191014_403367.html. Accessed April 14, 2021.

Challenges and strategies for HIV/ AIDS prevention and control in schools. W G Guo, N L Mao, Z Y Shen, Pract Prev Med. 2711Guo WG, Mao NL, Shen ZY. Challenges and strategies for HIV/ AIDS prevention and control in schools. Pract Prev Med. 2020;27 (11):1403-1405.

Sexual risk behavior, AIDS knowledge, and beliefs about AIDS among predominantly minority gay and bisexual male adolescents. M J Rotheram-Borus, C Koopman, AIDS Educ Prev. 34Rotheram-Borus MJ, Koopman C. Sexual risk behavior, AIDS knowledge, and beliefs about AIDS among predominantly minority gay and bisexual male adolescents. AIDS Educ Prev. 1991;3 (4):305-312.

The AIDS Prevention Working Committee Office of the State Council. China AIDS monitoring and assessment framework (trial). Li Y, Guochen H232China Health Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: People's Medical Publishing HouseThe AIDS Prevention Working Committee Office of the State Council. China AIDS monitoring and assessment framework (trial). In: Li Y, Guochen H, editors. 2008 China Health Statistics Yearbook. Beijing: People's Medical Publishing House; 2008:232.

Correlates of condom use among female prostitutes and tourist clients in Bali. L Thorpe, K Ford, P Fajans, D N Wirawan, 10.1080/09540129750125208Indonesia. AIDS Care. 92Thorpe L, Ford K, Fajans P, Wirawan DN. Correlates of condom use among female prostitutes and tourist clients in Bali, Indonesia. AIDS Care. 1997;9(2):181-197. doi:10.1080/09540129750125208

The Efficacy of Intervention on Risk Behavior via Peer-Group Among MSM. Hefei City (D): Anhui Medical School. F Yu, Yu F. The Efficacy of Intervention on Risk Behavior via Peer-Group Among MSM. Hefei City (D): Anhui Medical School; 2011.

IBM SPSS statistics 25.0. Available from. IBM SPSS statistics 25.0. Available from: https://www.ibm.com/sup port/pages/node/589145. Accessed April 20, 2021.

Predictors of condom use behavior among men who have sex with men in China using a modified information-motivation-behavioral skills (IMB) model. H Jiang, X Chen, J Li, Z Tan, W Cheng, Y Yang, 10.1186/s12889-019-6593-8BMC Public Health. 191261Jiang H, Chen X, Li J, Tan Z, Cheng W, Yang Y. Predictors of condom use behavior among men who have sex with men in China using a modified information-motivation-behavioral skills (IMB) model. BMC Public Health. 2019;19(1):261. doi:10.1186/s12889- 019-6593-8

Associations of consistent condom use among men who have sex with men in. S Stromdahl, Onigbanjo Williams, A Eziefule, B , 10.1089/aid.2012.0070AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2812Stromdahl S, Onigbanjo Williams A, Eziefule B, et al. Associations of consistent condom use among men who have sex with men in Abuja, Nigeria. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 2012;28 (12):1756-1762. doi:10.1089/aid.2012.0070

Condom use social norms and self-efficacy with different kinds of male partners among Chinese men who have sex with men: results from an online survey. C Wang, J D Tucker, C Liu, H Zheng, W Tang, L Ling, 10.1186/s12889-018-6090-5BMC Public Health. 1811175Wang C, Tucker JD, Liu C, Zheng H, Tang W, Ling L. Condom use social norms and self-efficacy with different kinds of male partners among Chinese men who have sex with men: results from an online survey. BMC Public Health. 2018;18(1):1175. doi:10.1186/s12889- 018-6090-5

Assessing consistent condom use among migrant men who have sex with men in Shanghai, China: validation of an information-motivation-behavioral skills model. Y Wang, M Jia, D Yuan, 10.1186/s12879-019-4090-4BMC Infect Dis. 191462Wang Y, Jia M, Yuan D, et al. Assessing consistent condom use among migrant men who have sex with men in Shanghai, China: validation of an information-motivation-behavioral skills model. BMC Infect Dis. 2019;19(1):462. doi:10.1186/s12879-019-4090-4

Patterns of condom use among men who have sex with men in China: a systematic review and meta-analysis. E P Chow, D P Wilson, L Zhang, 10.1007/s10461-011-9935-9doi:10.1007/ s10461-011-9935-9AIDS Behav. 163Chow EP, Wilson DP, Zhang L. Patterns of condom use among men who have sex with men in China: a systematic review and meta-analysis. AIDS Behav. 2012;16(3):653-663. doi:10.1007/ s10461-011-9935-9

Prevalence and correlates of unprotected anal intercourse among Hong Kong men who have sex with men traveling to Shenzhen. J T Lau, W Cai, H Y Tsui, 10.1007/s10461-012-0244-8China. AIDS Behav. 174Lau JT, Cai W, Tsui HY, et al. Prevalence and correlates of unpro- tected anal intercourse among Hong Kong men who have sex with men traveling to Shenzhen, China. AIDS Behav. 2013;17 (4):1395-1405. doi:10.1007/s10461-012-0244-8

. 10.2147/HIV.S305932https://doi.org/10.2147/HIV.S305932

. Hiv Dovepress, Palliative Aids -Research, Care, DovePress HIV/AIDS -Research and Palliative Care 2021:13

HIV, syphilis infection, and risky sexual behaviors among male university students who have sex with men in Beijing, China: a Cross-Sectional Study. J Zheng, Z Wu, K E Poundstone, L Pang, K Rou, 10.1521/aeap.2012.24.1.78doi:10.1521/ aeap.2012.24.1.78AIDS Educ Prev. 241Zheng J, Wu Z, Poundstone KE, Pang L, Rou K. HIV, syphilis infection, and risky sexual behaviors among male university stu- dents who have sex with men in Beijing, China: a Cross-Sectional Study. AIDS Educ Prev. 2012;24(1):78-88. doi:10.1521/ aeap.2012.24.1.78

Factors associated with condom use and HIV testing among young men who have sex with men: a cross-sectional survey in a random online sample in Sweden. K Johansson, K I Persson, C Deogan, Z El-Khatib, 10.1136/sextrans-2017-053369Sex Transm Infect. 946Johansson K, Persson KI, Deogan C, El-Khatib Z. Factors associated with condom use and HIV testing among young men who have sex with men: a cross-sectional survey in a random online sample in Sweden. Sex Transm Infect. 2018;94(6):427-433. doi:10.1136/sex- trans-2017-053369

Frequent condom use with casual partners varies by sexual position among younger gay and bisexual men in New Zealand: national behavioral surveillance. N J Lachowsky, Pjw Saxton, A J Hughes, 10.1071/SH14220Sex Health. 131Lachowsky NJ, Saxton PJW, Hughes AJ, et al. Frequent condom use with casual partners varies by sexual position among younger gay and bisexual men in New Zealand: national behavioral surveillance 2006-2011. Sex Health. 2016;13(1):81-86. doi:10.1071/SH14220

Between "0" and "1": safer sex and condom use among young gay men in Hong Kong. T E Yeo, T H Fung, 10.1080/13691058.2015.1080298Cult Health Sex. 183Yeo TE, Fung TH. Between "0" and "1": safer sex and condom use among young gay men in Hong Kong. Cult Health Sex. 2016;18 (3):294-307. doi:10.1080/13691058.2015.1080298

Condom-use self-efficacy as a mediator between syndemics and condomless sex in men who have sex with men (MSM). S A Safren, A J Blashill, J S Lee, 10.1037/hea0000617Health Psychol. 379Safren SA, Blashill AJ, Lee JS, et al. Condom-use self-efficacy as a mediator between syndemics and condomless sex in men who have sex with men (MSM). Health Psychol. 2018;37(9):820-827. doi:10.1037/hea0000617

Behavioral and psychosocial predictors of condom use among university students in Eastern China. Q Ma, M Ono-Kihara, L Cong, 10.1080/09540120801982921AIDS Care. 212Ma Q, Ono-Kihara M, Cong L, et al. Behavioral and psychosocial predictors of condom use among university students in Eastern China. AIDS Care. 2009;21(2):249-259. doi:10.1080/09540120801982921

Condom use errors and problems: a comparative study of HIV-positive versus HIV-negative young Black men who have sex with men. R Crosby, L Mena, W L Yarber, C A Graham, S A Sanders, R R Milhausen, 10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000356Sex Transm Dis. 4211Crosby R, Mena L, Yarber WL, Graham CA, Sanders SA, Milhausen RR. Condom use errors and problems: a comparative study of HIV-positive versus HIV-negative young Black men who have sex with men. Sex Transm Dis. 2015;42(11):634-636. doi:10.1097/OLQ.0000000000000356

Correlates of consistent condom use among men who have sex with men recruited through the internet in Huzhou City: a cross-sectional survey. M Jin, Z Yang, Z Dong, J Han, 10.1186/1471-2458-13-1101BMC Public Health. 1311101Jin M, Yang Z, Dong Z, Han J. Correlates of consistent condom use among men who have sex with men recruited through the internet in Huzhou City: a cross-sectional survey. BMC Public Health. 2013;13 (1):1101. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-1101

High HIV incidence and prevalence and associated factors among young MSM. A B Balaji, K E Bowles, B C Le, G Paz-Bailey, A M Oster, 10.1097/QAD.0b013e32835ad489AIDS. 272Balaji AB, Bowles KE, Le BC, Paz-Bailey G, Oster AM. High HIV incidence and prevalence and associated factors among young MSM, 2008. AIDS. 2013;27(2):269-278. doi:10.1097/QAD.0b013e32835ad489

Uptake and correlates of HIV testing among men in Malawi: evidence from a national population-based household survey. C Mandiwa, B Namondwe, 10.1186/s12913-019-4031-3BMC Health Serv Res. 191203Mandiwa C, Namondwe B. Uptake and correlates of HIV testing among men in Malawi: evidence from a national population-based household survey. BMC Health Serv Res. 2019;19(1):203. doi:10.1186/s12913-019-4031-3

Prevalence and correlates of condom use among sexually active men who have sex with men in the United States: findings from the national survey of family growth. W E Abara, E Oraka, Jeffries Iv, W L Chavez, P Nasrullah, M Dinenno, E , 10.1071/SH16034Sex Health. 144Abara WE, Oraka E, Jeffries Iv WL, Chavez P, Nasrullah M, DiNenno E. Prevalence and correlates of condom use among sexually active men who have sex with men in the United States: findings from the national survey of family growth, 2002, 2006-10 and 2011-13. Sex Health. 2017;14(4):363-371. doi:10.1071/SH16034

The impact of homophobia and HIV stigma on HIV testing uptake among Chinese men who have sex with men: a mediation analysis. C Wei, D H Cheung, H Yan, J Li, L E Shi, H F Raymond, Wei C, Cheung DH, Yan H, Li J, Shi LE, Raymond HF. The impact of homophobia and HIV stigma on HIV testing uptake among Chinese men who have sex with men: a mediation analysis.

. 10.1097/QAI.0000000000000815doi:10.1097/ QAI.0000000000000815J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 711J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016;71(1):87-93. doi:10.1097/ QAI.0000000000000815

Overcoming HIV stigma? A qualitative analysis of HIV cure research and stigma among men who have sex with men living with HIV. F Wu, A Zhang, A Babbitt, 10.1007/s10508-017-1062-xArch Sex Behav. 477Wu F, Zhang A, Babbitt A, et al. Overcoming HIV stigma? A qualitative analysis of HIV cure research and stigma among men who have sex with men living with HIV. Arch Sex Behav. 2018;47 (7):2061-2069. doi:10.1007/s10508-017-1062-x

HIV education and sexual risk behaviors among young men who have sex with men. J Raifman, C Beyrer, R Arrington-Sanders, 10.1089/lgbt.2017.0076LGBT Health. 52Raifman J, Beyrer C, Arrington-Sanders R. HIV education and sexual risk behaviors among young men who have sex with men. LGBT Health. 2018;5(2):131-138. doi:10.1089/lgbt.2017.0076

Sex education and HIV testing among young men who have sex with men: findings from the 2006-2010 and 2011-2015 national survey of family growth. J D Pierce, K R Ylitalo, B A Lanning, C C Limbers, 10.1097/QAI.0000000000001773J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 792Pierce JD, Ylitalo KR, Lanning BA, Limbers CC. Sex education and HIV testing among young men who have sex with men: findings from the 2006-2010 and 2011-2015 national survey of family growth. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2018;79(2):179-185. doi:10.1097/QAI.0000000000001773

Evolution of men who have sex with men community and experienced stigma among men who have sex with men in Chengdu. Y Feng, Z Wu, R Detels, 10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181c7df71China. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 53Suppl1Feng Y, Wu Z, Detels R. Evolution of men who have sex with men community and experienced stigma among men who have sex with men in Chengdu, China. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2010;53 (Suppl1):S98-103. doi:10.1097/QAI.0b013e3181c7df71

Challenges and responses to HIV/AIDS prevention and control in colleges. J F Yi, Chin J Sch Doctor. 3106Yi JF. Challenges and responses to HIV/AIDS prevention and control in colleges. Chin J Sch Doctor. 2017;31(06):405-406+409.

Parentadolescent sexual communication and adolescent safer sex behavior: a meta-analysis. L Widman, S Choukas-Bradley, S M Noar, J Nesi, K Garrett, 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2015.2731doi:10.1001/ jamapediatrics.2015.2731JAMA Pediatr. 1701Widman L, Choukas-Bradley S, Noar SM, Nesi J, Garrett K. Parent- adolescent sexual communication and adolescent safer sex behavior: a meta-analysis. JAMA Pediatr. 2016;170(1):52-61. doi:10.1001/ jamapediatrics.2015.2731