# Patterns and determinants of effective coverage of routine maternal and newborn health visits in Nepal: Analysis of the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey

CorpusID: 236270235
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f498b1b06d3058f650d5ef25170d39436ac87df](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f498b1b06d3058f650d5ef25170d39436ac87df)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Patterns and determinants of effective coverage of routine maternal and newborn health visits in Nepal: Analysis of the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey


Resham Khatri 
Jo Durham 
Rajendra Karkee 
Yibeltal Assefa 

BP Koirala Institute of Health Sciences
Health Social Science and Development Research Institute
Queensland University of Technology
University of Queensland Research Article



School of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine
University of Queensland
Brisbane7 Australia. 8


Health Social Science and Development Research Institute
KathmanduNepal


School of Public Health and Social Work
Queensland University of Technology
10BrisbaneAustralia. 11


School of Public Health and Community Medicine, BP Koirala Institute of Health 12 Sciences
DharanNepal. 13

Patterns and determinants of effective coverage of routine maternal and newborn health visits in Nepal: Analysis of the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey
10.21203/rs.3.rs-347305/v1License:   This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. Read Full LicenseEffective coveragehealth facilitymaternal and newborn healthdeterminantsNepal


Despite increased access to routine maternal and newborn (MNH) visits in many 91

LMICs [11,12], the reduction of the Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) and the 92

Neonatal Mortality Rate (NMR) is slow [13]. Poor uptake of essential interventions 93

during routine MNH visits have contributed to the stagnant or slow rate of reduction 94

of NMR and MMR [3]. Only reaching at HFs, however, does not guarantee that 95

women receive all the recommended interventions [14]. Programs and research 96 need to also examine the actual receipt of essential MNH interventions and patterns 97

and determinants of EC of health services including MNH services [15,16]. 98


## Measuring EC requires information about what happens at HF after visits, and can 99

provide insights into the quality of health services [17,18]. Estimation of EC 100

incorporates the population in need of health services, the proportion of HFs contact 101

for services, and the composite coverage of uptake of essential MNH interventions at 102

the HFs and reflects the performance of health systems [2,19]. The EC of health 103 services, therefore, provides a proxy measure of the quality of health services [20, 104 21] and is being given a high priority in policies and programs, especially in 105 reproductive, maternal and child health programs [8,22,23]. 106

Nepal has a high MMR (259 per 100,000 live births) and NMR (21 per 1000 live 107 births) within South Asia [24]. Further, while significant progress has been made, the 108 rate of reduction has slowed substantially compared to the rates of increases in MNH 109

visits over the past two decades in Nepal. For instance, from 2006 to 2016, 110

institutional delivery increased from 18% to 59%, while MMR decreased from 281 to 111 259 in the same period [25]. Evidence suggests that high death rates among 112 disadvantaged groups who usually have low coverage of routine MNH visits [25]. 113

The slow progress in women and newborns' survival can be explained by either 114 disadvantaged women having poor access to recommended MNH interventions or 115

the health system is inefficient in providing essential MNH interventions. 116

In the current health policy document, Nepal has prioritised quality of care as the 117 health system's overarching principle, within the Nepal health sector strategy (NHSS) 118

(2015-2020) [26], the national health policy 2019 [27] and the Nepal Safe 119

Motherhood and Newborn Health Roadmap 2030 [28] emphasizing the universal 120 quality of health services for achieving Sustainable Development Goal 3(SDG3), 121

including MNH services [29]. The current system, however, lacks a healthcare quality 122 monitoring mechanism. Neither the routine health information system such as health 123 management information system (HMIS) [30] nor do any strategic documents 124 describe the measurement of EC of health services, including for MNH [31,32]. 125

While studies have examined contact coverage of routine MNH visits [33,34] and 126

perceived quality of care [35,36], little is known evidence is published in the EC of 127 routine MNH visits [37]. This study examined about the patterns and determinants of 128 EC of routine MNH visits. This study begins to address this gap findings and may 129 inform programs and policies to target women groups with a high burden of maternal 130 and newborn mortalities but with poor access to quality MNH services in Nepal and 131 similar settings. 132


## Methods


## 133

Data sources and sampling design 134

The NDHS 2016 data were used for this study, extracted data of individual women 135 record from the NDHS. The NDHS 2016 is a nationally representative cross-136 sectional survey conducted to assess the health services performance, especially 137 health status of reproductive, newborn, child health and nutrition [25]. 138 A more detailed sampling method is described in the NDHS 2016 report [25]. In brief, 139

the NDHS 2016 identified rural and urban sampling strata from seven provinces 140 producing 14 strata. The survey adopted a two-stage sampling design. who had a live birth in the two years preceding the survey as this sample included 149 information on pregnancy, childbirth, and postnatal care interventions. 150


## Conceptual framework of the study 151

Based on the review of previous conceptual frameworks [38][39][40], a conceptual 152 framework was developed for this study (Figure 1). This conceptual framework 153 comprises inputs that include several determinants, their contexts and mechanisms 154

at system, institutional and individual level. These contexts and mechanisms can 155 produce the output of effective uptake of MNH interventions. Improved output as EC 156

of MNH visits may lead to the survival of mothers and newborns, economic benefit, 157

and confidence in the system. Inputs are broadly categorised into three domains: 158 structural, intermediary, and health system. Structural factors cover all basic factors 159 (e.g., wealth status, ethnicity, gender) that can influence the intermediary and health 160 system factors. Intermediary factors are non-health sector factors, which generally 161 affect the conditions of health via influencing the family/community contexts (living 162 and working conditions) and individual characteristics. Health system variables 163

include several variables that involve in the provision and delivery of quality health 164 services. on Social Determinants of Health [41]. 177 178


## Study variables 179

Independent variables included characteristics of women and their healthcare 180 experience (Supplementary Table S1). Based on available information in the NDHS 181 2016 data, and as guided by the conceptual framework ( Figure 1). MNH visit [2]. Based on these woman-specific coverage scores of each MNH visit, 227

population-level EC was calculated using formula EC=Q×U|N [46]. In this formula, 228

EC refers to effective coverage of MNH visit at the national level, Q relates to the 229 average quality score of all interventions of particular MNH visit (e.g.4ANC visits), 230

and U refers to the utilisation of MNH visit (the contact coverage of the MNH visit), 231

and N is the number of population of need [2,23]. 232


## 233

For the regression analysis to identify determinants of EC of MNH visits, coverage 234 scores were dichotomised, taking woman-specific score (of respective MNH visit).


## 235

Although there are no gold standards of cut-off points for categorisation of poor or 236

good effective coverage, this study took reference cut-off point of 0.80 to a previous 237 study undertaken in Kenya [47] and Nepal [48]. analyses [49]. Backward elimination multivariable logistic regression analyses were 261

conducted [50]. For which, firstly, a full multivariable regression model was run, and 262 then estimated p-values for each independent variable and the insignificant variable 263

were identified. This procedure was repeated until no insignificant independent 264

variable was left at p<0.2 [51]. The adjusted odds ratios (aOR) with 95% CIs for all 265 independent variables retaining p<0.05 were reported. The goodness of fit tests was 266 conducted using the Hosmer Lemeshow test (non-significant results (p>0.05) 267

indicated an adequate fit) [52]. All analyses were conducted using the survey 268 command function and considering the clustering effect in Stata 14.0 (Stata Corp, 269 2015). 270


## Results


## 271

Descriptive characteristics of women 272 Table 1 shows the background characteristics of the women included in the analysis.


## 273

Among 1,978 women, 42% were from households in the lowest two wealth quintiles. 274

More than two-thirds (69%) of women were from disadvantaged ethnic groups, 275

mostly Madhesi, Janajatis and Dalits. Nearly two in five women (42%) were native 276

Nepali speakers (the national language). Male household head characterised more 277 than two-thirds (73%) of the households. More than half (55%) of women were from 278 the Terai (Plain) Region. One in four women (26%) were from province two, whereas 279 one in twenty women (6%) were from province six. About half (46%) of women were 280 from urban areas. Two-thirds (67%) of women had no decision-making authority (or 281 empowerment) in relation to access in health-seeking, buying something (financial 282 empowerment) or meeting with relatives (movement authority). Nearly one-third 283

(29%) of women reported any kind of perceived violence (e.g., beating when food 284 burnt or beating if women went out without asking husband). In total, four in five 285

(79.7%) women were aged 20-34 years, and approximately 69% of women did not 286 have a bank account. Three in five women perceived distance to a health facility was 287 a challenge when accessing health services. Further, nearly 72% of women 288

perceived it as challenging to access care when there was no available female 289 healthcare worker. In addition, over two-thirds (68%) of women had no awareness of 290 the availability of a health mothers' group in their community. One in ten mothers 291

delivered babies via C-section (Table 1). 292  


## Determinants of good EC of routine MNH visits

In the bivariable logistic analysis, 16    Model I: outcome variable: good EC of 4ANC visits. Independent variables: wealth status, language, ethnicity, religion, maternal education, maternal occupation, perceived violence, household head, residence, province, maternal age, child sex, access to a bank account, media exposure, index child, empowerment, distance to HFs, the perceived problem of not having female providers, awareness on health mothers' group, c-section delivery. 


## Discussion


## Summary of the findings

The effective coverage of 4ANC visits, institutional delivery, and PNC visit was 52%, 33% and 23%, respectively. These findings provide a baseline for the future estimation of the quality of MNH services in Nepal. Women with disadvantaged ethnicity or those from province six, speaking Maithili as the first language, and those who had high birth order (≥4) had lower odds of EC of MNH visits. Women who had access to a bank account, or women who had C-section delivery had higher odds of good EC of MNH visits. Women who perceived problem if not seen by female providers had poor EC of MNH visits compared to who did not care about the gender of health care providers.


## EC of routine MNH visits and determinants

This study found low EC of all forms of MNH visits (4ANC visits, institutional delivery, and PNC visit) compared to contact coverage of respective coverage of MNH visit.

For example, in Nepal, contact coverage of 4ANC visits, institutional delivery and first PNC visits was 71%, 64% and 51% respectively [53], but EC was lower than these figures. These suggest that women are reaching to HFs but not receiving all essential interventions. Yet, while contact coverage of routine MNH visits is essential on its own it is inadequate to avert MMR and NMR.

Poor EC of MNH visits identified in the current study are consistent with the studies conducted in Bangladesh [54], Cambodia [55], and other LMICs of South Asia and Sub Saharan Africa [18,46]. Studies conducted in Nepal reported poor quality of ANC [48] and had low uptake of recommended antenatal interventions (e.g., ANC counselling or iron or tetanus toxoid injections) [56]. An analysis of multi-country data revealed low EC of facility delivery [57] and 4ANC visits and PNC visit [58] despite high contact coverage of respective MNH visits. Few studies also reported poor EC of other health services such as treatment of sick children (e.g., treatment of diarrhoea, pneumonia) [46] and family planning services [23,46]. In addition to challenges in reaching to HFs, poor EC coverage may have contributed by the health system's weakness, such as poor readiness, including a lack of trained health workers, or shortages of medicine for MNH services.

The current study identified several determinants associated with EC of routine MNH services including ethnic and geographic disadvantage, Maithili speaking women, birth order, and gender of health care providers. First, in Nepal, ethnicity and socioeconomic status are associated with power and position in the society [59,60].

Women with upper-caste groups usually have higher wealth status, usually are Nepali native speaker, they get a good opportunity for education and employment and are likely to have better awareness of health matters and the availability of health services. Disadvantaged ethnicities belong to the lower strata of the hierarchical caste system of Nepal [61]. Women with economic and ethic disadvantages have poor access to health services in Nepal [62]. Health programs should focus on disadvantaged ethnicities and design context-specific strategies to provide effective health services to those groups.

Secondly, women of province six had poor EC that could be contributed by scattered settlements, poor transportation facilities with limited access to reach HFs [63]. Reaching HFs is problematic due to limited road networks and poor transportation facilities [64,65]. Women's access to HFs can be improved via local development approaches such as constructing HFs in strategic locations and connecting community and health facilities by constructing bridges and road networks. However, these are non-health sector interventions that require multisectoral actions. Third, non-native Nepali speaker women, for instance, Maithili speaking women, usually have poor access to information. Poor access to health information might have contributed due to their low literacy rate [66]. Health education and information programs are not available in the local language, which affects health literacy among disadvantaged groups. In some cases, women cannot express their health care needs to health services providers if they could not understand Nepali or if health providers are unable to speak local languages.


## Recruitment of local health workforce and health education interventions conducted

in local language can increase the uptake of MNH interventions.

Fourthly, women with high birth order (four or more) had poor EC of MNH visits in their recent pregnancy and childbirth. If women have more children, they may not prioritise the latest pregnancy and might not take the recommended MNH interventions in their pregnancy and childbirth [67]. Effective family planning services could reduce the number of birth order [67,68]. Women with wanted pregnancy visit health facility and take recommended MNH interventions for a healthy pregnancy and healthy childbirth. Fifth, some women prefer female providers for the uptake of MNH services in Nepal. Female health care providers can understand the need for health service users, and evidence indicates the provision of female providers can improve access to health services [69]. Similarly, if women receive good quality ANC, they are more likely to receive good quality institutional delivery services or PNC visit [37]. Improved quality of care is also likely to increase subsequent utilisation of MNH visits [56]. In nutshell, both access and health system response approaches care likely to improve EC of routine MNH visits. These approaches include equipping HFs with adequate supplies, trained health workers (e.g., local health workers who can understand local language and culture) and respectful maternity care and improved awareness on uptake of quality pregnancy, childbirth, and postnatal care from HFs.

This study demonstrated the measurement of the EC of routine MNH visits using NDHS data. The quality of care is emphasised in global health policies and universal access to quality MNH services SDG3 [9]; evaluating EC however, requires a population level measurement of quality of care. The EC of MNH visits can provide a proxy indicator of quality of care and go beyond simply contact coverage. This is important as evidence suggests access to health services alone cannot result in the intended MNH outcomes [13,70]. Measurement of quality of care requires multiple sources of data, such as users, providers, facility inventory, and observation of interaction between providers and users [9,71]. This study also demonstrates, however, a single source of data can be used to assess the health care quality. This study assessed the EC of routine MNH visits taking information on services users' engagement with the health system and using data of household survey and information on adequate care, timely care, and frequent and skilled care while women visit health facilities.


## Policy and programmatic implications of the study

This study has implications for policies and programs. Firstly, the EC has been an important concept for its applicability in health system performance and could be instrumental in tracking the progress towards universal health coverage of MNH services [17]. Secondly, in Nepal, monitoring systems have given limited attention to measuring the EC of health services including MNH services [72]. The methods used to estimate to assess the EC could provide ideas for the measurement of quality of health services. Thirdly, the universal coverage of quality MNH services are essential and need to focus on the quality of care for the reduction of NMR and MMR. To achieve SDG3 targets, the programmatic and policy focus should be beyond the contact coverage of MNH visits as only improving access to health services or contact coverage could not result in intended better MNH outcomes. Finally, this study identified disadvantaged women who were getting poor EC of MNH visits and identified the need for targeted approaches for effective uptake of MNH interventions among those groups. Programs and policies should focus on women with poor wealth status and ethnic disadvantages, and women speaking Maithili as the first language. Context-specific program approaches require to receive essential MNH interventions and ultimately improve the EC of MNH visits.


## Limitations of the study

This study has some limitations. Firstly, data were self-reported, and thus, recall bias may occur. However, this study restricted to analysis among women who had a live birth in the two years prior to the survey (2014-2016), which is a relatively shorter recall period than other studies published using NDHS datasets in the past. Secondly, outcome variables were self-reported by women during face-to-face interviews, which may lead to recall bias and social desirability bias. Thirdly, assessment of EC was limited by the information of MNH interventions available in the NDHS 2016. The NDHS did not collect information on all the WHOrecommended essential MNH interventions [4,5,45]. This study emphasises the importance of collecting information on MNH interventions in NDHS or routine HMIS system.


## Conclusions

The uptake of recommended MNH interventions was low in all routine MNH visits (4 ANC visits, institutional delivery, and the first PNC visit) in Nepal. Poor EC of MNH   However, the first author took approval for the download and use of the dataset for his doctoral thesis and this publication.


## Consent for publication

## Figure 1 A
1conceptual framework adapted and modified from the WHO's Commission 176

## #
These are separate models adjusting for covariates listed in the respective column.


visits was observed among women with social disadvantages, including those with ethnic disadvantage and living in remote areas. Both supply and demand-side multisectoral actions are needed to address several social determinants of health affecting poor EC of MNH visits in Nepal. Supply-side strategies such as recruiting female health providers and providing health commodities in HFs could improve the health system responses for delivery of better quality MNH services. Improving the status of social determinant of health, community engagement, and health awareness through mass media on the antenatal, childbirth, and postnatal period could increase the demand of services for EC of routine MNH visits. Non-health sector interventions could improve the EC of routine MNH visits, including arranging transportation facilities or constructing local bridge and roads to reach HFs. Health policies and programs should focus on women with socioeconomic disadvantages and living in remote areas. Supplementary file 1 SupplementaryTable S1: Description of variables included in the analysis of effective coverage of routine MNH visits in Nepal, 2016 Supplementary


Abbreviations ANC: Antenatal Care; CoC: Continuum of care; EC: Effective Coverage; LMICs: Low and lower-middle-income countries; MNH: Maternal and newborn health; NDHS: Nepal Demographic and Health Survey; PNC: Postnatal Care; SDIP: Safe Delivery Incentive Program Declaration Ethics approval and consent to participate We used secondary data from the 2016 NDHS. This survey was approved by an ethical review board of Nepal Health Research Council, Nepal, and ICF Marco International, Maryland, USA. The Ministry of Health and Population (MOHP) (Nepal) oversaw the overall research process of the NDHS 2016. The NDHS data are publicly available for further analysis, and data were deidentified of the research participants. This study did not require ethical approval from respective institutions.


The first 141 stage involved a systematic selection of 383 clusters with probability proportional to 142 size from urban and rural strata. The second stage consisted of selecting 30 143 households per cluster through a systematic sampling from a selected household. Of 144 selected 11,203 households but 11,040 responded to the survey. From those145 
households, of 13,089 women age 15-49 years identified for interviews, 12,862 
146 
responded (response rate of 98%). Among them, 3,998 women had a live birth five 
147 
years preceding the survey. This study included 1,978 women aged 15-49 years 
148 



Binomial logistic regression analyses were conducted to identify determinants of EC 253 of MNH visits. Three independent multivariable logistic regression analyses wereThen scores were dichotomised into 
238 
poor EC (if scores >0 and ≤0.8) and good EC (if scores >0.8) to identify the 
239 
determinants of good EC of MNH visits. For each MNH visit, EC scores were 
240 
dichotomised into poor EC (if score >0 and ≤0.8) and good EC (if score >0.8), that is 
241 
i) EC of 4ANC visits, ii) EC of institutional delivery, and iii) EC of at least one PNC 
242 
visit for mothers and newborns within 48 hours of childbirth. 
243 

244 
Statistical analyses 
245 
All the analyses are adjusted for sampling weights available in the dataset to account 
246 
for two-stage cluster sampling used in the NDHS 2016 survey (primary sampling 
247 
unit=383; stratification (seven provinces with rural/urban dichotomy; strata=14); 
248 
survey weights (probability weight =sample weight/1,000,000) [25]. Thus, results are 
249 
representative at the national as well as strata levels. Statistical significance level 
250 
was set p<0.05 (two-tailed) to identify the determinants associated with the outcome 
251 
variable. All reported estimates were weighted (unless otherwise indicated). 
252 

254 
conducted for each outcome variable, for example, Model I for EC of 4ANC visits; 
255 
Model II for EC of institutional delivery; Model III for EC of the first PNC visit for 
256 
mothers and newborns within 48 hours of childbirth. The extent of inequities was 
257 
reported in terms of odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). Before 
258 
running final regression model, multicollinearity was checked: excluded independent 
259 
variables having variation inflation factors (VIF) ≥3 in the multivariable regression 
260 


## Table 1 :
1Characteristics of women who had a live birth in the two years preceding theTable 2shows the descriptive characteristics of the EC of routine MNH visits.293 
survey in Nepal, NDHS 2016 (N=1978) 
294 

Determinants 
Categories 
Frequency, n (%) 
Structural 
Wealth status 
Lower (40%) 
832 (42.0) 
Upper (60%) 
1146 (58.0) 
Ethnicity 
Disadvantaged 
1374 (69.5) 
Advantaged 
604 (30.5) 
Religion 
Others 
306 (15.5) 
Hindu 
1672 (84.5) 
Maternal education 
No 
570 (28.8) 
Primary 
391 (19.8) 
Secondary or higher 
1016 (51.4) 
Maternal occupation 
Not working 
928 (46.9) 
Agriculture 
824 (41.6) 
Working paid 
227 (11.5) 
Perceived violence 
No 
1397 (70.6) 
Yes 
581 (29.4) 
Decision-making authority 
No 
1324 (66.9) 
Yes 
654 (33.0) 
Household head 
Male 
1438 (72.7) 
Female 
540 (27.3) 
Intermediary 
Language 
Nepali 
839 (42.4) 
Maithili 
360 (18.2) 
Bhojpuri 
267 (13.5) 
Others 
512 (25.9) 
Residence 
Urban 
1062 (53.7) 
Rural 
916 (46.3) 
Provinces 
One 
338 (17.1) 
Two 
513 (25.9) 
Three 
312 (15.8) 
Four 
164 (8.3) 
Five 
364 (18.4) 
Six 
121 (6.1) 
Seven 
166 (8.4) 
Region 
Mountain 
131 (6.6) 
Hills 
760 (38.4) 
Terai 
1087 (55.0) 
Maternal age (in years) 
15-19 
291 (14.7) 
20-34 
1570 (79.7) 
35+ 
106 (5.3) 
Birth order (index child) 
<4 
1678 (84.8) 
≥4 
300 (15.2) 
Sex of index child 
Male 
1063 (53.7) 
Female 
915 (46.2) 
Access to bank account 
No 
1367 (69.1) 
Yes 
611 (30.9) 


## Table 2 :
2Good EC of routine MNH visits in Nepal, NDHS 2016 Note: p-values obtained by Fisher exact test, HMG: health mothers' group, EC: effective coverage, ANC: antenatal care, PNC: postnatal care.Determinants 
Categories 
4ANC visits (N=1401) 
Institutional delivery (N=1270) 
PNC visit (N=999) 

n 
% of 
good EC 
p 
n 
% of good 
EC 
p 
n 
% of 
good EC 
p 

Structural 
Wealth status 
Lower (40%) 
539 
61.5 
0.242 
405 
42.1 
0.692 
329 
60.8 
0.035 
Upper (60%) 
862 
65.6 
865 
43.4 
670 
69.3 
Ethnicity 
Disadvantaged 
903 
55.2 
<0.001 819 
41.0 
0.078 
615 
64.0 
0.110 
Advantaged 
498 
80.1 
451 
46.6 
384 
70.5 
Religion 
Others 
186 
59.3 
0.333 
193 
45.2 
0.591 
145 
66.4 
0.990 
Hindu 
1,215 
64.8 
1,076 
42.6 
854 
66.5 
Education 
No 
305 
47.9 
<0.001 270 
38.5 
0.278 
207 
60.9 
0.060 
Primary 
249 
58.7 
208 
40.5 
160 
61.6 
Secondary /higher 
847 
71.4 
792 
45.2 
632 
69.6 
Occupation 
Not working 
622 
58.8 
0.002 
636 
41.5 
0.082 
467 
63.9 
0.060 
Agriculture 
596 
65.7 
460 
41.6 
387 
65.6 
Working paid 
183 
76.4 
174 
51.9 
146 
77.1 
Perceived violence 
No 
1,009 
65.0 
0.352 
916 
43.2 
0.861 
741 
67.1 
0.541 

Yes 
393 
61.6 
354 
42.6 
258 
64.7 
Decision-making authority 
No 
915 
60.5 
0.003 
830 
39.7 
0.013 
645 
65.2 
0.342 

Yes 
486 
70.7 
439 
49.3 
354 
68.9 
Household head 
Male 
1,002 
62.6 
0.168 
908 
42.1 
0.375 
700 
65.8 
0.565 
Female 
400 
67.5 
361 
45.3 
299 
68.2 
Intermediary 
Language 
Nepali 
673 
76.2 
<0.001 589 
47.2 
0.073 
484 
68.1 
0.008 
Maithili 
244 
31.7 
204 
37.2 
147 
56.1 
Bhojpuri 
121 
55.5 
141 
36.5 
90 
55.4 
Others 
363 
65.9 
336 
41.9 
278 
72.7 
Residence 
Urban 
802 
68.4 
0.009 
781 
43.9 
0.449 
611 
67.3 
0.597 
Rural 
599 
58.1 
489 
41.6 
388 
65.3 
Provinces 
One 
266 
59.7 
<0.001 223 
41.0 
0.037 
184 
75.6 
0.001 
Two 
298 
36.9 
280 
36.8 
196 
53.9 
Three 
236 
76.4 
226 
50.6 
196 
70.4 
Four 
124 
78.1 
121 
50.4 
105 
76.0 
Five 
272 
71.9 
239 
46.0 
187 
67.4 
Six 
66 
68.7 
53 
37.7 
44 
45.1 
Seven 
139 
79.2 
128 
36.2 
87 
64.3 
Region 
Mountain 
94 
62.4 
<0.001 59 
30.0 
0.015 
60 
72.5 
0.019 



(of 19) variables were significantly associated with EC of 4ANC visits. Similarly, six (of 23) variables were significantly associated with good EC of institutional delivery. Total 12 (of 20) variables were significantly associated with good EC of PNC visit (Supplementary Table S3). In the multivariate logistic regression analysis (Model I) for determinants of EC of 4ANC visits, six variables were significantly associated with good EC of 4ANC visits. 4ANC visits. There was good EC of 4ANC visits if women resided in province four problem of not having female providers (aOR=0.47; 95% CI: 0.33, 0.67) were found to have a significant negative association with the uptake of good EC of 4ANC visits (Table 3). In the multivariable analysis (Model II for determinants of EC of institutional delivery), two variables (mode of delivery and continuity of 4ANC visits) were significantly associated with EC of institutional delivery. Women who had delivery via caesareansection had lower odds (aOR=0.54; 95% CI: 0.37, 0.80) of EC of institutional delivery services compared to women who had a normal delivery. Women with at least 4ANC visits during their pregnancy had higher odds (aOR=1.78; 95% CI: 1.33, 2.38) of good EC of institutional delivery compared to women who did not (Table 3). In the multivariable analysis (Model III for determinants of EC of PNC visit), six variables were significantly associated with EC of PNC visit. Nepali speaker women PNC visit. C-section (aOR=4.20; 95% CI: 2.29, 7.68), and EC of 4ANC visits (aOR=1.69; 95% CI: 1.18, 2.43) had a significant positive association with good EC of PNC visit(Table 3).Maithili speakers had lower odds (aOR=0.42; 95% CI: 0.20, 0.88) of good EC of 

(aOR=1.69; 95% CI: 1.02, 2.79) or seven (aOR=2.41; 95% CI: 1.46, 3.97), belonged 

to an advantaged ethnicity (aOR=1.68; 95% CI: 1.16, 2.43), and had a bank account 

(aOR=1.48; 95% CI: 1.08, 2.03) compared to their reference counterparts. Women 

with higher birth order (≥4) (aOR=0.54; 95% CI: 0.35, 0.85), and the perceived 

(aOR=0.65; 95% CI: 0.43, 0.99), women from province six (aOR=0.34; 95% CI: 0.18, 

0.64) and province seven (aOR=0.56; 95% CI: 0.31, 0.99), the perceived problem if 

not having female providers (aOR=0.67; 95% CI:0.47, 0.96), or higher birth order (≥ 

4) (aOR=0.52; 95% CI: 0.29, 0.93), had a significant negative association with EC of 



## Table 3 :
3Multivariable logistic regression for factors associated with good EC of routine MNH visits in Nepal, 2016 (N=1,978) Significance at *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05. EC=effective coverage. Shaded cells: Variables not included in the analysis. Variables that had p<0.2 included in the final model.Determinants 
Categories 
Model I # 
aOR (95% CI) 
Model II # 
aOR (95% CI) 
Model III # 
aOR (95% CI) 
Structural 
Ethnicity 
Disadvantage 
d 
1.00 

Advantaged 
1.68 (1.16, 2.43) ** 
Intermediary 
Languages 
Nepali 
1.00 
0.65*(0.43, 0.99) 
Maithili 
0.42 (0.20, 0.88) * 
0.48(0.22, 1.09) 
Bhojpuri 
1.01(0.48, 2.14) 
0.59(0.29,1.22) 
Others 
0.82(0.53, 1.25) 
1.00 
Provinces 
One 
1.00 
1.00 
Two 
0.74(0.37,1.49) 
0.73(0.37,1.46) 
Three 
1.65(0.97, 2.80) 
0.65(0.34,1.23) 
Four 
1.69 (1.02, 2.79) * 
0.92(0.47, 1.81) 
Five 
1.47(0.88, 2.46) 
0.72(0.44,1.18) 
Six 
1.37(0.77, 2.43) 
0.34 (0.18, 0.64) 
*** 
Seven 
2.41 (1.46, 3.97) *** 
0.56 (0.31,0.99) * 
Birth order (index child) <4 
1.00 
1.00 
≥4 
0.54 (0.35, 0.85) ** 
0.52 (0.29, 0.93) * 
Access to a bank 
account 
No 
1.00 

Yes 
1.48 (1.08, 2.03) * 
Health system 
Perceived problem not 
having female 
providers 

No problem 
1.00 
1.00 

Big problem 
0.47 (0.33,0.67) *** 
0.67 (0.47, 0.96) * 
Mode of delivery 
C-section 
0.54 (0.37, 0.80) 
** 
4.20 (2.29, 7.68) 
*** 
Normal 
1.00 
1.00 
EC of 4ANC visits 
Poor 
1.00 
1.00 
Good 
1.78 (1.33, 2.38) 
*** 
1.69 (1.18, 2.43) 
** 



Model II: outcome variable: good EC of institutional delivery. Independent variables: all variables model I plus the EC of 4ANC visits. Model III: outcome variable: Good EC of the first PNC visit. Independent variables: variables of model I plus the EC of 4ANC visit, and EC of institutional delivery. These figures show that our models are the best fit. P-values obtained by Fisher exact test. HMG: health mothers' group. EC= effective coverage, ANC: antenatal care, PNC: postnatal care.Goodness of fit test (Hosmer Lemeshow test) for Model I (p= 0.575), Model 2 (p= 0.879), and Model III 
(p= 0.493). 

## Table S2 :
S2Uptake of interventions during MNH visits in Nepal, 2016 SupplementaryTable S3: Bivariable binomial logistic regression analysis for good EC of MNH visits in Nepal
AcknowledgementsThis manuscript is a part of the first author's doctoral thesis at the School of PublicNot applicableAvailability of data and materialsData used in this study are publicly available secondary data obtained from the DHS (https://dhsprogram.com/data/available-datasets.cfm) program.Competing interestsThe authors declared that they have no competing interests.FundingNo funding received for the development of this manuscript.Supplementary FilesThis is a list of supplementary les associated with this preprint. Click to download. supplimentary le.doc
World Bank Group and the United Nations Population Division. WHO: Trends in maternal mortality 2000 to 2017: estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA. WHO: Trends in maternal mortality 2000 to 2017: estimates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and the United Nations Population Division. In. WHO Geneva,; 2019.

Effective coverage: a metric for monitoring universal health coverage. M Ng, N Fullman, J L Dieleman, A D Flaxman, C J Murray, S S Lim, PLoS Med. 1191001730Ng M, Fullman N, Dieleman JL, Flaxman AD, Murray CJ, Lim SS: Effective coverage: a metric for monitoring universal health coverage. PLoS Med 2014, 11(9):e1001730.

WHO: WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience: World Health Organization; 2016. 5. WHO: Compilation of WHO recommendations on maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health. A Amouzou, H H Leslie, M Ram, M Fox, S S Jiwani, J Requejo, T Marchant, M K Munos, Lme Vaz, W Weiss, e001297. 4BMJ Glob Health. 2019Advances in the measurement of coverage for RMNCH and nutrition: from contact to effective coverageAmouzou A, Leslie HH, Ram M, Fox M, Jiwani SS, Requejo J, Marchant T, Munos MK, Vaz LME, Weiss W et al: Advances in the measurement of coverage for RMNCH and nutrition: from contact to effective coverage. BMJ Glob Health 2019, 4(Suppl 4):e001297. 4. WHO: WHO recommendations on antenatal care for a positive pregnancy experience: World Health Organization; 2016. 5. WHO: Compilation of WHO recommendations on maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health. In. Geneva; 2013.

World Health Organization: WHO recommendations on postnatal care of the mother and newborn: World Health Organization. World Health Organization: WHO recommendations on postnatal care of the mother and newborn: World Health Organization; 2014.

WHO & UNICEF: Pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and newborn care: A guide for essential practice. GenevaWHO & UNICEF: Pregnancy, childbirth, postpartum and newborn care: A guide for essential practice. In. Geneva; 2015.

Effective coverage measurement in maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health and nutrition: progress, future prospects, and implications for quality health systems. A D Marsh, M Muzigaba, T Diaz, J Requejo, D Jackson, D Chou, J A Cresswell, R Guthold, A C Moran, K L Strong, Lancet Glob Health. 20205Marsh AD, Muzigaba M, Diaz T, Requejo J, Jackson D, Chou D, Cresswell JA, Guthold R, Moran AC, Strong KL et al: Effective coverage measurement in maternal, newborn, child, and adolescent health and nutrition: progress, future prospects, and implications for quality health systems. Lancet Glob Health 2020, 8(5):e730-e736.

High-quality health systems in the Sustainable Development Goals era: time for a revolution. M E Kruk, A D Gage, C Arsenault, K Jordan, H H Leslie, S Roder-Dewan, O Adeyi, P Barker, B Daelmans, S V Doubova, Lancet Glob Health. 611Kruk ME, Gage AD, Arsenault C, Jordan K, Leslie HH, Roder-DeWan S, Adeyi O, Barker P, Daelmans B, Doubova SV et al: High-quality health systems in the Sustainable Development Goals era: time for a revolution. Lancet Glob Health 2018, 6(11):e1196-e1252.

Measuring effective coverage of curative child health services in rural Burkina Faso: a cross-sectional study. J L Koulidiati, R C Nesbitt, N Ouedraogo, H Hien, P J Robyn, P Compaore, A Souares, S Brenner, BMJ. 8520423Koulidiati JL, Nesbitt RC, Ouedraogo N, Hien H, Robyn PJ, Compaore P, Souares A, Brenner S: Measuring effective coverage of curative child health services in rural Burkina Faso: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open 2018, 8(5):e020423.

Global perinatal health: accelerating progress through innovations, interactions, and interconnections. G L Darmstadt, Semin Perinatol. 346Darmstadt GL: Global perinatal health: accelerating progress through innovations, interactions, and interconnections. Semin Perinatol 2010, 34(6):367-370.

Saving newborn lives in Asia and Africa: cost and impact of phased scale-up of interventions within the continuum of care. G L Darmstadt, N Walker, J E Lawn, Z A Bhutta, R A Haws, S Cousens, Health Policy Plan. 232Darmstadt GL, Walker N, Lawn JE, Bhutta ZA, Haws RA, Cousens S: Saving newborn lives in Asia and Africa: cost and impact of phased scale-up of interventions within the continuum of care. Health Policy Plan 2008, 23(2):101-117.

Measuring progress in maternal and newborn health care in Mexico: validating indicators of health system contact and quality of care. A K Blanc, C Diaz, K J Mccarthy, K Berdichevsky, BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 161255Blanc AK, Diaz C, McCarthy KJ, Berdichevsky K: Measuring progress in maternal and newborn health care in Mexico: validating indicators of health system contact and quality of care. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2016, 16(1):255.

Equity in maternal, newborn, and child health interventions in Countdown to 2015: a retrospective review of survey data from 54 countries. A J Barros, C Ronsmans, H Axelson, E Loaiza, A D Bertoldi, G V Franca, J Bryce, J T Boerma, C G Victora, Lancet. 20129822Barros AJ, Ronsmans C, Axelson H, Loaiza E, Bertoldi AD, Franca GV, Bryce J, Boerma JT, Victora CG: Equity in maternal, newborn, and child health interventions in Countdown to 2015: a retrospective review of survey data from 54 countries. Lancet 2012, 379(9822):1225-1233.

Examining horizontal inequity and social determinants of inequality in facility delivery services in three South Asian countries. T M Huda, A Hayes, M J Dibley, J Glob Health. 8110416Huda TM, Hayes A, Dibley MJ: Examining horizontal inequity and social determinants of inequality in facility delivery services in three South Asian countries. J Glob Health 2018, 8(1):010416.

A critical assessment of the ideological underpinnings of current practice in global health and their historical origins. H Kim, U Novakovic, C Muntaner, M T Hawkes, Glob Health Action. 1211651017Kim H, Novakovic U, Muntaner C, Hawkes MT: A critical assessment of the ideological underpinnings of current practice in global health and their historical origins. Glob Health Action 2019, 12(1):1651017.

Effective coverage as a new approach to health system performance assessment: a scoping review. A Jannati, V Sadeghi, A Imani, M Saadati, BMC Health Serv Res. 181886Jannati A, Sadeghi V, Imani A, Saadati M: Effective coverage as a new approach to health system performance assessment: a scoping review. BMC Health Serv Res 2018, 18(1):886.

The quality-coverage gap in antenatal care: toward better measurement of effective coverage. S Hodgins, D Agostino, A , Glob Health Sci Pract. 20142Hodgins S, D'Agostino A: The quality-coverage gap in antenatal care: toward better measurement of effective coverage. Glob Health Sci Pract 2014, 2(2):173-181.

Effective coverage of health interventions in Latin America and the Caribbean: metrics for the assessment of health systems performance. S Martinez, G Carrasquilla, R Guerrero, H Gomez-Dantes, V Castro, H Arreola-Ornelas, P Bedregal, Salud Publica Mex. 532SupplMartinez S, Carrasquilla G, Guerrero R, Gomez-Dantes H, Castro V, Arreola- Ornelas H, Bedregal P: Effective coverage of health interventions in Latin America and the Caribbean: metrics for the assessment of health systems performance. Salud Publica Mex 2011, 53 Suppl 2:s78-84.

Measuring the adequacy of antenatal health care: a national crosssectional study in Mexico. I Heredia-Pi, E Servan-Mori, B G Darney, H Reyes-Morales, R Lozano, Bull World Health Organ. 946Heredia-Pi I, Servan-Mori E, Darney BG, Reyes-Morales H, Lozano R: Measuring the adequacy of antenatal health care: a national cross- sectional study in Mexico. Bull World Health Organ 2016, 94(6):452-461.

Healthcare equity analysis: applying the Tanahashi model of health service coverage to community health systems following devolution in Kenya. R Mccollum, M Taegtmeyer, L Otiso, M Mireku, N Muturi, T Martineau, Theobald S , Int J Equity Health. 18165McCollum R, Taegtmeyer M, Otiso L, Mireku M, Muturi N, Martineau T, Theobald S: Healthcare equity analysis: applying the Tanahashi model of health service coverage to community health systems following devolution in Kenya. Int J Equity Health 2019, 18(1):65.

The coverage of continuum of care in maternal, newborn and child health: a cross-sectional study of woman-child pairs in Ghana. A Shibanuma, F Yeji, S Okawa, E Mahama, K Kikuchi, C Narh, Y Enuameh, K Nanishi, A Oduro, S Owusu-Agyei, BMJ Glob Health. 20184786Shibanuma A, Yeji F, Okawa S, Mahama E, Kikuchi K, Narh C, Enuameh Y, Nanishi K, Oduro A, Owusu-Agyei S et al: The coverage of continuum of care in maternal, newborn and child health: a cross-sectional study of woman-child pairs in Ghana. BMJ Glob Health 2018, 3(4):e000786.

Determining the effective coverage of maternal and child health services in Kenya, using demographic and health survey data sets: tracking progress towards universal health coverage. P K Nguhiu, E W Barasa, J Chuma, Trop Med Int Health. 224Nguhiu PK, Barasa EW, Chuma J: Determining the effective coverage of maternal and child health services in Kenya, using demographic and health survey data sets: tracking progress towards universal health coverage. Trop Med Int Health 2017, 22(4):442-453.

Progress in maternal and child health: how has South Asia fared?. N Akseer, M Kamali, S E Arifeen, A Malik, Z Bhatti, N Thacker, M Maksey, D&apos; Silva, H Da Silva, I C Bhutta, Z A , BMJ. 20171608Akseer N, Kamali M, Arifeen SE, Malik A, Bhatti Z, Thacker N, Maksey M, D'Silva H, da Silva IC, Bhutta ZA: Progress in maternal and child health: how has South Asia fared? BMJ 2017, 357:j1608.

Nepal demographic and health survey 2016. MOHP. MOHP [Nepal]: Nepal demographic and health survey 2016. In. Kathmandu; 2017.

Nepal health sector strategy 2015-2020. In. Kathmandu. MOHPMOHP [Nepal]: Nepal health sector strategy 2015-2020. In. Kathmandu,; 2015.

FWD: Nepal Safe Motherhood and Newborn Health Road Map 2030. Ministry of Health and Population. Kathmandu; Kathmandu, NepalDepartment of Health ServicesMOHP [Nepal] National health policy 2019. In. Kathmandu; 2019. 28. FWD: Nepal Safe Motherhood and Newborn Health Road Map 2030. In. Kathmandu Ministry of Health and Population, Government of Nepal,; 2019 29. National Planning Commission, 2015: Sustainable Development Goals, 2016-2030, National Report. Government of Nepal, National Planning Commission, Kathmandu, Nepal 30. MOHP [Nepal]: Annual Report, Department of Health Services 2075/2076 (2018/2019). In.: Ministry of Health and Population. Kathmandu, Nepal. Ministry of Health and Population, Department of Health Services.; 2020.

Report on Stocktaking the Health Policies of Nepal. In.: Nepal Health Sector Support Programme III. Nhssp M, NHSSP M: Report on Stocktaking the Health Policies of Nepal. In.: Nepal Health Sector Support Programme III; 2018.

A critical account of the policy context shaping perinatal survival in Nepal: policy tension of socio-cultural versus a medical approach. M Paudel, S Javanparast, G Dasvarma, L Newman, BMC Health Serv Res. 191166Paudel M, Javanparast S, Dasvarma G, Newman L: A critical account of the policy context shaping perinatal survival in Nepal: policy tension of socio-cultural versus a medical approach. BMC Health Serv Res 2019, 19(1):166.

Need factors for utilisation of institutional delivery services in Nepal: an analysis from Nepal Demographic and Health Survey. R Karkee, A H Lee, V Khanal, BMJ Open. 434372Karkee R, Lee AH, Khanal V: Need factors for utilisation of institutional delivery services in Nepal: an analysis from Nepal Demographic and Health Survey, 2011. BMJ Open 2014, 4(3):e004372.

Factors associated with the utilisation of postnatal care services among the mothers of Nepal: analysis of Nepal demographic and health survey. V Khanal, M Adhikari, R Karkee, T Gavidia, BMC Womens Health. 14119Khanal V, Adhikari M, Karkee R, Gavidia T: Factors associated with the utilisation of postnatal care services among the mothers of Nepal: analysis of Nepal demographic and health survey 2011. BMC Womens Health 2014, 14(1):19.

Factors determining satisfaction among facility-based maternity clients in Nepal. S Mehata, Y R Paudel, M Dariang, K K Aryal, S Paudel, R Mehta, S King, S Barnett, BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 171319Mehata S, Paudel YR, Dariang M, Aryal KK, Paudel S, Mehta R, King S, Barnett S: Factors determining satisfaction among facility-based maternity clients in Nepal. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2017, 17(1):319.

Maternal satisfaction on delivery service among postnatal mothers in a government hospital, mid-western Nepal. A Panth, P Kafle, Obstet Gynecol Int. 4530161Panth A, Kafle P: Maternal satisfaction on delivery service among postnatal mothers in a government hospital, mid-western Nepal. Obstet Gynecol Int 2018, 2018:4530161.

Social determinants of health affecting utilisation of routine maternity services in Nepal: a narrative review of the evidence. R B Khatri, R Karkee, Reprod Health Matters. 2654Khatri RB, Karkee R: Social determinants of health affecting utilisation of routine maternity services in Nepal: a narrative review of the evidence. Reprod Health Matters 2018, 26(54):32-46.

Drivers of stunting reduction in Nepal: a country case study. K Conway, N Akseer, R K Subedi, S Brar, B Bhattarai, R R Dhungana, M Islam, A Mainali, N Pradhan, H Tasic, Am J Clin Nutr. Conway K, Akseer N, Subedi RK, Brar S, Bhattarai B, Dhungana RR, Islam M, Mainali A, Pradhan N, Tasic H et al: Drivers of stunting reduction in Nepal: a country case study. Am J Clin Nutr 2020.

Social autopsy: a potential health-promotion tool for preventing maternal mortality in low-income countries. P K Mahato, E Waithaka, E Van Teijlingen, P R Pant, A Biswas, WHO South East Asia J Public Health. 71Mahato PK, Waithaka E, van Teijlingen E, Pant PR, Biswas A: Social autopsy: a potential health-promotion tool for preventing maternal mortality in low-income countries. WHO South East Asia J Public Health 2018, 7(1):24-28.

WHO: A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. Geneva: World Health Organization. WHO: A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. In. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.

World Health Organization: A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. World Health Organization: A conceptual framework for action on the social determinants of health. 2010.

Prevalence and factors associated with underutilization of antenatal care services in Nigeria: A comparative study of rural and urban residences based on the 2013 Nigeria demographic and health survey. E O Adewuyi, A Auta, V Khanal, O D Bamidele, C P Akuoko, K Adefemi, S J Tapshak, Y Zhao, PLoS One. 135197324Adewuyi EO, Auta A, Khanal V, Bamidele OD, Akuoko CP, Adefemi K, Tapshak SJ, Zhao Y: Prevalence and factors associated with underutilization of antenatal care services in Nigeria: A comparative study of rural and urban residences based on the 2013 Nigeria demographic and health survey. PLoS One 2018, 13(5):e0197324.

Factors associated with unsafe abortion practices in Nepal: Pooled analysis of the 2011 and 2016 Nepal Demographic and Health Surveys. R B Khatri, S Poudel, P R Ghimire, e0223385. 44In.: World Health Organization. 141045WHO: WHO recommendations on postnatal care of the mother and newbornKhatri RB, Poudel S, Ghimire PR: Factors associated with unsafe abortion practices in Nepal: Pooled analysis of the 2011 and 2016 Nepal Demographic and Health Surveys. PLoS One 2019, 14(10):e0223385. 44. WHO: Definition of skilled health personnel providing care during childbirth. In.: World Health Organization; 2018. 45. WHO: WHO recommendations on postnatal care of the mother and newborn. In. Geneva; 2014.

Effective coverage of primary care services in eight high-mortality countries. H H Leslie, A Malata, Y Ndiaye, M E Kruk, BMJ Glob Health. 20173424Leslie HH, Malata A, Ndiaye Y, Kruk ME: Effective coverage of primary care services in eight high-mortality countries. BMJ Glob Health 2017, 2(3):e000424.

Poor quality for poor women? Inequities in the quality of antenatal and delivery care in Kenya. J Sharma, H H Leslie, F Kundu, M E Kruk, PLoS One. 121171236Sharma J, Leslie HH, Kundu F, Kruk ME: Poor quality for poor women? Inequities in the quality of antenatal and delivery care in Kenya. PLoS One 2017, 12(1):e0171236.

Sociodemographic correlates of antenatal care visits in Nepal: results from Nepal Demographic and Health Survey. M Adhikari, B Chalise, B Bista, A R Pandey, D P Upadhyaya, BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 20201513Adhikari M, Chalise B, Bista B, Pandey AR, Upadhyaya DP: Sociodemographic correlates of antenatal care visits in Nepal: results from Nepal Demographic and Health Survey 2016. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2020, 20(1):513.

Variance Inflation Factor: As a Condition for the Inclusion of Suppressor Variable(s) in Regression Analysis. M O Akinwande, H G Dikko, A Samson, Open Journal of Statistics. 07Akinwande MO, Dikko HG, Samson A: Variance Inflation Factor: As a Condition for the Inclusion of Suppressor Variable(s) in Regression Analysis. Open Journal of Statistics 2015, 05(07):754-767.

Variable selection -A review and recommendations for the practicing statistician. G Heinze, C Wallisch, D Dunkler, Biom J. 603Heinze G, Wallisch C, Dunkler D: Variable selection -A review and recommendations for the practicing statistician. Biom J 2018, 60(3):431- 449.

Purposeful selection of variables in logistic regression. Z Bursac, C H Gauss, D K Williams, D W Hosmer, Source Code Biol Med. 317Bursac Z, Gauss CH, Williams DK, Hosmer DW: Purposeful selection of variables in logistic regression. Source Code Biol Med 2008, 3:17.

Association of sedentary behavior and metabolic syndrome. I R Lemes, X Sui, R A Fernandes, S N Blair, B C Turi-Lynch, J S Codogno, H L Monteiro, Public Health. 167Lemes IR, Sui X, Fernandes RA, Blair SN, Turi-Lynch BC, Codogno JS, Monteiro HL: Association of sedentary behavior and metabolic syndrome. Public Health 2019, 167:96-102.

Towards equity of maternal and newborn health services in Nepal. R B Khatri, Queensland, AustraliaThe University ofPhD ThesisKhatri RB: Towards equity of maternal and newborn health services in Nepal. PhD Thesis. The University of Queensland, Australia; 2021.

Effective coverage of nutrition interventions across the continuum of care in Bangladesh: insights from nationwide cross-sectional household and health facility surveys. P H Nguyen, L Q Khương, P Pramanik, S M Billah, P Menon, E Piwoz, H H Leslie, BMJ Open. 2021140109Nguyen PH, Khương LQ, Pramanik P, Billah SM, Menon P, Piwoz E, Leslie HH: Effective coverage of nutrition interventions across the continuum of care in Bangladesh: insights from nationwide cross-sectional household and health facility surveys. BMJ Open 2021, 11(1):e040109.

Not just a number: examining coverage and content of antenatal care in low-income and middle-income countries. L Benova, Ö Tunçalp, A C Moran, Omr Campbell, BMJ Global Health. 20182779Benova L, Tunçalp Ö, Moran AC, Campbell OMR: Not just a number: examining coverage and content of antenatal care in low-income and middle-income countries. BMJ Global Health 2018, 3(2):e000779.

Factors associated with the use and quality of antenatal care in Nepal: a population-based study using the demographic and health survey data. C Joshi, S Torvaldsen, R Hodgson, A Hayen, BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 1494Joshi C, Torvaldsen S, Hodgson R, Hayen A: Factors associated with the use and quality of antenatal care in Nepal: a population-based study using the demographic and health survey data. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2014, 14:94.

Effective coverage of facility delivery in Bangladesh. W Wang, L Mallick, C Allen, T Pullum, PLoS One. 146217853Wang W, Mallick L, Allen C, Pullum T: Effective coverage of facility delivery in Bangladesh, Haiti, Malawi, Nepal, Senegal, and Tanzania. PLoS One 2019, 14(6):e0217853.

Gap between contact and content in maternal and newborn care: An analysis of data from 20 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. L Carvajal-Aguirre, A Amouzou, V Mehra, M Ziqi, N Zaka, H Newby, J Glob Health. 7220501Carvajal-Aguirre L, Amouzou A, Mehra V, Ziqi M, Zaka N, Newby H: Gap between contact and content in maternal and newborn care: An analysis of data from 20 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. J Glob Health 2017, 7(2):020501.

Factors Associated with Anemia among Pregnant Women of Underprivileged Ethnic Groups Attending Antenatal Care at Provincial Level Hospital of Province 2. U K Yadav, P Ghimire, A Amatya, A Lamichhane, NepalYadav UK, Ghimire P, Amatya A, Lamichhane A: Factors Associated with Anemia among Pregnant Women of Underprivileged Ethnic Groups Attending Antenatal Care at Provincial Level Hospital of Province 2, Nepal. Anemia 2021, 2021.

Timing of first antenatal care (ANC) and inequalities in early initiation of ANC in Nepal. Front Public Health. Y R Paudel, T Jha, S Mehata, 5242Paudel YR, Jha T, Mehata S: Timing of first antenatal care (ANC) and inequalities in early initiation of ANC in Nepal. Front Public Health 2017, 5:242.

Caste system: Theories and practices in Nepal. M Subedi, Himalayan Journal of Sociology and Anthropology. 4Subedi M: Caste system: Theories and practices in Nepal. Himalayan Journal of Sociology and Anthropology 2010, 4:134-159.

Gellner DN: Caste, ethnicity and inequality in Nepal. Economic and Political Weekly. Gellner DN: Caste, ethnicity and inequality in Nepal. Economic and Political Weekly 2007:1823-1828.

Maternal and Child Health in Nepal: The Effects of Caste, Ethnicity, and Regional Identity. N Kathmandu, Kathmandu N: Maternal and Child Health in Nepal: The Effects of Caste, Ethnicity, and Regional Identity. 2013.

Maternal and child health in Nepal: the effects of caste, ethnicity, and regional identity: further analysis of the 2011 Nepal demographic and health survey. J P Pandey, Pandey JP: Maternal and child health in Nepal: the effects of caste, ethnicity, and regional identity: further analysis of the 2011 Nepal demographic and health survey; 2013.

Looking beyond supply: a systematic literature review of demand-side barriers to health service utilization in the mountains of Nepal. A Byrne, A Hodge, E Jimenez-Soto, A Morgan, Asia Pac J Public Health. 256Byrne A, Hodge A, Jimenez-Soto E, Morgan A: Looking beyond supply: a systematic literature review of demand-side barriers to health service utilization in the mountains of Nepal. Asia Pac J Public Health 2013, 25(6):438-451.

National population and housing census. CBS [Nepal]: National population and housing census 2011. In.; 2012.

Factors influencing the use of reproductive health services among young women in Nepal: analysis of the 2016 Nepal demographic and health survey. N R Thapa, Reproductive Health. 20201102Thapa NR: Factors influencing the use of reproductive health services among young women in Nepal: analysis of the 2016 Nepal demographic and health survey. Reproductive Health 2020, 17(1):102.

Long acting reversible contraception use and associated factors among married women of reproductive age in Nepal. R Bhandari, K N Pokhrel, N Gabrielle, A Amatya, PLoS One. 143214590Bhandari R, Pokhrel KN, Gabrielle N, Amatya A: Long acting reversible contraception use and associated factors among married women of reproductive age in Nepal. PLoS One 2019, 14(3):e0214590.

Factors associated with utilization of adolescent-friendly services in Bhaktapur district. K Napit, K B Shrestha, S A Magar, R Paudel, B Thapa, B R Dhakal, A Amatya, Nepal. J Health Popul Nutr. 202012Napit K, Shrestha KB, Magar SA, Paudel R, Thapa B, Dhakal BR, Amatya A: Factors associated with utilization of adolescent-friendly services in Bhaktapur district, Nepal. J Health Popul Nutr 2020, 39(1):2.

India's conditional cash transfer programme (the JSY) to promote institutional birth: is there an association between institutional birth proportion and maternal mortality?. B Randive, V Diwan, De Costa, A , PLoS One. 8667452Randive B, Diwan V, De Costa A: India's conditional cash transfer programme (the JSY) to promote institutional birth: is there an association between institutional birth proportion and maternal mortality? PLoS One 2013, 8(6):e67452.

The quality of care. How can it be assessed?. A Donabedian, JAMA. 198812Donabedian A: The quality of care. How can it be assessed? JAMA 1988, 260(12):1743-1748.

Annual health report. MOHP. MOHP [Nepal]: Annual health report. In.; 2019.