# Chemical composition and uses of Honey: A Review

CorpusID: 237977463
 
tags: #Chemistry, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c607dd9199a2fff299b0cfa615f5081e102b75a0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c607dd9199a2fff299b0cfa615f5081e102b75a0)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Chemical composition and uses of Honey: A Review
2021. September 2021

Dessie Ashagrie Tafere 
Dessie Ashagrie Tafere 

College of Natural and Computational Science Department of Chemistry
College of Natural and Computational Science
Department of Chemistry
Mekdela Amba University
Ethiopia


Mekdela Amba University
Ethiopia

Chemical composition and uses of Honey: A Review

Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research
432021. September 202110.26502/jfsnr.2642-11000072Received: 28 June 2021; Accepted: 05 July 2021; Published: 13 July 2021 Citation: Dessie Ashagrie Tafere. Chemical Composition and uses of Honey: A Review. Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research 4 (2021): 194-201.Review ArticleHoneychemical compositionuses
Honey is an organic natural substance that is produced from the nectar of flowers by Apis mellifera and is a sweet, flavorful liquid. It is one of the most popular natural sweet substances. From a chemical point of view, it could be defined as a natural food mainly composed of sugars and water together with minor constituent such as minerals, vitamins, amino acids, organic acids, flavonoids and other phenolic compounds and aromatic substances. Its composition is particularly variable, depending on its botanical and geographical origins. Honey is used to feed bees during the winter.For centuries, honey has been used as food and as natural medicine, being prescribed by physicians of many ancient cultures for the treatment of a wide variety of ailments.

## Introduction

Honey is a natural substance produced by honeybees (Apis mellifera) from the nectar of flowers which is a sweet, flavorful, viscose liquid [1]. It has been used as a food and medical product since the earliest times.

Honey is a complex mixture and presents very great variations in composition and characteristics due to its geographical and botanical origin, its main features depending on the floral origin or the nectar foraged by bees [2]. The composition and quality of honey also depend on several environmental factors during production such as weather and humidity inside the hive, nectar conditions and treatment of honey during extraction and storage. The composition of honey varies with the feeding of the bees. Honey has been reported to contain more than 180 substances and is considered as an important part of traditional medicine. Honey has numerous uses and functional applications worldwide such as in food systems, religious and magical ceremonies as well as in human and veterinary medicine [3]. It is a very important energy food and is used as an  


## Chemical composition

The composition of honey basically varies to the floral source, but seasonal, environmental factors and processing conditions are also important.


## Carbohydrates

Sugar in honey is not a single species, but consists of three kinds of sugar. These are the fruit sugar (fructose), which has among the highest (41%), grape sugar (glucose), which has about 34% of ordinary sugar (sucrose) which is between 1 and 2% [5]. The ratio of one type of sugar to other depends of the source, i.e., flower pasture, and to some extent on enzyme invertase, which breaks down regular sugar in grape and fruit.

This enzyme is located in the flower from which the bees collect nectar, but it is also present in the bee's body [6].   [10]. Dark colored honeys are reported to contain more phenolic acid derivatives but less flavonoids than light-colored ones [11].


## HMF (HydroxyMethylFurfuraldehyde)

HMF is a six-carbon heterocyclic organic compound containing both aldehyde and alcohol (hydroxymethyl) functional groups [12]. The ring of the structure is centered on furan moieties, whereas the two functional groups, i.e., formyl and hydroxy-methyl groups, are linked at the second and fifth positions, respectively ( Figure 3). HMF is a solid, yellow substance that has a low melting point but is highly soluble in water [13].


## Figure 3: Chemical structure of HMF

HMF is a breakdown product of fructose (one of the main sugars in honey) that is formed slowly and naturally during the storage of honey, and much more quickly when honey is heated. The amount of HMF present in honey is the reference used as a guide to the amount of heating that has taken place: the higher the HMF value, the lower the quality of the honey is considered to be [15]. Some countries set an HMF limit for imported honey (sometimes 40 milligrams per kilogram), and honey with an HMF value higher than this limit will not be accepted [16].


## Minerals and trace elements

Honey contains varying amounts of mineral substances.

The main element found in honey is potassium, besides many other elements (as shown in 


## Acidity and pH

Acids are also components of honey. Before it was believed that bees by stomach inserted bee venom into the cell honeycomb with honey and make it so conserved. Given that one of the main components of bee venom is formic acid, it was thought that the honey has a formic acid [20]. Even some people urged to other not to use honey because of that.

Studies have shown that they are completely different acids that are composed in honey, mostly apple and lemon acid. Honey is a buffer, that means that that its pH does not change by the addition of small quantities of acids and bases. The buffer capacity is due to the content of phosphates, carbonates and other mineral salts [21].


## Water

The water content of honey (water-in-honey) is the quality aspect that determines the ability of honey to remain fresh and to avoid spoilage by yeast fermentation. Raw honey can have a water-in-honey content of less than 14% and the lower the water content the higher the perceived value of the honey [22]. It is internationally recognized that good quality honey should be processed at less than 20% water content. Low water content is desirable because honey may begin to ferment and lose its fresh quality if the water-in-honey is greater than 20%. Unpasteurized honey ferments because it contains wild yeast. However, due to honey's high sugar concentration these yeasts are less likely to cause fermentation in honey with low water content [23].


## Uses of Honey


## For bees

Bees produce honey to act as a food store for the 


## As food for humans

Honey is a useful source of high-carbohydrate food, and usually contains a rich diversity of minor constituents (minerals, proteins, vitamins and others), adding nutritional variety to human diets [25].


## As a medicine or tonic


### Antibacterial activity: Honey has proven

antimicrobial activity [26]. Honey inhibits a broad spectrum of bacterial species [27]. The alcohol extracts of honey exhibit an inhibitory effect to array of bacterial species including aerobes and anaerobes, Gram positives, and Gram negatives. Honey has powerful antimicrobial effects against pathogenic and non-pathogenic micro-organisms (yeasts and fungi), even against those that developed resistance to many antibiotics. The antimicrobial effects could be bacteriostatic or bactericidal depending on the concentration that is used [28]. 


### The antioxidant property of honey:


### Wound healing property of honey:

The development of wound infection has deleterious effects on patients by causing increased pain, discomfort and inconvenience and can lead to lifethreatening illness or even death [32]. Also, it interrupts the healing process, contributing to extended hospital stays, as well as increased treatment costs in terms of antibiotics, dressings and staff time. Wound healing can be affected by endogenous (pathophysiology) and exogenous (micro-organisms) factors [33]. The risk of wound infection increases as local conditions favor bacterial invasion and growth [34]. Honey is one of naturally existing remedies that has been applied in the treatment of wounds [35]. 


## Other uses

Honey is widely used as a source of sugars for making honey wines and beers, and in the Ear infections, impetigo, puerperal fever, rheumatic fever, scarlet fever, sore throat, wound infections Table 2: List of bacterial species sensitive to honey/honey products and diseases they cause [28].


## Conclusion

High-quality honey has a variety of positive nutritional and health effects. The quality of honey depends on its floral origin and chemical composition. Honey has been always taken place in diet not only nutritional aspects but also for health properties. The main nutrition-and health-relevant components are the carbohydrates, which make it an excellent energy source, especially for children and sportsmen. Honey is highly special, nutritious, functional and healthy food. Except nutritious value, it inhibits some food spoilage organisms too. As it has high antioxidant activity it is preferred as not only direct consumption but also supportive or preservative in foods. To make use of the miracles of honey, the tricks of honey should be avoided. Quality honey production and consumption should be increased. Adulteration of honey, decreases income of honest producers and it also has negative effects on consumers' nutrition and health.

## Figure 1 :
1Honey

## Figure 2 :
2Chemical structure of three kinds of sugar


Honey is being used since long time both in medical and domestic needs, but only recently its antioxidant property has come to limelight [29]. With increasing demand for antioxidant supply in the food, honey is becoming popular as a source of antioxidant. Oxidative stress results from lack of balancing chemical reaction between the production of free radicals and the natural protective effect of our body resulting into cellular damage and disruption of genetic structure the main antioxidants in honey are


It promotes faster wound healing through its regenerative tissue growth and epithelization effects, with little or no formation of scars. Furthermore, prostaglandins and nitric oxides play a major role in the healing process. Honey has proven safety for use. External application of honey dressings as well as application to mucous layers of the body cavities didn't show signs of allergic reaction and side effects [36].


table 1). Potassium,with an average of about one third of the total, is the main mineral element, but there is a wide variety of trace elements Several investigations have shown that the trace element content of honey depends mainly on the botanical origin of honey. Minerals has about 3.68%[17]. Although this part of the honey does not make a large amount, minerals in honey raise the value of honey for human consumption. Honey contains most of the minerals: potassium, chlorine, sulfur, calcium, sodium, phosphorus, magnesium, silicon, iron, manganese and copper[18]. When the observed mean value, dark types of honey are richer in minerals than lighter. Of course, singles can find a darker species that are poorer than some lighter species[19].Table 1: Minerals in honey in relation to human requirementsJ Food Sci Nutr Res 2021; 4 (3): 194-201 

DOI: 10.26502/jfsnr.2642-11000072 

Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research 
Vol. 4 No. 3 -September 2021. [ISSN 2642-1100] 
197 

Minerals 
Unit 
Average amount in 100g honey Recommended daily intake 

Calcium 
mg 
4-30 
1000 

Chlorine 
mg 
2-20 

Copper 
mg 
0.01-0.1 
2 

Iron 
mg 
1-3.4 
18 

Magnesium 
mg 
0.7-13 
400 

Phosphorous 
mg 
2-60 
1000 

Potassium 
mg 
10-470 
-

Sodium 
mg 
0.6-40 
-

Zinc 
mg 
0.2-0.5 
15 




Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research Vol. 4 No. 3 -September 2021. [ISSN 2642-1100] 199 manufacture of many secondary products: breakfast cereals, bakery goods, and a multitude of other value-added products. Ear infections, meningitis, pneumonia, sinusitis Streptococcus pyogenesJ Food Sci Nutr Res 2021; 4 (3): 194-201 

DOI: 10.26502/jfsnr.2642-11000072 

Bacterial Species 
Disease caused 
Bacillus anthracis 
Anthrax 
Corynebacterium 
diphtheriae 

Diphtheria 
Escherichia coli 
diarrhoea, septicaemia, urinary infections, wound infections 
Haemophilus influenzae 
Ear infections, meningitus, respiratory infections, sinusitis 

Klebsiella pneumoniae 
Pneumonia 
Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis 

Tuberculosis 

Proteus spp. 
Septicaemia, urinary infections 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
urinary infections, wound infections 

Salmonella spp. 
Diarrhea 
Salmonella choleraesuis 
Septicaemia 

Salmonella typhi 
Typhoid 
Salmonella typhimurium 
Wound infections 

Serrata marcescens 
septicaemia, wound infections 
Shigella spp. 
Dysentery 

Staphylococcus aureus 
Abscesses, boils, carbuncles, impetigo, wound infections 
Streptococcus faecalis 
Urinary infections 

Streptococcus mutans 
Dental carries 
Streptococcus 
pneumoniae 



. J W WhiteJr, Honey, Advances in food research. 24White Jr JW. Honey. Advances in food research 24 (1978): 287-374.

Composition and properties of Apis mellifera honey: A review. Machado De-Melo, A A Almeida-Muradian, Lbd Sancho, M T , Machado De-Melo AA, Almeida-Muradian LBD, Sancho MT et al. Composition and properties of Apis mellifera honey: A review. Journal of

. Apicultural Research. 57Apicultural Research 57 (2018): 5-37. (2012).

Carbohydrate terminology and classification. J H Cummings, A M Stephen, European journal of clinical nutrition. 61Cummings JH, Stephen AM. Carbohydrate terminology and classification. European journal of clinical nutrition 61 (2007): S5-S18.

Influence of pollen nutrition on honey bee health: do pollen quality and diversity matter?. Di Pasquale, G Salignon, M , Le Conte, Y , PloS one. 872016Di Pasquale G, Salignon M, Le Conte Y et al. Influence of pollen nutrition on honey bee health: do pollen quality and diversity matter? PloS one 8 (2013): e72016.

. J Alvarez-Suarez, F Giampieri, M Battino, Alvarez-Suarez J, Giampieri F, Battino M.

Honey as a source of dietary antioxidants: structures, bioavailability and evidence of protective effects against human chronic diseases. Current medicinal chemistry. 20Honey as a source of dietary antioxidants: structures, bioavailability and evidence of protective effects against human chronic diseases. Current medicinal chemistry 20 (2013): 621-638.

Honey composition. The honey book. S Bogdanov, Bogdanov S. Honey composition. The honey book (2009): 27-36.

. S Bogdanov, P Martin, Honey authenticityBogdanov S, Martin P. Honey authenticity.

. Mitteilungen aus Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Hygiene. 93Mitteilungen aus Lebensmitteluntersuchung und Hygiene 93 (2002): 232-254.

Physicochemical methods for the characterisation of unifloral honeys: a review. S Bogdanov, K Ruoff, L P Oddo, Apidologie. 35Bogdanov S, Ruoff K, Oddo LP. Physico- chemical methods for the characterisation of unifloral honeys: a review. Apidologie 35 (2004): S4-S17.

. N Gheldof, N J Engeseth, Antioxidant, Gheldof N, Engeseth NJ. Antioxidant

. F W Lichtenthaler, O- Unsaturated, N- , Lichtenthaler FW. Unsaturated O-and N-

. U M Shapla, M Solayman, N Alam, Shapla UM, Solayman M, Alam N, et al. 5-

Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) levels in honey and other food products: effects on bees and human health. Chemistry Central Journal. 12Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) levels in honey and other food products: effects on bees and human health. Chemistry Central Journal 12 (2018): 1-18.

. E A Tosi, E Ré, H Lucero, Technology. 37Tosi EA, Ré E, Lucero H, et al. Effect of Technology 37 (2004): 669-678.

. Da Silva, P M Gauche, C Gonzaga, L V , Da Silva PM, Gauche C, Gonzaga LV, et al.

Honey: Chemical composition, stability and authenticity. Food chemistry. 196Honey: Chemical composition, stability and authenticity. Food chemistry 196 (2016): 309-323.

Mineral content of the honeys produced in Galicia (North-west Spain). J L Rodriguez-Otero, P Paseiro, J Simal, Food Chemistry. 49Rodriguez-Otero JL, Paseiro P, Simal J, et al. Mineral content of the honeys produced in Galicia (North-west Spain). Food Chemistry 49 (1994): 169- 171.

The southern cypress. W R Mattoon, Mattoon WR. The southern cypress (No.

. S R Aili, A Touchard, P Escoubas, Aili SR, Touchard A, Escoubas P, et al.

Diversity of peptide toxins from stinging ant venoms. Toxicon. 92Diversity of peptide toxins from stinging ant venoms. Toxicon 92 (2014): 166-178.

Foods & Nutrition Encyclopedia, Two Volume Set. M E Ensminger, A H Ensminger, CRC pressEnsminger ME, Ensminger AH. Foods & Nutrition Encyclopedia, Two Volume Set. CRC press.

Composition and properties of Apis mellifera honey: A review. Machado De-Melo, A A Almeida-Muradian, Lbd Sancho, M T , Machado De-Melo AA, Almeida-Muradian LBD, Sancho MT, et al. Composition and properties of Apis mellifera honey: A review. Journal of

. Apicultural Research. 57Apicultural Research 57 (2018): 5-37.

Molan PC Authenticity of honey. In Food authentication. SpringerBoston, MAMolan PC Authenticity of honey. In Food authentication. Springer, Boston, MA (2006): 259- 303.

. F Hatjina, C Costa, R Büchler, Apicultural Research. 53Hatjina F, Costa C, Büchler R, et al. Apicultural Research 53 (2014): 233-247.

The athlete's diet: nutritional goals and dietary strategies. R Maughan, Proceedings of the nutrition Society. 61Maughan R. The athlete's diet: nutritional goals and dietary strategies. Proceedings of the nutrition Society 61 (2002): 87-96.

. 10.26502/jfsnr.2642-11000072J Food Sci Nutr Res. 43J Food Sci Nutr Res 2021; 4 (3): 194-201 DOI: 10.26502/jfsnr.2642-11000072

. 2642-1100] 201Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research. 43Journal of Food Science and Nutrition Research Vol. 4 No. 3 -September 2021. [ISSN 2642-1100] 201

. N J Basson, S R Grobler, Antimicrobial, Basson NJ, Grobler SR. Antimicrobial

. D J Willix, P C Molan, C G Harfoot, Willix DJ, Molan PC, Harfoot CG. A

Antimicrobial applications of nanotechnology: methods and literature. J T Seil, T J Webster, International journal of nanomedicine. 72767Seil JT, Webster TJ. Antimicrobial applications of nanotechnology: methods and literature. International journal of nanomedicine 7 (2012): 2767.

. P S Ocampo, V Lázár, B Papp, Ocampo PS, Lázár V, Papp B, et al.

Antagonism between bacteriostatic and bactericidal antibiotics is prevalent. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy. 58Antagonism between bacteriostatic and bactericidal antibiotics is prevalent. Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 58 (2014): 4573-4582.

. H K Nair, K V Rao, R Aalinkeel, Nair HK, Rao KV, Aalinkeel R et al.

. P G Anantharaju, P C Gowda, Vimalambike, Anantharaju PG, Gowda PC, Vimalambike

. C Hagberg, R Georgi, C Krier, Hagberg C, Georgi R, Krier C.

Wound pathophysiology, infection and therapeutic options. P G Bowler, Annals of medicine. 34Bowler PG. Wound pathophysiology, infection and therapeutic options. Annals of medicine 34 (2002): 419-427.

Wound infection: a failure of. M C Robson, Robson MC. Wound infection: a failure of

. Surgical Clinics of North America. 77Surgical Clinics of North America 77 (1997): 637- 650.

Traditional therapies for skin wound healing. R F Pereira, P J Bartolo, Advances in wound care. 5Pereira RF, Bartolo PJ. Traditional therapies for skin wound healing. Advances in wound care 5 (2016): 208-229.

Traditional and modern uses of natural honey in human diseases: a review. T Eteraf-Oskouei, M Najafi, Iranian journal of basic medical sciences. 16731Eteraf-Oskouei T, Najafi M. Traditional and modern uses of natural honey in human diseases: a review. Iranian journal of basic medical sciences 16 (2013): 731.

Value-added products from beekeeping. R Krell, Food & Agriculture. OrgKrell R. Value-added products from beekeeping (No. 124). Food & Agriculture Org (1996).

This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY). license 4.0This article is an open access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license 4.0