# Monophasic Synovial Sarcoma of the Left Ventricle of the Heart: An Extremely Rare Case and Literature Review

CorpusID: 238212571
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc203abb63d22983ea863f1f295a2b6601983634](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc203abb63d22983ea863f1f295a2b6601983634)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Monophasic Synovial Sarcoma of the Left Ventricle of the Heart: An Extremely Rare Case and Literature Review
2021 Jul 14. 2021 Jul 14

Anindhita Muthmaina 
Departement of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine
Faculty of Medicine
Public Health and Nursing
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sardjito General Hospital
YogyakartaDrIndonesia

Ery Kus Dwianingsih 
Department of Anatomical Pathology
Faculty of Medicine
Public Health and Nursing
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sardjito General Hospital
YogyakartaDrIndonesia

Shinta Andi Sarasati 
Department of Anatomical Pathology
Faculty of Medicine
Public Health and Nursing
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sardjito General Hospital
YogyakartaDrIndonesia

Hendry Purnasidha Bagaswoto 
Departement of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine
Faculty of Medicine
Public Health and Nursing
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sardjito General Hospital
YogyakartaDrIndonesia

Hasanah Mumpuni 
Departement of Cardiology and Vascular Medicine
Faculty of Medicine
Public Health and Nursing
Universitas Gadjah Mada
Sardjito General Hospital
YogyakartaDrIndonesia

Monophasic Synovial Sarcoma of the Left Ventricle of the Heart: An Extremely Rare Case and Literature Review

Macedonian Journal of Medical Sciences
Skopje, Republic of Macedonia Open Access92021 Jul 14. 2021 Jul 1410.3889/oamjms.2021.6541109 Category: C -Case Reports Section: Case Report in Surgery
BACKGROUND: Cardiac sarcomas account for <25% of all cardiac tumors. Of these, angiosarcomas are the most frequent. Synovial sarcomas (SS) are exceedingly rare. We present a case of primary left ventricle (LV) SS, a form of sarcoma particularly rare in the heart.

## Introduction

Primary cardiac tumors are very rare, and most of them are benign. Malignant primary cardiac tumor only represents 25% of all primary cardiac tumors, and most of them are sarcomas [1]. Undifferentiated sarcoma is the most common type of sarcoma in the heart, followed by angiosarcoma (25%), leiomyosarcoma (25%), and synovial sarcoma (SS) [2]. In another study, angiosarcoma was found as the most frequent sarcoma, followed by malignant fibrous histiocytoma, leiomyosarcoma, and SS. Cases with SS only account for 2% of the sarcomas in the heart [2], [3]. Primary cardiac sarcomas are predominantly located in the heart's right side, with the right to left side ratio of 2:1 [4]. In this case, we report the left ventricle's (LVs) primary cardiac SS, with a chief complaint of syncope. The diagnosis was confirmed by histopathological analysis and immunostaining. A 19-year-old male patient was suddenly unconscious when he was working 3 weeks prior to hospital admission. Palpitation or chest pain was not reported prior to unconsciousness event. Initially, the patient did not seek for medical help, however, a week later the symptom was repeated. He went to a private hospital, and congenital heart disease was suspected. An echocardiographic examination was performed and revealed a mass at the LV. He was referred to Dr. Sardjito General Hospital with the diagnosis of suspected LV Myxoma. Physical examination showed a 2/6 pan systolic murmur in the apex. Transthoracic and transoesophageal echocardiography examinations were performed, and showed two LV masses: one sized 2.6 cm × 1.5 cm attached to the posterior mitral left, and another, sized 1.2 cm × 2.1 cm with peduncle attached to the anterior mitral leaflet that obstructed the LV outflow tract (LVOT) (Figures 1 and 2). A Cardiac https://oamjms.eu/index.php/mjms/index Multi-Slice Computed Tomography was performed and showed a pedunculated mass in the LV, size 2.3 cm × 2.3 cm × 4.7 cm ( Figure 3). Enlarged lymph nodes or intrathoracic mass were not detected, and then open-heart surgery was performed. The procedure was started with cannulation of the aorta, inferior and superior cava veins. The cardiopulmonary bypass machine was started and cardioplegia administrated. The surgeons opened the right atrium and the interatrial septum to visualize the mitral valve and the tumor. A single encapsulated cardiac tumor with a size of 5 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.3 cm was found. The tumor was removed, and the mitral valve was replaced with a St. Jude mechanical valve size 29 mm. The atria were closed and the patient was rewarmed. The procedure was completed without any complications.


## Case Description

The tumor mass was sent to the Anatomical Pathology department for a morphologic examination. The histopathology analysis revealed a mesenchymal tumor arranged in hypercellular fascicular architecture with a small intervening stroma, infiltrative to surrounding stroma. Hyalinization and myxoid changes were observed. Tumor cells were polymorphic with scant amphophilic cytoplasm, ovoid-to-spindled vesicular nuclei with evenly dispersed chromatin, and inconspicuous nucleoli. Glandular differentiation was not observed in the morphological features. A suspicion of leiomyosarcoma, with differential diagnosis of monophasic SS of the heart, was established. Immunostaining analysis using specific antibodies was performed to differentiate those entities. The results showed positive expression of BCL2 and negative expression of desmin, suggesting SS with a monophasic variant. Tumor proliferation was observed with Ki67 immunostaining and exhibited a 25% proliferation index ( Figure 4). The diagnosis was then confirmed as monophasic SS. The   patient was discharged 10 days later with good postoperative condition. The patient was screened for any other similar malignancy in various body parts by performing a bone survey and abdominal ultrasound. However, none were detected. As a treatment plan, he was scheduled for chemotherapy with Doxorubicin-Ifosfamide-Mesna regimen for six times at 28 days intervals. The post-chemo evaluation was performed and showed no residuals nor relapse. The patient gave his consent to submit his case for publication.


## Discussion

The heart's primary SS is a rare tumor, accounting for only 2% of cardiac sarcomas, with the left atrium and pericardium as the predominant site [3].

Most SS of the heart is predominantly right-sided (ten cases), with seven tumors in the right atrium and three in the right ventricle. Predicted prognosis based on age is challenging to conclude because of the wide variation of age and few cases reported. Cardiac SS patients involving the left side of the heart are extremely rare; there are only three cases reported of primary SS of the LV [5], [6], [7].

A total of sixteen cases and the current case of cardiac SS are listed in Table 1. The average age was 38 years ranging from 17 to 66 years. At 19, the indexed case is much younger compared to the median age of previous cases. The clinical presentation is similar to the other tumors located in the heart. The symptoms are usually caused by a local obstruction or functional interference, which clinically can present as dyspnea, chest pain, congestive heart failure, and syncope [8]. The sarcoma may cause emboli to the cerebral vasa and present as a cerebrovascular accident [6], [9].  In this case, the SS had originated from the LV and obstructed the LVOT; thus, it manifested as syncope in this patient.

The sarcoma can arise from any part of the heart, and when it originates from the valvular structure, it usually has pedunculated morphology [8]. In this case, at first, the pedunculated mass was suspected as myxoma, since it accounts for 50% of cardiac mass cases [10]. We concluded that the SS in the heart was a primary tumor since we did not find another tumor outside the heart. We also did not find any evidence of SS with metastasis, especially in the lungs, as the most common metastatic site. The average tumor size was 7 cm (range 0.5-7.5 cm) in seventeen SS cases of the heart, with the largest at 15 cm and the smallest was 1 cm. Histologically, SS may display biphasic patterns, with epithelial and spindle cell components, while spindle cell components characterize the monophasic variant [4], [8]. In our review, there were six cases with monophasic SS, six cases with biphasic SS, and five cases that did not elaborate in detail concerning their histologic variants. In monophasic SS cases, the diagnosis can be challenging since it is frequently confused with leiomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, hemangiopericytoma, or malignant nerve sheath tumor. To differentiate those entities, immunostaining is needed to confirm the diagnosis [4], [8]. The SS shows positive immunostaining of the spindle cells for BCL2 and epithelial cells for cytokeratin and epithelial membrane antigen. The SS in our case was of the monophasic variety positively stained with vimentin, BCL2 protein, and negatively stained desmin [2], [4]. In some cases, the difference can only be made using chromosomal translocation analysis, with the hallmark being the detection of t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2), which presents in 90% of cases [5].

Surgery has been the primary treatment of the SS cases since wide excision is required for a better outcome, followed by chemotherapy. The prognosis of SS is poor, with the most common causes of death as tumor recurrence and metastasis [8], [11]. Favorable factors for better survival are the young age when the diagnosis was made, the absence of chromosomal abnormalities, and the pericardium origin tumor. In contrast, older age at diagnosis contributes to poor prognosis. However, since the incidence of SS is rare, the prognostic factors are hard to ascertain [4], [12].

The primary cardiac tumor has a poor prognosis. A recent study by Yin et al. in 2020 showed that patients with primary cardiac tumors had a median survival of 7 months, but the survival can be improved with surgery and chemotherapy [12]. The surgical procedure is aimed to remove the tumor completely, and the radical excision has the lowest recurrence [13]. In SS, chemotherapy after the surgical procedure will improve survival since SS is relatively more chemosensitive than any other soft-tissue sarcoma. The combination of ifosfamide and doxorubicin showed a better outcome than high-dose ifosfamide alone. There are several novel therapies for SS that are still under investigation, such as tyrosine kinase targeted therapy, epigenetic modifiers, and immunotherapy, that showed some promising preclinical and early results [14].


## Conclusions

Primary cardiac SS is rare, and SS originating from the LV is extremely rare. Classic histopathology of the SS is a biphasic variant, showing glandular differentiation. Monophasic SS is diagnostically challenging since it shares the broad list of differential diagnoses of spindle cell tumors and needs immunostaining or molecular analysis for definitive diagnosis. SS is more chemosensitive than other soft-tissue sarcomas. Ifosfamide and doxorubicin combination had a better outcome; recently, some novel therapies were developed to improve patient survival. This new development substantiates the importance of definitive diagnosis to differentiate SS from other softtissue sarcomas.


## Consent

Written informed consent for publication of his detail was obtained from the patient. Institutional approval was not required to publish this case report.

## Figure 2 :
2Transoesophageal echocardiography showed two masses that originated from AML with the size of 1.2 cm × 2.1 cm (red arrow) and PML with size 2.6 cm × 1.5 cm (blue arrow). LA = Left atrium, LV = Left ventricle, RV = Right ventricle, PML = Posterior mitral leaflet, AML = Anterior mitral leaflet

## Figure 4 :
4(a) showed Hematoxylin and Eosin staining, magnified 400 times, showing fascicular arrangement, consisting of the spindle, with some degree of mitosis, that supported the suspicion of leiomyosarcoma or monophasic synovial sarcoma. Immunostaining was performed to differentiate those entities. (b) showed immunostaining with BCL2 magnified 40 times, positively stained in tumor cells' cytoplasm. (c) showed Desmin immunostaining, magnified 40 times, showed a negative result. (d) showed Ki67 immunostaining, magnified 100 times, positively stained in nuclei 25% cell. The morphology and immunostaining result confirmed the diagnosis of monophasic synovial sarcoma d c b a

## Figure 1 :
1Transthoracic echocardiography showed two masses (yellow arrows) attached to mitral valves and obstructed LVOT. RVOT = right ventricular outflow tract, LV = Left ventricle, LA = Left atrium, LVOT = Left ventricular outflow tract

## Figure 3 :
3Cardiac CT showed a pedunculated mass in the LV with the size of 2.3 cm × 2.3 cm × 4.7 cm (yellow circle). LA = Left atrium, LV = Left ventricle, RA = Right atrium, RV = Right ventricle, DAO = Descending aorta, RS = Right superior, LI = Left inferior, A = Anterior, P = Posterior


Male, F: Female, LA: Left atrium, LV: Left ventricle, MV: Mitral valve, RA: Right atrium, RV: Right ventricle, SS: Synovial sarcoma, MSS: Monophasic synovial sarcoma, BSS: Biphasic synovial sarcoma. https://oamjms.eu/index.php/mjms/index

## Table 1 :
1Cases of synovial sarcoma of the heart, including the index caseReference 
Case Age 
Sex 
Clinical feature 
Site 
Size/Gross 
Diagnosis 
Treatment 
Follow-up 
Burke et al., 1992 [15] 
38 
Dyspnea, chest pain, 
syncope 

RV 
SS 

Burke et al., 1992 [15] 
38 
dyspnea, chest pain, 
syncope 

LA 
SS 

Boulter et al., 2009 [16] 
24 
F 
Dyspnea, palpitations 
LA 
5.1 cm by 2.9 cm 
MSS 
Partial excision, Adjuvant 
chemotherapy with 
adriamycin 

Doing well at her 
4-month follow-up 

Hussain et al., 2012 [17] 
28 
M 
facial oedema, distention 
of neck veins and 
systemic hypertension 

RA 
MSS 
Surgical resection 
followed by radiation 
therapy 

4 months following 
surgery, the patient 
developed multiple 
lung and neck nodules 
metastasis 
Bittira et al., 2000 [9] 
47 
M 
transient right arm 
weakness, right-sided 
facial droop, and aphasia 

RA 
3.9 cm × 4.2 cm 
BSS 
complete resection and 
adriamycin chemotherapy 

Sharma et al., 2015 [11] 
26 
F 
dyspnea and giddiness 
LA 
7 cm × 5 cm 
BSS 
complete resection and 
chemotherapy 

After 1 month patient 
showed metastasis to 
D 8 and L 2 vertebral 
bodies 
Hazelbag et al., 2004 [5] 
17 
M 
anorexia shortness of 
breath 

RV 
8 cm × 7 cm × 
6.5 cm 

MSS 
Resection and 
chemotherapy 
Okoro et al., 2017 [6] 
35 
M 
Cardiomegaly, pneumonia 
RA 
15 cm × 11 cm 
× 7 cm 

MSS 
resection 

Donsbeck et al. 1999 [2] 
34 
M 
dyspnea 
RA 
SS 
Hannachi et al., 2004 [1] 
45 
M 
dyspnea, orthopnea 
RA 
7.0 cm × 5.0 cm 
× 3.0 cm 

BSS 
Local excision and patch 
reconstruction of the 
atrial wall 

Disease-free at 5 years 

Zhang et al., 2011 [18] 
36 
M 
shortness of breath, 
dyspnea on exertion, 
paroxysmal nocturnal 
dyspnea, and intermittent 
hemoptysis of 1-month 
duration 

RA, 
LA 

2.5 cm × 2.9 cm 
and the other, 
4.7 cm × 2.9 cm 
× 3.6-3.8 cm 

MSS 
Biopsy and chemotherapy 
Overall condition and 
long-term outcome 
remain guarded. 
A recent follow-up 
echocardiogram 
revealed tumor regrowth 
in the RA 
Maleki et al., 2017 [19] 
21 
F 
dyspnea and weakness 
RA 
7.5 cm × 5.5 cm 
× 3.2 cm 

SS 
excision 

Okoro et al., 2017 [6] 
41 
F 
Migraines with complaints 
of sudden onset of left-
sided hemiplegia, facial 
paralysis, and dysarthria. 

LV 
1.7 cm× 1.8 cm 
BSS 
Excision and 
chemotherapy 

Braham et al., 2018 [20] 
63 
F 
dyspnea NYHA III, 
lipothymia and lower chest 
pain that had started 1 
month earlier 

RV 
SS 
Surgical and adjuvant 
chemotherapy 

8-year survival time 
following surgical and 
adjuvant chemotherapy 

Vinod et al., 2018 [21] 
66 
F 
complaints of progressive 
exertional dyspnea, 
orthopnea, paroxysmal 
nocturnal dyspnea (PND) 
and exercise intolerance 

LA 
4.1 cm × 3.4 cm 
BSS 
Surgical and 
chemotherapy 

Zhang et al., 2019 [22] 
52 
M 
thrombocytopenia, 
bilateral lower extremity 
oedema 

MV 
5 cm × 3.5 cm 
BSS 
Surgical and 
chemotherapy 

Patient died suddenly 6 
months later 

Our case 
19 
M 
3-month history of 
exertional dyspnea and 
palpitations, several 
syncopal episodes 

LV 
5 cm × 2.5 cm × 
0.5-1.3 cm 



Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. A clinicopathologic study of one case and review of the literature. S H Sassi, N Zargouni, M S Dakhlia, K Mrad, M Cammoun, K Ben Romdhane, PMid:15137596Pathologica. 961Sassi SH, Zargouni N, Dakhlia MS, Mrad K, Cammoun M, Ben Romdhane K. Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. A clinicopathologic study of one case and review of the literature. Pathologica. 2004;96(1):29-34. PMid:15137596.

Primary cardiac sarcomas: An immunohistochemical and grading study with long-term follow-up of 24 cases. A V Donsbeck, D Ranchere, J M Coindre, Le Gall, F Cordier, J F Loire, R , 10.1046/j.1365-2559.1999.00636.xPMidHistopathology. 34410231396Donsbeck AV, Ranchere D, Coindre JM, Le Gall F, Cordier JF, Loire R. Primary cardiac sarcomas: An immunohistochemical and grading study with long-term follow-up of 24 cases. Histopathology. 1999;34(4):295-304. https://doi. org/10.1046/j.1365-2559.1999.00636.x PMid:10231396

Primary malignant cardiac tumors. A Burke, Semin Diagnostic Pathol. 25Burke A. Primary malignant cardiac tumors. Semin Diagnostic Pathol. 2008;25:39-46.

Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma. T Varma, P Adegboyega, PMid:22458908Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1364Varma T, Adegboyega P. Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012;136(4):454-8. PMid:22458908

Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart: A cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis combining RT-PCR and COBRA-FISH of a case with a complex karyotype. H M Hazelbag, K Szuhai, H J Tanke, C Rosenberg, P C Hogendoorn, 10.1038/modpathol.3800200Mod Pathol. 1711Hazelbag HM, Szuhai K, Tanke HJ, Rosenberg C, Hogendoorn PC. Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart: A cytogenetic and molecular genetic analysis combining RT-PCR and COBRA-FISH of a case with a complex karyotype. Mod Pathol. 2004;17(11):1434-9. https://doi.org/10.1038/ modpathol.3800200

Infiltrating cardiac synovial sarcoma presenting as acute cerebrovascular accident. K U Okoro, M D Roby, D C Sane, R E Budin, 10.1155/2017/8539606Case Rep Med. 8539606Okoro KU, Roby MD, Sane DC, Budin RE. Infiltrating cardiac synovial sarcoma presenting as acute cerebrovascular accident. Case Rep Med. 2017;2017:8539606. https://doi. org/10.1155/2017/8539606

Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma originating from the mitral valve causing left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. E Prifti, A Veshti, M Ikonomi, A Demiraj, 10.1177/2150135115579109World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 64Prifti E, Veshti A, Ikonomi M, Demiraj A. Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma originating from the mitral valve causing left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg. 2015;6(4):650-3. https://doi.org/10.1177/2150135115579109

Biatrial primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. Q Zhao, A S Geha, S R Devries, C Tshibaka, S Wu, N Lavi, 10.1016/j.echo.2006.08.035Am Soc Echocardiogr. 197e1-4.Zhao Q, Geha AS, Devries SR, Tshibaka C, Wu S, Lavi N, et al. Biatrial primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2007;197.e1-4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. echo.2006.08.035

Primary right atrial synovial sarcoma manifesting as transient ischemic attacks. B Bittira, J Tsang, T Huynh, J F Morin, I Huttner, 10.1016/s0003-4975(00)01283-2PMidAnn Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 69610892961Bittira B, Tsang J, Huynh T, Morin JF, Huttner I. Primary right atrial synovial sarcoma manifesting as transient ischemic attacks. Ann Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2000;69(6):1949-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0003-4975(00)01283-2 PMid:10892961

Mitral valve myxoma presenting with transient ischemic attack: A case report and review of the literature. K J Grubb, V Jevremovic, E G Chedrawy, 10.1186/s13256-018-1920-8J Med Case Rep. 121363Grubb KJ, Jevremovic V, Chedrawy EG. Mitral valve myxoma presenting with transient ischemic attack: A case report and review of the literature. J Med Case Rep. 2018;12(1):363. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13256-018-1920-8

Primary synovial cell sarcoma of the heart: A rare case. A Sharma, S Dixit, M Sharma, N Sharma, O Sharma, 10.4103/1995-705x.159223Hear Views. 162Sharma A, Dixit S, Sharma M, Sharma N, Sharma O. Primary synovial cell sarcoma of the heart: A rare case. Hear Views. 2015;16(2):62-4. https://doi.org/10.4103/1995-705x.159223

Survival outcomes in patients with primary cardiac sarcoma in the United States. K Yin, R Luo, Y Wei, F Wang, Y Zhang, K J Karlson, PMid:32111430J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1621Yin K, Luo R, Wei Y, Wang F, Zhang Y, Karlson KJ, et al. Survival outcomes in patients with primary cardiac sarcoma in the United States. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;162(1):107-15.e2. PMid:32111430

Guidelines for the management of soft tissue sarcomas. R Grimer, Judson I Peake, D Seddon, B , 10.1155/2010/506182Sarcoma. 506182Grimer R, Judson I, Peake D, Seddon B. Guidelines for the management of soft tissue sarcomas. Sarcoma. 2010;2010:506182. https://doi.org/10.1155/2010/506182

Systemic treatment for adults with synovial sarcoma. I M Desar, E D Fleuren, W T Van Der Graaf, 10.1007/s11864-018-0525-1Curr Treat Options Oncol. 192Desar IM, Fleuren ED, van der Graaf WT. Systemic treatment for adults with synovial sarcoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2018;19(2):1-7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11864-018-0525-1

Primary sarcomas of the heart. A P Burke, D Cowan, R Virmani, Cancer. 692Burke AP, Cowan D, Virmani R. Primary sarcomas of the heart. Cancer. 1992;69(2):387-95.

Primary synovial sarcoma of the lung. D J Boulter, M L Rosado-De-Christenson, R Stevens, S Suster, 10.2484/rcr.v2i4.82Radiol Case Reports. 2482Boulter DJ, Rosado-de-Christenson ML, Stevens R, Suster S. Primary synovial sarcoma of the lung. Radiol Case Reports. 2009;2(4):82. https://doi.org/10.2484/rcr.v2i4.82

Synovial sarcoma of the heart. S Hussain, A A Khan, Q Khan, PMid:23146855J Coll Physicians Surg Pakistan. 2211Hussain S, Khan AA, Khan Q. Synovial sarcoma of the heart. J Coll Physicians Surg Pakistan. 2012;22(11):723-5. PMid:23146855

Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. L Zhang, J Qian, Z Li, H Jing, Cardiol J. 182Zhang L, Qian J, Li Z, Jing H. Primary synovial sarcoma of the heart. Cardiol J. 2011;18(2):128-33.

Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma: A case report. M H Maleki, M A Makouei, F Hatami, R Z Noghabi, PMid:28469690J Tehran Univ Hear Cent. 121Maleki MH, Makouei MA, Hatami F, Noghabi RZ. Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma: A case report. J Tehran Univ Hear Cent. 2017;12(1):32-4. PMid:28469690

Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma: An asymptomatic patient 8 years after the primary surgery. W Braham, A Pisani, B Poitier, A Sannier, 10.1093/icvts/ivy108Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 273Braham W, Pisani A, Poitier B, Sannier A. Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma: An asymptomatic patient 8 years after the primary surgery. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2018;27(3):471-3. https://doi.org/10.1093/icvts/ivy108

Functional mitral stenosis: Imposture of primary cardiac intimal sarcoma. P Vinod, A Jabri, V Hegde, J Lahorra, D Cutler, 10.14740/cr748wPMidCardiol Res. 9530344829Vinod P, Jabri A, Hegde V, Lahorra J, Cutler D. Functional mitral stenosis: Imposture of primary cardiac intimal sarcoma. Cardiol Res. 2018;9(5):307-13. https://doi.org/10.14740/cr748w PMid:30344829

Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma that was continuous with the mitral valve caused severe thrombocytopenia: A case report. G Zhang, Q Gao, S Chen, Y Chen, 10.1186/s13019-019-0852-8J Cardiothorac Surg. 141Zhang G, Gao Q, Chen S, Chen Y. Primary cardiac synovial sarcoma that was continuous with the mitral valve caused severe thrombocytopenia: A case report. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2019;14(1):1-6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13019-019-0852-8