# A Review on Historical Earth Pigments Used in India's Wall Paintings

CorpusID: 238656244
 
tags: #History, #Art

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb1d7da645e1b997d2660644d23ad82668875b9c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb1d7da645e1b997d2660644d23ad82668875b9c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on Historical Earth Pigments Used in India's Wall Paintings
Heritage 2021, 4, 1970-1994

Anjali Sharma 
Rajdeo Singh 
National Research Laboratory for the Conservation of Cultural Property
226024AliganjLucknowIndia

Diego Tamburini 
Francesco Paolo Romano 

Department of Conservation
National Museum Institute
110011JanpathNew DelhiIndia

A Review on Historical Earth Pigments Used in India's Wall Paintings
Heritage 2021, 4, 1970-199410.3390/heritage4030112Received: 17 June 2021 Accepted: 23 August 2021heritage Review Citation: Sharma, A.; Singh, M.R. A Review on Historical Earth Pigments Used in India's Wall Paintings.


## Introduction

Since time immemorial, wall paintings have been done in almost all countries. Paintings of all kinds, encompassing all types of wall paintings as well, are a valuable part of many countries' cultural heritage. In prehistoric paintings, the artistic style was primitive, and the techniques were also very basic, with the paint being applied directly onto the rock surface. As a result of this, the pigments seep through the pores and coarse surface of rocks. Later, more complex designs and figures were painted on walls, which were often prepared with several layers of plaster [1].

The uses and evidence of earth pigments in the India begin with the hematite and quartz crystals found in the Acheulian deposits of the Lower Paleolithic period. One such hematite specimen was discovered in the exposed floor of Hunsgi (Karnataka), locality V, and has a worn facet with characteristic striation patterns, indicating that it was used as a crayon to color or mark a rock surface [2]. Because this material does not occur in its natural state in the area surrounding the site, the site excavators believed that these little hematite nodules were brought-in from afar. Paddaya goes on to say that these red ochre nodules were probably also utilized for body ornamentation and other similar purposes [3]. Six other tiny quartz crystals were discovered from the base of the lower Paleolithic deposit at Singi Talav (Rajasthan), which was interesting evidence. They were virtually fully unchanged and measured 7-25 mm in length, making them too small to have been employed as tools. They had been purposefully transported to the site, as had the Hunsgi hematite nodules, and were collected for their visual attributes [4]. Although collected for their visual attributes [4]. Although these are only inferences, it is impossible to rule out the possibility of a functioning reality involving an aesthetic sense among our forefathers.

According to Wakankar, some of the earliest depictions in Mesolithic rock paintings painted in green color could be those belonging to the upper Paleolithic era of Indian antiquity. The discovery of green earth (what he refers to as terra verte) in upper Paleolithic deposits in one of the excavated rock shelters (III A-28) at Bhimbetka [5]could be the basis for this hypothesis. The chronological position in time of the green paintings, however, is a point of contention. Green pigments were discovered first, followed by red paintings, according to some scholars [6]. Wakankar also discovered yellow ochre, manganese, and terra verte in Bhimbetka's shelter III A-28 in 1975, where these pigments were observed to be smeared on multiple areas in the shelter III F-23 [2,7,8]. These early paintings represent the beginning of known or surviving rock art in India because of the quality of pigment applications in the form of fine and controlled lines. According to Mishra, for the paintings at Bhimbetka,apart from being executed in red or white, bluish-green and yellowish colors had also been used on occasions. Since they were only preserved in fragments and were found at the bottom of the paint layer; green painted layers tend to be the oldest. Many shades of red were visible, ranging from scarlet to pale red to dark chocolate. Natural minerals were used to make these pigments [2,9] The largest concentration of prehistoric sites and rock paintings are found in Central India's sandstone regions, which span three distinct mountain systems: the Vindhyachal and Satpura in Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, and a portion of Uttar Pradesh and the Aravalli in Rajasthan. In all more than a thousand rock-shelters with paintings have been explored and studied by archeologists. It is interesting to note that prehistoric paintings in India were first noticed 12 years earlier than the famous discovery of the cave paintings of Altamira (Spain). This was done by Archibald Carllyle, a superintendent of the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) in 1867, in the Mirzapur area of the then United Provinces. Like Marcelino de Santuola, through discovery of Altamira in 1879, Carllyle was the first scholar to attribute these paintings to the Stone-Age period. Some of the prominent sites in India with shelters containing prehistoric paintings are Panchmari in the Mahadeo Hills of Madhya Pradesh, Adamgarph, Raisen, Mirzapur, etc. Mirzapur has evidence dating from the Lower Palaeolithic to the Mesolithic periods, and was a major center of rock painted shelters in Uttar Pradesh [2,[10][11][12][13]. Figure 1 shows a list of most famous wall painting sites in India.  Wall paintings are exposed to a wide range of climatic conditions due to their location in many large and small geographical regions throughout the country [1]. They were executed on the rock surface, making use of the natural porosity of the rock exterior to secure the colors. The pigment was most likely powdered using a mortar and pestle or within natural depressions of rocks, combined with water, and applied with twig brushes. To remove the pulp and reveal the fibers, one end of the twig is pounded. It has been believed that palmetto twigs were most likely chosen since they are known to be the best among other materials. Considering sandstone shelters, when painting them, the pigment seeps into the porous rock surface and becomes permanently embedded in it, making it impossible to remove, even when washed. Only natural weathering of the granite surface can cause the paintings to deteriorate. It is believed that transparent and opaque color techniques were widely used to rock surfaces. It is a more relied upon technique than the stencil technique, which is traditionally used to make negative handprints. In the transparent color technique, the colors used were heavily diluted in water, except for the emerald green and white colors. For the first time, man-made mud brick structureswere observed during the Neolithic period around 6000 B.C.E where the structures were made by laying a smooth layer of fine mud plaster over a brick wall. Simultaneously, the need for a binding material, such as glue or gum, to set the color onto the smooth mud base became a necessity. As painting techniques developed, first of all a plaster layer was applied on the wall which was later painted upon [14,15].

Tempera has been the mainstay of Indian wall painting for centuries. The basic feature of this technique is the use of a binding medium for emulsifying the pigment in gum Arabic, animal glue, egg yolk, etc., which achieve the adhesion between the pigments and the dry background [14]. The paintings in southern India were mostly executed according to the tempera technique where walls were prepared with mud plaster or rock cuts as late as 6-7th C.E. century, such as Ajanta, cave no. 10. The Buddhist paintings in Bagh (Madhya Pradesh) executed in a similar technique immediately follow the Ajanta period. Some wall paintings in monuments and temples in South India were regarded be executed in lime medium (secco) by Paramasivan. The secco technique is done on dry lime plaster. The pigments are mixed with lime water, sometimes with the addition of a little skimmed milk. Some examples of secco paintings are Sitannavasal, Pallava paintings in Kaliasanatha temple, Kanchipuram, and Lepaskhi [1]. The art of wall painting in Rajasthan evolved into what is known as Rajasthani style after the 17th century C.E. The Indian painters elaborately prepared lime plaster which was laid on walls in several thin layers, each well compacted to a total thickness of a quarter to a half inch to cover crevices and joints. This was overlaid with thin lime plaster and again a specially prepared milk of lime of was applied to the wet wall. Several coats were applied, followed by rubbing with a stone each time. The final application was done with the milk of lime followed by polishing the surface with an agate stone to produce a smooth glaze that later received the pigments prepared in water with a gum medium and occasionally glue in the case of certain pigments, especially black. There are several notable paintings which were executed using the Rajasthani style such as Badal Mahal (Nagaur Fort), Lal Baba Temple (Jodhpur), and Amer Palace (Jaipur) [1,16].

The uses of earth pigments in India's painted works has continued since prehistoric times. Because of their high coloring potential and stability under a variety of environmental conditions, light, oxidation, and corrosion, these painting materials have been widely used [17]. Earth pigments can be used in almost any architectural background for the execution of wall paintings. Iron-rich ochres, green earth, wads (manganese-rich ochres), white earth (calcite, kaolinite, and gypsum), umbers, and vivianite-rich blue earth are the broad categories which are combinations of several chromophore minerals as well as accessory phases such as carbonates, clays, and quartz, rather than pure, single mineral colors. As deposits on the Earth's surface, they would have been both evident and desired sources of pigment, and it is this category of pigments that is most essential in the evolution of prehistoric art [18]. Table 1 listed earth pigments used in India's wall paintings. A detailed explanation of earth pigments will be provided further as a separate section below. The objectives of this paper include an overview on the uses of earth pigments in Indian wall paintings and their analysis and information. As human imagination has no limit when considering materiality and invention, the task at hand become arduous. The paper will also focus on wall paintings technique, scientific examination of pigments and will individually elucidate on earth pigments.


## Earth Pigments

The term "earth pigments" refers to inorganic, naturally occurring mineral pigments that are employed as colorants. Earth pigments can be separated into non-clay pigments and pigments with the chromophore element contained in the clay's crystal structure based on its coloring agent. The color is determined by the presence of non-clay pigments, such as those found in ochres, or by the presence of any chromogenic ingredient in the crystal structure. The natural color hue can be influenced by drying intensity and even more so by persistent high-temperature heating [19].


### Ochres

According to geology, ochres are oxides or oxide hydroxides of metal which form in a near surface setting. Iron-rich ochres are the most common ones, although copper and cobalt ochres have also been used as pigments [20]. Ochres are a form of inorganic pigment that comes from natural minerals. The word "ochre" is a common term that refers to substances that range in color from yellow to deep purple and have an iron oxide chromophore [21]. Types of ochres include red ochre, yellow ochre, purple ochre, brown ochre, sienna, umber, and a variety of other names depending on their hue.

Natural iron oxide pigments, unlike manufactured pigments, vary in color depending on the composition of the region of the earth from which they are mined. The color tends to be influenced by three primary factors where the existence of the iron oxide chromophore is the first consideration (principal coloring ingredient). The darker red ochres are more likely to contain hematite (Fe 2 O 3 ), whereas the paler yellow ochres are more likely to contain goethite (FeOOH or Fe 2 O 3 ·H 2 O, hydrated iron oxide). The existence of other metal oxides or clay minerals (secondary coloring ingredients) is the second factor to consider while the particle size distribution within the material is the third factor to consider. This last element is thought to be responsible for the color spectrum of brick red to violet found in the pigment known as caput mortuum, where Fe 2 O 3 is the chromophore [22]. The earth's color is determined by a combination of these variables. The wide variety of potential yellow, red, and brown is due to the numerous ways and combinations in which these ingredients can mix [23].

When the colors are different, distinguishing between pigments is easy. When color tones are identical, however, the distinction becomes more complicated, and classification may be incorrect. This is one of the most serious issues with red ochres such as hematite, caput mortuum, red or warm ochres, umbers, and raw or burnt sienna which come in a range of red color tones. Aluminosillicates or lower amounts of other oxides may occur with natural mixtures which causes a minor difference in color tones. Their recognition becomes more difficult since they were almost always mixed with other pigments rather than used in their pure form [24]. According to Bednarik [25], the states of hydration, reduction, hydrolysis, oxidation, adsorption, grain form, and size distribution of the several components within the pigments are all factors that influence the final tone of the pigment in question. The degree of hydration of the pigment which is equivalent to the amounts of the two main ochre-coloring minerals present (hematite to goethite ratio) is widely recognized as the most important factor that affects color [22]. As a result, anhydrous oxides (hematite) are more prevalent in purple and red shades of pigment. The lighter tones suggest hydration with goethite serving as the primary ferrous colourant whereas darker ochres contain several phases of iron hydroxides/oxides and manganese oxides.

Brown earth and umbers, which are sometimes represented as ochre variants [26], are pigments in which the manganese oxide content exceeds 5% of the total colorant matter within the pigment. However, their overall features and structure indicate otherwise. The umbers, in particular, contain between 5-20% manganese oxides which have a substantial impact on the pigment's physical properties. Besides color, accessory minerals may have affected a negative impact on ochre properties. Calcite, feldspars, quartz, dolomite, and other carbonate minerals, as well as clay minerals and probably gypsum, are examples of accessory minerals found in ochres [27].

Ochres also have excellent pigment properties, such as non-toxicity, excellent hiding ability, and tinting strength [28]. The continued and broad use of ochres can be attributed to a number of factors, including their abundance in Nature, suitable optical and handling characteristics, and relatively simple methods of preparation. These pigments are also among the most long-lasting pigments in the industry today, with exceptional resistance to water, light, and changing environmental conditions and, dilute acid and alkali attack [29]. Since ochres absorb ultraviolet light, they appear to shield their binding medium from degradation, in addition to extending the paint's overall permanence [28]. Manufacturers denote synthetic iron oxide pigments with names commonly reserved for earth pigments, such as yellow ochre for an artificial yellow iron oxide, which complicates the issue. The term "iron oxide pigment" is commonly used to describe both natural and manmade materials that contain mixes of iron oxides and iron oxide hydroxides while the nomenclature earth and ochre are acceptable when it is evident that the colour comes from a natural source [15,30]. The use of heat to manipulate color dates back to 298,000 B.C.E., demonstrating the scientific temper of the prehistoric people for artistic purposes.

Synthetic ochre was prepared by the irreversible process of calcining or boiling raw yellow soil to produce a variety of hues such as red, orange, brown, and mid tones of these colors. The dehydroxylation of hydrated iron oxides to oxides is involved in this procedure, with the final colour variation based on the initial material, temperatures, and heat treatment duration [31]. Solid-state transformation by heating iron ores or iron salts such as iron sulfates (FeSO 4 ), iron chlorides (FeCl 2 /FeCl 3 ), iron hydroxides (FeOOH), iron carbonate (Fe 2 CO 3 ), and magnetite (Fe 3 O 4 ) in an oxidizing atmosphere is one of the most extensively used ways of synthetic ochre processing. Methods for making synthetic therapeutic iron oxides by burning iron filings with various salts have been documented in India since the Ayurvedic period (600 B.C.E. to 800 C.E.) [32].


#### Red Ochre

The name is attributed to the reddish color from the mineral hematite, which is occasionally found as fossilsized ores, secular iron ores and micaceous iron ores. The name hematite, derived from the Greek word "haima" meaning blood, aptly describes its usual red hue. Hematite is typically formed as a result of the oxidation of biotite (K(Mg,Fe) 3 AlSi 3 O 10 (F,OH) 2 ),magnetite (Fe 3 O 4 ), (FeTiO 3 ), goethite (α-FeOOH),and ilmenite (FeTiO 3 ) [28]. The latter case tends to be diagenetic, with increasing temperature and burial depth favoring the transformation [33]. The transformation of geological ochres to ochre pigments is simple and requires a chain of operations that includes removing larger impurities (such as organic contaminants and plant roots), grinding, sieving, and levigation before intermixing withaa medium to make paint. Hematite grain size influences color as well, with a general shift from red to purple beds as the crystal size increases [28]. Goethite is also one of the most common iron-bearing minerals in red beds, and is more common in younger deposits with a distinct yellow-brown appearance [34]. One of the biggest issues with red ochres is in that tracing them back to their source which is extremely difficult, particularly after they've been heavily processed. The presence of carbonate or quartz along with the crystalline nature, color, and particle size, can help distinguish broad sedimentary environments. The character and mineralogy of surviving ochre deposits in the area of an archaeological site can be used to determine the possible provenance of local use. Red ochres are a universal pigment that can be employed in works of art from many periods and cultures. From the Pleistocene period to the present day, it has been used as a pigment [35]. Ajanta, Ellora, Badami, Bagh, and other sites have Buddhist paintings rendered with red and yellow ochre pigments [36].

Red ochres are non-toxic and are used in the production of paints that not only dry easily but also completely cover surfaces. Ochre sightings have been recorded in many regions throughout the world. In India, red ochre deposits can be found primarily in Bharatpur, Bhilwara, Bikaner, Chittorgarh and Udaipur districts in Rajasthan; Gwalior, Katni and Rewa districts in Madhya Pradesh; Anantapur, Kadapa, Visakhapatnam districts in Andhra Pradesh; Bhavnagar, and Kachchh and Patan districts in Gujarat; Ballari and Bidar districts in Karnataka, and Chandrapur district in Maharashtra [37].

Indian red (hirmize) is also a natural iron ore or hematite with a rich purplish-red color and a ferric oxide content of over 90%. Some of the reds exported from India come from roasting lighter-colored ores, but the majority of the specimens are genuine natural ores. It was assumed that the some of the hematite was imported from the Forest of Dean and some from Ormuz in the Persian Gulf. The faint purplish tint of this pigment is its most distinguishing characteristic in terms of color. Indian red is sometimes marketed as an admixture of iron oxide with other materials, most likely the result of judicious mixing of purple-brown, red ochre, or "light red" and cheap white substances [38].


#### Yellow Ochre

Natural yellow ochre (yellow earth) also known as limonite (hydrated iron hydroxide, FeO(OH)·nH 2 O which consists of a mixture of several iron-containing minerals including goethite (iron oxyhydroxide, FeO[OH]), akageneite, lepidocrocite, and jarosite, with goethite being the main component. Goethite is a type of pedogenic crystalline iron oxide hydroxides that can be found in rocks, soils, and ochre deposits [28]. Because of this, goethite-based earths are the most widely used yellow pigments in antiquity. However, yellow ochre became a regular artists' material as the palette grew beyond red and black, and the usage of goethite-rich yellow ochres, in particular, became temporally and globally widespread [34]. The second main pigment is potassium jarosite. The finding of jarosite in Mars meteorites has spurred renewed interest in these minerals and their petrogenes is occurs in supergene settings, as well as their relationship with mine waste [39][40][41][42].

Yellow ochre is prepared by washing the natural mineral to remove sand and other impurities, then drying, grinding, and sieving it [43]. Some pigments can be safely combined with yellow ochre. Yellow ochre is non-toxic and stable, with excellent hiding ability and permanence in all media. Yellow earth is converted to burnt yellow earth by heating below 800 • C for several hours, where its constituent goethite is thermally converted to red iron oxide having hematite crystal structure. It has been known that heating yellow earth produces a red pigment. This technology seems to have been used in the Paleolithic era, and it is observed that the method had entered written history by the time of the Assyrian cuneiform tablets [44]. The transition from goethite to hematite when burnt can be easily identified using X-ray diffraction [44][45][46][47]. Depending on the temperature at which the goethite is heated, the product hematite is formed. Using X-ray diffraction, it is possible to separate burnt yellow earth pigments from the natural red earth [48].

In early 20th C.E. India, yellow ochre deposits were found near Katni, and several central Indian states such as Sohawal (Uttar Pradesh), Gwalior and Panna (Madhya Pradesh), and Baraunda (Haryana). Yellow ochre was also found as inclusion within laterite soil of various localities such as Cretaceous rocks (Trichinopoly, Tamil Nadu) and Tertiary beds (Myingyan district, Burma) [38].

Today's, yellow ochre deposits can be found in Andhra Pradesh's Guntur and Kurnool districts, Madhya Pradesh's Jabalpur, Mandla, Satna, and Shahdol districts, and Maharashtra's Nagpur district. According to Indian Minerals Yearbook (2015) 


#### Umber

Umber is a naturally occurring iron oxide and manganese oxide-containing ore which is used as brown and reddish-brown earth pigment [21]. It has been used for thousands of years and has earth tones ranging from cream to brown, depending on the amount of iron and manganese compounds present. It is also completely stable and darker than ochre and sienna, which are similar earth pigments and can be, safely mixed with other pigments. The best variety comes from Cyprus which is distinguished by the presence of manganese dioxide [48,49]. Umber is made by mining the ore followed by grinding and washing it which leaves a mixture of rust-stained clay. In its natural state, it is known as raw umber. The brown red color of umber intensifies when calcined and is known as burnt umber due to the loss of water (dehydration). Raw earth umber (raw sienna earth) consisting of iron oxide, aluminum oxide, and manganese oxide while burnt umber (burnt sienna earth) consisting of iron oxide, clay, and manganese oxide [21].

Being a mineral pigment with yellowish-brown to greenish brown color, derived from natural earth colored iron and manganese oxides, umber is normally used in tempera, paint and water color paintings. Because of their high oil adsorption, umbers need about 18% oil to coalesce with oil paints. As a result, the later oil films darken over time. Umber's chemical composition is closely linked to its iron oxide content, much like sienna's. The increased manganese content distinguishes umber from other colors. Clay, talc, and calcium carbonate are other naturally occurring substances in umber that do not effect its color. The particles of umbers are heterogeneous and rounded in appearance. Burnt umber particles are almost similar to raw umber particles. Umbers with high tinting strength are the ones which have high content of iron and manganese within them. Alkalis and dilute acids have no effect on umbers [21].


#### Sienna

Sienna is an iron oxide and manganese oxide-based earth pigment while raw sienna is a yellow-brown pigment which occurs only in its natural state. Raw sienna's chemical breakdown is roughly 90% iron oxide (yellow) with minor amounts of manganese oxide, which distinguishes it from pure yellow ochre. Burnt sienna is produced by heating raw sienna to 537-1093 • C before the iron oxide is mainly converted to hematite. Sienna was one of the first pigments used for painting and can be found in prehistoric cave art. However, it was not until the 14th century C.E., at the dawn of the Renaissance period, that the pigment was further refined for artistic use. It gets its name from the Italian city-state of Siena, where it was created. During this time, the Italians improved the pigment's variety of colors by roasting sienna, resulting in raw sienna and burnt sienna pigments. Earth colors were used extensively in Renaissance painting techniques. It is stable at high temperatures but not acid resistant, and is compatible with all other pigments; so it is often mixed with a variety of others [18,50].


### Wads: Manganese Ochres

Soot is the natural choice of black pigment for any society since it is widely available and is a high purity carbon-based black pigment. Alternatively, woody plant material (as well as bones and ivory) can be quickly burned to create high-quality black pigments. Mineral blacks, such as manganese ochre or wad, are among the first examples of black pigment for artistic applications.

Wad is an old English term for black soil used by miners which refers to manganeserich earths, as well as graphite deposits. Manganese (Mn) is one of nature's most abundant elements, accounting for one-tenth of all elements found in the Earth's crust. According to geochemistry, Mn is found in minerals formed during the early stages of magmatic crystallization. Mn is easily oxidized near the Earth's surface, forming several oxidehydroxide minerals; however, it melts and can be abundant in late-stage deposits such as pegmatites; Mn is easily oxidized near the Earth's surface, forming several oxide-hydroxide minerals; however, it melts and can be abundant in late-stage deposits such as pegmatites. Manganese ochres are made up of a complex mix of manganese oxide and hydroxide minerals, as well as iron oxides [51].  [52]. Identification of the provenance of wads has proven to be extremely difficult due to their lack of documentation in geological literature. This material also has properties that make it useful for lighting fire, but it wasn't always used as a pigment in this sense.


### Green Earths (Terreverte)

Green earth, a siliceous mineral with a dull grayish-green hue, is found all over the world and has long piqued artists' interest [53]. Green earth has been discovered in some early Bhimbetka rock paintings, but there appears to be a general lack of black, such as carbon black or soot, in the primitive Indian paintings. The pigment was used by American Indians as well as artists from Pompeii and Ajanta caves in India. Perhaps the most wellknown use of the pigment for the green under painting and shadows in medieval era was for painting's flesh colors. Green earth was perfect for the artist because it was lightfast and easy to prepare by crushing and grinding, even though the hue was not as strong in chroma as malachite and azurite. The pigment is still sold in modern times from high-quality deposits found on Cyprus [54].

Green earths, also known as terreverte, are grey to blue green pigments made mainly from two closely related clay minerals, celadonite ( 2 ). Despite their chemical similarities, glauconite and celadonite are distinguished by a significantly higher number of trivalent ions in the octahedrally coordinated layer and a partial substitution of Al 3+ for Si 4+ in the tetrahedrally coordinated layer [55,56]. Celadonite is a relatively pure mineral that can be present in small amounts in vesicular cavities (amygdules) or volcanic rock fractures. Glauconite, a less pure but more commonly dispersed mineral, is often present in the form of small greenish pellets (green sand). Other greenish clay minerals may have been mixed into green earth pigments occasionally. One explanation for this is the morphological rather than the chemical characterization of the green pigment, and they may contain other clay minerals such as montmorillonite, chlorite, and kaolinite [56].

Although the chemical compositions of the two main source minerals, glauconite and, celadonite, are identical, traditionally the minerals were considered apart disparately, with glauconite attributedto a sedimentary origin and celadonite derived from altered basaltic rocks. Only recently has research allowed for an unmistakable distinction between the two minerals based on fractional differences in ionic substitution. Unfortunately, the name glauconite is used to characterize both a specific micaceous mineral and a specific morphological type (green sand). This arose from a long-standing inability to properly identify the components of glauconite pellets. Grissom [54] examined the terminology of green earth pigments, their materials, and their appearance in works of art. Green earth exhibits slight light scattering ability in oil due to its low refractive index of about 1.62 [56], where the resulting paint is relatively translucent. Apart from this the tinting ability and hiding power of the pigment are both poor.

When the pigment is glazed over white or used in conventional water-dispersed mediums like glue or egg tempera, which usually produce films with high pigment volume concentration, the highest saturation (chroma) is achieved. Green earth is partly soluble in acids and alkalis, making it easy to obtain enough ferrous and ferric ions for microchemical testing. Burnt green earth is formed when the pigment becomes brownish when heated. Key elements of celadonite and glauconite (iron, silicon, aluminium, magnesium), as well as small amounts of potassium-replacement ions (calcium, manganese and sodium) along with trace amounts of titanium were identified in dozens of samples of green earth examined in India. The elements that were not present were beryllium, boron, arsenic, bismuth, cadmium, mercury, cobalt, nickel, molybdenum, tin, strontium, vanadium, zinc, and zirconium [57,58].

Green earths were and continue to be the most widely available pure green pigments, and as a result, they are well-known in the art world. Green earth is commonly used in Indian wall paintings and has been discovered in large quantities. The color green is prevalent in the Buddhist frescoes painted on lime and mud plasters in the caves of Ajanta, Maharashtra, India, from the 2nd Century B.C.E. to the 6th Century C.E. [59], and M. Singh and Arbad [36] identified the green pigment as celadonite which was derived from altered basalt.


### White Earths

Kaolinite, calcium carbonate and gypsum were used as white pigments since prehistoric times. M. Singh reported the kaoline, and calcium carbonate were used as white pigments, and often also with gypsum in Ajanta's wall paintings [60].


#### Calcite and Gypsum

In all cultures around the world, calcium carbonate (CaCO 3 ) and calcium sulfate {gypsum (CaSO 4 2H 2 O), anhydrite (CaSO 4 ), and other hydration states of calcium sulfate} were invariably used for backgrounds and white pigments. They can be referred as simply as white or calcium-based white [20]. Calcium carbonate in different forms has played a significant role in art since ancient times. Calcite is the most common natural source of calcium carbonate. It is mostly found in sedimentary rocks like limestone and chalk, but it's also found in metamorphic rocks (marble) and igneous rocks in rare cases. Calcite and its dimorph form aragonite are the principal components of some mollusk shells, but aragonite (the less stable type) is more likely to be found in living or fossilized lower organisms, which is converted to calcite with climate changes, especially when heated [54].

Since pure calcium carbonate is white, it has a wide range of applications in the arts and industries, both in powdered and large forms. Some modern paints also use powdered whites as the primary pigment white, as well as bulking agents and extenders for white hiding and colored paints. Calcium carbonate pigments such as chalk, calcite, precipitated chalk, shell white, lime white, and coral have all been employed in the history of painting materials. Aragonite and vaterite are two less common polymorphic forms while calcite is frequently found as single large transparent crystals. The varieties range from coarse granular to impalpable. Both of these types of calcite can be found in paintings, both in the support structures and pictorial layers, along with several quantities of common impurities like dolomite, quartz, magnesite, clays, and coloring agents like carbon and hematite. In fresco painting, marble dust or ground marble was used [61]. Powdered forms of all kinds of calcium carbonate are white if relatively pure, but they lack the strong scattering and hiding power of heavy-metal whites when used in drying oil-based paints. Depending on the amount of impurities present, particularly iron oxide, natural chalk is typically a yellowish-white rock or grayish white. When exposed to light, all types of calcium carbonate become permanent. Hydrogen sulfide gas or contact with sulfide pigments does not darken them. Except for alkali-sensitive colors like Prussian blue, which may be discolored by lime white, which can maintain its alkalinity for a long time, they are compatible with most other pigments. However, acids found in modern industrial and urban environments are harmful to calcite (particularly the finely crystalline and porous varieties). Since calcium sulfate has a larger volume than carbonate when produced in the presence of sulfuric acid, it causes spalling and flaking of lime surfaces [62].

The mineral gypsum is made up of hydrated calcium sulfate (CaSO 4 2H 2 O). Selenite is the name given to the mineral when in well-developed crystals. Satin spar is a fibrous vast variety with a silky lustre that is transparent and opalescent. Gypsum comes in a variety of types and is extremely economically valuable. It is colorless or white, but due to the presence of impurities, it may be tinted light brown, grey, yellow, green, or orange. Anhydrite (CaSO 4 ) is a natural mineral that contains calcium sulfate but is devoid of all water of crystallization. This can be observed as large opaque white mineral underlying gypsum in several locations. The two layers are undergo net-mixing in an intermediate region, so it's not unusual to find gypsum samples containing anhydrite, and vice versa. In terms of crystal habit and other physical properties, gypsum differs from anhydrite due to the two molecules of water used in crystallization. The former can be used in a variety of ways [63].

Paramasivan reported that the calcium carbonate (lime plaster) levels found during analysis were also quite low and present in the form of impurities only. He chemically examined the fine plaster layers of several Indian wall paintings after separating the paint film from rough plasters. He treated rough plasters with dilute hydrochloric acid, which dissolved the fine plaster giving efflorescence with emission of carbon dioxide. The presence of calcium and traces of sulfate in the solution indicated that a lime-calcium sulfate mixture was used as lime plaster over the rough plaster. Calcium sulfate is an impurity in the lime, according to him. Calcite and gypsum both were used either as white pigments or ground in many rock and cave paintings of India [64][65][66][67][68][69]. Through his researchSingh has identified calcite as the white pigment used at the Ajanta and Ellora paintings [70,71].


#### Kaolinite

Kaolin is a type of natural clay rock that is mostly composed of the clay mineral kaolinite, which has the chemical composition (Al 2 [Si 2 O 5 ][OH] 4 ). The structural layer of kaolinite is made up of two sheets, one of which is made up of tetrahedra of [SiO 4 ] 4− ("T") and the other of which is made up of octahedra of [AlO 3 (OH) 3 ] 6− ("O"), with a T/O ratio of 1:1 and the net charge of a layer iszero [72]. The lack of or random displacement of two-sheet layers along the b axis indicate whether the kaolinite structure is well or poorly organized [73]. With a soft consistency and earthy texture, kaoline is abundant locally in combination with hydrothermally altered granites and volcanic clastic rocks, and it can be broken easily and molded or formed, particularly when wet. In spite of this, it is yet to be widely recognized as a pigment in its own right.

While kaolin is a dull and uninteresting mineral in and of itself, it does occasionally form interesting pseudomorphs, especially after feldspars. The word kaolin refers to both a group of closely related clay mineral and a particular member of that group. Many commercial kaolinite mines exist, where this mineral is extracted in large quantities for various industrial applications [74]. Works bySingh have evinced the use of kaolin for executing floral designs in Ajanta. The Ajanta caves belong to the 2nd B.C.E. and painting work was ere executed from the 4th C.E. Singh has suggested that kaolin was used in combination with different pigments such as red and yellow ochres as well to change the tone and hue of the paintings [75].


### Blue Earths

The mineral vivianite (Fe 3 2+ [PO 4 ] 2 ·8H 2 O) refers to the blue earth, an iron phosphate hydrate that forms naturally in peat bogs and is also known as "blue ochre" [19]. It can also be found in organic-rich habitats, such as the insides of fossilized mollusk shells, and also is found in traces quantity within bones, rotting wood, and other organic matter. In combination with hematite, siderite, or anapaite, vivianite is formed as radiating clusters of acicular (needle-like), prismatic, or fibrous bluish-green crystals. Vivianite is a dark blue or green mineral that is normally stable, but it can be colorless when first exposed. This color transformation is unique to vivianite, which is found in peat bogs [76].

Since vivianite has a low tinting intensity, it is rarely reliably opaque unless applied in thick or multiple coats, allowing the substrate to show through. Vivianite is not as reflective as other pigments when visually recognizing it. Unlike "brighter" ultramarine blue and darker, more concentrated Prussian blue, vivianite absorbs light rather than reflecting it, even though a lipid binder is used [77].

Vivianite is seldom found in archaeological contexts in the ancient world, but further identifications of this peculiar pigment may be produced soon. Vivianite has been discovered in several easel paintings from the historical period and it has been found in medieval art in France. However, vivianite as a blue pigment could not be detected in Indian painting, but its existence cannot be denied since the absence of a discussion of these minerals in the literature is simply an absence of analysis rather than proof of a mineral's non-existence or rarity in a specific place.


## Materials and Methods (Scientific Examination of Pigments)

Since the purpose of this paper was to analyze earth pigments used in Indian wall paintings, it was important to determine the techniques that were suitable for characterization, as will be mentioned below, and in Table 2.

There are several instrumentation techniques for characterizing earth pigments which have been practiced and described in literature. The characterization is done through direct and oblique lights which help in providing visual information and condition of pigment layer.

The surface characterization study can be done by preparing the cross-section of pigment sample which is prepared by embedding the pigment fragment in the epoxy resin, then polishing, and mounting on glass slides. The cross-section of the pigment sample can be seen in reflected light at different magnifications which enables to provide information on the order of pigment layers, thickness of layer, texture and color of those layers, and pigment particle size. Optical microscopy (OM), UV fluorescence, scanning electron microscopes (SEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), and other imaging techniques can be used to examine cross-section samples. Cross-sections also provide a safe platform for conducting micro-chemical tests away from the actual painting or surface. The examination of a sample in cross-section is the initial stage in determining what a sample is made up of and developing a testing regimen [78].

X-ray based techniques including X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF), X-ray diffraction (XRD), laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and energy dispersion X-ray (EDX) are the commonly used as a preliminary investigation techniques either used solely or employed with other analytical and physicochemical approaches to provide a comprehensive understanding of all the components present, determination of material's crystallography, detection of a wide range of major, minor and trace elements, determination of the valence and electronic levels of specific elements, and determination of elementary information in various pigments respectively. FTIR and Raman spectroscopy both use the interaction of infrared rays (IR) with materials to gather knowledge about organic and inorganic molecular bonds. Both these techniques are useful methods in characterizing molecular chemistry of materials [79]. FTIR is very valuable technique for identifying organic binding medium in the pigment sample whereas Raman is frequently utilized for the investigation of organic and inorganic pigments. FTIR can identify complex anions in inorganic compounds (such as sulphates, carbonates, and silicates), but it cannot distinguish simple anions (such as oxides and sulfides). FTIR is generally preferred for differentiating earth ochres because it provides much information about the clay proportion inside the ochre than Raman methods [17,80,81]. 


## LIBS

Elemental and cross-section analysis.


## Mossbauer spectroscopy

Distinguish between lattice structures and geometries of coordination particularly for iron-containing pigments.


## Molecular Methods


## Raman

Identification of organic and inorganic pigment.


## FTIR

Identification of organic functional groups.


## 4.

Thermal gravimetric analysis TG Identification of material's chemical, structure and textural nature.


## DTA

Providing data on structure decomposition, phase transformations, crystallization, sublimation, etc.


## 5.

Ion beam analysis technique PIXE Identification of elements at trace level. Thermal gravimetric analysis consists of three methods which are thermogravimetry (TG), differential thermal analysis (DTA), and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). TA method is used for analyzing the association between the physicochemical and thermodynamic parameters with temperature fluctuations. TG measures variations in the weight of materials caused by temperature variations (weight loss curve), which are intimately related to their chemical, structural, and textural properties. DTA measures the temperature difference between the material under study and an inert reference material during heating under identical conditions. As a result, the DTA curve provides information on all of the transformations that occur during heating, such as sublimation, crystallization, phase transformation, structural disintegration, and so on. DSC is a thermo-analytical technique for measuring the energy difference between a target sample and a reference material as temperature changes. DSC which quite corresponds to DTA is used to characterize a wide range of characteristic properties of samples [72,82,83].

Apart from identification of pigments, mass-spectroscopy based techniques, e.g gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS)] are currently recognized as the best approach for distinguishing organic components in micro-samples of painting layers such as proteins, waxes, terpenic resins, polysaccharide gums and drying oils. The approach provides basic information of organic compounds which evaluates the best circumstances for long-term conservation and to planning restoration [78]. Table 3 lists the chronological development of pigment used in Indian wall painting, their techniques, analytical instruments used in identification and locations.


## Discussion on Earth Pigments Used in India's Wall Paintings

The Bhimbetka site is the most widely studied and investigated of the many prehistoric sites identified in India. The artwork is done on calcareous sandstone, which is produced from argillaceous parent rock. M. Singh examined the pigments in Bhimbetka were calcite, gypsum, hematite, whewellite, and goethite using portable Raman and EDX analysis [84].

The wall paintings at the Buddhist temples of Jogimara date to the 2nd century B.C.E. and were executed as a secco onto the wall that had been roughly levelled and covered with a thin clay render. A rough plaster of ferruginous earth admixed with clay and reinforced with vegetable fiber and paddy husk was first laid on the rock surface at Ajanta (2nd century B.C.E. to 6th century C.E.). Over this, a fine thin clay plaster was applied. The pigments used were red ochre, yellow ochre, lime and gypsum, terreverte, lapis lazuli, and carbon ( Figure 2). The painting was executed as tempera using animal glue as the binding medium. From the 7th century C.E. onwards, substantial use of lime as a significant ground was observed, with the most notable example being the south India Pallava paintings at the Kailashnatha Temple, Kancheepuram, painting of the early Pandian period at Sittannavasal (9th century C.E.), Chola paintings at Tanajavur, (11th century C.E.) and later paintings of the Vijayanayar, Nayaka, and Mahratta period (6-18th century C.E.) [9,[85][86][87].

A majority of the paintings in India were created on lime plaster or mud plaster ground, with animal glue or another gelatin-based binding medium. In addition to prehistoric earth colors, painters began to use minerals such as lead white, orpiment, realgar, cinnabar, litharge, malachite, and verdigris, as well as dyes such as dragon's blood, madder, and indigo. Lapis lazuli, lead, Indian yellow, tin yellow and azurite, and other pigments were introduced later. Synthetic pigments such as cadmium and chrome yellows, synthetic ultramarine, Prussian blue, Scheele's green, cobalt blue, and others are, without a doubt, relatively new [11,87]. According to Subbaraman, the selection of pigments used in Indian mural painting is somewhat restricted and thus has remained consistent over a wide geographic area for nearly 2000 years [15]. From prehistoric to Mughal times, the pigments used in India have remained nearly similar without much difference [70].

Parmasivan did pioneering work on Indian mural paintings in the 1930s by researching the paintings of Ajanta, Sittanavasal, Thanjavur (Figure 3), and Lepakshi, among others, to identify the painting's methods and materials. He identified the white pigments in Vijayalaya Cholisvaram, Tamil Nadu to be from lime, black from wood charcoal, yellow from yellow ochre, red from red ochre, green from green ochre, and bluish-greenfrom a mixture of terreverte and ultramarine [64]. Similarly, pigments such as yellow ochre, red ochre, carbon, lime, terreverte were also found at Badami in Karnataka and Kanchi Kailasanathar temple in Chennai [65,66]. Identified pigments in Bagh cave were red ochre, yellow ochre, lapis lazuli, terreverte, carbon, and lime [60]. Parmasivan also found grounds to believe that they were probably in the true fresco technique but was unable to firmly establish this. He examined the 10 pigment samples of Chola paintings using X-ray diffraction which helped to identify that in all the cases, the d lines of the actual compounds constituting the pigments strongly interfered, making the identification of the pigments almost impossible. This seemed to indicate that carbonization had taken place and the pigment particles were surrounded by calcite. It is of interest in this context that there are several old Indian texts from the 9th century C.E. onwards that deal with the tempera painting technique. All of them mention binding media like gums and glues of different types but with no references to the use of lime medium [68].

The study of pigments has piqued the interest of many mural restorers over the last few decades. The pigments used in Ajanta-Ellora have been identified by Lal [88] in 1967 and Bharadwaj in 1983 [89]. Except for black, the colors employed at Ajanta-Ellora were said to be mineral-based except for the lamp black. Ajanta painters used lime and kaolin as clay for white, lapis lazuli for blue, red ochre for red, yellow ochre for yellow, charcoal (lamp black) for black, and gluconate or terra verte for green. All of the pigments were residual products from the alteration of volcanic rock including red, green, white, and yellow. These pigments were easily available locally except for lapis lazuli which appears to have been imported because of its scarcity in the region. According to Lal, there is no indication of the usage of copper compounds such as azurite for blue, and malachite for green in Ajanta caves [21,87]. Terra verte, also known as glauconite, is a green ferrous silicate complex that is formed as a by-product of basalt formation. There existed no evidence regarding the scientific study of pigment samples from Ajanta and Ellora until the recent researches by Singh, which aided in identifying the pigments at Ajanta as yellow ochre, red ochre, green earth, carbon black, lapis lazuli, and kaolin/shell lime [36,70] whereas hematite, cinnabar, green ochre, orpiment, and lime as pigments at Ellora (Figure 4) [71]. A majority of the paintings in India were created on lime plaster or mud plaster ground, with animal glue or another gelatin-based binding medium. In addition to prehistoric earth colors, painters began to use minerals such as lead white, orpiment, realgar, cinnabar, litharge, malachite, and verdigris, as well as dyes such as dragon's blood, madder, and indigo. Lapis lazuli, lead, Indian yellow, tin yellow and azurite, and other pigments were introduced later. Synthetic pigments such as cadmium and chrome yellows, synthetic ultramarine, Prussian blue, Scheele's green, cobalt blue, and others are, constituting the pigments strongly interfered, making the identification of the pigments almost impossible. This seemed to indicate that carbonization had taken place and the pigment particles were surrounded by calcite. It is of interest in this context that there are several old Indian texts from the 9th century C.E. onwards that deal with the tempera painting technique. All of them mention binding media like gums and glues of different types but with no references to the use of lime medium [68]. The study of pigments has piqued the interest of many mural restorers over the last few decades. The pigments used in Ajanta-Ellora have been identified by Lal [88] in 1967 and Bharadwaj in 1983 [89]. Except for black, the colors employed at Ajanta-Ellora were said to be mineral-based except for the lamp black. Ajanta painters used lime and kaolin as clay for white, lapis lazuli for blue, red ochre for red, yellow ochre for yellow, charcoal (lamp black) for black, and gluconate or terra verte for green. All of the pigments were residual products from the alteration of volcanic rock including red, green, white, and yellow. These pigments were easily available locally except for lapis lazuli which appears to have been imported because of its scarcity in the region. According to Lal, there is no indication of the usage of copper compounds such as azurite for blue, and malachite for green in Ajanta caves [21,87]. Terra verte, also known as glauconite, is a green ferrous silicate complex that is formed as a by-product of basalt formation. There existed no evidence regarding the scientific study of pigment samples from Ajanta and Ellora until the recent researches by Singh, which aided in identifying the pigments at Ajanta as yellow ochre, red ochre, green earth, carbon black, lapis lazuli, and kaolin/shell lime [36,70]whereas hematite, cinnabar, green ochre, orpiment, and lime as pigments at Ellora (Figure 4) [71].

Aditya Prakash Kanth identified the 16th century C.E. Orchaha fort's ( Figure 5) pigments as yellow ochre for yellow, copper-based pigment for green, lapis lazuli for blue, and mixtures of lead carbonate, calcite, and gypsum for white [58]. Cinnabar and Aditya Prakash Kanth identified the 16th century C.E. Orchaha fort's ( Figure 5) pigments as yellow ochre for yellow, copper-based pigment for green, lapis lazuli for blue, and mixtures of lead carbonate, calcite, and gypsum for white [58]. Cinnabar and red lead were commonly associated with earth pigments. These pigments have been used with red ochre in 17-18th century C.E. wall painting of Chatta Chowk, Red fort. Sharma [57] identified the pigments at Chatta Chowk where red paint layers were attributed to the mixture of hematite (Fe 2 O 3 ), cinnabar (HgS), and cadmium sulfide (CdS). The utilization of a mixture of mercury, iron, and cadmium compounds has served as clear evidence to specific tones on the painted surfaces. The green paint layer was attributed to green earth (celadonite) through vibrational features, differentiating from glauconite spectra.         


## PEER REVIEW 21


## Conclusions

Throughout the history of Indian wall paintings, artists' palette were dominated by earth pigments, (iron) ochres, green earth, wads and white earth, and palettes were similarly limited to colors including red, yellow, brown, green, black, and white. Explorations for suitable hues were relentlessly undertaken; quarries were established, and trade in their products flourished. White was derived from kaolin, limestone and gypsum; black from manganese ochre; green from celadonite and glauconite, red from hematite, and yellow from goethite. The colors were frequently produced by the painters themselves, using their own specific formulae. These pigments were carefully chosen, then ground and blended, and outstandingly the test of time has proven their exceptional 


## Conclusions

Throughout the history of Indian wall paintings, artists' palette were dominated by earth pigments, (iron) ochres, green earth, wads and white earth, and palettes were similarly limited to colors including red, yellow, brown, green, black, and white. Explorations for suitable hues were relentlessly undertaken; quarries were established, and trade in their products flourished. White was derived from kaolin, limestone and gypsum; black from manganese ochre; green from celadonite and glauconite, red from hematite, and yellow from goethite. The colors were frequently produced by the painters themselves, using their own specific formulae. These pigments were carefully chosen, then ground and blended, and outstandingly the test of time has proven their exceptional durability. Vivianite as a blue pigment hasnot been detected in Indian paintings, but its existence and usage cannot be unequivocally denied, since the absence of any discussion on these minerals in the literature is simply an absence of analysis rather than proof of the mineral's non-existence or rarity. However, the evidence of historical pigments in Indian painting is not limited to earth pigments; there are other categories of pigments which are widely used in wall paintings (inorganic and organic) such as cinnabar, lapis lazuli, indigo, Indian yellow, malachite, carbon black or lamp black, lead white, madder, Prussian blue, orpiment, etc. The present review article is based on earth pigments explaining their existence and uses with regard to the Indian context. 

## Figure 1 .
1Location of most famous mural paintings in India.

## Figure 1 .
1Location of most famous mural paintings in India.


MS/Py-GC-MS Identification and quantification of unknown organic compounds at molecular level.ICP-MSAnalysis of traces of inorganic elements.

## Figure 2 .
2Painting showingdevoteesat Ajanta (cave no-10), Maharashtra.

## Figure 2 .
2Painting showingdevoteesat Ajanta (cave no-10), Maharashtra.

## Figure 3 .
3Wall painting from Brihadeeswarartemple, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu.

## Figure 3 .
3Wall painting from Brihadeeswarartemple, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu.

## Figure 4 .
4Mural fromNataraj, Kailashnath temple (cave no-16), Ellora, Maharashtra.

## Figure 4 .
4Mural fromNataraj, Kailashnath temple (cave no-16), Ellora, Maharashtra.

## Figure 5 .
5Wall paintings inside the Orchha fort complex, Madhya Pradesh.

## Figure 5 .
5Wall paintings inside the Orchha fort complex, Madhya Pradesh.

## Figure 6 .
6Mural paintings from Adhiyamankottai, Tamil Nadu.

## Figure 6 .
6Mural paintings from Adhiyamankottai, Tamil Nadu.

## Funding:
This research received no external funding.

## Table 1 .
1Chronological development of pigment used in Indian mural painting with techniques.Earth Pigment 
Color 
Name of Pigment 
Chemical Formula 

Ochre 
Red 
Purplish red 

Red Ochre 
Indian Red 

α-Fe 2 O 3 
Fe 2 O 3 

Yellow 
Yellow ochre 
Fe 2 O 3 ·H 2 O or α-FeO(OH) 

Brown or Reddish brown 
Umber 
Fe 2 O 3 ·(H 2 O)+MnO 2 ·(nH 2 O)+Al 2 O 3 

Yellow-brown 
Sienna 
Fe 2 O 3 +MnO 2 

Green earth 
Green 
Celadonite 
Glauconite 

K[(Al,Fe 3+ ),(Fe 2+ ,Mg)](AlSi 3 ,Si 4 )O 10 (OH) 2 
(K,Na)(Fe 3+ ,Al,Mg) 2 (Si,Al) 4 O 10 (OH) 2 

White earth 
White 

Calcite 
Gypsum 
Kaolinite 

CaCO 3 
CaSO 4 ·2H 2 O 
Al 2 [Si 2 O 5 ][OH] 

Wade 
Black 
Manganese ochre (Pyrolusite) MnO 2 

Blue Earths 
Blue 
Vivianite 
Fe 3 
2+ [PO 4 ] 2 ·8H 2 O 




data based on the United Nations Framework Classification for Resources (UNFC) scheme, the total reserves/resources of ochre as of 1.4.2015 are estimated to be 167.79 million tones. Around 36.93 million tons of these resources fall into the 'Reserves' category, while 130.86 million tons fall into the 'Remaining Resources' category. Around 87% of the total resources are red ochre, 11 percent are yellow ochre, and the remaining 2% are grade "Unknown." Rajasthan has about 78% of the resources, followed by Madhya Pradesh with 11%, Andhra Pradesh with 7%, and Gujarat with 2%. Karnataka, Maharashtra, Jharkhand, and Uttar Pradesh have the remaining 2% of the total[37].


Simple oxides like Mn x O y or mixed oxides like A x Mn y O z , where A is K or Ba, reveal their sedimentary origin. The black mineral pyrolusite (MnO 2 ) is the most prevalent one, while other minerals that contain manganeseinclude rhodonite(MnSiO 3 ), rhodochrosite (MnCO 3 ), manganite (MnO(OH), cryptomelane 
(K x (Mn 4+ ,Mn 3+ ) 8 O 16 ), alabandite (MnS), and hollandite (Ba(Mn 4+ 
6 ,Mn 3+ 
2 )O 16 ) 


K[Mg,Fe 2+ ]Fe 3+ [Si 4 O 10 ][OH] 2 ) and glauconite ([K,Na][Mg,Fe 2+ , Fe 3+ ][Fe 3+ ,Al][Si,Al] 4 O 10 [OH]

## Table 2 .
2Applications of each technique for characterizing pigment used in wall paintings.S.No. 
Analytical Technique 
Instrument Used 
Applications 

1. 
Imaging technique 

Optical Microscopy 
Morphology characterization including phase 
information, grain size and presence of defects. 

SEM 
Surface characterization and cross-section 
analysis. 

AFM 
Evaluation of surface properties. 

2. 
X-Ray Technique 

XRF 
Major and trace elemental analysis. 

XRD 
Identification of crystalline phases. 

XPS 
Characterization of surface contamination or 
corrosion products. 

NAA 
Elemental characterization. 



## Table 3 .
3Chronological development of pigment used in Indian mural painting with techniques.S.No. 
Date 
Location 
Pigments 
Painting Techniques 
Analytical 
Technique Used 
References 

1. 
8000 B.C.E. 
Bhimbetka, Bhopal 
(Madhya Pradesh) 

White: Whewellite, lime and 
gypsum 
Red: Hematite 
Yellow: Goethite 

Transparent/opaque 
color 

Portable-Raman 
EDX 
[84] 

2. 
2nd B.C.E.-6th C.E. 
Ajanta 
(Maharashtra) 

Red: Red ochre 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Black: Carbon 
White: Lime and gypsum 
Green: Terre verte 
Blue: Lapis lazuli 

Tempera 

Colorimetry 
Particle size 
analyzer 
XRF 
FTIR 
SEM-EDX 

[75] 

3. 
4-6th C.E. 

Sitabenji Paintings 
Keonjhar District 
(Odisha) 

Red: Red ochre 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
White: Lime 

Data not available 
[90] 


## Table 3 .
3Cont.S.No. 
Date 
Location 
Pigments 
Painting Techniques 
Analytical 
Technique Used 
References 

4. 
6-7th C.E. 
Rock cut temple, 
Badami (Karnataka) 

Red: Red ochre 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
White: Lime 
Green: Terre verte 
Black: Carbon 

Tempera 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis * 
[65] 

5. 
7th C.E. 
Bagh Caves 
(Madhya Pradesh) 

Red: Red ochre 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Green: Terre verte 
Blue: Lapis lazuli 
Black: Carbon 
White: Lime 

Tempera 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[60] 

6. 
7th C.E. 
Ellora 
(Maharashtra), 

Red: Hematite + Cinnabar 
Green: Green ochre 
Yellow: Orpiment 
White: Lime 

Tempera 

micro-XRF 
XRD 
FTIR 
Raman 

[71] 

7. 
7-9th C.E. 

Pallava Painting, 
Kailasanatha 
Vaikunthaperumal 
temple 
Conjeevaram (Tamil 
Nadu) 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Green: Terre verte 
Black: Carbon 
White: Lime 

Lime (secco) 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[66] 

8. 
Late 7th C.E. 
Kanchipuram 
(Tamil Nadu) 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Black: Carbon 
Green: Terre verte 
Blue: Ultramarine 

Lime (secco) 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

9. 
6-9th C.E. 

Vishnu Temple, 
Thodikodiyanum, 
Kottayam (Kerala) 

Pale red: Red ochre 
Dark red: Hematite 
Pale green: Malachite 
Dark green: Terre verte 

Data not available 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

10. 
9th C.E. 
Sittannavasal (Tamil 
Nadu) 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Black: Carbon 
Green: Terre verte 
Blue: Ultramarine 

Lime (Secco) 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

11. 
11th C.E. 
Thanjavur (Tamil 
Nadu) 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Black: Lamp black 
Green: Terre verte 
Blue: Ultramarine 
White: Lime 

Lime (Secco) 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[68] 

12. 
11th C.E. 

Ramdwara 
Galiakot, 
Dungarpur 
(Rajasthan) 

Shining red: Cinnabar 
Dark red: Hematite 
Dark green: Malachite 
Shining blue: Azurite 

Rajasthani 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

13. 
12th C.E. 

Sankaranarayana 
temple, Peruvanam, 
Trichur (Kerala) 

Dark red: Hematite 
Dark green: Terre-verte 
Pale yellow: Yellow ochre 
Dark black: Carbon black 

Data not available 
[90] 

14. 
12th C.E. 

Lakhang-Gongma 
Monastery, Nako 
(Himachal Pradesh) 

Dark green: Malachite + iron 
oxide + silica, azurite, calcite 
and phloghite. 
Red: Cinnabar + gypsum + 
quartz + muscovite 
Dark blue: Azurite + gypsum + 
quartz 
Greenish black blue: Azurite + 
malachite + goethite + gypsum 
+ quartz 
Reddish dark: Karpatite + iron 
oxide, cinnabar, calcite, quartz 
and kaoline 

Tempera 
XRD 
[91] 

15. 
13th C.E. 

JunaMahal, 
Dungarpur 
(Rajasthan) 

Shining red: Cinnabar 
Dark red: Hematite 
Dark green: Malachite 
Pale green: Terre-verte 
Violet blue: Ultramarine 
Off white: Lime 
Shining red: Cinnabar 
Pale yellow: Yellow ochre 
Pale blue: Ultramarine 

Rajasthani 
[90] 


## Table 3 .
3Cont.S.No. 
Date 
Location 
Pigments 
Painting Techniques 
Analytical 
Technique Used 
References 

16. 
14-15th C.E. 

Vijayalaya 
Cholisvaram, 
Pudukkottai state 
(Tamil Nadu) 

White: Lime 
Black: Wood charcoal. 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Bluish green: Terre verte + 
ultramarine 

Tempera 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[64] 

17. 
16th C.E. 
Lepakshi (Andhra 
Pradesh) 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Black: Carbon 
White: Lime 

Lime (Secco) 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

18. 
16th C.E. 

Charryyapali 
Church, Kottayam 
(Kerala) 

Shining red: Cinnabar 
Dark red: Terre verte 
Pale green: Malachite 
Dark green: Terre verte 

Data not available 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

19. 
16th C.E. 
Moghul Gateway, 
Bairat, (Rajasthan) 

Red: Red ochre 
Green: Terre verte 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
White: Chalk 
Black: Carbon black 
Blue: Ultramarine 

Rajasthani 

Optical microscopy 
with polarizing 
microscopy 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 

[92] 

20. 
16th C.E. 
Raja Mahal, Orchha 
(Madhya Pradesh) 

Dark red: Cinnabar 
Brilliant red: Cinnabar + red 
lead 
Pink: Cinnabar + chalk 
Brownish red: Red ochre 
White: Chalk 
Bright yellow: Orpiment 
Brownish yellow: Yellow ochre 
Warm green: Malachite 
Cold green: Terre verte 
Dark blue: Prussian blue 
Medium blue: Ultramarine or 
azurite 
Silver: Silver 

Tempera 

micro-Raman 
FTIR 
SEM-EDX 

[58] 

21. 
16th C.E. 

St. Mary Church of 
Cheriapally, 
Kottyam (Kerala) 

Red: Cinnabar/hematite 
Green: Malachite 
Tempera 

XRD 
XRF 
FTIR 
Raman 

(Unpublished 
work) 

22. 
16th C.E. 

Golden temple (Sri 
Harmandar 
SahebJi), Amritsar 
(Punjab) 

Reddish brown: Raw umber 
Red: Burnt umber 
Yellowish brown: Raw sienna 
Reddish brown: Burnt sienna 
Red: Red ochre 
Blue: Ultramarine blue 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Green: Green earth 
Black: Carbon black 
White: Lime 

Tempera 
Microscopic 
Analysis 
[93] 

23. 
16-17th C.E. 

Sri 
Ranganathaswamy 
temple, Srirangam, 
Tiruchira-palli 
Thiruvannali 
Prakalam Vishnu 
Temple (Tamil 
Nadu) 

Dark green: Malachite 
Pale yellow: Yellow ochre 
Pale blue: Ultramarine 
Deep blue: Carbon black 

Data not available 
[90] 

24. 
16-17th C.E. 

Adiyamankottai 
Temple (Tamil 
Nadu), Figure 6 

Red: Cinnabar + hematite 
Yellow: Orpiment 
Gray: Lime+ manganese oxide 
Black: Lamp black 

Tempera 

XRD 
XRF 
FTIR 
Raman 

[(unpublished 
work) 

25. 
17th C.E. 

Servent Chapel of 
St. Monica Church 
and Convent (Goa) 

Gold: Gold 
White: White lead. 
Black: Carbon black 
Red: Red ochre/Red lead 
Blue: Prussian blue/malachite 
Green: Terre verte 

Tempera 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[94] 

26. 
16-17th CE 
Chatta Chowk, Red 
Fort, Delhi 

Red: Red ochre+ cinnabar 
+cadmium sulfide 
Green: celadonite 

High 
resolution-XRD 
FTIR 
Portable-Raman 

[57] 


## Table 3 .
3Cont.S.No. 
Date 
Location 
Pigments 
Painting Techniques 
Analytical 
Technique Used 
References 

27. 
17-18th C.E. 
Kerala Paintings 

Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Red: Red ochre 
Black: Carbon 
Green: Terre verte 

Lime (Secco) 
[90] 

28. 
18th C.E. 
Indian Temple 
(New Delhi) 

Red: Red ochre 
Blue: Lapis lazuli 
Yellow: Yellow ochre 
Green: Green ochre 
Black: Carbon black 
White: Lime or gypsum + 
kaoline 

Tempera 

Micro-Raman 
FTIR -ATR & 
FTIR-KBr 
SEM-EDX 

[95] 

29. 
18th C.E. 

Kushalgarh palace, 
Dungarpur 
(Rajasthan) 

Shining red: Cinnabar 
Dark red: Hematite 
Pale green/Dark green: 
Malachite 
Pale yellow: Yellow ochre 
Off-white: Lime 

Rajasthani 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

30. 
18th C.E. 

Mansa Devi Temple, 
Panchkula 
(Haryana) 

Shining red: Cinnabar 
Dark red: Hematite 
Dark green: Terre verte 
Pale yellow: Yellow ochre 
Off white: Lime 

Secco 
Micro-chemical spot 
analysis 
[90] 

31. 
18th C.E. 

Kusum Sarovar, 
Govardhan (Uttar 
Pradesh) 

Acknowledgments:The authors are thankful to the National Museum Institute, Janpath, and National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow for providing us necessary facilities. We would like to provide our special thanks to Satyajith Ibn for revising the current manuscript.Conflicts of Interest:The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.* Micro-chemical spot analysis[99].Heritage 2021, 4
Mural Paintings in India. J C Nagpal, Gyan Publishing House8121201497New Delhi, IndiaNagpal, J.C. Mural Paintings in India; Gyan Publishing House: New Delhi, India, 1988; ISBN 8121201497.

An Acheulian haematite pebble with striations. R G Bednarik, Rock Art Res. 775Bednarik, R.G. An Acheulian haematite pebble with striations. Rock Art Res. 1990, 7, 75.

Age sites near Bhagi mohari, Nagpur district. K Paddayya, Stone, Maharashtra. Bull. Deccan Coll. Res. Inst. 43Paddayya, K. Stone Age sites near Bhagi mohari, Nagpur district, Maharashtra. Bull. Deccan Coll. Res. Inst. 1984, 43, 91-98.

The pleistocene art of Asia. R G Bednarik, 10.1007/BF02221090J. World Prehistory. 8Bednarik, R.G. The pleistocene art of Asia. J. World Prehistory 1994, 8, 351-375. [CrossRef]

Prehistoric Cave Paintings. Marg. V S Wakankar, 27Wakankar, V.S. Prehistoric Cave Paintings. Marg 1975, 27, 17-34.

Decorative intricate patterns in Indian rock art. G S Tyagi, M Lorblanchet, Rock Art Old World. Tyagi, G.S.; Lorblanchet, M. Decorative intricate patterns in Indian rock art. Rock Art Old World 1992, 303-317.

Bhimbetka-The prehistoric paradise. V S Wakankar, 3Pr. PratibhaWakankar, V.S. Bhimbetka-The prehistoric paradise. Pr. Pratibha 1975, 3, 7-29.

Painted Rock_Shelters of India. V S Wakankar, 10Savitribai Phule Pune UniversityWakankar, V.S. Painted Rock_Shelters of India, Savitribai Phule Pune University. 1973. Available online: http://hdl.handle.net/ 10603/151570 (accessed on 10 June 2021).

Prehistoric Culture Sequence of Bhimbetka; re-Historic Man His Art Center. V N Misra, Pune, IndiaMisra, V.N. Prehistoric Culture Sequence of Bhimbetka; re-Historic Man His Art Center: Pune, India, 1970; pp. 10-16.

Rock art of India. Y Mathpal, J. Indian Hist. 54Mathpal, Y. Rock art of India. J. Indian Hist. 1976, 54, 27-51.

Jaora-The Shelter of the Largest Rock Painting in India. S Tiwari, Pr. Pratibha. 3Tiwari, S. Jaora-The Shelter of the Largest Rock Painting in India. Pr. Pratibha 1975, 3, 93-96.

Prehistoric Rock Art of Bhimbetka. Y Mathpal, Central India. Abhinav PublicationsMathpal, Y. Prehistoric Rock Art of Bhimbetka, Central India; Abhinav Publications: New Delhi, India, 1984.

V N Misra, Indian, proceedings of the Seminar on Indian Prehistory and Protohistory, held at the Univ. Dept. of Archaeology. the Seminar on Indian Prehistory and Protohistory, held at the Univ. Dept. of ArchaeologyDeccan College, PoonaMisra, V.N. Indian prehistory: 1964; [proceedings of the Seminar on Indian Prehistory and Protohistory, held at the Univ. Dept. of Archaeology, Deccan College, Poona, 24-31 May 1965].

. Deccan Coll. Build. Centen. Silver Jubil. Ser. 32266Deccan Coll. Build. Centen. Silver Jubil. Ser. 1965, 32, 266.

Technique of Indian Painting: A Study Chiefly Made on the Basis of theŚilpa Texts. A K Bhattacharya, Calcutta, IndiaSaraswat LibraryBhattacharya, A.K. Technique of Indian Painting: A Study Chiefly Made on the Basis of theŚilpa Texts; Saraswat Library: Calcutta, India, 1976.

Conservation of mural paintings. S Subbaraman, Curr. Sci. Subbaraman, S. Conservation of mural paintings. Curr. Sci. 1993, 736-753.

Trends in Modern Indian Art. S K Bhattacharya, MD Publications Pvt. LtdNew Delhi, IndiaISBN 8185880212Bhattacharya, S.K. Trends in Modern Indian Art; MD Publications Pvt. Ltd.: New Delhi, India, 1994; ISBN 8185880212.

Ochre-differentiation through micro-Raman and micro-FTIR spectroscopies: Application on wall paintings at Meteora and Mount Athos. D Bikiaris, S Daniilia, S Sotiropoulou, O Katsimbiri, E Pavlidou, A P Moutsatsou, Y Chryssoulakis, 10.1016/S1386-1425(99)00134-1Greece. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 56Bikiaris, D.; Daniilia, S.; Sotiropoulou, S.; Katsimbiri, O.; Pavlidou, E.; Moutsatsou, A.P.; Chryssoulakis, Y. Ochre-differentiation through micro-Raman and micro-FTIR spectroscopies: Application on wall paintings at Meteora and Mount Athos, Greece. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2000, 56, 3-18. [CrossRef]

Mineral pigments in archaeology: Their analysis and the range of available materials. R Siddall, 10.3390/min80502018Siddall, R. Mineral pigments in archaeology: Their analysis and the range of available materials. Minerals 2018, 8, 201. [CrossRef]

Clay and man: Clay raw materials in the service of man. J Konta, 10.1016/0169-1317(95)00029-4Appl. Clay Sci. 10Konta, J. Clay and man: Clay raw materials in the service of man. Appl. Clay Sci. 1995, 10, 275-335. [CrossRef]

Raman Spectroscopy in Archaeology and Art History. H G M Edwards, J M Chalmers, Royal Society of Chemistry. 9854045228Edwards, H.G.M.; Chalmers, J.M. Raman Spectroscopy in Archaeology and Art History; Royal Society of Chemistry: Cambridge, UK, 2005; Volume 9, ISBN 0854045228.

. M Douma, Pigments through the Ages. Inst. Dyn. Educ. Dev. 10Douma, M. Pigments through the Ages. Inst. Dyn. Educ. Dev. 2008. Available online: http://www.webexhibits.org/pigments (accessed on 10 June 2021).

Analysis of red and yellow ochre samples from Clearwell Caves and Çatalhöyük by vibrational spectroscopy and other techniques. J L Mortimore, L.-J R Marshall, M J Almond, P Hollins, W Matthews, 10.1016/j.saa.2003.08.002Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 60PubMedMortimore, J.L.; Marshall, L.-J.R.; Almond, M.J.; Hollins, P.; Matthews, W. Analysis of red and yellow ochre samples from Clearwell Caves and Çatalhöyük by vibrational spectroscopy and other techniques. Spectrochim. Acta Part A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2004, 60, 1179-1188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Iron Oxide Pigment, Ochre, 31C Gr. Minerals, 10Minerals, Iron Oxide Pigment, Ochre, 31C Gr. (n.d.). Available online: https://3icindustries.com/about-us.html# (accessed on 10 June 2021).

Blombos cave: Middle stone age ochre differentiation through ftir, icp oes. S Moyo, D Mphuthi, E Cukrowska, C S Henshilwood, K Van Niekerk, L Chimuka, 10.1016/j.quaint.2015.09.041Quat. Int. 404Moyo, S.; Mphuthi, D.; Cukrowska, E.; Henshilwood, C.S.; van Niekerk, K.; Chimuka, L. Blombos cave: Middle stone age ochre differentiation through ftir, icp oes, ed xrf and xrd. Quat. Int. 2016, 404, 20-29. [CrossRef]

Art origins. R G Bednarik, 89Bednarik, R.G. Art origins. Anthropos 1994, 89, 169-180.

Palaeolithic painting matter: Natural or heat-treated pigment?. E Chalmin, C Vignaud, M Menu, 10.1007/s00339-004-2542-0Appl. Phys. A. 79Chalmin, E.; Vignaud, C.; Menu, M. Palaeolithic painting matter: Natural or heat-treated pigment? Appl. Phys. A 2004, 79, 187-191. [CrossRef]

Natural Fe-oxide and-oxyhydroxide nanoparticles: An EPR and SQUID investigation. C Carbone, F Di Benedetto, P Marescotti, C Sangregorio, L Sorace, N Lima, M Romanelli, G Lucchetti, C Cipriani, 10.1007/s00710-005-0098-0Mineral. Petrol. 85Carbone, C.; Di Benedetto, F.; Marescotti, P.; Sangregorio, C.; Sorace, L.; Lima, N.; Romanelli, M.; Lucchetti, G.; Cipriani, C. Natural Fe-oxide and-oxyhydroxide nanoparticles: An EPR and SQUID investigation. Mineral. Petrol. 2005, 85, 19-32. [CrossRef]

The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, Occurrences and Uses. R M Cornell, U Schwertmann, Cornell, R.M.; Schwertmann, U. The Iron Oxides: Structure, Properties, Reactions, Occurrences and Uses;

Diagnostic methodology for the examination of Byzantine frescoes and icons. Non-destructive investigation and pigment identification. S Daniilia, S Sotiropoulou, D Bikiaris, C Salpistis, G Karagiannis, Y Chryssoulakis, Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry. Amsterdam, The NetherlandsElsevier42Daniilia, S.; Sotiropoulou, S.; Bikiaris, D.; Salpistis, C.; Karagiannis, G.; Chryssoulakis, Y. Diagnostic methodology for the examination of Byzantine frescoes and icons. Non-destructive investigation and pigment identification. In Comprehensive Analytical Chemistry; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2004; Volume 42, pp. 565-604, ISBN 0166-526X.

New Perspectives on Iron-Based Nanostructures. S.-M Taghizadeh, A Berenjian, M Zare, A Ebrahiminezhad, 10.3390/pr8091128Processes 2020. esses 20208Taghizadeh, S.-M.; Berenjian, A.; Zare, M.; Ebrahiminezhad, A. New Perspectives on Iron-Based Nanostructures. Processes 2020, 8, 1128. [CrossRef]

Ocher in Prehistory: 300,000 Years of the Use of Iron Ore as Pigmets. D Schmandt-Besserat, Schmandt-Besserat, D. Ocher in Prehistory: 300,000 Years of the Use of Iron Ore as Pigmets;

The Characterisation and Provenancing of Ancient Ochres. N Attard Montalto, Bedford, UKCranfield UniversityPh.D. ThesisAttard Montalto, N. The Characterisation and Provenancing of Ancient Ochres. Ph.D. Thesis, Cranfield University, Bedford, UK, 2010.

Pseudomorphous transformation of goethite needles into hematite in sediments of the Triassic Skagerrak Formation, Denmark. Clay Miner. R Weibel, B Grobety, 10.1180/00098559954641534Weibel, R.; Grobety, B. Pseudomorphous transformation of goethite needles into hematite in sediments of the Triassic Skagerrak Formation, Denmark. Clay Miner. 1999, 34, 657-660. [CrossRef]

In situ study of the goethite-hematite phase transformation by real time synchrotron powder diffraction. A F Gualtieri, P Venturelli, 10.2138/am-1999-5-624Am. Mineral. 84Gualtieri, A.F.; Venturelli, P. In situ study of the goethite-hematite phase transformation by real time synchrotron powder diffraction. Am. Mineral. 1999, 84, 895-904. [CrossRef]

The changing provenance of red ochre at Puritjarra rock shelter, Central Australia: Late Pleistocene to present. M A Smith, B Fankhauser, M Jercher, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society. the Prehistoric SocietyCambridge, UKCambridge University Press6492Smith, M.A.; Fankhauser, B.; Jercher, M. The changing provenance of red ochre at Puritjarra rock shelter, Central Australia: Late Pleistocene to present. In Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 1998; Volume 64, p. 92.

Chemistry of Preservation of the Ajanta Murals. M Singh, B Arbad, Int. J. Conserv. Sci. 4Singh, M.; Arbad, B. Chemistry of Preservation of the Ajanta Murals. Int. J. Conserv. Sci. 2013, 4, 161-176.

Indian Minerals Yearbook. I B O F Mines, Gov. India Minist. Mines Nagpur. 13Mines, I.B.O.F. Indian Minerals Yearbook 2016. Gov. India Minist. Mines Nagpur 2018, 13, 1-17.

Manufacturer of Paint and Varnish in India. N Brodie, Calcutta, IndiaSuperitendent Government PrintingBrodie, N. Manufacturer of Paint and Varnish in India; Superitendent Government Printing: Calcutta, India, 1919.

Man's first use of jarosite: The pre-Roman mining-metallurgical operations at Rio Tinto. J E Dutrizac, J L Jambor, J B O&apos;reilly, Spain. Can. Min. Metall. Bull. 76Dutrizac, J.E.; Jambor, J.L.; O'reilly, J.B. Man's first use of jarosite: The pre-Roman mining-metallurgical operations at Rio Tinto, Spain. Can. Min. Metall. Bull. 1983, 76, 78-82.

The crystal structure of ammoniojarosite, (NH4) Fe 3 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 6 and the crystal chemistry of the ammoniojarosite-hydronium jarosite solid-solution series. L C Basciano, R C Peterson, 10.1180/minmag.2007.071.4.427Mineral. Mag. 71Basciano, L.C.; Peterson, R.C. The crystal structure of ammoniojarosite, (NH4) Fe 3 (SO 4 ) 2 (OH) 6 and the crystal chemistry of the ammoniojarosite-hydronium jarosite solid-solution series. Mineral. Mag. 2007, 71, 427-441. [CrossRef]

Crystal chemistry of the natrojarosite-jarosite and natrojarosite-hydronium jarosite solid-solution series: A synthetic study with full Fe site occupancy. L C Basciano, R C Peterson, 10.2138/am.2008.2731Am. Mineral. 93Basciano, L.C.; Peterson, R.C. Crystal chemistry of the natrojarosite-jarosite and natrojarosite-hydronium jarosite solid-solution series: A synthetic study with full Fe site occupancy. Am. Mineral. 2008, 93, 853-862. [CrossRef]

40 Ar/39 Ar ages and stable isotopes of supergene jarosite from the Baiyin VHMS ore field, NE Tibetan Plateau with paleoclimatic implications. L Chen, J Li, 10.1007/s11434-014-0276-8Chin. Sci. Bull. 59Chen, L.; Li, J. 40 Ar/39 Ar ages and stable isotopes of supergene jarosite from the Baiyin VHMS ore field, NE Tibetan Plateau with paleoclimatic implications. Chin. Sci. Bull. 2014, 59, 2999-3009. [CrossRef]

Trace element characterization of ochre from geological sources. R S Popelka-Filcoff, J D Robertson, M D Glascock, C Descantes, 10.1007/s10967-006-6836-xJ. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 272Popelka-Filcoff, R.S.; Robertson, J.D.; Glascock, M.D.; Descantes, C. Trace element characterization of ochre from geological sources. J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem. 2007, 272, 17-27. [CrossRef]

A note on burnt yellow earth pigments: Documentary sources and scientific analysis. K Helwig, Stud. Conserv. 42Helwig, K. A note on burnt yellow earth pigments: Documentary sources and scientific analysis. Stud. Conserv. 1997, 42, 181-188.

The oxides and hydroxides of iron and their structural inter-relationships. J D Bernal, D R Dasgupta, A L Mackay, 10.1180/claymin.1959.004.21.02Clay Miner. Bull. 4Bernal, J.D.; Dasgupta, D.R.; Mackay, A.L. The oxides and hydroxides of iron and their structural inter-relationships. Clay Miner. Bull. 1959, 4, 15-30. [CrossRef]

International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). International Committee on Vernacular Architecture (CIAV). A Camões, R Eires, S C Jalali, Camões, A.; Eires, R.; Jalali, S.C. International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS). International Committee on Vernacular Architecture (CIAV). 2012.

The kinetics and reaction mechanism of the goethite to hematite transformation. C J Goss, 10.1180/minmag.1987.051.361.11Mineral. Mag. 51Goss, C.J. The kinetics and reaction mechanism of the goethite to hematite transformation. Mineral. Mag. 1987, 51, 437-451. [CrossRef]

A study of the pigments and the grounds used by Jan Vermeer. H Kühn, Rep. Stud. Hist. Art. 2Kühn, H. A study of the pigments and the grounds used by Jan Vermeer. Rep. Stud. Hist. Art 1968, 2, 155-175.

EDXRF analysis of pigment used for the decoration of Mleiha pottery. A G Attaelmanan, E A Yousif, 10.1016/j.jas.2012.01.036J. Archaeol. Sci. 39Attaelmanan, A.G.; Yousif, E.A. EDXRF analysis of pigment used for the decoration of Mleiha pottery. J. Archaeol. Sci. 2012, 39, 2231-2237. [CrossRef]

Pigments and their application in maxillofacial elastomers: A literature review. J J Gary, C T Smith, 10.1016/S0022-3913(98)70111-8J. Prosthet. Dent. 80Gary, J.J.; Smith, C.T. Pigments and their application in maxillofacial elastomers: A literature review. J. Prosthet. Dent. 1998, 80, 204-208. [CrossRef]

Pigment Compendium: A Dictionary and Optical Microscopy of Historic. N Eastaugh, Butterworth-HeinemannWaltham, MA, USAEastaugh, N. Pigment Compendium: A Dictionary and Optical Microscopy of Historic; Butterworth-Heinemann: Waltham, MA, USA, 2008.

Micro-Raman spectral identification of manganese oxides black pigments in an archaeological context in Northern Chile. M Sepúlveda, S Gutiérrez, M C Vallette, V G Standen, B T Arriaza, J J Cárcamo-Vega, 10.1186/s40494-015-0061-2Herit. Sci. 3Sepúlveda, M.; Gutiérrez, S.; Vallette, M.C.; Standen, V.G.; Arriaza, B.T.; Cárcamo-Vega, J.J. Micro-Raman spectral identification of manganese oxides black pigments in an archaeological context in Northern Chile. Herit. Sci. 2015, 3, 1-6. [CrossRef]

Onoufrios, the famous XVI's century iconographer, creator of the "Berati School": Studying the technique and materials used in wall paintings of inscribed churches. E Pavlidou, M Arapi, T Zorba, M Anastasiou, N Civici, F Stamati, K M Paraskevopoulos, 10.1007/s00339-006-3557-5Appl. Phys. A. 83Pavlidou, E.; Arapi, M.; Zorba, T.; Anastasiou, M.; Civici, N.; Stamati, F.; Paraskevopoulos, K.M. Onoufrios, the famous XVI's century iconographer, creator of the "Berati School": Studying the technique and materials used in wall paintings of inscribed churches. Appl. Phys. A 2006, 83, 709-717. [CrossRef]

Green earth. In Artists' Pigments; A Handbook of Their History and Characteristics. C A Grissom, National Gallery of Arts. 1ISBN 0521303745Grissom, C.A. Green earth. In Artists' Pigments; A Handbook of Their History and Characteristics; National Gallery of Arts: Washington, DC, USA, 1986; Volume 1, pp. 141-167, ISBN 0521303745.

Glauconite and celadonite: Two separate mineral species. H A Buckley, J C Bevan, K M Brown, L R Johnson, V C Farmer, 10.1180/minmag.1978.042.323.08Mineral. Mag. 42Buckley, H.A.; Bevan, J.C.; Brown, K.M.; Johnson, L.R.; Farmer, V.C. Glauconite and celadonite: Two separate mineral species. Mineral. Mag. 1978, 42, 373-382. [CrossRef]

Chemical weathering of glauconite. G Abudelgawad, A L Page, L J Lund, 10.2136/sssaj1975.03615995003900030049xSoil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 39Abudelgawad, G.; Page, A.L.; Lund, L.J. Chemical weathering of glauconite. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 1975, 39, 567-571. [CrossRef]

Execution technique and pigment characteristics of decorative wall from 17th CE Chatta Chowk. A Sharma, Period. Mineral. 90Sharma, A. Execution technique and pigment characteristics of decorative wall from 17th CE Chatta Chowk, Red Fort Complex, New Delhi. Period. Mineral. 2020, 90, 43-56.

Vibrational spectroscopy and SEM-EDX analysis of wall painted surfaces. A P Kanth, M R Singh, 10.1016/j.jasrep.2019.02.008J. Archaeol. Sci. Rep. 24Kanth, A.P.; Singh, M.R. Vibrational spectroscopy and SEM-EDX analysis of wall painted surfaces, Orchha Fort, India. J. Archaeol. Sci. Rep. 2019, 24, 434-444. [CrossRef]

Fresco painting of Ajanta. R B Khan, J. Oil Colour Chem. Assoc. 32Khan, R.B. Fresco painting of Ajanta. J. Oil Colour Chem. Assoc. 1949, 32, 24-31.

The wall paintings in the Bagh caves-An investigation into their methods. S Paramasivan, Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A. the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section ABerlin/Heidelberg, GermanySpringer1085Paramasivan, S. The wall paintings in the Bagh caves-An investigation into their methods. In Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1939; Volume 10, p. 85.

Calcium carbonate whites. R J Gettens, E W Fitzhugh, R L Feller, Stud. Conserv. 19Gettens, R.J.; Fitzhugh, E.W.; Feller, R.L. Calcium carbonate whites. Stud. Conserv. 1974, 19, 157-184.

Calcium carbonate whites. In Artists' Pigments: A Handbook of Their History and Characteristics; National Galllery of Art. R J Gettens, E W Fitzhugh, R L Feller, 2Washington, DC, USAGettens, R.J.; FitzHugh, E.W.; Feller, R.L. Calcium carbonate whites. In Artists' Pigments: A Handbook of Their History and Characteristics; National Galllery of Art: Washington, DC, USA, 1993; Volume 2, pp. 203-226.

Rocks and Minerals. R Bonewitz, DK Publishing1405375868London, UKBonewitz, R. Rocks and Minerals; DK Publishing: London, UK, 2012; ISBN 1405375868.

Technique of the painting process in the temple of vijayalaya cholisvaram in the Pudukkottai State. S Paramasivan, Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A. the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section ABerlin/Heidelberg, GermanySpringer7Paramasivan, S. Technique of the painting process in the temple of vijayalaya cholisvaram in the Pudukkottai State. In Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1938; Volume 7, pp. 282-292.

Technique of the painting process in the rock-cut temples at Badami. S Paramasivan, Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A. the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section ABerlin/Heidelberg, GermanySpringer10145Paramasivan, S. Technique of the painting process in the rock-cut temples at Badami. In Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1939; Volume 10, p. 145.

The Pallava paintings at Conjeevaram-An investigation into the methods. S Paramasivan, Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A. the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section ABerlin/Heidelberg, GermanySpringer10Paramasivan, S. The Pallava paintings at Conjeevaram-An investigation into the methods. In Proceedings of the Indian Academy of Sciences-Section A; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1939; Volume 10, pp. 77-84.

The Buddhist cave paintings of Bagh. A Pande, Aryan Books InternationalCalcutta, IndiaISBN 8173052182Pande, A. The Buddhist cave paintings of Bagh; Aryan Books International: Calcutta, India, 2002; ISBN 8173052182.

Technique of the Painting Process in the Brihadesvara Temple at Tanjore. S Paramasivan, 10.1038/137867b0Nature. 137Paramasivan, S. Technique of the Painting Process in the Brihadesvara Temple at Tanjore. Nature 1936, 137, 867-868. [CrossRef]

Technique of Painting Process in Cave Temples of Ajanta. S Parmasivan, Mineral Data PublishingCalcutta, IndiaParmasivan, S. Technique of Painting Process in Cave Temples of Ajanta; Mineral Data Publishing: Calcutta, India, 1936.

Ancient indian painting recipes and mural art technique at ajanta. B R Arbad, Int. J. Conserv. Sci. 5Arbad, B.R. Ancient indian painting recipes and mural art technique at ajanta. Int. J. Conserv. Sci. 2014, 5, 35-50.

Analytical Investigation of the Materials and Painting Techniques of Wall Paintings in the Eighth to Tenth-Century CE Jain Caves at Ellora, India. Stud. A Sharma, M R Singh, Multi, 10.1080/00393630.2020.17533532020Sharma, A.; Singh, M.R. A Multi-Analytical Investigation of the Materials and Painting Techniques of Wall Paintings in the Eighth to Tenth-Century CE Jain Caves at Ellora, India. Stud. Conserv. 2020, 65, P296-P300. [CrossRef]

. R S W Braithwaite, J W Anthony, R A Bideaux, K W Bladh, M C Nichols, ISBN 0962209732Handbook of Mineraiogy. 4680Mineral Data PublishingBraithwaite, R.S.W.; Anthony, J.W.; Bideaux, R.A.; Bladh, K.W.; Nichols, M.C. Handbook of Mineraiogy, Volume 4, Arsenates, Phosphates, Vanadates; Mineral Data Publishing: Tucson, AZ, USA, 2000; 680p, ISBN 0962209732.

Žižak, I. Clay pigment structure characterisation as a guide for provenance determination-A comparison between laboratory powder micro-XRD and synchrotron radiation XRD. S Švarcová, P Bezdička, D Hradil, J Hradilová, 10.1007/s00216-010-4382-4Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 399PubMedŠvarcová, S.; Bezdička, P.; Hradil, D.; Hradilová, J.; Žižak, I. Clay pigment structure characterisation as a guide for provenance determination-A comparison between laboratory powder micro-XRD and synchrotron radiation XRD. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2011, 399, 331-336. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Characterization, beneficiation and utilization of a kaolinite clay from Assam. N J Saikia, D J Bharali, P Sengupta, D Bordoloi, R L Goswamee, P C Saikia, P C Borthakur, 10.1016/S0169-1317(03)00151-0India. Appl. Clay Sci. 24Saikia, N.J.; Bharali, D.J.; Sengupta, P.; Bordoloi, D.; Goswamee, R.L.; Saikia, P.C.; Borthakur, P.C. Characterization, beneficiation and utilization of a kaolinite clay from Assam, India. Appl. Clay Sci. 2003, 24, 93-103. [CrossRef]

Mural paintings of Ajanta Caves, part II: Non destructive investigations and microanalysis on execution technique and state of conservation. D Artioli, F Capanna, A Giovagnoli, M Ioele, A Marcone, M Mariottini, E Ozino-Caligaris, L Rissotto, M Singh, Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on NDT of Art. the 9th International Conference on NDT of ArtJerusalem, IsraelArtioli, D.; Capanna, F.; Giovagnoli, A.; Ioele, M.; Marcone, A.; Mariottini, M.; Ozino-Caligaris, E.; Rissotto, L.; Singh, M. Mural paintings of Ajanta Caves, part II: Non destructive investigations and microanalysis on execution technique and state of conservation. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on NDT of Art, Jerusalem, Israel, 25-30 May 2008.

Identification of vivianite, an unusual blue pigment, in a sixteenth century painting and its implications. A J Cruz, E Eires, L Dias, T Desterro, C Rego, 10.1002/col.22181Color Res. Appl. 43Cruz, A.J.; Eires, E.; Dias, L.; Desterro, T.; Rego, C. Identification of vivianite, an unusual blue pigment, in a sixteenth century painting and its implications. Color Res. Appl. 2018, 43, 177-183. [CrossRef]

Revealing Blue on the Northern Northwest Coast. M Ancheta, 10.17953/aicrj.43.1.anchetaAm. Indian Cult. Res. J. 43Ancheta, M. Revealing Blue on the Northern Northwest Coast. Am. Indian Cult. Res. J. 2019, 43, 1-30. [CrossRef]

Recent progress in instrumental techniques for architectural heritage materials. C Zhao, Y Zhang, C.-C Wang, M Hou, A Li, 10.1186/s40494-019-0280-zHerit. Sci. 7Zhao, C.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, C.-C.; Hou, M.; Li, A. Recent progress in instrumental techniques for architectural heritage materials. Herit. Sci. 2019, 7, 1-50. [CrossRef]

Advantages and disadvantages of PIXE/PIGE, XRF and EDX spectrometries applied to archaeometric characterisation of glasses. N Carmona, I Ortega-Feliu, B Gomez-Tubio, M A Villegas, 10.1016/j.matchar.2009.12.006Mater. Charact. 61Carmona, N.; Ortega-Feliu, I.; Gomez-Tubio, B.; Villegas, M.A. Advantages and disadvantages of PIXE/PIGE, XRF and EDX spectrometries applied to archaeometric characterisation of glasses. Mater. Charact. 2010, 61, 257-267. [CrossRef]

Analysis of the surface of different marbles by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to evaluate decay by SO 2 attack. A Luque, M V M De Yuso, G Cultrone, E Sebastián, 10.1007/s12665-012-1786-9Environ. Earth Sci. 68Luque, A.; De Yuso, M.V.M.; Cultrone, G.; Sebastián, E. Analysis of the surface of different marbles by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to evaluate decay by SO 2 attack. Environ. Earth Sci. 2013, 68, 833-845. [CrossRef]

Earth pigments in painting: Characterisation and differentiation by means of FTIR spectroscopy and SEM-EDS microanalysis. C Genestar, C Pons, 10.1007/s00216-005-3085-8Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 382Genestar, C.; Pons, C. Earth pigments in painting: Characterisation and differentiation by means of FTIR spectroscopy and SEM-EDS microanalysis. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2005, 382, 269-274. [CrossRef]

Characterization of technical kaolin using XRF, SEM, XRD, FTIR and its potentials as industrial raw materials. R Dewi, H Agusnar, Z Alfian, In Proceedings of the Journal of Physics: Conference Series. 111642010IOP PublishingDewi, R.; Agusnar, H.; Alfian, Z. Characterization of technical kaolin using XRF, SEM, XRD, FTIR and its potentials as industrial raw materials. In Proceedings of the Journal of Physics: Conference Series; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2018; Volume 1116, p. 42010.

The Raman spectrum of kaolinite# 9 at 21 C. K H Michaelian, Can. J. Chem. 64Michaelian, K.H. The Raman spectrum of kaolinite# 9 at 21 C. Can. J. Chem. 1986, 64, 285-294.

On-and off-site Raman study of rock-shelter paintings at world-heritage site of Bhimbetka. T R Ravindran, A K Arora, M Singh, S B Ota, 10.1002/jrs.4148J. Raman Spectrosc. 44Ravindran, T.R.; Arora, A.K.; Singh, M.; Ota, S.B. On-and off-site Raman study of rock-shelter paintings at world-heritage site of Bhimbetka. J. Raman Spectrosc. 2013, 44, 108-113. [CrossRef]

Prehistoric Rock Paintings of Bhimbetka Central India. Y Mathpal, Mathpal, Y. Prehistoric Rock Paintings of Bhimbetka Central India;

. V S Wakankar, Brooks, Stone Age Paintings in IndiaWakankar, V.S. RRR Brooks-Stone Age Paintings in India;

. DB Taraporevala Sons Co. Priv. Ltd. DB Taraporevala Sons Co. Priv. Ltd.: Bombay, India, 1976.

Rock art of Bhimbetka region, central India. Man Environ. V N Misra, Y Mathpal, 3Misra, V.N.; Mathpal, Y. Rock art of Bhimbetka region, central India. Man Environ. 1979, 3, 27-33.

The Murals: Their Preservation. B Lal, A Ghosh, GoshNew Delhi, IndiaLal, B.; Ghosh, A. The Murals: Their Preservation; Gosh: New Delhi, India, 1969.

Some observations on the conservation of murals. H C Bhardwaj, Proceedings of the Conservation of Cultural Property in India. the Conservation of Cultural Property in IndiaNew Delhi, IndiaBhardwaj, H.C. Some observations on the conservation of murals. In Proceedings of the Conservation of Cultural Property in India, New Delhi, India, 23-25 February 1966; pp. 37-46.

Conservation of Wall Paintings in India-Achievements and Problems. O P Agarwal, INTACHNew Delhi, IndiaAgarwal, O.P. Conservation of Wall Paintings in India-Achievements and Problems; INTACH: New Delhi, India, 1994.

Scientific study of pigments and plaster of 12th century wall painting of Lakhang-Gongma Monastery at Nako (H.P). U S Lal, G Lal, M V Nair, Conserv. Cult. Prop. India. 38Lal, U.S.; Lal, G.; Nair, M.V. Scientific study of pigments and plaster of 12th century wall painting of Lakhang-Gongma Monastery at Nako (H.P). Conserv. Cult. Prop. India 2009, 38, 21-25.

Examination of the technique of painting at the Moghul Gateway, Bairat, Rajasthan, and its conservation problems. O P Agrawal, R Tiwari, A K Yadav, Conserv. Cult. Prop. India. 21Agrawal, O.P.; Tiwari, R.; Yadav, A.K. Examination of the technique of painting at the Moghul Gateway, Bairat, Rajasthan, and its conservation problems. Conserv. Cult. Prop. India 1988, 21, 73-79.

Conservation of Wall Paintings at the Golden Temple(Sri Harmandar Saheb Ji). N Jaspal, 10Amritsar, IndiaJaspal, N. Conservation of Wall Paintings at the Golden Temple(Sri Harmandar Saheb Ji), Amritsar, India. Available on- line: https://heritagepreservationatelier.com/2020/06/13/conservation-of-wall-paintings-at-the-golden-templesri-harmandar- saheb-ji-amritsar-india/ (accessed on 10 June 2021).

Conservation of wall paintings in Servent Chapel of St. Monica Church and Convent. A K Yadav, R P Savita, K Singh, Q L Faleiro, Goa; New Delhi, IndiaINTACH TrustYadav, A.K.; Savita, R.P.; Singh, K.; Faleiro, Q.L. Conservation of wall paintings in Servent Chapel of St. Monica Church and Convent, Goa; INTACH Trust: New Delhi, India, 1995.

Spectroscopic and chromatographic investigation of the wall painted surfaces of an 18th century Indian temple. A P Kanth, M R Singh, 10.1016/j.vibspec.2019.102947Vib. Spectrosc. 104Kanth, A.P.; Singh, M.R. Spectroscopic and chromatographic investigation of the wall painted surfaces of an 18th century Indian temple, New Delhi. Vib. Spectrosc. 2019, 104, 102947. [CrossRef]

Conservation of Wall paintings at Kusum Sarovar. O P Agarwal, U Agarwal, Govardhan. J. UP State Archaeol. Organ. 1Agarwal, O.P.; Agarwal, U. Conservation of Wall paintings at Kusum Sarovar, Govardhan. J. UP State Archaeol. Organ. 1990, 1, 173-178.

Examination and Conservation of Wall Paintings of Sheesh Mahal, Nagaur: A programme under National Project on Wall Paintings. O P Agrawal, NRLC. INTACH Conservation CenterLucknow, IndiaAgrawal, O.P. Examination and Conservation of Wall Paintings of Sheesh Mahal, Nagaur: A programme under National Project on Wall Paintings; NRLC. INTACH Conservation Center: Lucknow, India, 1989.

Conservation of Mural Paintings at Panchai Court, Imphal. G Lal, K Singh, A K Yadav, INTACHNew Delhi, IndiaLal, G.; Singh, K.; Yadav, A.K. Conservation of Mural Paintings at Panchai Court, Imphal; INTACH: New Delhi, India, 1995.

Examination and Conservation of Wall Paintings-a Manual. O P Agrawal, R Pathak, New Delhi, IndiaSundeep Prakashan. ISBN 8175740973Agrawal, O.P.; Pathak, R. Examination and Conservation of Wall Paintings-a Manual; Sundeep Prakashan: New Delhi, India, 2001; ISBN 8175740973.