# CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ITS IMPACT ON ORGANISATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN THE FOURTH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 246696627
 
tags: #Business, #Economics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/892d1d569e1b076432ca08e52a12f180767b0d51](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/892d1d569e1b076432ca08e52a12f180767b0d51)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ITS IMPACT ON ORGANISATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN THE FOURTH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW


Ranson Sifiso Gwala 
Corresponding author
Graduate School of Business & Leadership
University of KwaZulu-Natal
DurbanSouth Africa

University of KwaZulu-Natal
Durban

KwaZulu-Natal
Westville Campus 4041South Africa

Pfano Mashau 
Graduate School of Business & Leadership
University of KwaZulu-Natal
DurbanSouth Africa

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE AND ITS IMPACT ON ORGANISATIONAL PERFORMANCE IN THE FOURTH INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

Corporate Governance and Organizational Behavior Review
61202210.22495/cgobrv6i1p7Received: 18.10.2021 Accepted: 07.02.2022Corporate Governance and Organizational Behavior Review / Volume 6, Issue 1, 2022 98 Abstract How to cite this paper: Gwala, R. S., & Mashau, P. (2022). Corporate governance and its impact on organisational performance in the Fourth Industrial Revolution: A systematic literature review. Corporate Governance and Organizational Behavior Review, 6(1), 98-114. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/ 4.0/ ISSN Online: 2521-1889 JEL Classification: G34, M1, L25 This paper aims to systematically review the existing studies of corporate governance with organisational performance in the Fourth Industrial Revolution and put forward theories, research methods, topics, and variables that emerge from the review. The systematic literature review is based on 42 peer-reviewed journal articles on the topic written by reputable academics on the Science Direct Database focused on corporate governance, board characteristics, and ownership structure. This study's conceptual framework is based on agency theory, which is the most widely used to analyse corporate governance (Fama & Jensen, 1983; Jensen & Meckling, 1976). The majority of results show a positive correlation between corporate governance and organisational performance (Pucheta-Martínez & Gallego-Álvarez, 2020) with agency theory being the most utilised theory of choice (Bergh, Ketchen, Orlandi, Heugens, & Boyd, 2019; Panda & Leepsa, 2017). This paper undertakes a significant thorough systematic review of corporate governance with firm performance and the Fourth Industrial Revolution literature. It gives an 11-year review with a reference index from 2011 to 2021, useful for both academics and professionals. This study recommends more evidence-based systematic reviews for different aspects and within different regions. It is further recommended to expand geographical spread across all continents to cover corporate governance area and to improve studies related to the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its impact on corporate governance. Lastly, it is recommended that more studies that look at the impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on corporate governance and firm performance should be performed. Authors' individual contribution: Conceptualisation -R.S.G. and P.M.; Methodology -R.S.G.; Investigation -R.S.G.; Funding Acquisition -R.S.G.; Resources -R.S.G. and P.M.; Writing -Original Draft -R.S.G. and P.M.; Writing -Review & Editing -R.S.G. and P.M. Declaration of conflicting interests: The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 99Corporate GovernanceBusiness AdministrationManagement and AccountingFirm PerformanceCompany PerformanceFourth Industrial RevolutionOwnership Structure


## INTRODUCTION

Many researchers have built a vast body of knowledge in the literature on corporate governance and organisational performance ( Velte, 2017). The reviews have been growing with varying views. There has been sufficient consensus on internal variables that affect and influence corporate governance. A few studies continue to study and argue that external or exogenous variables also have some effect on corporate governance and organisational performance (Bhagat &  Corporate governance has received growing interest over the past few decades. There has also been a lot of work done on discovering the link between corporate governance and firm performance. The critical question of this paper is thus to look at how different researchers have gone about answering the very question by reviewing their work. Through the lens of agency theory and supporting theories as anchoring the theoretical framework, we examine factors inherent in the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance in an environment of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Firstly, we begin this discussion with a review of the current understanding of corporate governance in Section 2. Next, we introduce the agency theory and other theories of corporate governance supporting and supplementing the agency theory encapsulating the Fourth Industrial Revolution aspects using contingency theory. We then examine and discuss the research methodology followed in selecting journal articles from Science Direct Database for the review in Section 3. We then table and discuss the results of theories, research methodologies, the impact of corporate governance on firm performance, and the impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on firm performance in Section 4. Finally, we conclude by looking at the relevance and significance of the study, and the main findings/contributions and provide synthesis on what factors could inform future research in Section 5.


## LITERATURE REVIEW

The main theories used in corporate governance are mainly rooted in agency theory. The main theories that feature in the studies are:

1. Agency theory. 2. Resource theories: a) resource dependence theory; b) resource-based view theory. 3. Legitimacy theory. 4. Stewardship perspective. 5. Stakeholder theory. 6. Strategic management theories: a) contingency theory; b) survival-based theory. The theories are discussed in brief below and the analysis of how they have been used in the journal articles are surveyed. Agency theory stands alone in the use of superiority in corporate governance (Madhani, 2017;Wiley & Monllor-Tormos, 2018). Agency theory remains best in explaining the agency problem and how it could be resolved. The emergency of shareholder theory and stakeholder theory comes with alternative means to explain the relationship between the shareholder and agents who can on behalf of principal shareholders.


### Agency theory

The agency problem is how can an organization, through its owners and its stewards, minimize the posited tendency for managers to inappropriately leverage their advantage when managers' interests are not consonant with those of owners (Dalton, Hitt, Certo, & Dalton, 2007). The agency problem has been defined as managerial power and discretion that managers and executives yield (Liang & Renneboog, 2018;Tan & Liu, 2016;Wangrow, Schepker, & Barker, 2015). A formal contract, in theory, is a tool that could mitigate the agency problem, as formal contracts tend to align the interests of shareholders with those of managers (Barako, Hancock, & Izan, 2006;Healy & Palepu, 2001). The board represents a monitoring and control mechanism aimed at analysing and evaluating the work of top management and ensuring profit maximisation for shareholders (Donnelly & Mulcahy, 2008).


## Figure 1. Agency relationship model

Source: Adapted from Mitnick (1975), Ross (1973 


### Stewardship theory

The stewardship theory offers a complementary perception and states that the stakeholders are good stewards to firms' resources and can contribute to the improvement of their efficiency (Donaldson & Davis, 1991). A recent study by Gillan (2006) showed a positive relationship between CEO duality and the firm's financial performance. Similarly, Faleye (2007) found that CEO duality is positively correlated to organisational complexity, the CEO reputation, and the level of managerial ownership. These findings are similar to those of Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira (2005) and Jackling and Johl (2009) who argued that the shareholders' benefits are enhanced by the combination of chairman and CEO functions. The stewardship theory vintages that the CEO duality found in more consistent strategies' formulation and implementation; and as a result yields better firm performance ( 


### Resource theories

The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.


#### Resource-based view theory

Studies have attempted to integrate institutional theory and the resource-based view theory to explain organisational decision-making as independent motives for organisations (Tehseen et 


#### Resource dependence theory

The resource dependence theory posits that organisations are constrained and affected by their environment and that these organizations act to try to control their resource dependencies by creating different forms of inter-organisational arrangements (Pfeffer & Salancik, 2003). The central proposition of this theory is how an organisation can efficiently acquire and utilise external resources to gain a competitive advantage and maximise organisational performance. The role of managers, therefore, is to find a requisite combination of staff and transactions, to maximise the firm's performance (Tran, Yuen, Li, Balci, & Ma, 2020). The firm therefore must consider how it engages with its environment in its long-term operations (Li, Liao, & Albitar, 2020).

The boards must possess highly experienced directors for information exchange with the outsiders, provide advice for insiders and ensure proper access to the external resources that will guarantee organisational success (   It is therefore critical that directors become resourceful and well-vested in the industry, to create strong relations with different stakeholders and address their differing and competing interests. Implicit and explicit factors, such as political, legal, financial, tax, and regulatory factors, may ensure many benefits that enhance management's expertise and the quality of their decisions and decrease capital costs ( 


### Legitimacy theory

Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.


### Stakeholder theory

Stakeholder theory was put forward by Freeman (1984) as a proposal for the strategic management of organizations in the late twentieth century. Over time, this theory has gained in importance, with key works of Clarkson (1994Clarkson ( , 2016. Stakeholder theory begins with the assumption that values are necessarily and explicitly a part of doing business. It asks managers to articulate the shared sense of the value they create, and what brings its core 


### Strategic management theory

A strategic management theory may be said to be a supposition, proposition, or a system of ideas intended to explain the origin, evolution, principles, and applications of strategic management. Strategic management theories stem mainly from the system's perspective, contingency approach, and information technology approach to corporate management. However, we shall only concentrate on the discussion of contingency theory and survival-based theory. The agency theory and resource-based theory have been adequately discussed under theories of corporate governance. Among the common strategic management theories applicable in the industry today are:  contingency theory;  survival-based theory;  agency theory;  resource-based theory;  human resource-based theory;  profit-maximising and competition-based theory. 


### Contingency theory

The contingency theory has been used in strategy and organisational studies and adopted in strategic management (Kelly & Fairley, 2018;Otley, 2016). Contingency theory has been used by many scholars as a theory of choice as compared to 110 others (Sitkin, Sutcliffe, & Barrios-Choplin, 1992). Contingency theory has its roots in organisational theories. It helped revitalise the classical universality of management theory, which emphasised that "there is always one best way of doing things". The contingency theory is broadly applied in strategic management and it is considered to have the most influence on studies on strategy and the organisation (Barney, 2005). The contingency theory's main principle states that every organisation is unique and what works for one organisation cannot be applied in another. Also, no organisation can depend on one strategy based on the current situation that the organization is facing to achieve consistent firm performance. The strategic management approach helps managers to develop, implement and evaluate strategy, and guide them to make other strategic decisions (Lynch, 2000). The contingency theory states that the organisation seeks to be effective by adapting itself to the current situation that the organisation is in at the moment.

So, the early contingency theories held that the organisations that perform highly are projecting the fact that the company is suitably adapted to its environmental situation such as its size, its level of adaptation to the new technology, and changing its products to the changing needs of customers (Miller, 2003). Therefore, if the current situation of an organisation changes and the company does not immediately change to reflect these changes, then that company will perform poorly. We will apply this theory in the next section regarding the Fourth Industrial Revolution.  


### Survival-based theory

The survival-based theory is based on the concept that firms need to adapt to the agile environment to keep afloat. Technological changes and emerging innovations in business environments influence both the firms' short-term performance and long-term sustainability (Ghobakhloo & Fathi, 2019). The companies use differentiated business models to improve operations, understand the market, compete better for long-term profitability this is done through continuous research and development (Ghobakhloo & Fathi, 2019). The concept of survivalbased theory or some might call it "survival of the fittest theory" was originally developed by Herbert Spencer. The survival-based view in strategic management emphasised the assumptions that to survive, organisations have to deploy strategies that should be focused on running very efficient operations which can respond rapidly to the changing of the competitive environment (Khairuddin, 2005) since the one that survives is the one that is the fittest and ablest to adapt to the environment.

The application of this theory in the field of corporate turnaround is also quite straightforward. An ailing company usually faces lots of problems simultaneously, such as financial difficulties, failing products, losing key personnel, and many others. The Fourth Industrial Revolution poses challenges.


## RESEARCH METHODOLOGY


### Systematic literature review into corporate governance and its applicability

The systematic literature review method has been adopted in this study to discover the theories, methods, and topics used in corporate governance research published in different journals under the Science Direct family of journals. The research follows fundamental guidelines stated by Petticrew and Roberts (2008) for conducting a systematic review in the social sciences. Also, this research followed an amended five-step process (Ahmad, Jamshidi, & Pahl, 2012), as shown in Figure 7 below:  


### Defining research questions

The study intends to survey the corporate governance studies from the Science Direct Database. These studies are related to corporate governance and firm or company performance. The study will, therefore, survey and check corporate governance theories, and the research methodologies used. The study aims to review theories, research methods, topics, and variables that are mostly addressed in corporate governance literature.


### Systematic literature review

The systematic literature review methodology looks at the identification of keywords, the selection of the database, and selecting the search period, all of which shall be discussed hereunder.


#### The search strategy and identification of keywords

The search strategy was related to keywords as shown in Table 1 below. The three keywords, namely independent variable, firm performance, and corporate governance, as well as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, as independent variables. We selected papers with these keywords in at least one of the following fields, namely, title, abstract, and keywords. The following keywords were identified:  corporate governance;  organisational or firm performance;  ownership structure;  Fourth Industrial Revolution;  systematic literature review. 


#### Selection of the database and journals

The Science Direct Database is highly reputable and has many peer-reviewed journals; and for that particular reason, it became the best candidate to search for corporate governance and firm performance. The following Tables 2 and 3    The inconsistencies in the research findings could be attributed to the restrictive nature of the data. Despite these conflicting results, the literature generally attests that there is no doubt as to the importance of good corporate governance in enhancing firm performance. This fact is attested to by the particular attention being given to issues of corporate governance by governments, regional bodies, and private institutions. In the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2007, Blundell-Wignall, Atkinson, and Lee (2009) concluded, on the corporate lessons from the financial crises, that the crises were largely due to failures and weaknesses in corporate governance arrangements which could not serve their purpose to safeguard against excessive risktaking by the financial institutions. The studies neither have not concentrated on corporate governance and the Fourth Industrial Revolution per se nor have they looked at firm performance in the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The paper will seek to link these aspects to understand what effects the Fourth Industrial Revolution brings to corporate governance and firm performance.


### Research methodology used

The qualifying studies that met the criterion were 42 and of those 57% used quantitative research methodology, 14% of them utilised qualitative research methodology, whilst 29% used systematic literature review, and none used empirical research methodology. It was further noted that none of the studies used a mixed research methodology. Table 4 shows the analysis of the research methods used by the journal articles. This analysis shows that most of the studies used quantitative analysis closely followed systematic literature review.  The resource theories constitute 26% of the studies. These theories are mainly concerned with the use and allocation of resources to run the organisation effectively. The stakeholder theory was utilised by 24% of the journal articles surveyed. The stakeholder theory enjoys being an alternative theory that is used in conjunction with agency theory to explain the role of stakeholders in the organisation and how the interests of stakeholders can be addressed. Strategic management theories have always found a way into corporate governance and vice versa. This is because both fields share some of the theories, namely agency theory, and resource-based theory. The studies that used strategic management theories constitute 10% of the 42 surveyed journal articles. Legitimacy theory, stewardship theory, survival-based theory, and other theories constituted 12% of the journal articles reviewed. Whilst only 5% of articles did not use any theory.


### Theories used


### Topics discussed

Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.


## CONCLUSION

There is a need to ensure that corporate governance is not only taken as a compliance ticking of boxes but it must be to ensure that it creates value for the companies. The Steinhoff South Africa, 2018, fiasco where workers lost a lot of money invested in Public Investment Corporation (PIC) as a result of corporate governance failures. Eskom and South African Airways (SAA) are also close examples of corporate governance shortcomings in the recent past. This is especially critical in state-owned enterprises where the government invests money intending to create value and ensure proper service delivery or generate income for its support. The study of course is limited in terms of geography and the time-bound of 2011 to 2021 studies may show bias to European and Asian countries, and only one study was about an African country. Corporate governance is also mainly focused on private companies -very few studies are aimed at stateowned enterprises. Chinese studies have, however, tried to probe the state-owned enterprises which need to be further studied as government systems, especially in China, Europe, America, and Africa which show distinct differences in economic, social, and political stability (Ziltener & Künzler, 2013). The lack of stability in a country is widely associated with unpredictability and hence the inability for long-term planning. This affects input and output resources which in turn affects firm performance. The purpose of this study is the critical analysis of theories, research methods, and topics that include variables that have been discussed in corporate governance and its impact on organisational performance at the interphase of the Fourth Industrial Revolution also known as "Industry 4.0" on the Science Direct Database during the period from 2011 to 2021. However, not a single study involved corporate governance, firm performance, and the Fourth Industrial Revolution in one. By doing so, a gap arises in that the studies that have been widely studied in this database are in well-developed countries and less in Africa and Australia. These studies have also concentrated on the private sector and less than 5% have looked at corporate governance in the public sector. Notably, vast improvements in the study of corporate governance and organisational performance have taken place over the years with variable results. The results show a growing body of knowledge and studies in corporate governance. Agency theory is most used, whilst quantitative research methods are also highly utilised. A growing number of studies conclusively, positively, and significantly relate firm performance with corporate governance ( Technological revolutions mark profound transformations in socio-economic systems. They are associated with the development and diffusion of general-purpose technologies that display degrees of pervasiveness, dynamism, and complementarity (Martinelli, Mina, & Moggi, 2021). Corporate governance has been studied for over three decades now, whilst the Fourth Industrial Revolution is hardly a decade and a half. This study concentrated on the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance with the 4IR as peripheral interphase. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, however, remains a factor whose adoption initially seems to be forced upon businesses and governments alike. Its adoption has remained uneven between firms and governments alike. Its essence and understanding have not been fully understood or realised because of the high costs of adoption, acquisition, and maintenance. It also has a very negative side that must be ethically and legally managed within and amongst nations, raising another challenge of international collaboration. COVID-19 has, to a certain extent, accelerated some aspects of the 4IR adoption and allowed firms to continue to operate and increase their firm performance through online stores. Many authors agree that the Fourth Industrial Revolution has the potential to significantly improve firm performance. There is no conclusive agreement on the improvement of corporate governance as industry and governments adopt the Fourth Industrial Revolution. It must further be noted that corporate governance started in earnest at the dawn of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Clear concerns are raised on the legislative framework, monitoring and enforcement to protect consumers against misuse of technology, use of robotics, unethical medical use technology as trade takes place between countries without proper regulations as the internet becomes one global village. Martinelli et al. (2021) highlight four problems that remain a stumbling block for the Fourth Industrial Revolution and these are adoptions, industrial dynamics, standards, and government policy (Morgan, 2019). No article combined corporate governance, firm performance, and the Fourth Industrial Revolution in these studies reviewed. Schwab (2017) and Xing and Marwala (2017) have conceptualised the fundamentals and taken a lead in explaining several aspects of the Fourth Industrial Revolution with Xing and Marwala (2017) having done excellent technical work on the Fourth Industrial Revolution aspects.

Further studies should look at corporate governance in the public sector and the effect of the compulsory use of corporate governance codes. Further studies should also look at the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its impact on corporate governance, independently. Notably, the Fourth Industrial Revolution has not reached its peak, more studies should be undertaken as it develops and takes shape. This should lay a foundation for more studies and how they influence corporate governance and firm performance. The uneven continental developments reveal uneven development, adoption, and experiences in all these fields and hence studies that have been undertaken.

The issue of diversity as it relates to women and young people has been understudied (Cicchiello, Fellegara, Kazemikhasragh, & Monferrà, 2021; Dennissen, Benschop, & van den Brink, 2020). Gender diversity is slowly being adopted and taking off positively in Africa and Asia. Women hold less than 10% of board seats (at 9.3%) with 4.2% as board chairpersons (Deloitte, 2019). The study of regional or continental studies on corporate governance and organisational performance is recommended. These studies could reveal gaps in theories, research methods, and topics. Further studies could also look at the impact of COVID-19 on corporate governance and firm performance (Almoneef & Samontaray, 2019), as well as the impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its adoption on corporate governance and firm performance.


Bolton, 2019; Chadam, 2019; Chen, Lin, & Yi, 2008; Kammoun, Loukil, & Loukil, 2020; Shao, 2019). Whilst many corporate governance theories led by agency theory explain the core corporate governance challenge, strategic management theories explain the interventionist manner to deal with change and disruption (FitzRoy, Hulbert, & Ghobadian, 2012; Hoskisson, Wan, Yiu, & Hitt, 1999; Oke & Fernandes, 2020; Oosthuizen, 2017; Veselovsky, Izmailova, Lobacheva, Pilipenko, & Rybina, 2019). Change and disruption like the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR or Industry 4.0) and COVID-19 are where contingency theory and survival-based theory fit in to explain and address such challenges (Adejare, Olaore, Udofia, & Adenigba, 2020; Effiong, Inameti, Pepple, & Ernest, 2018; Josefy, Harrison, Sirmon, & Carnes, 2017). The Fourth Industrial Revolution and COVID-19 have had a significant impact on corporate governance and company performance (Ebekozien & Aigbavboa, 2021; Gelter & Puaschunder, 2020; Khatib & Nour, 2021). During COVID-19 the adoption of the Fourth Industrial Revolution moved at a faster pace (Akpan, Udoh, & Adebisi, 2020; Allam, 2020; Meotto, 2021; Morgan & Forbes, 2020; Shahzad, Hassan, Abdullah, Hussain, & Fareed, 2020; Tan, 2021; Van Zyl, Venter, & Bruwer, 2021) allowing working from home and advancing company performance.

## Figure 2 .
2The representation of the resource dependence theory Source: Adapted from Pfeffer and Salancik (2003).Ntim, Lindop, and Thomas (2013) suggest that a company with risk-related disclosures can gain different competitive advantages because of their potential resources, and prior literature proves that resource-based directors possess this quality.

## Figure 3 .
3Resource dependence theorySource: Adapted fromLuthans and Stewart (1977).

## Figure 4 .
4Theories of strategic managementSource: Adapted fromDavid (2005) andHashim (2005).

## Figure 6 .
6The Fourth Industrial Revolution (From 1IR to 4IR) Source:Otanez (2017).

## Figure 7 .
7The steps to conducting the systematic review Source: Adapted fromPetticrew and Roberts (2008) andAhmad and Omar (2016).


theory is by far the most used theory of corporate governance with 35 studies of the 42. This is 83% of the studies, showing that by far agency theory as posited by Adegboye et al. (2019), Ahmed and Rugami (2019), Manukaji (2018), Tang, Yang, and Yang (2020). The stewardship theory was utilised by 5% of the journal articles surveyed.


; Banerjee, Nordqvist, & Hellerstedt, 2020; Dalton & Dalton, 2011; Garg, Li, & Shaw, 2018; Herndon, 2020; Patnaik & Suar, 2020; Pucheta-Martínez & Gallego-Álvarez, 2020) to organisational performance measurements. On the organisational performance, three measures of performance are widely used in corporate governance studies; these are: return on assets (ROA), return on equity (ROE), and Tobin's Quotient (TQ) (Alsoboa, 2016; Buallay, 2019, 2021; Buallay, Cummings, & Hamdan, 2019; Pal & De, 2017). The contingency theory describes the behaviour of firms that respond to change with an aim of adoption and change. Whilst those that do not change are doomed to resist and encounter (Ooi, Lee, Tan, Hew, & Hew, 2018; Vaidya, Ambad, & Bhosle, 2018) challenges or failure. Using the contingency theory, we are able to introduce the Fourth Industrial Revolution and the potential advantages it entails. The Fourth Industrial Revolution pauses such disruption in many firms and governments (Didier, Huneeus, Larrain, & Schmukler, 2021; Girasa, 2020; Santos et al., 2017; Shava & Hofisi, 2017). Every industrial revolution has brought about drastic change and a quantum leap in human development (Attaran, 2017; Rauch, Linder, & Dallasega, 2020;


Adegboye, Ojeka, Adegboye, Ebuzor, & Samson, 2019; Farag, Mallin, & Ow-Yong, 2018; Herndon, 2020; Iqbal, Nawaz, & Ehsan, 2019; Lagasio, 2018; Manukaji, 2018; Nawaz, 2019; Pillai & Al-Malkawi, 2018; Pucheta-Martínez & Gallego-Álvarez, 2020; Saini & Singhania, 2018;


).


Ahmadi, Nakaa, & Bouri, 2018; Ozbek & Boyd, 2020; Torres & Augusto, 2021).


The resources can be differentiated into tangible resources, and intangible resources(Porter, 2011). The tangible resources are those that are identifiable and physical whilst intangible resources encapsulate patents, knowledge, skills, trademarks, etc. (Galati, Tulone, Tinervia, & Crescimanno, 2019). Mahdi, Nassar, and Almsafir (2019), Ying, Hassan, and Ahmad (2019) posit that intellectual capital helps managers in acquiring valuable resources, which in turn enhances sustainable competitive performance.al., 2019), and 

the different roles of external pressures and internal 
resources as well as their relationships (Dubey, 
Gunasekaran, Childe, Blome, & Papadopoulos, 2019). 
Porter's Five Forces can be described as the outside 
looking inside the organisation theory as compared 
to the resourced-based view theory (Hunt & 
Madhavaram, 
2019). 



Cheng, Ioannou, & Serafeim, 2014; Dhaliwal, Li, Tsang, & Yang, 2014).


The resource dependency theoryLabour (Employees) 

Budget (Funds) 

Lines of communication (Transport) 

Materials (Suppliers) 

Facilities (Warehouses) 

Knowledge and equipment 
(Recruiters, Technical Sector) 

Organisation 
(Logistics) 
Outputs 

Environment 

Situational 

ENVIRONMENT 

MANAGEMENT 
RESOURCE 
Organisational 

Performance criteria 
stakeholders together (Freeman, Wicks, & Parmar, 
2004). Stakeholder theory research, which many 
scholars have framed as a replacement theory, 
has in actuality been building instead of a well-
developed theoretical foundation that now is ready 
to complement the agency theory behaviour (Kuek 
et al., 2021). 




The Fourth Industrial Revolution, like the ones that have preceded it, has enormous benefits for humankind(Morrar, Arman, & Mousa, 2017; Radanović & Likić, 2018; Sendler, 2017). Corporate governance has evolved over the past three decades as a consequence of company failures and the growing conflict between the agent and the principal. Corporate governance has developed alongside the Fourth Industrial Revolution. There have been more studies on corporate governance than there have been on the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The Fourth Industrial Revolution has been conceptual for some time, giving rise to speculation and theory development. The world is on the verge of a Fourth Industrial Revolution, which is ready to transmute the way businesses exploit the markets, innovate and adopt technologies (Mahmood & Mubarik, 2020; Manesh, Pellegrini, Marzi, & Dabic, 2020; Monostori, 2014). the hands of unethical governments and individuals can pose a major threat to peace and stability across the globe. Mahmood and Mubarik (2020) posit that the creation of specific policies aimed to develop intellectual capital (IC) of a firm, which, in turn, can enable a firm to maintain a balance between innovation as a result of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and market exploitation activities in a study of 217 SMME in Pakistan. Similarly, in Africa, the adoption of the Fourth Fourth Industrial Revolution in many parts of the world because as much as it brings about technological advancement, it also poses dangers of unemployment to the unskilled labour force (Brunello & Wruuck, 2019; Lahtinen, Sirniö, & Martikainen, 2020; Nonyana & Njuho, 2018). Whilst reskilling is an option, the cost of such has not been negotiated or agreed upon. Governments have been slow in moving and understanding the benefits of the Fourth Industrial Revolution so that they could regulate how firms could benefit when they adopt the Fourth Industrial Revolution and where there is resistance (Ghadge, Kara, Moradlou, & Goswami, 2020; Ivanov & Webster, 2017; Nagy, Oláh, Erdei, Máté, & Popp, 2018), governments could bring in some incentives. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, unfortunately, is inescapable. The poor nations stand to lose a lot if their governments adopt the wait and see attitude instead of expanding the internet spectrum, reducing data costs, and regulating how firms could take a lead in adopting the Fourth Industrial Revolution and hence assist the populace. What is undeniable is that the Fourth Industrial Revolution is an enabler for change and improved performance (Dallasega, Rauch, & Linder, 2018; Horváth & Szabó, 2019; Lee et al., 2018; Schwab, 2017; Stock, Obenaus, Kunz, Kohl, & Protection, 2018; Syam & Sharma, 2018).Contingency theory 

Agency theory 

Profit maximisation & 
Competition-based theory 

Human resource based theory 

Resource-based theory 

Survival theory 

STRATEGIC 
MANAGEMENT 
THEORIES 
Figure 5. A contingency approach to managing planned change 

Source: Adapted from Luthans and Stewart (1977). 

2.7.1. Contingency theory and the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution 

Technology 
can enhance service delivery by, for example, using 
drone technology to deliver medical supplies to 
underdeveloped rural areas, enhancing citizen 
communication, allowing doctors to conduct 
surgeries remotely, or even utilising big data 
analysis to enhance policymaking (Jarbandhan, 
2021; Nalubega & Uwizeyimana, 2019). This saves 
time and money and improves firm performance. 
However, the converse also rings true in that 
technology in Industrial 
Revolution 
is 
significantly 
slow 

(Kalantari, 2017; Kamble, Gunasekaran, & Sharma, 
2018; Radanović & Likić, 2018; Schwab, 2017). 
The emergence of COVID-19 raises the need to 
transform and shape the 4IR paradigm (Abdulrahim 
& Mabrouk, 2020; Ebekozien & Aigbavboa, 2021; 
Sokhulu, 2020) for businesses is ever-increasing as 
the firms seek to improve productivity and firm 
performance (Schwab, 2017). Education and skills 
development are central in responding to the 4IR, as 
skills underpin national performance in terms of 
innovation, 
economic 
competitiveness, 
and 
the capacity to utilise and benefit from new 
technologies (Gastrow, 2020). 
There are clear challenges to the adoption of 
the Develop the intervention strategy 
Evaluate results and update and asses 
Start again till satisfied 

Contingency audit 

Implement the change strategy 


## Table 1 .
1The search variables utilised to search for journal articlesNo. 
Dependent variable 
No. 
Independent variable 
1. 
Performance 
1. 
Corporate governance 
2. 
Profitability 
2. 
Board performance 
3. 
Firm performance 
3. 
Ownership structure 
4. 
Corporate governance 
4. 
Fourth Industrial Revolution 



## Table 2 .
2Studies from Science Direct Database per journal per year utilised in the corporate governance studiesJournal name from Science Direct Database 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 

1 
Emerging Markets Review 
1 
1 
2 
4 
2 
European Management Journal 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
3 
International Business Review 
1 
1 
2 
4 
International Review of Economics and Finance 
1 
1 
1 
3 
5 
Journal of Business Research 
1 
1 
2 
4 
6 
Journal of Cleaner Production 
1 
1 
2 
7 
Journal of Corporate Finance 
2 
2 
8 
Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 
1 
1 
2 
9 
Procedia-Economics and Finance 
1 
4 
5 
10 
Procedia -Social and Behavioural Sciences 
1 
3 
4 
11 
Research in International Business and Finance 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
8 
12 
The British Accounting Review 
1 
1 
2 
Total number of journals 
42 



## Table 3 .
3Analysis of research methods and theories utilised in the corporate governance studiesResearch methods and 
theories 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 
Percent 

Total number of articles 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
7 
3 
4 
4 
42 
Research methods 
Quantitative 
1 
3 
1 
3 
4 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
24 
57% 
Qualitative 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
6 
14% 
Review 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
12 
29% 
Non-empirical 
Total 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
7 
3 
4 
4 
42 
Theories 
Agency theory 
1 
3 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
3 
3 
4 
35 
83% 
Resource theories 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
11 
26% 
Contingency theory 
0 
0% 
Institutional theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 
Stewardship perspective 
2 
2 
5% 
Stakeholder theory 
1 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
10 
24% 
Shareholder theory 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
7 
17% 
Strategic management theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
10% 
Other theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
12% 
No. of papers without theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

4.1. Evolution of journal papers on corporate 
governance and firm performance 

Previous studies (Ahmadi et al., 2018; Al-ahdal, 
Alsamhi, Tabash, & Farhan, 2020; Bhatia & Gulati, 
2021; Brenes, Madrigal, & Requena, 2011; Pillai & 
Al-Malkawi, 2018) established a positive relationship 
between good corporate governance practices and 
firm performance. However, other studies (Bathala & 
Rao, 1995; Hutchinson, 2002) have established 
a negative relationship. Nevertheless, some other 
researchers (Park & Shin, 2003; Singh & Davidson, 
2003) could not establish any relationship. 


## Table 4 .
4Research methods utilised in the studiesResearch methods 
Total 
Percent 
Quantitative 
24 
57% 
Qualitative 
6 
14% 
Review 
12 
29% 
Mixed research methodology 
0 
0% 
Empirical 
0 
0% 
Total 
42 
100% 



## Table 5 .## INTRODUCTION

Many researchers have built a vast body of knowledge in the literature on corporate governance and organisational performance ( Velte, 2017). The reviews have been growing with varying views. There has been sufficient consensus on internal variables that affect and influence corporate governance. A few studies continue to study and argue that external or exogenous variables also have some effect on corporate governance and organisational performance (Bhagat &  Corporate governance has received growing interest over the past few decades. There has also been a lot of work done on discovering the link between corporate governance and firm performance. The critical question of this paper is thus to look at how different researchers have gone about answering the very question by reviewing their work. Through the lens of agency theory and supporting theories as anchoring the theoretical framework, we examine factors inherent in the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance in an environment of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.

Firstly, we begin this discussion with a review of the current understanding of corporate governance in Section 2. Next, we introduce the agency theory and other theories of corporate governance supporting and supplementing the agency theory encapsulating the Fourth Industrial Revolution aspects using contingency theory. We then examine and discuss the research methodology followed in selecting journal articles from Science Direct Database for the review in Section 3. We then table and discuss the results of theories, research methodologies, the impact of corporate governance on firm performance, and the impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on firm performance in Section 4. Finally, we conclude by looking at the relevance and significance of the study, and the main findings/contributions and provide synthesis on what factors could inform future research in Section 5.


## LITERATURE REVIEW

The main theories used in corporate governance are mainly rooted in agency theory. The main theories that feature in the studies are:

1. Agency theory. 2. Resource theories: a) resource dependence theory; b) resource-based view theory. 3. Legitimacy theory. 4. Stewardship perspective. 5. Stakeholder theory. 6. Strategic management theories: a) contingency theory; b) survival-based theory. The theories are discussed in brief below and the analysis of how they have been used in the journal articles are surveyed. Agency theory stands alone in the use of superiority in corporate governance (Madhani, 2017;Wiley & Monllor-Tormos, 2018). Agency theory remains best in explaining the agency problem and how it could be resolved. The emergency of shareholder theory and stakeholder theory comes with alternative means to explain the relationship between the shareholder and agents who can on behalf of principal shareholders.


### Agency theory

The agency problem is how can an organization, through its owners and its stewards, minimize the posited tendency for managers to inappropriately leverage their advantage when managers' interests are not consonant with those of owners (Dalton, Hitt, Certo, & Dalton, 2007). The agency problem has been defined as managerial power and discretion that managers and executives yield (Liang & Renneboog, 2018;Tan & Liu, 2016;Wangrow, Schepker, & Barker, 2015). A formal contract, in theory, is a tool that could mitigate the agency problem, as formal contracts tend to align the interests of shareholders with those of managers (Barako, Hancock, & Izan, 2006;Healy & Palepu, 2001). The board represents a monitoring and control mechanism aimed at analysing and evaluating the work of top management and ensuring profit maximisation for shareholders (Donnelly & Mulcahy, 2008).


## Figure 1. Agency relationship model

Source: Adapted from Mitnick (1975), Ross (1973 


### Stewardship theory

The stewardship theory offers a complementary perception and states that the stakeholders are good stewards to firms' resources and can contribute to the improvement of their efficiency (Donaldson & Davis, 1991). A recent study by Gillan (2006) showed a positive relationship between CEO duality and the firm's financial performance. Similarly, Faleye (2007) found that CEO duality is positively correlated to organisational complexity, the CEO reputation, and the level of managerial ownership. These findings are similar to those of Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira (2005) and Jackling and Johl (2009) who argued that the shareholders' benefits are enhanced by the combination of chairman and CEO functions. The stewardship theory vintages that the CEO duality found in more consistent strategies' formulation and implementation; and as a result yields better firm performance ( 


### Resource theories

The resource theories are namely the resource-based view theory and resource dependence theory. The resource dependence theory is based on the notion that board members whose role is vested in advising and counselling the company owners (Zahra & Pearce, 1989), provide experience and expertise, facilitate better access to resources outside the company, and influence strategic decisions (Hillman & Dalziel, 2003). Resource-based view theory posit that firms stand to benefit and sustain competitive advantages by constructing and employing valuable resources and capabilities which are outside the firm's environment (Collins, 2021;Zawawi et al., 2016). The two theories are discussed below.


#### Resource-based view theory

Studies have attempted to integrate institutional theory and the resource-based view theory to explain organisational decision-making as independent motives for organisations (Tehseen et 


#### Resource dependence theory

The resource dependence theory posits that organisations are constrained and affected by their environment and that these organizations act to try to control their resource dependencies by creating different forms of inter-organisational arrangements (Pfeffer & Salancik, 2003). The central proposition of this theory is how an organisation can efficiently acquire and utilise external resources to gain a competitive advantage and maximise organisational performance. The role of managers, therefore, is to find a requisite combination of staff and transactions, to maximise the firm's performance (Tran, Yuen, Li, Balci, & Ma, 2020). The firm therefore must consider how it engages with its environment in its long-term operations (Li, Liao, & Albitar, 2020).

The boards must possess highly experienced directors for information exchange with the outsiders, provide advice for insiders and ensure proper access to the external resources that will guarantee organisational success (   It is therefore critical that directors become resourceful and well-vested in the industry, to create strong relations with different stakeholders and address their differing and competing interests. Implicit and explicit factors, such as political, legal, financial, tax, and regulatory factors, may ensure many benefits that enhance management's expertise and the quality of their decisions and decrease capital costs ( 


### Legitimacy theory

Suchman (1995) defines legitimacy as "a generalized perception or assumption that the actions of an entity are desirable, proper, or appropriate within some socially constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions". Legitimacy theory proposes the concept of a "social contract" existing between organisations and society at large, which further helps in the environmental and social disclosures (Choi, Lee, & Psaros, 2013). Firms convince stakeholders that their activities are in line with stakeholders' expectations concerning carbon emissions to legitimise themselves and to keep the social contract (Kılıç & Kuzey, 2019; Yunus, Evangeline, & Abhayawansa, 2016). By doing so, the company asserts itself in the community as a responsible and legitimate company that is doing well for society.


### Stakeholder theory

Stakeholder theory was put forward by Freeman (1984) as a proposal for the strategic management of organizations in the late twentieth century. Over time, this theory has gained in importance, with key works of Clarkson (1994Clarkson ( , 2016. Stakeholder theory begins with the assumption that values are necessarily and explicitly a part of doing business. It asks managers to articulate the shared sense of the value they create, and what brings its core 


### Strategic management theory

A strategic management theory may be said to be a supposition, proposition, or a system of ideas intended to explain the origin, evolution, principles, and applications of strategic management. Strategic management theories stem mainly from the system's perspective, contingency approach, and information technology approach to corporate management. However, we shall only concentrate on the discussion of contingency theory and survival-based theory. The agency theory and resource-based theory have been adequately discussed under theories of corporate governance. Among the common strategic management theories applicable in the industry today are:  contingency theory;  survival-based theory;  agency theory;  resource-based theory;  human resource-based theory;  profit-maximising and competition-based theory. 


### Contingency theory

The contingency theory has been used in strategy and organisational studies and adopted in strategic management (Kelly & Fairley, 2018;Otley, 2016). Contingency theory has been used by many scholars as a theory of choice as compared to 110 others (Sitkin, Sutcliffe, & Barrios-Choplin, 1992). Contingency theory has its roots in organisational theories. It helped revitalise the classical universality of management theory, which emphasised that "there is always one best way of doing things". The contingency theory is broadly applied in strategic management and it is considered to have the most influence on studies on strategy and the organisation (Barney, 2005). The contingency theory's main principle states that every organisation is unique and what works for one organisation cannot be applied in another. Also, no organisation can depend on one strategy based on the current situation that the organization is facing to achieve consistent firm performance. The strategic management approach helps managers to develop, implement and evaluate strategy, and guide them to make other strategic decisions (Lynch, 2000). The contingency theory states that the organisation seeks to be effective by adapting itself to the current situation that the organisation is in at the moment.

So, the early contingency theories held that the organisations that perform highly are projecting the fact that the company is suitably adapted to its environmental situation such as its size, its level of adaptation to the new technology, and changing its products to the changing needs of customers (Miller, 2003). Therefore, if the current situation of an organisation changes and the company does not immediately change to reflect these changes, then that company will perform poorly. We will apply this theory in the next section regarding the Fourth Industrial Revolution.  


### Survival-based theory

The survival-based theory is based on the concept that firms need to adapt to the agile environment to keep afloat. Technological changes and emerging innovations in business environments influence both the firms' short-term performance and long-term sustainability (Ghobakhloo & Fathi, 2019). The companies use differentiated business models to improve operations, understand the market, compete better for long-term profitability this is done through continuous research and development (Ghobakhloo & Fathi, 2019). The concept of survivalbased theory or some might call it "survival of the fittest theory" was originally developed by Herbert Spencer. The survival-based view in strategic management emphasised the assumptions that to survive, organisations have to deploy strategies that should be focused on running very efficient operations which can respond rapidly to the changing of the competitive environment (Khairuddin, 2005) since the one that survives is the one that is the fittest and ablest to adapt to the environment.

The application of this theory in the field of corporate turnaround is also quite straightforward. An ailing company usually faces lots of problems simultaneously, such as financial difficulties, failing products, losing key personnel, and many others. The Fourth Industrial Revolution poses challenges.


## RESEARCH METHODOLOGY


### Systematic literature review into corporate governance and its applicability

The systematic literature review method has been adopted in this study to discover the theories, methods, and topics used in corporate governance research published in different journals under the Science Direct family of journals. The research follows fundamental guidelines stated by Petticrew and Roberts (2008) for conducting a systematic review in the social sciences. Also, this research followed an amended five-step process (Ahmad, Jamshidi, & Pahl, 2012), as shown in Figure 7 below:  


### Defining research questions

The study intends to survey the corporate governance studies from the Science Direct Database. These studies are related to corporate governance and firm or company performance. The study will, therefore, survey and check corporate governance theories, and the research methodologies used. The study aims to review theories, research methods, topics, and variables that are mostly addressed in corporate governance literature.


### Systematic literature review

The systematic literature review methodology looks at the identification of keywords, the selection of the database, and selecting the search period, all of which shall be discussed hereunder.


#### The search strategy and identification of keywords

The search strategy was related to keywords as shown in Table 1 below. The three keywords, namely independent variable, firm performance, and corporate governance, as well as the Fourth Industrial Revolution, as independent variables. We selected papers with these keywords in at least one of the following fields, namely, title, abstract, and keywords. The following keywords were identified:  corporate governance;  organisational or firm performance;  ownership structure;  Fourth Industrial Revolution;  systematic literature review. 


#### Selection of the database and journals

The Science Direct Database is highly reputable and has many peer-reviewed journals; and for that particular reason, it became the best candidate to search for corporate governance and firm performance. The following Tables 2 and 3    The inconsistencies in the research findings could be attributed to the restrictive nature of the data. Despite these conflicting results, the literature generally attests that there is no doubt as to the importance of good corporate governance in enhancing firm performance. This fact is attested to by the particular attention being given to issues of corporate governance by governments, regional bodies, and private institutions. In the aftermath of the financial crisis in 2007, Blundell-Wignall, Atkinson, and Lee (2009) concluded, on the corporate lessons from the financial crises, that the crises were largely due to failures and weaknesses in corporate governance arrangements which could not serve their purpose to safeguard against excessive risktaking by the financial institutions. The studies neither have not concentrated on corporate governance and the Fourth Industrial Revolution per se nor have they looked at firm performance in the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The paper will seek to link these aspects to understand what effects the Fourth Industrial Revolution brings to corporate governance and firm performance.


### Research methodology used

The qualifying studies that met the criterion were 42 and of those 57% used quantitative research methodology, 14% of them utilised qualitative research methodology, whilst 29% used systematic literature review, and none used empirical research methodology. It was further noted that none of the studies used a mixed research methodology. Table 4 shows the analysis of the research methods used by the journal articles. This analysis shows that most of the studies used quantitative analysis closely followed systematic literature review.  The resource theories constitute 26% of the studies. These theories are mainly concerned with the use and allocation of resources to run the organisation effectively. The stakeholder theory was utilised by 24% of the journal articles surveyed. The stakeholder theory enjoys being an alternative theory that is used in conjunction with agency theory to explain the role of stakeholders in the organisation and how the interests of stakeholders can be addressed. Strategic management theories have always found a way into corporate governance and vice versa. This is because both fields share some of the theories, namely agency theory, and resource-based theory. The studies that used strategic management theories constitute 10% of the 42 surveyed journal articles. Legitimacy theory, stewardship theory, survival-based theory, and other theories constituted 12% of the journal articles reviewed. Whilst only 5% of articles did not use any theory.


### Theories used


### Topics discussed

Several topics are discussed in corporate governance and organisational performance. These range from internal corporate governance, which includes board activities, number of board members, gender diversity, racial diversity, CEO duality, board meetings, board committees, board compensation, board qualifications, board experience, board independence, and board leadership (Abdullah, 2004 Sengupta, Ruj, & Bit, 2020), however, beneficiaries are those that enjoy early adoption. They lead change and others follow. The Fourth Industrial Revolution promises fundamental changes in the economy and business with enormous profits to be made. Companies that adopt these gradual changes will become learning organisations of the future which will change the manner we see the world very shortly. It will change all aspects of life and how business is conducted. Firm performance and corporate governance must therefore evolve to accept these fundamental changes in the structure of the economy.


## CONCLUSION

There is a need to ensure that corporate governance is not only taken as a compliance ticking of boxes but it must be to ensure that it creates value for the companies. The Steinhoff South Africa, 2018, fiasco where workers lost a lot of money invested in Public Investment Corporation (PIC) as a result of corporate governance failures. Eskom and South African Airways (SAA) are also close examples of corporate governance shortcomings in the recent past. This is especially critical in state-owned enterprises where the government invests money intending to create value and ensure proper service delivery or generate income for its support. The study of course is limited in terms of geography and the time-bound of 2011 to 2021 studies may show bias to European and Asian countries, and only one study was about an African country. Corporate governance is also mainly focused on private companies -very few studies are aimed at stateowned enterprises. Chinese studies have, however, tried to probe the state-owned enterprises which need to be further studied as government systems, especially in China, Europe, America, and Africa which show distinct differences in economic, social, and political stability (Ziltener & Künzler, 2013). The lack of stability in a country is widely associated with unpredictability and hence the inability for long-term planning. This affects input and output resources which in turn affects firm performance. The purpose of this study is the critical analysis of theories, research methods, and topics that include variables that have been discussed in corporate governance and its impact on organisational performance at the interphase of the Fourth Industrial Revolution also known as "Industry 4.0" on the Science Direct Database during the period from 2011 to 2021. However, not a single study involved corporate governance, firm performance, and the Fourth Industrial Revolution in one. By doing so, a gap arises in that the studies that have been widely studied in this database are in well-developed countries and less in Africa and Australia. These studies have also concentrated on the private sector and less than 5% have looked at corporate governance in the public sector. Notably, vast improvements in the study of corporate governance and organisational performance have taken place over the years with variable results. The results show a growing body of knowledge and studies in corporate governance. Agency theory is most used, whilst quantitative research methods are also highly utilised. A growing number of studies conclusively, positively, and significantly relate firm performance with corporate governance ( Technological revolutions mark profound transformations in socio-economic systems. They are associated with the development and diffusion of general-purpose technologies that display degrees of pervasiveness, dynamism, and complementarity (Martinelli, Mina, & Moggi, 2021). Corporate governance has been studied for over three decades now, whilst the Fourth Industrial Revolution is hardly a decade and a half. This study concentrated on the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance with the 4IR as peripheral interphase. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, however, remains a factor whose adoption initially seems to be forced upon businesses and governments alike. Its adoption has remained uneven between firms and governments alike. Its essence and understanding have not been fully understood or realised because of the high costs of adoption, acquisition, and maintenance. It also has a very negative side that must be ethically and legally managed within and amongst nations, raising another challenge of international collaboration. COVID-19 has, to a certain extent, accelerated some aspects of the 4IR adoption and allowed firms to continue to operate and increase their firm performance through online stores. Many authors agree that the Fourth Industrial Revolution has the potential to significantly improve firm performance. There is no conclusive agreement on the improvement of corporate governance as industry and governments adopt the Fourth Industrial Revolution. It must further be noted that corporate governance started in earnest at the dawn of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. Clear concerns are raised on the legislative framework, monitoring and enforcement to protect consumers against misuse of technology, use of robotics, unethical medical use technology as trade takes place between countries without proper regulations as the internet becomes one global village. Martinelli et al. (2021) highlight four problems that remain a stumbling block for the Fourth Industrial Revolution and these are adoptions, industrial dynamics, standards, and government policy (Morgan, 2019). No article combined corporate governance, firm performance, and the Fourth Industrial Revolution in these studies reviewed. Schwab (2017) and Xing and Marwala (2017) have conceptualised the fundamentals and taken a lead in explaining several aspects of the Fourth Industrial Revolution with Xing and Marwala (2017) having done excellent technical work on the Fourth Industrial Revolution aspects.

Further studies should look at corporate governance in the public sector and the effect of the compulsory use of corporate governance codes. Further studies should also look at the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its impact on corporate governance, independently. Notably, the Fourth Industrial Revolution has not reached its peak, more studies should be undertaken as it develops and takes shape. This should lay a foundation for more studies and how they influence corporate governance and firm performance. The uneven continental developments reveal uneven development, adoption, and experiences in all these fields and hence studies that have been undertaken.

The issue of diversity as it relates to women and young people has been understudied (Cicchiello, Fellegara, Kazemikhasragh, & Monferrà, 2021; Dennissen, Benschop, & van den Brink, 2020). Gender diversity is slowly being adopted and taking off positively in Africa and Asia. Women hold less than 10% of board seats (at 9.3%) with 4.2% as board chairpersons (Deloitte, 2019). The study of regional or continental studies on corporate governance and organisational performance is recommended. These studies could reveal gaps in theories, research methods, and topics. Further studies could also look at the impact of COVID-19 on corporate governance and firm performance (Almoneef & Samontaray, 2019), as well as the impact of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and its adoption on corporate governance and firm performance.


Bolton, 2019; Chadam, 2019; Chen, Lin, & Yi, 2008; Kammoun, Loukil, & Loukil, 2020; Shao, 2019). Whilst many corporate governance theories led by agency theory explain the core corporate governance challenge, strategic management theories explain the interventionist manner to deal with change and disruption (FitzRoy, Hulbert, & Ghobadian, 2012; Hoskisson, Wan, Yiu, & Hitt, 1999; Oke & Fernandes, 2020; Oosthuizen, 2017; Veselovsky, Izmailova, Lobacheva, Pilipenko, & Rybina, 2019). Change and disruption like the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR or Industry 4.0) and COVID-19 are where contingency theory and survival-based theory fit in to explain and address such challenges (Adejare, Olaore, Udofia, & Adenigba, 2020; Effiong, Inameti, Pepple, & Ernest, 2018; Josefy, Harrison, Sirmon, & Carnes, 2017). The Fourth Industrial Revolution and COVID-19 have had a significant impact on corporate governance and company performance (Ebekozien & Aigbavboa, 2021; Gelter & Puaschunder, 2020; Khatib & Nour, 2021). During COVID-19 the adoption of the Fourth Industrial Revolution moved at a faster pace (Akpan, Udoh, & Adebisi, 2020; Allam, 2020; Meotto, 2021; Morgan & Forbes, 2020; Shahzad, Hassan, Abdullah, Hussain, & Fareed, 2020; Tan, 2021; Van Zyl, Venter, & Bruwer, 2021) allowing working from home and advancing company performance.

## Figure 2 .
2The representation of the resource dependence theory Source: Adapted from Pfeffer and Salancik (2003).Ntim, Lindop, and Thomas (2013) suggest that a company with risk-related disclosures can gain different competitive advantages because of their potential resources, and prior literature proves that resource-based directors possess this quality.

## Figure 3 .
3Resource dependence theorySource: Adapted fromLuthans and Stewart (1977).

## Figure 4 .
4Theories of strategic managementSource: Adapted fromDavid (2005) andHashim (2005).

## Figure 6 .
6The Fourth Industrial Revolution (From 1IR to 4IR) Source:Otanez (2017).

## Figure 7 .
7The steps to conducting the systematic review Source: Adapted fromPetticrew and Roberts (2008) andAhmad and Omar (2016).


theory is by far the most used theory of corporate governance with 35 studies of the 42. This is 83% of the studies, showing that by far agency theory as posited by Adegboye et al. (2019), Ahmed and Rugami (2019), Manukaji (2018), Tang, Yang, and Yang (2020). The stewardship theory was utilised by 5% of the journal articles surveyed.


; Banerjee, Nordqvist, & Hellerstedt, 2020; Dalton & Dalton, 2011; Garg, Li, & Shaw, 2018; Herndon, 2020; Patnaik & Suar, 2020; Pucheta-Martínez & Gallego-Álvarez, 2020) to organisational performance measurements. On the organisational performance, three measures of performance are widely used in corporate governance studies; these are: return on assets (ROA), return on equity (ROE), and Tobin's Quotient (TQ) (Alsoboa, 2016; Buallay, 2019, 2021; Buallay, Cummings, & Hamdan, 2019; Pal & De, 2017). The contingency theory describes the behaviour of firms that respond to change with an aim of adoption and change. Whilst those that do not change are doomed to resist and encounter (Ooi, Lee, Tan, Hew, & Hew, 2018; Vaidya, Ambad, & Bhosle, 2018) challenges or failure. Using the contingency theory, we are able to introduce the Fourth Industrial Revolution and the potential advantages it entails. The Fourth Industrial Revolution pauses such disruption in many firms and governments (Didier, Huneeus, Larrain, & Schmukler, 2021; Girasa, 2020; Santos et al., 2017; Shava & Hofisi, 2017). Every industrial revolution has brought about drastic change and a quantum leap in human development (Attaran, 2017; Rauch, Linder, & Dallasega, 2020;


Adegboye, Ojeka, Adegboye, Ebuzor, & Samson, 2019; Farag, Mallin, & Ow-Yong, 2018; Herndon, 2020; Iqbal, Nawaz, & Ehsan, 2019; Lagasio, 2018; Manukaji, 2018; Nawaz, 2019; Pillai & Al-Malkawi, 2018; Pucheta-Martínez & Gallego-Álvarez, 2020; Saini & Singhania, 2018;


).


Ahmadi, Nakaa, & Bouri, 2018; Ozbek & Boyd, 2020; Torres & Augusto, 2021).


The resources can be differentiated into tangible resources, and intangible resources(Porter, 2011). The tangible resources are those that are identifiable and physical whilst intangible resources encapsulate patents, knowledge, skills, trademarks, etc. (Galati, Tulone, Tinervia, & Crescimanno, 2019). Mahdi, Nassar, and Almsafir (2019), Ying, Hassan, and Ahmad (2019) posit that intellectual capital helps managers in acquiring valuable resources, which in turn enhances sustainable competitive performance.al., 2019), and 

the different roles of external pressures and internal 
resources as well as their relationships (Dubey, 
Gunasekaran, Childe, Blome, & Papadopoulos, 2019). 
Porter's Five Forces can be described as the outside 
looking inside the organisation theory as compared 
to the resourced-based view theory (Hunt & 
Madhavaram, 
2019). 



Cheng, Ioannou, & Serafeim, 2014; Dhaliwal, Li, Tsang, & Yang, 2014).


The resource dependency theoryLabour (Employees) 

Budget (Funds) 

Lines of communication (Transport) 

Materials (Suppliers) 

Facilities (Warehouses) 

Knowledge and equipment 
(Recruiters, Technical Sector) 

Organisation 
(Logistics) 
Outputs 

Environment 

Situational 

ENVIRONMENT 

MANAGEMENT 
RESOURCE 
Organisational 

Performance criteria 
stakeholders together (Freeman, Wicks, & Parmar, 
2004). Stakeholder theory research, which many 
scholars have framed as a replacement theory, 
has in actuality been building instead of a well-
developed theoretical foundation that now is ready 
to complement the agency theory behaviour (Kuek 
et al., 2021). 




The Fourth Industrial Revolution, like the ones that have preceded it, has enormous benefits for humankind(Morrar, Arman, & Mousa, 2017; Radanović & Likić, 2018; Sendler, 2017). Corporate governance has evolved over the past three decades as a consequence of company failures and the growing conflict between the agent and the principal. Corporate governance has developed alongside the Fourth Industrial Revolution. There have been more studies on corporate governance than there have been on the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The Fourth Industrial Revolution has been conceptual for some time, giving rise to speculation and theory development. The world is on the verge of a Fourth Industrial Revolution, which is ready to transmute the way businesses exploit the markets, innovate and adopt technologies (Mahmood & Mubarik, 2020; Manesh, Pellegrini, Marzi, & Dabic, 2020; Monostori, 2014). the hands of unethical governments and individuals can pose a major threat to peace and stability across the globe. Mahmood and Mubarik (2020) posit that the creation of specific policies aimed to develop intellectual capital (IC) of a firm, which, in turn, can enable a firm to maintain a balance between innovation as a result of the Fourth Industrial Revolution and market exploitation activities in a study of 217 SMME in Pakistan. Similarly, in Africa, the adoption of the Fourth Fourth Industrial Revolution in many parts of the world because as much as it brings about technological advancement, it also poses dangers of unemployment to the unskilled labour force (Brunello & Wruuck, 2019; Lahtinen, Sirniö, & Martikainen, 2020; Nonyana & Njuho, 2018). Whilst reskilling is an option, the cost of such has not been negotiated or agreed upon. Governments have been slow in moving and understanding the benefits of the Fourth Industrial Revolution so that they could regulate how firms could benefit when they adopt the Fourth Industrial Revolution and where there is resistance (Ghadge, Kara, Moradlou, & Goswami, 2020; Ivanov & Webster, 2017; Nagy, Oláh, Erdei, Máté, & Popp, 2018), governments could bring in some incentives. The Fourth Industrial Revolution, unfortunately, is inescapable. The poor nations stand to lose a lot if their governments adopt the wait and see attitude instead of expanding the internet spectrum, reducing data costs, and regulating how firms could take a lead in adopting the Fourth Industrial Revolution and hence assist the populace. What is undeniable is that the Fourth Industrial Revolution is an enabler for change and improved performance (Dallasega, Rauch, & Linder, 2018; Horváth & Szabó, 2019; Lee et al., 2018; Schwab, 2017; Stock, Obenaus, Kunz, Kohl, & Protection, 2018; Syam & Sharma, 2018).Contingency theory 

Agency theory 

Profit maximisation & 
Competition-based theory 

Human resource based theory 

Resource-based theory 

Survival theory 

STRATEGIC 
MANAGEMENT 
THEORIES 
Figure 5. A contingency approach to managing planned change 

Source: Adapted from Luthans and Stewart (1977). 

2.7.1. Contingency theory and the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution 

Technology 
can enhance service delivery by, for example, using 
drone technology to deliver medical supplies to 
underdeveloped rural areas, enhancing citizen 
communication, allowing doctors to conduct 
surgeries remotely, or even utilising big data 
analysis to enhance policymaking (Jarbandhan, 
2021; Nalubega & Uwizeyimana, 2019). This saves 
time and money and improves firm performance. 
However, the converse also rings true in that 
technology in Industrial 
Revolution 
is 
significantly 
slow 

(Kalantari, 2017; Kamble, Gunasekaran, & Sharma, 
2018; Radanović & Likić, 2018; Schwab, 2017). 
The emergence of COVID-19 raises the need to 
transform and shape the 4IR paradigm (Abdulrahim 
& Mabrouk, 2020; Ebekozien & Aigbavboa, 2021; 
Sokhulu, 2020) for businesses is ever-increasing as 
the firms seek to improve productivity and firm 
performance (Schwab, 2017). Education and skills 
development are central in responding to the 4IR, as 
skills underpin national performance in terms of 
innovation, 
economic 
competitiveness, 
and 
the capacity to utilise and benefit from new 
technologies (Gastrow, 2020). 
There are clear challenges to the adoption of 
the Develop the intervention strategy 
Evaluate results and update and asses 
Start again till satisfied 

Contingency audit 

Implement the change strategy 


## Table 1 .
1The search variables utilised to search for journal articlesNo. 
Dependent variable 
No. 
Independent variable 
1. 
Performance 
1. 
Corporate governance 
2. 
Profitability 
2. 
Board performance 
3. 
Firm performance 
3. 
Ownership structure 
4. 
Corporate governance 
4. 
Fourth Industrial Revolution 



## Table 2 .
2Studies from Science Direct Database per journal per year utilised in the corporate governance studiesJournal name from Science Direct Database 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 

1 
Emerging Markets Review 
1 
1 
2 
4 
2 
European Management Journal 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
3 
International Business Review 
1 
1 
2 
4 
International Review of Economics and Finance 
1 
1 
1 
3 
5 
Journal of Business Research 
1 
1 
2 
4 
6 
Journal of Cleaner Production 
1 
1 
2 
7 
Journal of Corporate Finance 
2 
2 
8 
Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 
1 
1 
2 
9 
Procedia-Economics and Finance 
1 
4 
5 
10 
Procedia -Social and Behavioural Sciences 
1 
3 
4 
11 
Research in International Business and Finance 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
8 
12 
The British Accounting Review 
1 
1 
2 
Total number of journals 
42 



## Table 3 .
3Analysis of research methods and theories utilised in the corporate governance studiesResearch methods and 
theories 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 
Percent 

Total number of articles 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
7 
3 
4 
4 
42 
Research methods 
Quantitative 
1 
3 
1 
3 
4 
3 
3 
2 
2 
2 
24 
57% 
Qualitative 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
6 
14% 
Review 
1 
2 
1 
1 
3 
1 
1 
2 
12 
29% 
Non-empirical 
Total 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
7 
3 
4 
4 
42 
Theories 
Agency theory 
1 
3 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
3 
3 
4 
35 
83% 
Resource theories 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
11 
26% 
Contingency theory 
0 
0% 
Institutional theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 
Stewardship perspective 
2 
2 
5% 
Stakeholder theory 
1 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
10 
24% 
Shareholder theory 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
7 
17% 
Strategic management theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
10% 
Other theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
12% 
No. of papers without theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

4.1. Evolution of journal papers on corporate 
governance and firm performance 

Previous studies (Ahmadi et al., 2018; Al-ahdal, 
Alsamhi, Tabash, & Farhan, 2020; Bhatia & Gulati, 
2021; Brenes, Madrigal, & Requena, 2011; Pillai & 
Al-Malkawi, 2018) established a positive relationship 
between good corporate governance practices and 
firm performance. However, other studies (Bathala & 
Rao, 1995; Hutchinson, 2002) have established 
a negative relationship. Nevertheless, some other 
researchers (Park & Shin, 2003; Singh & Davidson, 
2003) could not establish any relationship. 


## Table 4 .
4Research methods utilised in the studiesResearch methods 
Total 
Percent 
Quantitative 
24 
57% 
Qualitative 
6 
14% 
Review 
12 
29% 
Mixed research methodology 
0 
0% 
Empirical 
0 
0% 
Total 
42 
100% 



## Table 5 .
5Analysis of research methods and theories utilised in the corporate governance studiesResearch methods and 
theories 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
2018 
2019 
2020 
2021 
Total 
Percent 

Total number of articles 
2 
4 
3 
3 
3 
4 
5 
7 
3 
4 
4 
42 
Theories 
Agency theory 
1 
3 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
5 
3 
3 
4 
35 
83% 
Resource theories 
3 
1 
2 
1 
1 
2 
1 
11 
26% 
Contingency theory 
0 
0% 
Institutional theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 
Stewardship perspective 
2 
2 
5% 
Stakeholder theory 
1 
2 
1 
3 
2 
1 
10 
24% 
Shareholder theory 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
7 
17% 
Strategic management theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
4 
10% 
Other theories 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
5 
12% 
No. of papers without theory 
1 
1 
2 
5% 




Almoneef & Samontaray, 2019; Alodat, Salleh, Hashim, & Sulong, 2021; Bhagat & Bolton, 2019; Bhatt & Bhatt, 2017; Danoshana & Ravivathani, 2019).

Board composition, CEO duality and performance among Malaysian listed companies. S N Abdullah, Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society. 44Abdullah, S. N. (2004). Board composition, CEO duality and performance among Malaysian listed companies. Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society, 4(4), 47-61.

. 10.1108/14720700410558871https://doi.org/10.1108/14720700410558871

COVID-19 and the digital transformation of Saudi higher education. H Abdulrahim, F Mabrouk, Asian Journal of Distance Education. 151Abdulrahim, H., & Mabrouk, F. (2020). COVID-19 and the digital transformation of Saudi higher education. Asian Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 291-306. Retrieved from https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1289975.pdf

Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate performance. R B Adams, H Almeida, D Ferreira, 10.1093/rfs/hhi030The Review of Financial Studies. 184Adams, R. B., Almeida, H., & Ferreira, D. (2005). Powerful CEOs and their impact on corporate performance. The Review of Financial Studies, 18(4), 1403-1432. https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhi030

Firm performance and condensed corporate governance mechanism: Evidence of Nigerian financial institutions. A Adegboye, S Ojeka, K Adegboye, E Ebuzor, D Samson, 10.3846/btp.2019.38Business: Theory Practice. 20Adegboye, A., Ojeka, S., Adegboye, K., Ebuzor, E., & Samson, D. (2019). Firm performance and condensed corporate governance mechanism: Evidence of Nigerian financial institutions. Business: Theory Practice, 20, 403-416. https://doi.org/10.3846/btp.2019.38

COVID-19 pandemic and business survival as mediation on the performance of firms in the FMCG-sector. B O Adejare, G O Olaore, E E Udofia, O A Adenigba, Athens Journal of Business & Economics. 7Adejare, B. O., Olaore, G. O., Udofia, E. E., & Adenigba, O. A. (2020). COVID-19 pandemic and business survival as mediation on the performance of firms in the FMCG-sector. Athens Journal of Business & Economics, 7, 1-22. Retrieved from https://www.athensjournals.gr/business/2021-4138-AJBE-Adejare-07.pdf

Protocol for systematic literature review. A Ahmad, P Jamshidi, C Pahl, Dublin City UniversityTechnical reportAhmad, A., Jamshidi, P., & Pahl, C. (2012). Protocol for systematic literature review (Technical report, Dublin City University).

Basic corporate governance models: A systematic review. S Ahmad, R Omar, 10.1108/IJLMA-10-2014-0057International Journal of Law Management Accounting Research. 581Ahmad, S., & Omar, R. (2016). Basic corporate governance models: A systematic review. International Journal of Law Management Accounting Research, 58(1), 73-107. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJLMA-10-2014-0057

Chief Executive Officer attributes, board structures, gender diversity and firm performance among French CAC 40 listed firms. A Ahmadi, N Nakaa, A Bouri, 10.1016/j.ribaf.2017.07.083International Business and Finance. 44Ahmadi, A., Nakaa, N., & Bouri, A. (2018). Chief Executive Officer attributes, board structures, gender diversity and firm performance among French CAC 40 listed firms. Research in International Business and Finance, 44, 218-226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2017.07.083

Corporate governance and performance of savings and credit cooperative societies in Kilifi County. A F Ahmed, M Rugami, Kenya. International Academic Journal of Economics Finance. 33Ahmed, A. F., & Rugami, M. (2019). Corporate governance and performance of savings and credit cooperative societies in Kilifi County, Kenya. International Academic Journal of Economics Finance, 3(3), 61-79. Retrieved from http://www.iajournals.org/articles/iajef_v3_i3_61_79.pdf

Small business awareness and adoption of state-of-the-art technologies in emerging and developing markets, and lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic. I J Akpan, E A P Udoh, B Adebisi, 10.1080/08276331.2020.1820185Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship. Akpan, I. J., Udoh, E. A. P., & Adebisi, B. (2020). Small business awareness and adoption of state-of-the-art technologies in emerging and developing markets, and lessons from the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship. https://doi.org/10.1080/08276331.2020.1820185

The impact of corporate governance on financial performance of Indian and GCC listed firms: An empirical investigation. W M Al-Ahdal, M H Alsamhi, M I Tabash, N H S Farhan, 10.1016/j.ribaf.2019.101083Research in International Business and Finance. 51Al-ahdal, W. M., Alsamhi, M. H., Tabash, M. I., & Farhan, N. H. S. (2020). The impact of corporate governance on financial performance of Indian and GCC listed firms: An empirical investigation. Research in International Business and Finance, 51, 101083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2019.101083

The forceful reevaluation of cash-based transactions by COVID-19 and its opportunities to transition to cashless systems in digital urban networks. Z Allam, 10.1016/B978-0-12-824313-8.00008-5Z. AllamElsevierSurveying the COVID-19 pandemic its implicationsAllam, Z. (2020). The forceful reevaluation of cash-based transactions by COVID-19 and its opportunities to transition to cashless systems in digital urban networks. In Z. Allam (Ed.), Surveying the COVID-19 pandemic its implications (Chapter 8, pp. 107-117). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-824313-8.00008-5

Corporate governance and firm performance in the Saudi banking industry. Banks Bank Systems. A Almoneef, D P Samontaray, 10.21511/bbs.14(1).2019.1314Almoneef, A., & Samontaray, D. P. (2019). Corporate governance and firm performance in the Saudi banking industry. Banks Bank Systems, 14(1), 147-158. https://doi.org/10.21511/bbs.14(1).2019.13

Corporate governance and firm performance: Empirical evidence from Jordan. A Y Alodat, Z Salleh, H A Hashim, F Sulong, 10.1108/JFRA-12-2020-0361Journal of Financial Reporting and Accounting. Alodat, A. Y., Salleh, Z., Hashim, H. A., & Sulong, F. (2021). Corporate governance and firm performance: Empirical evidence from Jordan. Journal of Financial Reporting and Accounting. https://doi.org/10.1108/JFRA- 12-2020-0361

Exploring the constructed corporate governance index's effect on the firm performance and firm value: An empirical study on service and industrial companies listed in Amman Stock Exchange. S S Alsoboa, 10.19044/esj.2016.v12n31p330European Scientific Journal. 1231Alsoboa, S. S. (2016). Exploring the constructed corporate governance index's effect on the firm performance and firm value: An empirical study on service and industrial companies listed in Amman Stock Exchange. European Scientific Journal, 12(31), 330-356. https://doi.org/10.19044/esj.2016.v12n31p330

The rise of 3-D printing: The advantages of additive manufacturing over traditional manufacturing. M Attaran, 10.1016/j.bushor.2017.05.011Business Horizons. 605Attaran, M. (2017). The rise of 3-D printing: The advantages of additive manufacturing over traditional manufacturing. Business Horizons, 60(5), 677-688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bushor.2017.05.011

The role of the board chair -A literature review and suggestions for future research. A Banerjee, M Nordqvist, K Hellerstedt, 10.1111/corg.12350Corporate Governance: An International Review. 286Banerjee, A., Nordqvist, M., & Hellerstedt, K. (2020). The role of the board chair -A literature review and suggestions for future research. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 28(6), 372-405. https://doi.org/10.1111/corg.12350

Factors influencing voluntary corporate disclosure by Kenyan companies. D G Barako, P Hancock, H Izan, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2006.00491.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 142Barako, D. G., Hancock, P., & Izan, H. (2006). Factors influencing voluntary corporate disclosure by Kenyan companies. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 14(2), 107-125. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 8683.2006.00491.x

Should strategic management research engage public policy debates?. J B Barney, 10.5465/amj.2005.19573092Academy of Management Journal. 486Barney, J. B. (2005). Should strategic management research engage public policy debates? Academy of Management Journal, 48(6), 945-948. https://doi.org/10.5465/amj.2005.19573092

The determinants of board composition: An agency theory perspective. C T Bathala, R P Rao, Managerial Decision Economics. 161Bathala, C. T., & Rao, R. P. (1995). The determinants of board composition: An agency theory perspective. Managerial Decision Economics, 16(1), 59-69. Retrieved from https://www.jstor.org/stable/2487897

Information asymmetry in management research: Past accomplishments and future opportunities. D D Bergh, D J Ketchen, Jr, I Orlandi, P P Heugens, B K Boyd, 10.1177/0149206318798026Journal of Management. 451Bergh, D. D., Ketchen, D. J., Jr., Orlandi, I., Heugens, P. P., & Boyd, B. K. (2019). Information asymmetry in management research: Past accomplishments and future opportunities. Journal of Management, 45(1), 122-158. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206318798026

Corporate governance and firm performance: The sequel. S Bhagat, B Bolton, 10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2019.04.006Journal of Corporate Finance. 58Bhagat, S., & Bolton, B. (2019). Corporate governance and firm performance: The sequel. Journal of Corporate Finance, 58, 142-168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2019.04.006

Board governance and bank performance: A meta-analysis. M Bhatia, R Gulati, 10.1016/j.ribaf.2021.101425Research in International Business and Finance. 58101425Bhatia, M., & Gulati, R. (2021). Board governance and bank performance: A meta-analysis. Research in International Business and Finance, 58, 101425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2021.101425

Corporate governance and firm performance in Malaysia. P R Bhatt, R R Bhatt, 10.1108/CG-03-2016-0054Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society. 175Bhatt, P. R., & Bhatt, R. R. (2017). Corporate governance and firm performance in Malaysia. Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society, 17(5), 896-912. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-03- 2016-0054

The current financial crisis: Causes and policy issues. A Blundell-Wignall, P Atkinson, S Lee, 10.1787/fmt-v2008-art10-enOECD Journal: Financial Market Trends. 2Blundell-Wignall, A., Atkinson, P., & Lee, S. (2009). The current financial crisis: Causes and policy issues. OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends, 2008/2. https://doi.org/10.1787/fmt-v2008-art10-en

Corporate governance and family business performance. E R Brenes, K Madrigal, B Requena, 10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.11.013Journal of Business Research. 643Brenes, E. R., Madrigal, K., & Requena, B. (2011). Corporate governance and family business performance. Journal of Business Research, 64(3), 280-285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.11.013

Skill shortages and skill mismatch in Europe: A review of the literature. G Brunello, P Wruuck, 10.2139/ssrn.3390340IZA Discussion Paper No. 12346Brunello, G., & Wruuck, P. (2019). Skill shortages and skill mismatch in Europe: A review of the literature (IZA Discussion Paper No. 12346). https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3390340

Corporate governance, Sharia'ah governance and performance: A cross-country comparison in MENA region. A Buallay, 10.1108/IMEFM-07-2017-0172International Journal of Islamic Middle Eastern Finance Management Decision. 122Buallay, A. (2019). Corporate governance, Sharia'ah governance and performance: A cross-country comparison in MENA region. International Journal of Islamic Middle Eastern Finance Management Decision, 12(2), 216-235. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMEFM-07-2017-0172

Corporate governance, Sharia'ah governance and performance: A cross-country comparison in the MENA region. A Buallay, 10.52747/aqujie.1.1.26Al Qasimia University Journal of Islamic Economics. 11Buallay, A. (2021). Corporate governance, Sharia'ah governance and performance: A cross-country comparison in the MENA region. Al Qasimia University Journal of Islamic Economics, 1(1), 189-215. https://doi.org/10.52747/aqujie.1.1.26

Intellectual capital efficiency and bank's performance: A comparative study after the global financial crisis. A Buallay, R Cummings, A Hamdan, 10.1108/PAR-04-2019-0039Pacific Accounting Review. 314Buallay, A., Cummings, R., & Hamdan, A. (2019). Intellectual capital efficiency and bank's performance: A comparative study after the global financial crisis. Pacific Accounting Review, 31(4), 672-694. https://doi.org/10.1108/PAR-04-2019-0039

Does the structure of the board of directors improve M&A performance?. A A Chadam, 10.17951/ijsr.2018.7.0.15-31International Journal of Synergy Research in International Business and Finance. 7Chadam, A. A. (2019). Does the structure of the board of directors improve M&A performance? International Journal of Synergy Research in International Business and Finance, 7, 15-31. https://doi.org/10.17951/ijsr.2018.7.0.15-31

CEO duality and firm performance: An endogenous issue. C.-W Chen, J B Lin, B Yi, 10.22495/cocv6i1p6Corporate Ownership Control. 61Chen, C.-W., Lin, J. B., & Yi, B. (2008). CEO duality and firm performance: An endogenous issue. Corporate Ownership Control, 6(1), 58-65. https://doi.org/10.22495/cocv6i1p6

Corporate social responsibility and access to finance. B Cheng, I Ioannou, G Serafeim, 10.1002/smj.2131Strategic Management Journal. 351Cheng, B., Ioannou, I., & Serafeim, G. (2014). Corporate social responsibility and access to finance. Strategic Management Journal, 35(1), 1-23. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2131

An analysis of Australian company carbon emission disclosures. B B Choi, D Lee, J Psaros, 10.1108/01140581311318968Pacific Accounting Review. 251Choi, B. B., Lee, D., & Psaros, J. (2013). An analysis of Australian company carbon emission disclosures. Pacific Accounting Review, 25(1), 58-79. https://doi.org/10.1108/01140581311318968

Gender diversity on corporate boards: How Asian and African women contribute on sustainability reporting activity. A F Cicchiello, A M Fellegara, A Kazemikhasragh, S Monferrà, 10.1108/GM-05-2020-0147Gender in Management. 367Cicchiello, A. F., Fellegara, A. M., Kazemikhasragh, A., & Monferrà, S. (2021). Gender diversity on corporate boards: How Asian and African women contribute on sustainability reporting activity. Gender in Management, 36(7), 801-820. https://doi.org/10.1108/GM-05-2020-0147

A risk based model of stakeholder theory. M Clarkson, Proceedings of the Second Toronto Conference on Stakeholder Theory. M. B. E. Clarksonthe Second Toronto Conference on Stakeholder TheoryToronto, CanadaCentre for Corporate Social Performance & Ethics, University of TorontoClarkson, M. (1994). A risk based model of stakeholder theory. In M. B. E. Clarkson (Ed.), Proceedings of the Second Toronto Conference on Stakeholder Theory. Toronto, Canada: Centre for Corporate Social Performance & Ethics, University of Toronto.

A stakeholder framework for analysing and evaluating corporate social performance. M Clarkson, 10.2307/258888The Academy of Management Review. 201Clarkson, M. (2016). A stakeholder framework for analysing and evaluating corporate social performance. The Academy of Management Review, 20(1), 92-117. https://doi.org/10.2307/258888

Expanding the resource based view model of strategic human resource management. C J Collins, 10.1080/09585192â•„.2019.1711442The International Journal of Human Resource Management. 322Collins, C. J. (2021). Expanding the resource based view model of strategic human resource management. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 32(2), 331-358. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192 .2019.1711442

Industry 4.0 as an enabler of proximity for construction supply chains: A systematic literature review. P Dallasega, E Rauch, C Linder, 10.1016/j.compind.2018.03.039Computers in Industry. 99Dallasega, P., Rauch, E., & Linder, C. (2018). Industry 4.0 as an enabler of proximity for construction supply chains: A systematic literature review. Computers in Industry, 99, 205-225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.03.039

Integration of micro and macro studies in governance research: CEO duality, board composition, and financial performance. D R Dalton, C M Dalton, 10.1177/0149206310373399Journal of Management. 372Dalton, D. R., & Dalton, C. M. (2011). Integration of micro and macro studies in governance research: CEO duality, board composition, and financial performance. Journal of Management, 37(2), 404-411. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310373399

The fundamental agency problem and its mitigation. D R Dalton, M A Hitt, S T Certo, C M Dalton, 10.1080/078559806Academy of Management Annals. 11Dalton, D. R., Hitt, M. A., Certo, S. T., & Dalton, C. M. (2007). The fundamental agency problem and its mitigation. Academy of Management Annals, 1(1), 1-64. https://doi.org/10.1080/078559806

The impact of the corporate governance on firm performance: A study on financial institutions in Sri Lanka. S Danoshana, T Ravivathani, 10.5958/2319-1422.2019.00004.3SAARJ Journal on Banking Insurance Research. 81Danoshana, S., & Ravivathani, T. (2019). The impact of the corporate governance on firm performance: A study on financial institutions in Sri Lanka. SAARJ Journal on Banking Insurance Research, 8(1), 62-67. https://doi.org/10.5958/2319-1422.2019.00004.3

Strategic management: Concepts and cases. F R David, Pearson Education InternationalHoboken, NJ10th ed.David, F. R. (2005). Strategic management: Concepts and cases (10th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Prentice Hall, Pearson Education International.

The effect of board characteristics on firm environmental performance. C De Villiers, V Naiker, C J Van Staden, 10.1177/0149206311411506Journal of Management. 376de Villiers, C., Naiker, V., & van Staden, C. J. (2011). The effect of board characteristics on firm environmental performance. Journal of Management, 37(6), 1636-1663. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206311411506

Deloitte, Women in the boardroom: A global perspective. 6th ed.Deloitte. (2019). Women in the boardroom: A global perspective (6th ed.). Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte .com/global/en/pages/risk/cyber-strategic-risk/articles/women-in-the-boardroom-global-perspective.html

Rethinking diversity management: An intersectional analysis of diversity networks. M Dennissen, Y Benschop, Van Den, M Brink, 10.1177/0170840618800103Organization Studies. 412Dennissen, M., Benschop, Y., & van den Brink, M. (2020). Rethinking diversity management: An intersectional analysis of diversity networks. Organization Studies, 41(2), 219-240. https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840618800103

Corporate social responsibility disclosure and the cost of equity capital: The roles of stakeholder orientation and financial transparency. D Dhaliwal, O Z Li, A Tsang, Y G Yang, 10.1016/j.jaccpubpol.2014.04.006Journal of Accounting Public Policy. 334Dhaliwal, D., Li, O. Z., Tsang, A., & Yang, Y. G. (2014). Corporate social responsibility disclosure and the cost of equity capital: The roles of stakeholder orientation and financial transparency. Journal of Accounting Public Policy, 33(4), 328-355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaccpubpol.2014.04.006

Financing firms in hibernation during the COVID-19 pandemic. T Didier, F Huneeus, M Larrain, S L Schmukler, 10.1016/j.jfs.2020.100837Journal of Financial Stability. 53Didier, T., Huneeus, F., Larrain, M., & Schmukler, S. L. (2021). Financing firms in hibernation during the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Financial Stability, 53, 100837. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfs.2020.100837

Stewardship theory or agency theory: CEO governance and shareholder returns. L Donaldson, J H Davis, 10.1177/031289629101600103Australian Journal of Management. 161Donaldson, L., & Davis, J. H. (1991). Stewardship theory or agency theory: CEO governance and shareholder returns. Australian Journal of Management, 16(1), 49-64. https://doi.org/10.1177/031289629101600103

Board structure, ownership, and voluntary disclosure in Ireland. R Donnelly, M Mulcahy, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2008.00692.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 165Donnelly, R., & Mulcahy, M. (2008). Board structure, ownership, and voluntary disclosure in Ireland. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 16(5), 416-429. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2008.00692.x

Big data and predictive analytics and manufacturing performance: Integrating institutional theory, resource-based view and big data culture. Special Issue: Big Data and Firm Performance. R Dubey, A Gunasekaran, S J Childe, C Blome, T Papadopoulos, 10.1111/1467-8551.1235530Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., Childe, S. J., Blome, C., & Papadopoulos, T. (2019). Big data and predictive analytics and manufacturing performance: Integrating institutional theory, resource-based view and big data culture. Special Issue: Big Data and Firm Performance, 30(2), 341-361. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12355

COVID-19 recovery for the Nigerian construction sites: The role of the fourth industrial revolution technologies. A Ebekozien, C Aigbavboa, 10.1016/j.scs.2021.102803Sustainable Cities Society. 69102803Ebekozien, A., & Aigbavboa, C. (2021). COVID-19 recovery for the Nigerian construction sites: The role of the fourth industrial revolution technologies. Sustainable Cities Society, 69, 102803. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2021.102803

Sources of information on awareness and strategic management of green marketing in Southern Senatorial Zone of Cross River State. C Effiong, E E Inameti, G J Pepple, N A Ernest, 10.4314/gjss.v17i1.9Nigeria. Global Journal of Social Sciences. 17Effiong, C., Inameti, E. E., Pepple, G. J., & Ernest, N. A. (2018). Sources of information on awareness and strategic management of green marketing in Southern Senatorial Zone of Cross River State, Nigeria. Global Journal of Social Sciences, 17, 93-107. https://doi.org/10.4314/gjss.v17i1.9

Classified boards, firm value, and managerial entrenchment. O Faleye, 10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.01.005Journal of Financial Economics. 832Faleye, O. (2007). Classified boards, firm value, and managerial entrenchment. Journal of Financial Economics, 83(2), 501-529. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2006.01.005

Separation of ownership and control. E F Fama, M C Jensen, 10.1086/467037The Journal of Law Economics. 262Fama, E. F., & Jensen, M. C. (1983). Separation of ownership and control. The Journal of Law Economics, 26(2), 301-325. https://doi.org/10.1086/467037

Corporate governance in Islamic banks: New insights for dual board structure and agency relationships. H Farag, C Mallin, K Ow-Yong, 10.1016/j.intfin.2017.08.002Journal of International Financial Markets. 54Institutions and MoneyFarag, H., Mallin, C., & Ow-Yong, K. (2018). Corporate governance in Islamic banks: New insights for dual board structure and agency relationships. Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, 54, 59-77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.intfin.2017.08.002

Strategic management: The challenge of creating value. P Fitzroy, J M Hulbert, A Ghobadian, 10.4324/9780203804407FitzRoy, P., Hulbert, J. M., & Ghobadian, A. (2012). Strategic management: The challenge of creating value. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203804407

Strategic management: A stakeholder approach. R E Freeman, PitmanBoston, MAFreeman, R. E. (1984). Strategic management: A stakeholder approach. Boston, MA: Pitman.

Stakeholder theory and "the corporate objective revisited. R E Freeman, A C Wicks, B Parmar, 10.1287/orsc.1040.0066Organization Science. 153Freeman, R. E., Wicks, A. C., & Parmar, B. (2004). Stakeholder theory and "the corporate objective revisited". Organization Science, 15(3), 364-369. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1040.0066

The role of internal resources in the competitive positioning of Sicilian wine cooperatives. A Galati, A Tulone, S Tinervia, M Crescimanno, 10.1504/IJGSB.2019.103582International Journal of Globalisation Small Business. 104Galati, A., Tulone, A., Tinervia, S., & Crescimanno, M. (2019). The role of internal resources in the competitive positioning of Sicilian wine cooperatives. International Journal of Globalisation Small Business, 10(4), 324-337. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJGSB.2019.103582

Undervaluation of directors in the board hierarchy: Impact on turnover of directors (and CEOs) in newly public firms. S Garg, Q Li, J D Shaw, 10.1002/smj.2716Strategic Management Journal. 392Garg, S., Li, Q., & Shaw, J. D. (2018). Undervaluation of directors in the board hierarchy: Impact on turnover of directors (and CEOs) in newly public firms. Strategic Management Journal, 39(2), 429-457. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2716

Policy options for the Fourth Industrial Revolution in South Africa (HSRC Policy Brief). M Gastrow, Gastrow, M. (2020). Policy options for the Fourth Industrial Revolution in South Africa (HSRC Policy Brief). Retrieved from https://repository.hsrc.ac.za/handle/20.500.11910/15119

COVID-19 and comparative corporate governance. M Gelter, J M Puaschunder, 10.2139/ssrn.3772965Journal of Corporation Law. 46Gelter, M., & Puaschunder, J. M. (2020). COVID-19 and comparative corporate governance. Journal of Corporation Law, 46, 557-629. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3772965

The impact of Industry 4.0 implementation on supply chains. A Ghadge, M E Kara, H Moradlou, M Goswami, 10.1108/JMTM-10-2019-0368Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management. 314Ghadge, A., Kara, M. E., Moradlou, H., & Goswami, M. (2020). The impact of Industry 4.0 implementation on supply chains. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 31(4), 669-686. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM-10- 2019-0368

Corporate survival in Industry 4.0 era: The enabling role of lean-digitized manufacturing. M Ghobakhloo, M Fathi, 10.1108/JMTM-11-2018-0417Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management. 311Ghobakhloo, M., & Fathi, M. (2019). Corporate survival in Industry 4.0 era: The enabling role of lean-digitized manufacturing. Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, 31(1), 1-30. https://doi.org/10.1108/JMTM- 11-2018-0417

Recent developments in corporate governance: An overview. S L Gillan, 10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2005.11.002Journal of Corporate Finance. 123Gillan, S. L. (2006). Recent developments in corporate governance: An overview. Journal of Corporate Finance, 12(3), 381-402. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcorpfin.2005.11.002

AI as a disruptive technology. R Girasa, 10.1007/978-3-030-35975-1_1Artificial intelligence as a disruptive technology. R. GirasaSpringerGirasa, R. (2020). AI as a disruptive technology. In R. Girasa (Ed.), Artificial intelligence as a disruptive technology (pp. 3-21). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-35975-1_1

Strategic management. M K Hashim, Thomson LearningSingaporeHashim, M. K. (2005). Strategic management. Singapore: Thomson Learning.

Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature. P M Healy, K G Palepu, 10.1016/S0165-4101(01)00018-0Journal of Accounting Economics. 311-3Healy, P. M., & Palepu, K. G. (2001). Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting Economics, 31(1-3), 405-440. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-4101(01)00018-0

The relationship of CEO duality to financial performance and efficiency in electronics firms (Doctoral dissertation. F Herndon, Capella UniversityHerndon, F. (2020). The relationship of CEO duality to financial performance and efficiency in electronics firms (Doctoral dissertation, Capella University).

Boards of directors and firm performance: Integrating agency and resource dependence perspectives. A J Hillman, T Dalziel, 10.2307/30040728Academy of Management Review. 283Hillman, A. J., & Dalziel, T. (2003). Boards of directors and firm performance: Integrating agency and resource dependence perspectives. Academy of Management Review, 28(3), 383-396. https://doi.org/10.2307/30040728

Resource dependence theory: A review. A J Hillman, M C Withers, B J Collins, 10.1177/0149206309343469Journal of Management. 356Hillman, A. J., Withers, M. C., & Collins, B. J. (2009). Resource dependence theory: A review. Journal of Management, 35(6), 1404-1427. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206309343469

Driving forces and barriers of Industry 4.0: Do multinational and small and medium-sized companies have equal opportunities? Technological Forecasting Social Change. D Horváth, R Z Szabó, 10.1016/j.techfore.2019.05.021146Horváth, D., & Szabó, R. Z. (2019). Driving forces and barriers of Industry 4.0: Do multinational and small and medium-sized companies have equal opportunities? Technological Forecasting Social Change, 146, 119-132. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2019.05.021

Theory and research in strategic management: Swings of a pendulum. R E Hoskisson, W P Wan, D Yiu, M A Hitt, 10.1177/014920639902500307Journal of Management. 253Hoskisson, R. E., Wan, W. P., Yiu, D., & Hitt, M. A. (1999). Theory and research in strategic management: Swings of a pendulum. Journal of Management, 25(3), 417-456. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920639902500307

Adaptive marketing capabilities, dynamic capabilities, and renewal competences: The "outside vs. inside" and "static vs. dynamic" controversies in strategy. Industrial Marketing Management. S D Hunt, S Madhavaram, 10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.07.00489Hunt, S. D., & Madhavaram, S. (2019). Adaptive marketing capabilities, dynamic capabilities, and renewal competences: The "outside vs. inside" and "static vs. dynamic" controversies in strategy. Industrial Marketing Management, 89, 129-139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.07.004

An analysis of the association between firms' investment opportunities, board composition and firm performance. M Hutchinson, 10.1080/16081625.2002.10510598Asia-Pacific Journal of Accounting Economics. 91Hutchinson, M. (2002). An analysis of the association between firms' investment opportunities, board composition and firm performance. Asia-Pacific Journal of Accounting Economics, 9(1), 17-38. https://doi.org/10.1080/16081625.2002.10510598

Financial performance and corporate governance in microfinance: Evidence from Asia. S Iqbal, A Nawaz, S Ehsan, 10.1016/j.asieco.2018.10.002Journal of Asian Economics. 60Iqbal, S., Nawaz, A., & Ehsan, S. (2019). Financial performance and corporate governance in microfinance: Evidence from Asia. Journal of Asian Economics, 60, 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asieco.2018.10.002

Adoption of robots, artificial intelligence and service automation by travel, tourism and hospitality companies -A cost-benefit analysis. Prepared for the International Scientific Conference "Contemporary Tourism -Traditions and Innovations. S H Ivanov, C Webster, Ivanov, S. H., & Webster, C. (2017). Adoption of robots, artificial intelligence and service automation by travel, tourism and hospitality companies -A cost-benefit analysis. Prepared for the International Scientific Conference "Contemporary Tourism -Traditions and Innovations". Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3007577

Board structure and firm performance: Evidence from India's top companies. B Jackling, S Johl, 10.1111/j.1467-8683.2009.00760.xCorporate Governance: An International Review. 174Jackling, B., & Johl, S. (2009). Board structure and firm performance: Evidence from India's top companies. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 17(4), 492-509. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8683.2009.00760.x

Ethical public sector leadership and good governance: Implications for the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). V Jarbandhan, Jarbandhan, V. (2021). Ethical public sector leadership and good governance: Implications for the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR). Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/353929900_Ethical _Public_Sector_Leadership_and_Good_Governance_Implications_for_the_Fourth_Industrial_Revolution_4IR

Theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour, agency costs and ownership structure. M C Jensen, W H Meckling, 10.1016/0304-405X(76)90026-XJournal of Financial Economics. 34Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics, 3(4), 305-360. https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-405X(76)90026-X

Living and dying: Synthesizing the literature on firm survival and failure across stages of development. M A Josefy, J S Harrison, D G Sirmon, C Carnes, 10.5465/annals.2015.0148Academy of Management Annals. 112Josefy, M. A., Harrison, J. S., Sirmon, D. G., & Carnes, C. (2017). Living and dying: Synthesizing the literature on firm survival and failure across stages of development. Academy of Management Annals, 11(2), 770-799. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.2015.0148

Consumers' adoption of wearable technologies: Literature review, synthesis, and future research agenda. M Kalantari, 10.1504/IJTMKT.2017.089665International Journal of Technology Marketing. 123Kalantari, M. (2017). Consumers' adoption of wearable technologies: Literature review, synthesis, and future research agenda. International Journal of Technology Marketing, 12(3), 274-307. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTMKT.2017.089665

Analysis of the driving and dependence power of barriers to adopt industry 4.0 in Indian manufacturing industry. S S Kamble, A Gunasekaran, R Sharma, 10.1016/j.compind.2018.06.004Computers in Industry. 101Kamble, S. S., Gunasekaran, A., & Sharma, R. (2018). Analysis of the driving and dependence power of barriers to adopt industry 4.0 in Indian manufacturing industry. Computers in Industry, 101, 107-119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.06.004

Conceptual and theoretical approaches to corporate social responsibility, entrepreneurial orientation, and financial performance. S Kammoun, S Loukil, Y B R Loukil, 10.4018/978-1-7998-2128-1.ch014I. Paiva & L. CarvalhoIGI GlobalThe impact of firm performance and corporate governance on corporate social responsibility: Evidence from FranceKammoun, S., Loukil, S., & Loukil, Y. B. R. (2020). The impact of firm performance and corporate governance on corporate social responsibility: Evidence from France. In I. Paiva & L. Carvalho (Ed.), Conceptual and theoretical approaches to corporate social responsibility, entrepreneurial orientation, and financial performance (pp. 266-288). IGI Global. https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-7998-2128-1.ch014

What about the event? How do tourism leveraging strategies affect small-scale events? Tourism Management. D M Kelly, S Fairley, 10.1016/j.tourman.2017.09.00964Kelly, D. M., & Fairley, S. (2018). What about the event? How do tourism leveraging strategies affect small-scale events? Tourism Management, 64, 335-345. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2017.09.009

Strategic management. H M Khairuddin, Thomson LearningSingaporeKhairuddin, H. M. (2005). Strategic management. Singapore: Thomson Learning.

The impact of corporate governance on firm performance during the COVID-19 pandemic: Evidence from Malaysia. S F A Khatib, A.-N I Nour, Journal of Asian Finance. 82Economics BusinessKhatib, S. F. A., & Nour, A.-N. I. (2021). The impact of corporate governance on firm performance during the COVID-19 pandemic: Evidence from Malaysia. Journal of Asian Finance, Economics Business, 8(2), 943-952. Retrieved from https://www.koreascience.or.kr/article/JAKO202104142259637.pdf

The effect of corporate governance on carbon emission disclosures: Evidence from Turkey. M Kılıç, C Kuzey, 10.1108/IJCCSM-07-2017-0144International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management. 111Kılıç, M., & Kuzey, C. (2019). The effect of corporate governance on carbon emission disclosures: Evidence from Turkey. International Journal of Climate Change Strategies and Management, 11(1), 35-53. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCCSM-07-2017-0144

Diversity within the board of directors. T Y Kuek, I.-C Chen, Y O Choong, S C Khor, B B H Chai, T T V Yap, Asia Pacific Journal of Social Science Research. 61Kuek, T. Y., Chen, I.-C., Choong, Y. O., Khor, S. C., Chai, B. B. H., & Yap, T. T. V. (2021). Diversity within the board of directors. Asia Pacific Journal of Social Science Research, 6(1), 9-9. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate .net/publication/349915649_DIVERSITY_WITHIN_THE_BOARD_OF_DIRECTORS

Corporate governance in banks: Systematic literature review and meta-analysis. V Lagasio, 10.22495/cocv16i1c1art1Corporate Ownership & Control. 161-1Lagasio, V. (2018). Corporate governance in banks: Systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Corporate Ownership & Control, 16(1-1), 113-126. https://doi.org/10.22495/cocv16i1c1art1

Social class and the risk of unemployment: Trends, gender differences and the contribution of education. H Lahtinen, O Sirniö, P Martikainen, 10.1177/0001699318817594Acta Sociologica. 633Lahtinen, H., Sirniö, O., & Martikainen, P. (2020). Social class and the risk of unemployment: Trends, gender differences and the contribution of education. Acta Sociologica, 63(3), 303-321. https://doi.org/10.1177 /0001699318817594

How to respond to the fourth industrial revolution, or the second information technology revolution? Dynamic new combinations between technology, market, and society through open innovation. M Lee, J J Yun, A Pyka, D Won, F Kodama, G Schiuma, X Zhao, 10.3390/joitmc4030021Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, Complexity. 43Lee, M., Yun, J. J., Pyka, A., Won, D., Kodama, F., Schiuma, G., … Zhao, X. (2018). How to respond to the fourth industrial revolution, or the second information technology revolution? Dynamic new combinations between technology, market, and society through open innovation. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, Complexity, 4(3), 21. https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc4030021

Does corporate environmental responsibility engagement affect firm value? The mediating role of corporate innovation. Z Li, G Liao, K Albitar, 10.1002/bse.2416Business Strategy the Environment. 293Li, Z., Liao, G., & Albitar, K. (2020). Does corporate environmental responsibility engagement affect firm value? The mediating role of corporate innovation. Business Strategy the Environment, 29(3), 1045-1055. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.2416

Is corporate social responsibility an agency problem. H Liang, L Renneboog, Research handbook of finance and sustainability. S. Boubaker, D. Cumming & D. K. NguyenEdward Elgar PublishingLiang, H., & Renneboog, L. (2018). Is corporate social responsibility an agency problem? In S. Boubaker, D. Cumming & D. K. Nguyen (Eds.), Research handbook of finance and sustainability (pp. 64-71). Edward Elgar Publishing.

A general contingency theory of management. F Luthans, T I Stewart, 10.2307/257902Academy of Management Review. 22Luthans, F., & Stewart, T. I. (1977). A general contingency theory of management. Academy of Management Review, 2(2), 181-195. https://doi.org/10.2307/257902

Corporate strategy. R Lynch, Prentice-HallHarlow, EnglandLynch, R. (2000). Corporate strategy. Harlow, England: Prentice-Hall.

Diverse roles of corporate board: Review of various corporate governance theories. P M Madhani, The IUP Journal of Corporate Governance. 162Madhani, P. M. (2017). Diverse roles of corporate board: Review of various corporate governance theories. The IUP Journal of Corporate Governance, 16(2), 7-28. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication /333775406_Diverse_Roles_of_Corporate_Board_A_Review_of_Various_Corporate_Governance_Theories

Knowledge management processes and sustainable competitive advantage: An empirical examination in private universities. O R Mahdi, I A Nassar, M K Almsafir, 10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.02.013Journal of Business Research. 94Mahdi, O. R., Nassar, I. A., & Almsafir, M. K. (2019). Knowledge management processes and sustainable competitive advantage: An empirical examination in private universities. Journal of Business Research, 94, 320-334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2018.02.013

Balancing innovation and exploitation in the fourth industrial revolution: Role of intellectual capital and technology absorptive capacity. T Mahmood, M S Mubarik, 10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120248Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 160Mahmood, T., & Mubarik, M. S. (2020). Balancing innovation and exploitation in the fourth industrial revolution: Role of intellectual capital and technology absorptive capacity. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 160, 120248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2020.120248

Knowledge management in the fourth industrial revolution: Mapping the literature and scoping future avenues. M F Manesh, M M Pellegrini, G Marzi, M Dabic, 10.1109/TEM.2019.2963489EEE Transactions on Engineering Management. 681Manesh, M. F., Pellegrini, M. M., Marzi, G., & Dabic, M. (2020). Knowledge management in the fourth industrial revolution: Mapping the literature and scoping future avenues. EEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 68(1), 289-300. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2019.2963489

Corporate governance and income smoothing in the Nigerian deposit money banks. I J Manukaji, International Journal of Business Law Research. 61Manukaji, I. J. (2018). Corporate governance and income smoothing in the Nigerian deposit money banks. International Journal of Business Law Research, 6(1), 27-38. Retrieved from https://seahipaj.org/journals- ci/mar-2018/IJBLR/full/IJBLR-M-3-2018.pdf

The enabling technologies of industry 4.0: Examining the seeds of the fourth industrial revolution. Industrial and Corporate Change. A Martinelli, A Mina, M Moggi, 10.1093/icc/dtaa06030Martinelli, A., Mina, A., & Moggi, M. (2021). The enabling technologies of industry 4.0: Examining the seeds of the fourth industrial revolution. Industrial and Corporate Change, 30(1), 161-188. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtaa060

Implications of COVID-19 on fast-moving consumer goods and electronics supply chains: A systematic review of secondary materials. M Meotto, Meotto, M. (2021). Implications of COVID-19 on fast-moving consumer goods and electronics supply chains: A systematic review of secondary materials. Retrieved from https://www.politesi.polimi.it/handle/10589/173721

An asymmetry-based view of advantage: Towards an attainable sustainability. D Miller, Strategic Management Journal. 2410Miller, D. (2003). An asymmetry-based view of advantage: Towards an attainable sustainability. Strategic Management Journal, 24(10), 961-976.

The theory of agency. B M J P C Mitnick, 10.1007/BF01718413Public Choice. 241Mitnick, B. M. J. P. C. (1975). The theory of agency. Public Choice, 24(1), 27-42. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01718413

Cyber-physical production systems: Roots, expectations and R&D challenges. L Monostori, 10.1016/j.procir.2014.03.115Procedia Cirp. 17Monostori, L. (2014). Cyber-physical production systems: Roots, expectations and R&D challenges. Procedia Cirp, 17, 9-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2014.03.115

Is COVID-19 forcing your digital transformation? 12 steps to move faster. B Morgan, A Forbes, Morgan, B., & Forbes, A. (2020, April 5). Is COVID-19 forcing your digital transformation? 12 steps to move faster. Forbes. Retrieved from https://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2020/04/05/is-covid-19-forcing- your-digital-transformation-12-steps-to-move-faster/?sh=3cc1387d617b

Will we work in twenty-first century capitalism? A critique of the fourth industrial revolution literature. J Morgan, 10.1080/03085147.2019.1620027Economy Society. 483Morgan, J. (2019). Will we work in twenty-first century capitalism? A critique of the fourth industrial revolution literature. Economy Society, 48(3), 371-398. https://doi.org/10.1080/03085147.2019.1620027

The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): A social innovation perspective. R Morrar, H Arman, S Mousa, 10.22215/timreview/1117Technology Innovation Management Review. 711Morrar, R., Arman, H., & Mousa, S. (2017). The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): A social innovation perspective. Technology Innovation Management Review, 7(11), 12-20. https://doi.org/10.22215/timreview/1117

The role and impact of Industry 4.0 and the internet of things on the business strategy of the value chain -The case of Hungary. J Nagy, J Oláh, E Erdei, D Máté, J Popp, 10.3390/su10103491Sustainability. 10103491Nagy, J., Oláh, J., Erdei, E., Máté, D., & Popp, J. (2018). The role and impact of Industry 4.0 and the internet of things on the business strategy of the value chain -The case of Hungary. Sustainability, 10(10), 3491. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10103491

Public sector monitoring and evaluation in the Fourth Industrial Revolution: Implications for Africa. Africa's Public Service Delivery Performance Review. T Nalubega, D E Uwizeyimana, 10.4102/apsdpr.v7i1.3187Nalubega, T., & Uwizeyimana, D. E. (2019). Public sector monitoring and evaluation in the Fourth Industrial Revolution: Implications for Africa. Africa's Public Service Delivery Performance Review, 7(1), 1-12. https://doi.org/10.4102/apsdpr.v7i1.318

Exploring the nexus between human capital, corporate governance and performance: Evidence from Islamic banks. T Nawaz, 10.1007/s10551-017-3694-0Journal of Business Ethics. 1572Nawaz, T. (2019). Exploring the nexus between human capital, corporate governance and performance: Evidence from Islamic banks. Journal of Business Ethics, 157(2), 567-587. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-017-3694-0

Modelling the length of time spent in an unemployment state in South Africa. J Z Nonyana, P M Njuho, 10.17159/sajs.2018/4313South African Journal of Science. 11411-12Nonyana, J. Z., & Njuho, P. M. (2018). Modelling the length of time spent in an unemployment state in South Africa. South African Journal of Science, 114(11-12), 1-7. https://doi.org/10.17159/sajs.2018/4313

Corporate governance and risk reporting in South Africa: A study of corporate risk disclosures in the pre-and post-2007/2008 global financial crisis periods. C G Ntim, S Lindop, D A Thomas, 10.1016/j.irfa.2013.07.001International Review of Financial Analysis. 30Ntim, C. G., Lindop, S., & Thomas, D. A. (2013). Corporate governance and risk reporting in South Africa: A study of corporate risk disclosures in the pre-and post-2007/2008 global financial crisis periods. International Review of Financial Analysis, 30, 363-383. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2013.07.001

The effect of ownership structure on corporate social responsibility: Empirical evidence from Korea. W Y Oh, Y K Chang, A Martynov, 10.1007/s10551-011-0912-zJournal of Business Ethics. 1042Oh, W. Y., Chang, Y. K., & Martynov, A. (2011). The effect of ownership structure on corporate social responsibility: Empirical evidence from Korea. Journal of Business Ethics, 104(2), 283-297. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-011- 0912-z

Innovations in teaching and learning: Exploring the perceptions of the education sector on the 4th industrial revolution (4IR). A Oke, F A P Fernandes, 10.3390/joitmc6020031Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market. 6231ComplexityOke, A., & Fernandes, F. A. P. (2020). Innovations in teaching and learning: Exploring the perceptions of the education sector on the 4th industrial revolution (4IR). Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, Complexity, 6(2), 31. https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc6020031

Cloud computing in manufacturing: The next industrial revolution in Malaysia?. K.-B Ooi, V.-H Lee, G W Tan, .-H Hew, T.-S Hew, J.-J , Expert Systems with Applications. 93Ooi, K.-B., Lee, V.-H., Tan, G. W.-H., Hew, T.-S., & Hew, J.-J. (2018). Cloud computing in manufacturing: The next industrial revolution in Malaysia? Expert Systems with Applications, 93, 376-394.

. 10.1016/j.eswa.2017.10.009https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2017.10.009

The determinants of fourth industrial revolution leadership dexterity: A proposed framework for 4ir-intelligence and subsequent 4ir leadership development. J Oosthuizen, Oosthuizen, J. (2017). The determinants of fourth industrial revolution leadership dexterity: A proposed framework for 4ir-intelligence and subsequent 4ir leadership development. Retrieved from https://cutt.ly/tOvYQzY

Understanding the impacts of the Fourth industrial Revolution. A Otanez, December 8)Otanez, A. (2017, December 8). Understanding the impacts of the Fourth industrial Revolution. Shockoe. Retrieved from https://shockoe.com/ideas/understanding-impacts-fourth-industrial-revolution

The contingency theory of management accounting and control. D Otley, 10.1016/j.mar.2016.02.001Management Accounting Research. 31Otley, D. (2016). The contingency theory of management accounting and control: 1980-2014. Management Accounting Research, 31, 45-62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mar.2016.02.001

The influence of CEO duality and board size on the market value of spun-off subsidiaries: The contingency effect of firm size. O V Ozbek, B Boyd, 10.1108/JSMA-03-2019-0039Journal of Strategy Management. 133Ozbek, O. V., & Boyd, B. (2020). The influence of CEO duality and board size on the market value of spun-off subsidiaries: The contingency effect of firm size. Journal of Strategy Management, 13(3), 333-350. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSMA-03-2019-0039

A study of working capital management and profitability in selected Indian companies (Doctoral dissertation. R P Pal, A K De, Vidyasagar UniversityPal, R. P., & De, A. K. (2017). A study of working capital management and profitability in selected Indian companies (Doctoral dissertation, Vidyasagar University). Retrieved from http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in:8080 /jspui/handle/10603/292438

Agency theory: Review of theory and evidence on problems and perspectives. B Panda, N M Leepsa, 10.1177/0974686217701467Indian Journal of Corporate Governance. 101Panda, B., & Leepsa, N. M. (2017). Agency theory: Review of theory and evidence on problems and perspectives. Indian Journal of Corporate Governance, 10(1), 74-95. https://doi.org/10.1177/0974686217701467

Board composition and earnings management in Canada. Y W Park, H.-H Shin, 10.1016/S0929-1199(03)00025-7Journal of Corporate Finance. 103Park, Y. W., & Shin, H.-H. (2004). Board composition and earnings management in Canada. Journal of Corporate Finance, 10(3), 431-457. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0929-1199(03)00025-7

Does corporate governance affect CEO compensation in Indian manufacturing firms. P Patnaik, D Suar, 10.1002/pa.2115Journal of Public Affairs. 203Patnaik, P., & Suar, D. (2020). Does corporate governance affect CEO compensation in Indian manufacturing firms? Journal of Public Affairs, 20(3), e2115. https://doi.org/10.1002/pa.2115

Systematic reviews in the social sciences: A practical guide. M Petticrew, H Roberts, John Wiley & SonsHoboken, NJPetticrew, M., & Roberts, H. (2008). Systematic reviews in the social sciences: A practical guide. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective. J Pfeffer, G R Salancik, Stanford University PressRedwood City, CAPfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. (2003). The external control of organizations: A resource dependence perspective. Redwood City, CA: Stanford University Press.

On the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance: Evidence from GCC countries. R Pillai, H.-A N Al-Malkawi, 10.1016/j.ribaf.2017.07.110Research in International Business and Finance. 44Pillai, R., & Al-Malkawi, H.-A. N. (2018). On the relationship between corporate governance and firm performance: Evidence from GCC countries. Research in International Business and Finance, 44, 394-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ribaf.2017.07.110

Competitive advantage of nations: Creating and sustaining superior performance. M E Porter, Simon and SchusterNew York, NYPorter, M. E. (2011). Competitive advantage of nations: Creating and sustaining superior performance. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

Do board characteristics drive firm performance? An international perspective. M C Pucheta-Martínez, I Gallego-Álvarez, 10.1007/s11846-019-00330-xReview of Managerial Science. 146Pucheta-Martínez, M. C., & Gallego-Álvarez, I. (2020). Do board characteristics drive firm performance? An international perspective. Review of Managerial Science, 14(6), 1251-1297. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11846- 019-00330-x

Opportunities for use of blockchain technology in medicine. Applied Health Economics Health Policy. I Radanović, R Likić, 10.1007/s40258-018-0412-816Radanović, I., & Likić, R. (2018). Opportunities for use of blockchain technology in medicine. Applied Health Economics Health Policy, 16(5), 583-590. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40258-018-0412-8

Anthropocentric perspective of production before and within Industry 4.0. E Rauch, C Linder, P Dallasega, 10.1016/j.cie.2019.01.018Computers Industrial Engineering. 139Rauch, E., Linder, C., & Dallasega, P. (2020). Anthropocentric perspective of production before and within Industry 4.0. Computers Industrial Engineering, 139, 105644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.01.018

The economic theory of agency: The principal's problem. S A Ross, The American Economic Review. 632Ross, S. A. (1973). The economic theory of agency: The principal's problem. The American Economic Review, 63(2), 134-139. Retrieved from https://www.aeaweb.org/aer/top20/63.2.134-139.pdf

Corporate governance, globalization and firm performance in emerging economies: Evidence from India. N Saini, M Singhania, 10.1108/IJPPM-04-2017-0091International Journal of Productivity Performance Management. 678Saini, N., & Singhania, M. (2018). Corporate governance, globalization and firm performance in emerging economies: Evidence from India. International Journal of Productivity Performance Management, 67(8), 1310-1333. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJPPM-04-2017-0091

A big data system supporting bosch braga industry 4.0 strategy. M Y Santos, J O Sá, C Andrade, F V Lima, E Costa, C Costa, J Galvão, 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.07.012International Journal of Information Management. 376Santos, M. Y., e Sá, J. O., Andrade, C., Lima, F. V., Costa, E., Costa, C., … Galvão, J. (2017). A big data system supporting bosch braga industry 4.0 strategy. International Journal of Information Management, 37(6), 750-760. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2017.07.012

The fourth industrial revolution: Currency. World Economic Forum. K Schwab, Schwab, K. (2017). The fourth industrial revolution: Currency. World Economic Forum. Retrieved from https://www.weforum.org/about/the-fourth-industrial-revolution-by-klaus-schwab

The internet of things: Industrie 4.0 unleashed. U Sendler, 10.1007/978-3-662-54904-9SpringerSendler, U. (2017). The internet of things: Industrie 4.0 unleashed. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662- 54904-9

A comprehensive survey on attacks, security issues and blockchain solutions for IoT and IIoT. J Sengupta, S Ruj, S D Bit, 10.1016/j.jnca.2019.102481Journal of Network Computer Applications. 149102481Sengupta, J., Ruj, S., & Bit, S. D. (2020). A comprehensive survey on attacks, security issues and blockchain solutions for IoT and IIoT. Journal of Network Computer Applications, 149, 102481. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2019.102481

COVID-19 impact on e-commerce usage: An empirical evidence from Malaysian healthcare industry. A Shahzad, R Hassan, N I Abdullah, A Hussain, M Fareed, 10.18510/hssr.2020.8364Humanities Social Sciences Reviews. 83Shahzad, A., Hassan, R., Abdullah, N. I., Hussain, A., & Fareed, M. (2020). COVID-19 impact on e-commerce usage: An empirical evidence from Malaysian healthcare industry. Humanities Social Sciences Reviews, 8(3), 599-609. https://doi.org/10.18510/hssr.2020.8364

Dynamic study of corporate governance structure and firm performance in China: Evidence from. L Shao, 10.1108/CMS-08-2017-0217Chinese Management Studies. 132Shao, L. (2019). Dynamic study of corporate governance structure and firm performance in China: Evidence from 2001-2015. Chinese Management Studies, 13(2), 299-317. https://doi.org/10.1108/CMS-08-2017-0217

Challenges and opportunities for public administration in the fourth industrial revolution. E Shava, C Hofisi, African Journal of Public Affairs. 99Shava, E., & Hofisi, C. (2017). Challenges and opportunities for public administration in the fourth industrial revolution. African Journal of Public Affairs, 9(9), 203-215. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net /publication/322676701_Challenges_and_Opportunities_for_Public_Administration_in_the_Fourth_Industrial_R evolution

Agency costs, ownership structure and corporate governance mechanisms. M Singh, W N Davidson, Iii, 10.1016/S0378-4266(01)00260-6Journal of Banking Finance. 275Singh, M., & Davidson, W. N., III. (2003). Agency costs, ownership structure and corporate governance mechanisms. Journal of Banking Finance, 27(5), 793-816. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-4266(01)00260-6

A dual-capacity model of communication media choice in organizations. S B Sitkin, K M Sutcliffe, J R Barrios-Choplin, 10.1111/j.1468-2958.1992.tb00572.xHuman Communication Research. 184Sitkin, S. B., Sutcliffe, K. M., & Barrios-Choplin, J. R. (1992). A dual-capacity model of communication media choice in organizations. Human Communication Research, 18(4), 563-598. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468- 2958.1992.tb00572.x

Students' experiences of using digital technologies to address their personal research needs during the COVID-19 lockdown. L H Sokhulu, 10.1080/14725843.2020.1801384African Identities. 194Sokhulu, L. H. (2020). Students' experiences of using digital technologies to address their personal research needs during the COVID-19 lockdown. African Identities, 19(4), 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1080/14725843.2020.1801384

Industry 4.0 as enabler for a sustainable development: A qualitative assessment of its ecological and social potential. T Stock, M Obenaus, S Kunz, H J P S Kohl, E Protection, 10.1016/j.psep.2018.06.026Process Safety and Environmental Protection. 118Stock, T., Obenaus, M., Kunz, S., Kohl, H. J. P. S., & Protection, E. (2018). Industry 4.0 as enabler for a sustainable development: A qualitative assessment of its ecological and social potential. Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 118, 254-267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psep.2018.06.026

Managing legitimacy. M Suchman, 10.5465/amr.1995.9508080331Academy of Management Review. 203Suchman, M. (1995). Managing legitimacy. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 571-610. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1995.9508080331

Waiting for a sales renaissance in the fourth industrial revolution: Machine learning and artificial intelligence in sales research and practice. Industrial Marketing Management. N Syam, A Sharma, 10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.12.01969Syam, N., & Sharma, A. (2018). Waiting for a sales renaissance in the fourth industrial revolution: Machine learning and artificial intelligence in sales research and practice. Industrial Marketing Management, 69, 135-146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.12.019

The impact of COVID-19 pandemic on student learning performance from the perspectives of community of inquiry. C Tan, 10.1108/CG-09-2020-0419Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society. 216Tan, C. (2021). The impact of COVID-19 pandemic on student learning performance from the perspectives of community of inquiry. Corporate Governance: The International Journal of Business in Society, 21(6), 1215-1228. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-09-2020-0419

CEO's managerial power, board committee memberships and idiosyncratic volatility. M Tan, B Liu, 10.1016/j.irfa.2016.09.003International Review of Financial Analysis. 48Tan, M., & Liu, B. (2016). CEO's managerial power, board committee memberships and idiosyncratic volatility. International Review of Financial Analysis, 48, 21-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.irfa.2016.09.003

How to design corporate governance structures to enhance corporate social responsibility in China's mining state-owned enterprises? Resources Policy. P Tang, S Yang, S Yang, 10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.10161966101619Tang, P., Yang, S., & Yang, S. (2020). How to design corporate governance structures to enhance corporate social responsibility in China's mining state-owned enterprises? Resources Policy, 66, 101619. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2020.101619

Composition-based view of the firm as a promising approach to studying small businesses. Production. S Tehseen, S A Mughal, S Durst, M Shujahat, Z H Qureshi, P Kokkalis, 10.1590/0103-6513.2018002229Tehseen, S., Mughal, S. A., Durst, S., Shujahat, M., Qureshi, Z. H., & Kokkalis, P. (2019). Composition-based view of the firm as a promising approach to studying small businesses. Production, 29. https://doi.org/10.1590/0103- 6513.20180022

Attention to social issues and CEO duality as enablers of resilience to exogenous shocks in the tourism industry. P Torres, M Augusto, 10.1016/j.tourman.2021.104400Tourism Management. 87Torres, P., & Augusto, M. (2021). Attention to social issues and CEO duality as enablers of resilience to exogenous shocks in the tourism industry. Tourism Management, 87, 104400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2021.104400

A theory-driven identification and ranking of the critical success factors of sustainable shipping management. T M T Tran, K F Yuen, K X Li, G Balci, F Ma, 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118401Journal of Cleaner Production. 243118401Tran, T. M. T., Yuen, K. F., Li, K. X., Balci, G., & Ma, F. (2020). A theory-driven identification and ranking of the critical success factors of sustainable shipping management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 243, 118401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.118401

Industry 4.0 -A glimpse. S Vaidya, P Ambad, S Bhosle, 10.1016/j.promfg.2018.02.034Procedia Manufacturing. edia Manufacturing20Vaidya, S., Ambad, P., & Bhosle, S. (2018). Industry 4.0 -A glimpse. Procedia Manufacturing, 20, 233-238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.promfg.2018.02.034

The catalysed use of Fourth Industrial Revolution interventions in South African higher education institutions, due to COVID-19, and its influence on efficacy. E Van Zyl, T Venter, J.-P Bruwer, Van Zyl, E., Venter, T., & Bruwer, J.-P. (2021). The catalysed use of Fourth Industrial Revolution interventions in South African higher education institutions, due to COVID-19, and its influence on efficacy. Retrieved from https://business.expertjournals.com/ark:/16759/EJBM_907zyl64-73.pdf

The link between audit committees, corporate governance quality and firm performance: A literature review. P Velte, 10.22495/cocv14i4art2Corporate Ownership Control. 144Velte, P. (2017). The link between audit committees, corporate governance quality and firm performance: A literature review. Corporate Ownership Control, 14(4), 15-31. https://doi.org/10.22495/cocv14i4art2

Strategic management of innovation development: Insights into a role of economic policy. M Y Veselovsky, M A Izmailova, E N Lobacheva, P P Pilipenko, G A Rybina, 10.9770/jesi.2019.7.2(34)Entrepreneurship Sustainability Issues. 72Veselovsky, M. Y., Izmailova, M. A., Lobacheva, E. N., Pilipenko, P. P., & Rybina, G. A. (2019). Strategic management of innovation development: Insights into a role of economic policy. Entrepreneurship Sustainability Issues, 7(2), 1296-1307. https://doi.org/10.9770/jesi.2019.7.2(34)

Managerial discretion: An empirical review and focus on future research directions. D B Wangrow, D J Schepker, V L Barker, Iii, 10.1177/0149206314554214Journal of Management. 411Wangrow, D. B., Schepker, D. J., & Barker, V. L., III. (2015). Managerial discretion: An empirical review and focus on future research directions. Journal of Management, 41(1), 99-135. https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206314554214

Board gender diversity in the STEM&F sectors: The critical mass required to drive firm performance. C Wiley, M Monllor-Tormos, 10.1177/1548051817750535Journal of Leadership Organizational Studies. 253Wiley, C., & Monllor-Tormos, M. (2018). Board gender diversity in the STEM&F sectors: The critical mass required to drive firm performance. Journal of Leadership Organizational Studies, 25(3), 290-308. https://doi.org/10.1177/1548051817750535

Implications of the fourth industrial age for higher education. The Thinker. B Xing, T Marwala, 73Xing, B., & Marwala, T. (2017). Implications of the fourth industrial age for higher education. The Thinker, 73. Retrieved from https://ssrn.com/abstract=3225331

The role of a manager's intangible capabilities in resource acquisition and sustainable competitive performance. Q Ying, H Hassan, H Ahmad, 10.3390/su11020527Sustainability. 112Ying, Q., Hassan, H., & Ahmad, H. (2019). The role of a manager's intangible capabilities in resource acquisition and sustainable competitive performance. Sustainability, 11(2), 527. https://doi.org/10.3390/su11020527

Determinants of carbon management strategy adoption: Evidence from Australia's top 200 publicly listed firms. S Yunus, E T Evangeline, S Abhayawansa, 10.1108/MAJ-09-2014-1087Managerial Auditing Journal. 312Yunus, S., Evangeline, E. T., & Abhayawansa, S. (2016). Determinants of carbon management strategy adoption: Evidence from Australia's top 200 publicly listed firms. Managerial Auditing Journal, 31(2), 156-179. https://doi.org/10.1108/MAJ-09-2014-1087

Boards of directors and corporate financial performance: A review and integrative model. S A Zahra, J A Pearce, 10.1177/014920638901500208Journal of Management. 152Zahra, S. A., & Pearce, J. A. (1989). Boards of directors and corporate financial performance: A review and integrative model. Journal of Management, 15(2), 291-334. https://doi.org/10.1177/014920638901500208

Defining the concept of innovation and firm innovativeness: A critical analysis from resource-based view perspective. N F M Zawawi, S A Wahab, A Al-Mamun, A S Yaacob, N Kumar, S A Fazal, 10.5539/ijbm.v11n6p87International Journal of Business Management Decision. 116Zawawi, N. F. M., Wahab, S. A., Al-Mamun, A., Yaacob, A. S., Kumar, N., & Fazal, S. A. (2016). Defining the concept of innovation and firm innovativeness: A critical analysis from resource-based view perspective. International Journal of Business Management Decision, 11(6), 87-94. https://doi.org/10.5539/ijbm.v11n6p87

Impacts of colonialism -A research survey. P Ziltener, D Künzler, 10.5195/jwsr.2013.507Journal of World-Systems Research. 192Ziltener, P., & Künzler, D. (2013). Impacts of colonialism -A research survey. Journal of World-Systems Research, 19(2), 290-311. https://doi.org/10.5195/jwsr.2013.507