# Phytochemical and pharmacological studies on Solanum lyratum: a review Open Access Natural Products and Bioprospecting †

CorpusID: 253399881
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e717e28c73cc5290f1ec4b3e60968f68008222c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e717e28c73cc5290f1ec4b3e60968f68008222c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Phytochemical and pharmacological studies on Solanum lyratum: a review Open Access Natural Products and Bioprospecting †


Yue Zhao 
Wen-Ke Gao 
Xiang-Dong Wang 
Li-Hua Zhang 
Hai-Yang Yu 
Hong-Hua Wu 
Yue Zhao 
Wen-Ke Gao 
Xiang-Dong Wang 

Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine
State Key Laboratory of Component-Based Chinese Medicine
Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
10 Poyanghu Road, West Area


Tuanbo New Town
Jinghai District
301617TianjinPeople's Republic of China

Phytochemical and pharmacological studies on Solanum lyratum: a review Open Access Natural Products and Bioprospecting †
10.1007/s13659-022-00361-0Zhao et al. Natural Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39 REVIEW This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article' s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article' s contributed equally to this work and should be considered co-first authors. *Correspondence: Page 2 of 35 Zhao et al. Natural Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39Solanum lyratum ThunbSteroidal saponinsSteroidal alkaloidsAnti-cancerToxicity
Solanum lyratum is one of the temperate plants, broadly distributed in Korea, China, Japan, India, and South-East Asia and well-documented in those oriental ethnic medicine systems for curing cancers, jaundice, edema, gonorrhea, cholecystitis, phlogosis, rheumatoid arthritis, etc. This review systematically summarized the research progress on S. lyratum respecting the botany, traditional uses, phytochemistry, pharmacology, and toxicology to increase people's in-depth understanding of this plant, by data retrieval in a series of online or off-line electronic databases as far as we can reach. Steroidal saponins and alkaloids, terpenoids, nitrogenous compounds, and flavonoid compounds are the main chemical constituents in S. lyratum. Among them, steroidal alkaloids and saponins are the major active ingredients ever found in S. lyratum, exerting activities of anti-cancer, anti-inflammation, anti-microbial, anti-allergy, and antioxidation in vivo or in vitro. As a result, S. lyratum has been frequently prescribed for the abovementioned therapeutic purposes, and there are substantial traditional and modern shreds of evidence of its use.

# Introduction

Solanum lyratum Thunb. is a herbaceous vine of the family Solanaceae, with white villous hairs on violinshaped leaves and stems, distributed throughout China, Japan, Korea, etc. [1]. S. lyratum prefers a warm and humid environment and is distributed widely in valley grass, roadside and field. S. lyratum is commonly known as "Bai-Mao-Teng" in traditional Chinese medicine and "Back-Mo-Deung" in traditional Korean medicine [2]. In traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), S. lyratum has the functions of clearing heat and removing toxicity ("Qingre Jiedu" in Chinese), dispelling wind and eliminating dampness ("Qufeng Lishi" in Chinese). Therefore, S. lyratum has been traditionally prescribed mainly for healing jaundice, edema, gonorrhea, cholecystitis, phlogosis, and rheumatoid arthritis [3]. Modern phytochemistry and pharmacological studies revealed that S. lyratum consists of a variety of active ingredients, including steroidal saponins, steroidal alkaloids, terpenoids, lignans, and flavonoids [4]. And steroidal saponins and steroidal alkaloids have been used in the modern clinic to treat various cancers, especially lung cancer, cervical cancer, and liver cancer [3].

In the last ten years, dozens of reviews on the research progress of Solanum plants have been published, occasionally referring few phytochemistry and pharmacological reports on S. lyratum [5][6][7][8] (Fig. 1). However, there is no specialized and systematic research review on the S. lyratum species, especially on its phytochemistry and pharmacological aspects. Thus, this review intends to provide an updated and comprehensive summary on the botanical characterization, phytochemistry, and pharmacological and toxicity studies of S. lyratum to fill a gap in the research review of this plant and provides for a better exploration and application of S. lyratum. The literature for this manuscript was obtained from reports published from 1981 to Mar 2022. [2]. The botanical characteristics of S. lyratum were recorded in many classics of TCM, including "Tang Xinxiu Bencao" in the Tang Dynasty [9], "Zhenglei Bencao" in the Song Dynasty [10], and "Compendium of Materia Medica" in Ming Dynasty [11].

S. lyratum is commonly known as "Bai-Mao-Teng" in TCM. It should be noted that there are several adulterants of S. lyratum, including Aristolochia mollissima, Paederia scandens (Lour.) Merr. and Solanumrr  Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39 dulcamara L., all of which are so called as "Bai-Mao-Teng" that it may easily cause an event of medication confusion [12]. For example, a misuse of A. mollissima instead of S. lyratum, has ever led to a renal failure event in patients of Hong Kong [13]. Those adulterants closely resemble S. lyratum in botanical morphology, it is very important to seek advice from a professional or pharmacist before use. The plant morphological characteristics of S. lyratum are as follows: Root is slender and cylindrical. Leaves are mostly violin-shaped, with 3.5-5.5 cm long and 2.5-4.8 cm wide, and the base is 3-5 cm deep-lobed. Lateral lobes are smaller near the base. Middle lobes are usually larger oval and tend to apex acuminate. Both sides of the leaves were covered with white shiny villous hairs, and the levels own midvein and lateral veins. Flowers are sparsely terminal inflorescence or extra-axillary inflorescence, and the pedicel is approximately 2-2.5 cm long. Corollas are blue-purple or white and corollas are about 1.1 cm in diameter. Fruits are spherical and about 8 cm in diameter, which become reddish-black when it matures. Seeds are nearly disc-shaped and about 1.5 mm in diameter. The flowering period of S. lyratum is between May and June, while the fruiting period is between August and October. Significantly, the suitable harvest time has been recommended to be between October and December ( Fig. 2) [14,17].


# Traditional uses

In TCM, S. lyratum has been considered as one of the "Top-grade" herbs in "Shennong Bencao Jing" (100 BC-200 AD, Han Dynasties) [18]. For centuries, it has been used for the treatments of cold and fever, malaria, jaundice, nephritis, edema, cholecystitis, rheumatoid arthritis, vaginitis, uterine erosion, and several types of cancer including lung cancer, cervical cancer, and gastric cancer [19,21]. External applications of S. lyratum [22] have been recorded to treat carbuncle, furuncle and swollen poison, etc. In the "Compendium of Materia Medica", S. lyratum is documented [11] to have the effects of clearing heat, detoxification, and expelling rheumatism, for the treatment of rubella, erysipelas, malaria, cancer, etc. The traditional uses of S. lyratum in Korea, Japan, and the Indochina Peninsula focused mainly on the treatments of several types of cancers, warts, herpes, pyretic syndrome, diarrhea, etc., as summarized in Table 1.


# Phytochemistry

So far, hundreds of phytochemicals have been isolated and identified from S. lyratum, including steroidal alkaloids , steroids and steroidal saponins , terpenoids , nitrogenous compounds (154-178), phenylpropanoids (179-227), flavonoids (228-258) and other compounds (259-270). Among them, steroidal alkaloids, steroidal saponins and terpenoids are so often recognized as the main active constituents of S. lyratum [32,33].


## Steroidal alkaloids

Steroidal alkaloids in S. lyratum include mostly solanidane (27 carbon atoms), spirosolane (27 carbon atoms) and solayraine (27 carbon atoms) (Fig. 3) types of nitrogenous sapogenins. The glycone moieties are most likely to be substituted at C-3 position of the nitrogenous sapogenin aglycone. D-glucose (D-Glc), D-galactose (D-Gal), D-xylose (D-Xyl), and L-rhamnose (L-Rha) are the common components of the glycones, in which one to four monosaccharides linked linearly or with one or more branched chains, as shown in Fig. 4. Steroidal alkaloid is one of the characteristic ingredients of Solanum plants [34]. Until now, a total of fortyone steroidal alkaloids (1-41) have been identified from S. lyratum (Table 2). It is noteworthy that there were two epimers for the most abundant spirosolane-type steroidal alkaloids in Solanum plants, one is 22-β N type (1-4, 6-11) [33,[35][36][37][38][39] and the other is 22-α N type (5, 13-22) [24,[35][36][37][38][39][40] in clue of the existence of an oxa-azaspirodecane system. In addition, solanidane-type steroidal alkaloids (23)(24)(25)(26)(27)(28)(29)(30) [35,36,41,42], with a unique octahydroindolizine complex cholestane skeleton, have also been found to be existed in this plant. Further, other unusual spirosolane-type glycoalkaloids with a deformed E and F rings (piperidine, pyridine or other derived F rings) have been also occasionally discovered from S. lyratum, exemplified by compounds 31-41 [39,43], as shown in Fig. 5.


## NMR characteristics of steroidal alkaloids

Representative NMR data of the common steroidal alkaloids and saponins from S. lyratum were summarized in Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6. 13 C NMR spectra of the spirosolanetype, spirostanol-type, and furostanol-type steroidal alkaloids or saponins, with intrinsic twenty-seven steroid skeleton, normally exhibit characteristic carbon signals for C-22 around δ C 98.0 [35], 109.0 [22], and 112.0 [40] ppm, respectively. In addition, in the high field of the 1 H NMR spectra of steroidal alkaloids and saponins, the resonance signals of methylene and methine protons are generally around δ H 1.1-3.0, while the four methyl groups show proton resonances at δ H 0.6-1.4, among which there are two singlets for the methyl groups at C-18 and C-19 [44], and two doublets for those methyls at C-21 and C-27 [45].

In the 13 C NMR spectra, spirosolane-type of steroidal alkaloids, characterizing a A/B/C/D ring system of C 27 steroid scaffold (Table 3 and Fig. 6), show twenty-seven carbon signals generally containing four methyl carbon signals around at δ C 16.0 (C-18), 19.0 (C-19), 15.0 (C-21), and 19.0 (C-27). Steroidal alkaloid can be simply recognized to be a steroidal saponin with a replacement of the oxygen atom in F ring by a nitrogen atom, resulting in the high-field shifting of the carbon chemical shifts of C-22 and C-26, from δ C 109.0 and 67.0 to 98.0 and 47.5, respectively [30,39,40,46]. In the 13 C NMR spectra of the solanidane-type steroidal alkaloids, there were four methyl carbon signals around at δ C 16.0 (C-18), 12.0 (C-19), 19.0 (C-21), and 22.0 (C-27) [30,38,39,46] besides those characteristic carbon signals around at δ C 69.0 (C-16), 78.0 (C-22) and 58.0 (C-26) [35,41]. And, chemical shifts of the glycosyl anomeric carbon are at 


## Steroids and steroidal saponins 4.3.1 Steroids

Cholestanol, containing a perhydrocyclopentenophenanthrene moiety (rings A, B, C and D) with a acyclic sidechain, has been considered as the precursor of furostanol and spirostanol (Fig. 7). At present, thirty steroids have been isolated from S. lyratum   (Table 4) [35,36,39,47,48,50,52].


### Steroidal saponins

Steroidal saponins reported in S. lyratum are well-known characterized by possessing the steroid-derived aglycones normally consisting of a hydrophobic C 27 -skeleton of cholestane with an oxygen fused into the F ring, exemplified by the spirostanol (27 carbon atoms), furostanol (27 carbon atoms) and cholestanol (27 carbon atoms) as the most common scaffolds. Nevertheless, C 21 -steroidal saponins have also been reported to be existed in S. lyratum (Fig. 8). As is known, the remaining hydrophilic glycone unit of a steroidal saponin has been frequently reported to be substituted at the C-3 position of the sapogenin.              D-Glc, D-Gal, D-Xyl, L-Rha, and L-arabinose (L-Ara) are the common members of the glycones, in which one to five monosaccharides linked linearly or with one or more branched chains, as shown in Fig. 9. Till now, a total of thirty steroidal saponins (72-101) have been identified from S. lyratum (Table 5 and Fig. 10). Most of the isolated steroidal saponins of S. lyratum belong to the spirostane-type (72)(73)(74)(75)(76)(77)(78)(79)(80)(81)(82)(83)(84)(85)(86)(87) [4,22,46,47,49], C 21 -steroidal subclass (89)(90)(91)(92)(93) [40,46,51] and furostanol-type (94)(95)(96)(97)(98)(99)(100)(101) [22,23,40,46]. Notably, when F-ring of a spirostanol is ring-opened, a new sapogenin skeleton of a furostanol is then afforded. As far as we know, the furostanol and its derivatives are the only reported ring-opened steroidal saponins ever isolated from S. lyratum up to now (94)(95)(96)(97)(98)(99)(100)(101) [22,23,40,46].
2 (3β,22α,25R)-Spirosol-5-en-3-ol-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-[O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)]-O-β- D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-3 (3β,5α,22α,25R)-Spirosol-3-ol-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-4 (3β,5α,22α,25R)-Spirosol-3-ol-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-[O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-10 Soladulcidine-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-[O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-24 (25S or R)-Solanid-5-ene-3β.23β-diol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-25 (25S or R)-Solanid-5-ene-3β,23β-diol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-[xylopyranosyl-(1,3)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-26 (25S or R)-Solanidane-3β.23β-diol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-27 (25S or R)-Solanidane-3β.23β-diol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-[xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-

## NMR characteristics of steroidal saponins

In short, in the 13 C NMR spectra, spirostanol and furostanol-types of steroidal saponins, characterizing a A/B/C/D ring system of C 27 -steroidal scaffold, show twenty-seven carbon signals generally containing four methyl carbon signals at δ C 16.0 (C-18), 19.0 (C-19), 14.0 (C-21), and 17.0 (C-27) or two olefinic carbon signals at δ C 140.0 (C-5) and 120.0 (C-6) [47,49] (Table 6 and Fig. 11). The carbon chemical shift of CH 3 -19 will downfield shifted from δ C 12.0 to δ C 19.0 [47,49], when the two methylenes at C-5,6 being dehydrogenated (-H 2 ) to form a double bond [53]. The carbon resonances of C-16, 17, 22 (spiroketal carbon) and C-26 in a spirostanol-type steroidal saponin, were at about δ C 81.0, 62.0, 109.0 and 67.0, respectively [47,49], while those in a furostanoltype steroidal saponin were at about δ C 81.0, 64.0, 112.0  and 75.0, respectively [22,48]. It is worth noting that the proton chemical shift (δ H ) difference (∆ ab = δ a -δ b ) of the two geminal protons (Ha and Hb) of CH 2 -26 has been recognized for ascertaining 25R or 25S orientation of the CH 3 -27 [∆ ab ≤0.48 for 25R, ∆ ab ≥ 0.57 for 25S] in the spirostanol and furostanol-types of steroidal saponins [45,54,55]. Similarly, the abovementioned empirical law for configuration assignment of C-25 applies equally well to spirosolane-type of steroidal alkaloids (Table 3).


## Terpenoids

So far, fifty-one terpenoids, including sesquiterpenoids, monoterpenoids and triterpenoids (Table 7 and Fig. 12 [47]. In addition to the abovementioned constituents, two monoterpenoids (149-150) and three pentacyclic triterpenoids (151-153) have also been found in S. lyratum.


## Nitrogenous compounds

Nitrogenous compounds found in S. lyratum include arylamides (154-167) [36,47,[65][66][67][68], aliphatic amides (168-169) [47], and other nitrogenous compounds (170-178) ( Table 8 and Fig. 13) [47,65].


## Phenylpropanoids


### Lignans

Till now, a total of twenty-eight lignans (179-205) have been isolated from S. lyratum (Table 9, Fig. 14), including simple lignans (184, 188) [32,47,68], lignanolides  [20,32,47]. Lignans with one or more isovaleroyloxyl substitution, as exemplified by compounds 195-204 [20], has been frequently uncovered from S. lyratum in recent years. Notably, neolignans including compounds 186-187 [47], and 195-202, exhibited neuroprotective effects against human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y cell injury induced by H 2 O 2 [20].


### Coumarins, simple phenylpropanoids and their derivatives

So far, seven coumarins (206-212) and eight simple phenylpropanoids (213-220) and their derivatives (221-227) have been isolated from S. lyratum as shown in Table 10 and Fig. 15.


## Flavonoids

Thirty-one flavonoids (228-258) have been reported from S. lyratum (Table 11, Fig. 16 [47,54,69,71], chalcones (231) [47], and isoflavan-4-ols (252-255) [73], usually in the form of flavonoid glycoside with C-3 or C-7 substitution of the monosaccharides (D-Glc, D-Gal, D-Xyl, L-Rha, and L-Ara) and disaccharides [Rha (1 → 6) Glc, Xyl (1 → 2) Glc, Api (1 → 2) Glc and Xyl (1 → 6) Glc].


## Other compounds

In addition to the abovementioned constituents, other compounds including anthraquinones and fatty acids have also been isolated from S. lyratum (Table 12, Fig. 17). 


# Pharmacology

Water decoction of the whole herb of S. lyratum was commonly used to treat various diseases, and the fresh whole herb was mashed to remedy herpes and warts for external use. Modern pharmacological evaluations revealed that extracts, fractions or compounds isolated from S. lyratum possessed various therapeutic potentials.

Recently, the plant has been most extensively studied for its anti-cancer pharmacological properties. Meanwhile, other pharmacological effects such as anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-allergy, and hepatoprotective activities of S. lyratum have also been assessed, as summarized in Table 13.              
72 Diosgenin-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-[O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-galcopyranoside C 51 H 84 O 23 1064.5403 [22] 73 Diosgenin-3-O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-[O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-75 Diosgenin-3-O-α-L-rhamnosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosiduronic acid C 39 H 60 O 13 736.4034 [47] 76 Diosgenin-3-O-α-L-rhamnosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-78 Diosgenin-3-O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-O-β-D-glucopyranosy1-(1 → 4)-[O-α-L- rhamnopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D-glucopyranoside C 50 H 80 O 21 1016.5192 [47] 79 Diosgenin-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-galactopyranoside C 39 H 62 O 13 738.4190 [47, 49] 80 Diosgenin-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosy1-(1 → 3)-[O-α -L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D- glucopyranoside C 45 H 72 O 17 884.4770 [4] 81 (25R)-Spirost-5-en-3β-ol-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-[O-α-L-rhmanopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D-84 (25R)-Spirost-5-en-3β-ol-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-[O-α-L-rhmanopyranosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D- glucopyranosiduronic acid methyl ester C 46 H 72 O 18 912.4719 [4] 85 Gitogenin-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-galactopyranoside C 39 H 64 O 13 740.4347 [47] 86 (3β,25S)-Spirost-5-ene-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D- galactopyranoside C 45 H 74 O 18 902.4875 [46] 87 (3β,25S)-Spirit-5-ene-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-89 16-Dehydropregnenolone-3-O-α-L-rhamnopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-92 5α-Pregn-16-en-3β-ol-20-one-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β- D-94 26-O-β-D-Glucopyranosyl-(22S,25S)-3β,26-dihydroxy-22-methoxyfurost-5-ene-3-O-α-L- rhamnose-(1 → 2)-3-O-β-D-95 26-O-β-D-Glucopyranosyl-(22S,25S)-3β,26-dihydroxy-22-methoxyfurost-5-ene-3-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1 → 3)-[O-α-L-rhamnose-(1 → 2)]-3-O-β-D-96 26-O-β-D-Glucopyranosyl-(22,25R)-3β,26-dihydroxy-22-methoxyfurost-5-ene-3-O-α-L- rhamnopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-98 26-O-β-D-Glucopyranosylfurostane-3,22,26-triol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1→2)-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1→4)-O-β-D-99 26-O-β-D-Glucopyranosyl-22-methoxyfurost-3,26-diol-3-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1→2)-O-β-D- glucopyranosyl-(1→4)-O-β-D-

## Anti-cancer


### Extracts and fractions

The heat-clearing and detoxicating property of S. lyratum is favorable in the treatment of cancer [17,19,21]. It has been reported that S. lyratum treats various cancers by inhibiting the tumor growth [74,75], enhancing immunity [76,78] and inducing apoptosis via activating both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways [27,34,79]. In S 180 tumor-bearing mice, both ethanol and aqueous extracts of S. lyratum could improve immune function and exhibited anti-cancer potential with certain tumor inhibitory effect by improving the activities of natural killer (NK) and cluster of differentiation 4 (CD4) cells, and elevating the contents of serum Interleukin-2 (IL-2) and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) [77,78,80]. Total alkaloids from S. lyratum (SLTA, 24 mL/kg) could inhibit the tumor growth in mice with Lewis lung cancer, and when combined with cisplatin, a synergistic effect had been shown to down-regulate the mRNA expression of Notch1, Notch3 and Jagged1 in Notch signaling pathway [81]. In addition, the hexane fraction of the methanol extract (50 mg/kg) of S. lyratum showed similar inhibitory activity on tumor growth in mice with Lewis lung carcinoma tumor, potentially acting through upregulating Fas, caspase-8, caspase-3, and p53, and downregulating FasL and B-cell lymphoma-2 (Bcl-2) in the mitochondrial pathway [27,79].

Further studies revealed that the 70% ethanol extract of S. lyratum (SLE) could suppress tumor angiogenesis in vitro by repressing migration, invasion, and tube formation of tumor-derived vascular endothelial cells (Td-ECs). The mechanism of the anti-angiogenic effect of SLE may be related to the inhibitory activity of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) via reducing the number of lipid rafts in the cell membrane [43] and interfering with the lipid rafts by agglutinating cell membrane cholesterol [75]. These changes led to the inhibition of VEGFR2 phosphorylation and activation of its downstream signaling molecules, thereby inhibiting tumor angiogenesis [43]. In addition, SLTA could induce apoptosis of lung carcinoma A549 cells by inhibiting the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) signaling pathway [82], while glycoalkaloids of S. lyratum (SLGS) significantly inhibited the activity of A549-derived exosomes with IC 50 = 99.59 μg/mL [43].


### Compounds

The cytotoxic tests involved in most in vitro studies of S. lyratum have shown that the compounds isolated  from S. lyratum possess a good cytotoxic potential for several cancer cells.

In the process of cytotoxic investigation by MTT assay and flow cytometry, the characteristic ompounds 5, 8, 21 from the methanolic extract of S. lyratum showed significant cytotoxicities against huh-7 and HepG2 cell lines with IC 50 values of 9.6 ± 0.5 and 10.8 ± 0.1 μM, 11.7 ± 0.3 and 19.4 ± 0.4 μM, and 10.3 ± 1.5 and 91.8 ± 9.4 μM, respectively. The mechanism was attributed to cell cycle arrest at S-phase [83]. while sesquiterpenoids 104, 106, 108, 109, 116, 118,   124, 126, 127, 132, 135, 142, and 143 were evaluated for their cytotoxicity activities with IC 50 1.9-8.6 μg/ mL against HONE-1 cells [1,57,58,60,61]. Among them, compounds 126-127 showed potent cytotoxicity activity with IC 50 2.1 and 1.9 μg/mL, slightly weaker than the positive controls etoposide and cisplatin (IC 50 1.6 and 1.7 μg/mL) [1,57,58,60,61]. Notably, the IC 50 differences of the positive controls (etoposide and cisplatin) may have been caused by the operation of the author, so the experimental cytotoxicity results need to be further verified.  


## Anti-inflammatory


### Extracts and fractions

Inflammation is closely related to cancer disease [84]. The detoxication and detumescence effect of S. lyratum can be used as a supplement to modern anti-inflammatory agents.

Total alkaloid fraction from the 70% ethanol extract of S. lyratum significantly relieved the inflammatory effect of the lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages for 48 h. Further evaluation revealed that this total alkaloid fraction could inhibit the release of Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages [85].


### Compounds

In vitro, diosgenin-3-O-α-L-rhamnosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosiduronic acid (75) could inhibit the lipopolysaccharide-induced expression of intercellular cell adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) protein at 16 μg/ mL, and exhibited anti-inflammatory activities [86]. In addition, in the anti-inflammatory experiments with 


## Antioxidant activity 5.3.1 Extracts

Modern pharmacological studies have revealed that cancer or other diseases are primarily associated with the production and accumulation of excessive free radicals [87], which are commonly produced by the continuous contact between our body and the outside world. Thus, antioxidants can effectively relieve the harmful effects of free radicals. It has been confirmed that S. lyratum extracts and compounds possess significant antioxidant activities. 50% Ethanol extract of S. lyratum (10 μg/mL) could protect against oxidized low-density lipoprotein (Ox-LDL)-induced injury in cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) by direct antioxidative action [88]. In the DPPH radical-scavenging tests in vitro using the spectrophotometric method with vitamin C as the positive control, the ethanol and ethyl acetate extracts from S. lyratum showed antioxidative potential with IC 50 of 0.230 mg/mL and 1.010 mg/mL, respectively [89]. Five flavones 236, 248, 249, 251, and 258 from the ethanol extracts of S. lyratum possessed the capability of scavenging DPPH free radicals with IC 50 values of 2.56-21.33 μg/mL [70]. It seems that the glycosidation of the flavone C-3 and C-5 is essential for the scavenging of DPPH free radicals.


### Compounds


## Antimicrobial


### Extracts and fractions

There were reports verified the antibacterial potential of S. lyratum extracts. For example, the water-soluble polysaccharide of S. lyratum exerted a significant antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella, Pasteurella, Escherichia coli, Candida albicans, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The inhibition zone diameters were > 13 mm at a concentration of 120 mg/mL [90].


### Compounds

Several gram-positive bacteria (S. aureus and Enterococcus faecalis) were used to assess the antimicrobial activity of a new compound 266 from S. lyratum, with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values of 2.0 μM (1.08 μg/mL) and 10.0 μM (5.44 μg/mL), respectively [21].


## Other activities

The extracts of S. lyratum showed a therapeutic potential on the tetrachloride-induced liver damage in rats, by decreasing significantly the activity of transaminase in rat serum [91,92]. Further, there was an in vivo report revealed that the aqueous extract of S. lyratum possessed strong antiallergy activity [93] by inhibiting dose-dependently the histamine release from the rat peritoneal mast cells and decreasing the mRNA expression of L-histamine decarboxylase [94]. Lastly, the ethanol extract of S. lyratum possesses molluscicidal activities with IC 50 values of 30-50 mg/mL [95]. Notably, several Chinese patent prescriptions with S. lyratum as the major component herb, showed significant anticancer efficacies in reported clinic trials. For example, 'Baiyingtang' (composed of S. lyratum, Herba Patriniae, Houttuynia cordata, Lilium brownii var., Aspa raguscochinchinensis(Lour.)Merr.) retention enema could reduce plasma transforming growth factor-β1 (TGF-β1), interleukin-6 (IL-6) levels and increase plasma IL-4 levels in patients with pelvic tumors receiving radiotherapy [96]. 'Baiying decoction' (composed of S. lyratum, Ophiocordyceps sinensis, Houttuynia cordata, Lilium brownii var., Asparaguscochinchinensis(Lour.)Merr.) treatment could ameliorate the marrow suppression and the quality of life in patients with advance non-small cell lung cancer, with high safety [97].


# Toxicology

Up to now, the toxicity studies of the isolated compounds and extracts of S. lyratum may have been overlooked by researchers, while few studies have found the toxic potential of Solanum glycoalkaloid [125]. The toxic properties of Glycoalkaloids including solamargine (8) have been reviewed by Sinani AI S.S.S. et al. are due to (1) their ability to disrupt cell-membrane function by complexation with membrane 3β-hydroxysterols to form aggregates and damage the membrane integrity [126], (2) their anti-acetylcholinesterase activity on the central nervous system [126,127], and (3) changes caused by them in active transport of ions through membranes, resulting in disorders in general body metabolism [126]. Additionally, in the acute toxicity experiment with rats, neither mortality nor clinical alterations were shown, except for the mild transient diarrhea with 70% ethanol extract of S. lyratum at 5000 mg/kg [31]. In future, more pharmacological evidences should be sought on the possible adverse effects and the toxicities of S. lyratum extracts and their bioactive constituents when   


# Conclusion

This review summarized the latest advancements of S. lyratum in botany, traditional uses, phytochemistry, pharmacology, and toxicology. Phytochemical and pharmacological studies have validated many modern usages of this plant. A total of 270 chemical constituents have been isolated from S. lyratum, including steroidal alkaloids, steroidal saponins, terpenoids, nitrogenous compounds, phenylpropanoids, flavonoids, etc. It has been popular in traditional practices due to its potential efficacy on cancer and inflammation, and showed important biological properties in scientific investigations. In the phytochemical analysis of S. lyratum extracts, aqueous and ethanol extracts were commonly acquired from S. lyratum, whose main components included total alkaloids and total saponins. In modern pharmacological studies, compounds and extracts from S. lyratum were evaluated in vivo and in vitro, and their anticancer and cytotoxic, antiinflammatory, antioxidant, antimicrobial, anti-allergy, and hepatoprotective activities have been demonstrated. However, many aspects of S. lyratum have not been studied yet and some relative studies on S. lyratum should be further explored in the following aspects in the future. Firstly, the pharmacological activities are mostly proven from the aqueous and ethanol extracts from S. lyratum, while insufficient pharmacological studies have been conducted on pure compounds. In addition, some activities are lacking comparisons to standards or positive and negative controls. Other studies especially on anticancer and anti-inflammatory activities have shown that the IC 50 values of the test extracts/compounds of S. lyratum are above 200 μg/mL, which can be considered that such extracts/compounds are actually poorly active.

Secondly, pharmacological studies were mostly performed in cell models and animals while investigations in humans have been seldomly performed. Hence, the future investigation should be focused on the bioactivity of S. lyratum in various clinical studies with humans. In addition, the DPPH radical scavenging test and antimicrobial activities also should be guaranteed in vivo, instead of solely relying on method models in vitro.

Thirdly, global quality control standards of S. lyratum are needed urgently and should be improved. Simultaneous qualitative and quantitative measures are recommended to be used for those major active constituents of S. lyratum.      Finally, in toxicological studies of S. lyratum, no unequivocal proof of the toxicological activities in human exists. Further, relationship studies between systematic toxicity and safety evaluation are still needed to assure safety for clinical application in the future. Pharmacological effects of S. lyratum have been demonstrated by ethanol and aqueous extracts of high doses, the effectiveness of high doses extracts in treating diseases provides the possibility of finding active compounds. Therefore, it is important to study the therapeutic window (the range between the doses that produce the desired therapeutic effect and doses that produce toxicity) and the long-term in vivo toxicity for further research on S. lyratum.

In summary, S. lyratum can be considered as an important and valuable resources for human's health. Further research is needed in terms of quality control, toxicity and pharmacological mechanism to provide a theoretical basis for exploitation of the medicinal functions of S. lyratum.

## Fig. 1 Fig. 2
12Reviews of Solanum species published in last ten years Plant morphology of S. lyratum, (a) leaves, (b) flowers (c) fruits (d) the whole plant [data originated from the Plant Photo Bank of China (http:// ppbc. iplant. cn/), accessed 10 April 2022] Page 4 of 35 Zhao et al. Natural

## Fig. 4 δ
4Glycones of steroidal alkaloids reported in S. lyratum C 100.0-108.0, especially when the glycosidation taking place at OH-3 of the steroidal alkaloids[47][48][49].

## Fig. 5
5Chemical structures of steroidal alkaloids from S. lyratum


20 (3β,22β,25S)-Spirosol-5-ene-3-O-β-D-xylopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-α-L-rhamnopynanosyl-(1 → 4)-[O-α-Lrhamnopynanosyl-(1 → 2)]-O-β-D-glucopyranoside


-Ethoxyl-(3β,5α,25R)-16,23-epoxyl-23,24-iminocholest-16,20,23(N)-trien-3β-ol-3-O-β-Dglucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-16,23-Epoxyl-22,26-iminocholestane-22(N),23,25(26)-trien-3β-ol-3-O-β-Dglucopyranosyl-(1 → 2)-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl-(1 → 4)-O-β-D-galactopyranoside

## Fig. 8 Fig. 10
810Sapogenin scaffolds of saponins reported in S. lyratum Fig. 9 Glycones of saponins reported in S. lyratum Chemical structures of steroidal saponins from S. lyratumFig. 11 Representative six common steroidal saponins Page 17 of 35 Zhao et al. Natural Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39

## Fig. 12
12Chemical structures of terpenoids from S. lyratum

## Fig. 13 Further
13Chemical structures of nitrogenous compounds from S. lyratum , the cytotoxic potentials of nine steroids saponins and alkaloids (36, 72, 73, 81-83, 86) against ASGC7901 and BEL-7402 cancer cell lines were tested, and compounds 72, 73, and 83 showed attractive antiproliferative activities with respective IC 50 values of 6.39-9.11 μM, 3.19-8.86 μM and 0.39-1.16 μM, as compared with IC 50 values of 0.17-5.34 μM and 8.15-23.06 μM of positive control adriamycin and 5-fluorouracil, respectively [22]. Another, a glycoalkaloid (10) exhibited significant cytotoxicity against mouse colon cancer CT-26 cells with IC 50 3.5 μM, as compared to IC 50 values of 1.8 μM of positive control etoposide, in clue of the inhibition on the expressions of survivin and NF-κB/p65 and the induction of the AIF nuclear translocation [74]. Besides those characteristic constituents of S. lyratum, four other compounds 267-270 have been evaluated their cytotoxicities against hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines, and 267 and 269 showed significant inhibitory activities against HepG2 cell lines with IC 50 values of 46.07 μM and 45.39 μM, respectively[26].

## Fig. 14
14Chemical structures of lignans from S. lyratum

## Fig. 15
15Chemical structures of coumarins, simple phenylpropanoids and their derivatives from S. lyratum

## Fig. 16
16Chemical structures of flavonoids from S. lyratum Page 25 of 35 Zhao et al. Natural Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39 used in treatments of acute, subchronic, or chronic diseases. Further, more clinical trials must be conducted to evaluate the safety and clinical efficacy of S. lyratum in humans.

## Table 1
1Traditional uses of S. lyratumPlant part used Place 
Traditional uses 


## Table 2
2Steroidal alkaloids isolated from S. lyratumNo Compounds 


## Table 2 (continued)
2No Compounds 


## Table 3
3Representative 13 C NMR data of six common steroid alkaloidsPosition 
Compound 8 a 
(spirosolane-
type) 

Compound 4 b 
(spirosolane-
type) 

Compound 19 b 
(spirosolane-type) 

Compound 26 c 
(solanidane-type) 

Compound 24 c 
(solanidane-type) 

Compound 33 b 
(solalyraine-
type) 

1 
37.6 
38.2 
38.5 
37.1 
37.3 
29.7 

2 
30.3 
30.4 
30.7 
31.5 
31.5 
30.4 

3 
78.1 
79.3 
79.9 
71.2 
71.6 
79.3 

4 
39.0 
35.3 
39.6 
38.2 
42.3 
30.4 

5 
148.0 
46.0 
142.1 
45.0 
141.0 
46.1 

6 
121.9 
29.8 
122.3 
28.7 
121.3 
32.9 

7 
32.7 
33.2 
33.1 
32.3 
32.1 
35.3 

8 
31.8 
36.5 
32.8 
35.4 
31.7 
38.0 

9 
50.4 
55.6 
51.5 
54.5 
50.2 
55.7 

10 
37.2 
36.8 
38.0 
35.6 
36.6 
36.9 

11 
21.3 
22.1 
21.9 
21.0 
20.8 
22.2 

12 
40.2 
40.6 
40.4 
39.6 
39.4 
37.1 

13 
40.7 
42.4 
42.2 
41.4 
41.4 
48.1 

14 
56.8 
57.5 
57.7 
57.4 
57.7 
57.2 

15 
32.5 
33.0 
33.0 
31.5 
31.5 
35.2 

16 
78.9 
84.7 
84.8 
69.6 
69.6 
138.7 

17 
63.6 
63.2 
63.0 
62.2 
62.2 
149.8 

18 
16.7 
16.7 
16.5 
16.8 
16.6 
17.1 

19 
19.5 
12.7 
19.8 
12.4 
19.4 
12.6 

20 
41.7 
42.8 
42.8 
30.6 
30.6 
141.4 

21 
15.8 
14.7 
14.9 
18.9 
18.9 
12.3 

22 
98.5 
100.2 
100.2 
78.9 
78.9 
162.6 

23 
34.8 
33.4 
33.2 
67.0 
67.0 
141.7 

24 
31.2 
28.9 
28.9 
37.1 
37.1 
63.2 

25 
31.7 
29.5 
29.5 
26.9 
26.9 
31.6 

26 
48.2 
46.7 
46.7 
58.7 
58.7 
38.2 

27 
19.9 
18.6 
18.6 
22.4 
22.4 
16.6 

Gal-(1 → 3)-skeleton 

1' 
102.7 
102.8 
102.3 
102.3 
102.7 

2' 
73.2 
73.2 
73.1 
73.1 
73.2 

3' 
75.3 
75.2 
75.4 
75.4 
75.3 

4' 
80.2 
80.5 
80.8 
80.8 
80.2 

5' 
75.9 
76.3 
76.5 
76.5 
75.9 

6' 
61.1 
60.9 
60.4 
60.4 
61.1 

Glc-(1 → 3)-skeleton 

1' 
100.3 

2' 
78.0 

3' 
77.8 

4' 
78.6 

5' 
77.0 

6' 
61.3 

Rha'-(1 → 4)-Gal 

1'' 
102.1 

2'' 
72.6 

3'' 
72.9 

4'' 
74.2 

5'' 
69.6 

6'' 
18.8 



## Table 3 (continued)
3Position 
Compound 8 a 
(spirosolane-
type) 

Compound 4 b 
(spirosolane-
type) 

Compound 19 b 
(spirosolane-type) 

Compound 26 c 
(solanidane-type) 

Compound 24 c 
(solanidane-type) 

Compound 33 b 
(solalyraine-
type) 

Rha''-(1 → 2)-Gal 

1'' 
102.9 

2'' 
72.6 

3'' 
72.8 

4'' 
74.0 

5'' 
70.5 

6'' 
18.6 

Glc'-(1 → 4)-Gal 

1'' 
104.3 
104.9 
105.0 
105.0 
104.3 

2'' 
81.0 
85.0 
85.8 
85.8 
81.1 

3'' 
87.9 
77.6 
78.0 
78.0 
87.9 

4'' 
71.0 
70.7 
71.7 
71.7 
71.0 

5'' 
78.3 
78.2 
77.4 
77.4 
78.3 

6'' 
62.7 
62.0 
61.4 
61.4 
62.0 

Glc''-(1 → 2)-Glc' 

1''' 
104.7 
106.2 
106.7 
106.7 
104.7 

2''' 
75.6 
75.6 
74.9 
74.9 
75.6 

3''' 
78.5 
78.7 
78.2 
78.2 
78.5 

4''' 
71.6 
71.8 
70.2 
70.2 
71.6 

5''' 
78.0 
77.9 
77.4 
77.4 
78.0 

6''' 
63.2 
63.2 
63.1 
63.1 
63.1 

Xyl-(1 → 3)-Glc' 

1''' 
105.0 
104.8 
105.0 

2''' 
75.2 
75.5 
75.3 

3''' 
77.5 
78.5 
77.5 

4''' 
70.4 
70.4 
70.5 

5''' 
67.2 
67.2 
67.2 

a In C 5 D 5 N; b In CD 3 OD; c In CDCl 3 



## Table 4
4Steroids isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 
Chemical formula 
Molecular Wt 
Refs. 

42 
Tigogenin 
C 27 H 44 O 3 
416.3290 
[47] 

43 
Diosgenin 
C 27 H 42 O 3 
414.3134 
[47] 

44 
(25R)-Spirost-4-ene-3,12-dione 
C 27 H 38 O 4 
426.2770 
[47] 

45 
(25R)-Spirostane-4,6-dien-3-one 
C 27 H 38 O 3 
410.2821 
[47] 

46 
(25R)-Spirost-4-en-3-one 
C 27 H 40 O 3 
412.1977 
[47] 

47 
7-Ketodiosgenin 
C 27 H 40 O 4 
428.2927 
[47] 

48 
Agigenin 
C 27 H 44 O 5 
448.3189 
[47] 

49 
Hecogenin 
C 27 H 42 O 4 
430.3083 
[47] 

50 
△ 5(6) -22-Isospirostene-2,3-diol 
C 27 H 42 O 4 
430.3038 
[47] 

51 
Gitogenin 
C 27 H 44 O 4 
432.3240 
[47] 

52 
20-Hydroxydiosgenone 
C 27 H 40 O 4 
428.2927 
[47] 

53 
(25R)-25-Hydroxyspirost-4-en-3-one 
C 27 H 42 O 4 
430.3083 
[47] 

54 
Tigogenone 
C 27 H 42 O 3 
414.3134 
[50] 

55 
△ 3,5 -deoxytigogenin-(25R)-spirost-3,5-diene 
C 27 H 40 O 2 
396.3208 
[48] 

56 
Diosgenin 
C 27 H 42 O 2 
398.3185 
[35] 

57 
Yamogenin 
C 27 H 42 O 2 
398.3185 
[35] 

58 
Periplogenin 
C 23 H 34 O 5 
390.2406 
[47] 

59 
16-Dehydropregnenolone 
C 21 H 30 O 2 
314.2246 
[51] 

60 
3-Hydroxy-5-pregn-16-en-20-one 
C 21 H 32 O 2 
316.2402 
[51] 

61 
3β,6α,16β-Trihydroxy-5α-pregnane-(20S)-carboxylic acid 
(22,16)-lactone 

C 22 H 32 O 3 
344.2351 
[47] 

62 
24-Methylcholest-5-en-3,16-diol 
C 28 H 48 O 2 
416.3654 
[47] 

63 
Cholesterol 
C 27 H 46 O 
386.3549 
[40] 

64 
5α-Stigmanstane-3,6-dione 
C 29 H 48 O 2 
428.3654 
[40] 

65 
4-Methylcholest-7-en-3β-ol 
C 28 H 48 O 
400.3705 
[50] 

66 
24α-Methylcholestane-7,22-diene-3β,5α,6β-triol 
C 28 H 46 O 3 
430.3447 
[36] 

67 
5α-Stigmanstane-3-hydroxy-6-dione 
C 29 H 50 O 2 
430.3811 
[40] 

68 
β-Sitosterol 
C 30 H 52 O 
428.7330 
[44] 

69 
Daucosterol 
C 35 H 60 O 6 
576.4390 
[44] 

70 
Ergosterol endoperoxide 
C 28 H 44 O 3 
428.3290 
[52] 

71 
9,11-Dehydroergosterol endoperoxide 
C 28 H 42 O 3 
426.3134 
[52] 



## Table 5
5Steroidal saponins isolated from S. lyratumNo CompoundsChemical formula Molecular Wt Refs.

## Table 6
6Representative 13 C NMR data of six common steroidal saponins (in C 5 H 5 N-d 5 )Position 
Compound 73 
(spirostanol-type) 

Compound 79 
(spirostanol-type) 

Compound 60 
(C 21 -steroid-type) 

Compound 91 
(C 21 -steroid-type) 

Compound 97 
(furostanol-type) 

Compound 99 
(furostanol-type) 

1 
37.2 
37.6 
32.5 
37.3 
37.4 
37.2 

2 
29.9 
30.4 
32.2 
30.2 
30.2 
30.8 

3 
78.5 
78.4 
70.6 
78.0 
77.2 
77.4 

4 
34.8 
39.4 
37.3 
39.3 
39.2 
34.8 

5 
44.7 
141.2 
45.5 
141.4 
141.0 
44.7 

6 
28.9 
121.6 
29.1 
121.3 
121.6 
28.9 

7 
32.4 
32.4 
32.3 
31.7 
32.1 
32.4 

8 
35.3 
31.9 
34.0 
30.3 
31.6 
35.2 

9 
54.4 
50.5 
56.6 
50.7 
50.2 
54.4 

10 
35.8 
37.2 
36.0 
37.1 
37.0 
35.8 

11 
21.3 
21.3 
21.4 
20.9 
21.0 
21.2 

12 
40.1 
40.1 
39.3 
35.1 
39.7 
40.0 

13 
40.8 
40.6 
46.6 
46.3 
40.5 
41.1 

14 
56.4 
56.8 
55.4 
56.4 
56.5 
56.3 

15 
32.1 
32.3 
35.4 
32.3 
32.2 
32.1 

16 
81.1 
81.2 
144.7 
144.6 
81.3 
81.3 

17 
63.0 
63.2 
155.5 
155.2 
64.2 
64.3 

18 
16.5 
16.4 
16.3 
15.9 
19.3 
16.5 

19 
12.3 
19.5 
12.4 
19.2 
19.3 
12.3 

20 
42.0 
42.1 
196.3 
196.2 
40.7 
40.5 

21 
14.9 
15.0 
30.5 
27.1 
16.3 
16.3 

22 
109.2 
109.3 
112.6 
112.6 

23 
31.8 
32.0 
30.8 
30.0 

24 
29.2 
29.4 
28.4 
28.2 

25 
30.6 
30.7 
34.2 
34.2 

26 
66.9 
67.0 
75.2 
75.2 

27 
17.2 
17.3 
17.2 
17.1 

22-OCH 3 
47.2 
47.2 

Gal-(1 → 3)-skeleton 

1' 
102.5 
103.0 
100.3 
102.7 
102.4 

2' 
73.1 
73.5 
73.2 
73.3 
73.3 

3' 
75.5 
75.4 
75.6 
75.6 
75.6 

4' 
79.8 
79.8 
81.0 
81.0 
81.0 

5' 
75.3 
75.9 
75.1 
75.2 
75.2 

6' 
60.6 
61.0 
60.4 
60.4 
60.5 

Glc'-(1 → 4)-Gal 

1'' 
104.9 
107.0 
105.2 
105.0 
105.0 

2'' 
81.2 
75.2 
86.1 
86.1 
86.1 

3'' 
87.0 
78.4 
78.5 
78.5 
78.4 

4'' 
70.4 
72.4 
71.8 
71.8 
71.8 

5'' 
77.6 
78.7 
78.2 
78.2 
78.9 

6'' 
63.0 
63.1 
63.2 
63.2 
63.2 

Glc''-(1 → 2)-Glc' 

1''' 
104.7 
106.9 
106.9 
106.9 

2''' 
76.1 
76.6 
76.7 
76.7 

3''' 
77.5 
77.6 
77.6 
77.6 

4''' 
71.1 
70.3 
70.3 
70.3 

5''' 
77.8 
78.9 
78.9 
78.9 

6''' 
62.5 
61.6 
61.6 
61.6 



## Table 6 (continued)
6Position 
Compound 73 
(spirostanol-type) 

Compound 79 
(spirostanol-type) 

Compound 60 
(C 21 -steroid-type) 

Compound 91 
(C 21 -steroid-type) 

Compound 97 
(furostanol-type) 

Compound 99 
(furostanol-type) 

Xyl-(1 → 3)-Glc' 

1''' 
104.9 

2''' 
75.0 

3''' 
78.5 

4''' 
70.7 

5''' 
67.2 

26-Glc 

1'''' 
105.2 
105.2 

2'''' 
75.2 
75.2 

3'''' 
78.6 
78.6 

4'''' 
71.7 
71.7 

5'''' 
78.5 
78.5 

6'''' 
62.9 
62.9 



## Table 7
7Terpenoids isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 


## Table 7 (continued)
7No 
Compounds 


## Table 8
8Nitrogenous compounds isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 


## Table 9
9Lignans isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 
Chemical formula 
Molecular Wt 
Refs. 

179 
( +)-Isolariciresinol 
C 22 H 22 O 8 
414.1315 
[47] 

180 
ent-Isolariciresinol 
C 22 H 22 O 8 
414.1315 
[32, 47] 

181 
( +)-Lyoniresinol 
C 22 H 28 O 8 
420.1784 
[47] 

182 
Isolariciresinol-9-acetate 
C 22 H 26 O 7 
402.1679 
[66] 

183 
Aviculin 
C 22 H 22 O 8 
414.1315 
[32, 47] 

184 
(−)-Secoisolariciresinol 
C 20 H 26 O 6 
362.1729 
[32, 47] 

185 
( +)-Matairesinol 
C 20 H 22 O 6 
358.1416 
[47] 

186 
Leptolepisol D 
C 27 H 32 O 10 
516.1995 
[32, 47] 

187 
Ciwujiatone 
C 22 H 26 O 9 
434.1577 
[32, 47] 

188 
3-Methoxy-4-hydroxy-5-[(8'S)-3'-methoxy-4'-hydroxyphenylpropyl 
alcohol]-E-cinnamic alcohol-4-O-β-D-glucopyranoside 

C 26 H 34 O 11 
522.2101 
[68] 

189 
( +)-Pinoresinol 
C 20 H 22 O 6 
358.1416 
[32, 47] 

190 
( +)-Medioresinol 
C 21 H 24 O 7 
388.1522 
[47] 

191 
( +)-Syringaresinol 
C 22 H 26 O 8 
418.1628 
[32] 

192 
(−)-Syringaresinol 
C 22 H 26 O 8 
418.1628 
[47] 

193 
(−)-Epipinoresinol 
C 21 H 24 O 7 
388.1522 
[32, 47] 

194 
( +)-Lariciresinol 
C 20 H 24 O 6 
360.1573 
[47] 

195 
(7S,8R,7'R,8'R)-Solanumin A 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

196 
(7R,8S,7'S,8'S)-Solanumin A 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

197 
Solanumin B 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

198 
Solanumin C 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

199 
Solanumin D 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

200 
Solanumin E 
C 30 H 40 O 9 
544.2672 
[20] 

201 
Solanumin F 
C 31 H 42 O 9 
558.2829 
[20] 

202 
Solanumin G 
C 31 H 42 O 9 
558.2829 
[20] 

203 
Solanumin H 
C 26 H 32 O 7 
456.2148 
[20] 

204 
Solanumin I 
C 30 H 38 O 8 
526.2567 
[20] 

205 
Cinncassin D 
C 28 H 28 O 9 
508.1733 
[47] 



## Table 10
10Coumarins, simple phenylpropanoids and their derivatives isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 
Chemical formula 
Molecular Wt 
Refs. 

206 
Scopoletin 
C 10 H 8 O 4 
192.0423 
[47] 

207 
Solalyratin A 
C 20 H 16 O 5 
336.0998 
[25] 

208 
Coumestrol 
C 15 H 8 O 5 
268.0372 
[25] 

209 
Puerariafuran 
C 16 H 12 O 5 
284.0685 
[25] 

210 
9-Hydroxy-2' ,2-dimethylpyrano[5' ,6':2,3]-coumestan 
C 20 H 16 O 5 
336.0998 
[25] 

211 
Magnolioside 
C 16 H 18 O 9 
354.0951 
[69] 

212 
7-(2,3-Epoxy-3-methyl-3-butyloxy)-6-methoxycoumarin 
C 15 H 16 O 5 
276.0998 
[47] 

213 
Caffeic acid 
C 9 H 8 O 4 
180.0423 
[47] 

214 
p-Hydroxybenzaldehyde 
C 7 H 6 O 2 
122.0368 
[47] 

215 
Protocatechuic acid 
C 7 H 6 O 4 
154.0266 
[47] 

216 
Syringaldehyde 
C 9 H 10 O 4 
182.0579 
[47] 

217 
Syringate 
C 9 H 10 O 5 
198.0528 
[47] 

218 
Isovanillin 
C 8 H 8 O 3 
152.0473 
[47] 

219 
Vanillic acid 
C 8 H 8 O 4 
168.0423 
[36] 

220 
p-Hydroxyphenethyl alcohol 
C 8 H 10 O 2 
138.0681 
[36] 

221 
Zhebeiresinol 
C 14 H 16 O 6 
280.0947 
[32, 47] 

222 
Eugenyl-O-β-D-apiofuranosyl-(1'' → 6')-O-β-D-glucopyranoside 
C 20 H 28 O 11 
444.1632 
[47] 

223 
Syringin 
C 17 H 24 O 9 
372.1420 
[32] 

224 
Arbutin 
C 12 H 16 O 7 
272.0896 
[70] 

225 
Dihydroconiferyl ferulate 
C 20 H 22 O 6 
358.1416 
[36] 

226 
Dihydrosinapyl ferulate 
C 21 H 24 O 7 
388.1522 
[36] 

227 
Docosvl ferulate 
C 32 H 54 O 4 
502.4022 
[47] 



## Table 11
11Flavonoids isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 


## Table 12
12Other compounds isolated from S. lyratumNo 
Compounds 
Chemical formula 
Molecular Wt 
Refs. 

259 
Erythritol 
C 4 H 10 O 4 
122.0579 
[47] 

260 
Mannitol 
C 6 H 14 O 6 
182.0790 
[47] 

261 
3,4' ,5-Trihydroxystilbene 
C 14 H 12 O 3 
228.0786 
[72] 

262 
1,3,5-Trihydroxy-7-methylanthraquinone 
C 15 H 12 O 5 
272.0685 
[50] 

263 
1,5-Dihydroxy-3-methoxy-7-methylanthraquinone 
C 16 H 14 O 5 
286.0841 
[50] 

264 
Physcion-8-O-β-D-glucopyranoside 
C 22 H 24 O 10 
446.1213 
[50] 

265 
Ethyl-α-D-arabinofuranoside 
C 7 H 14 O 5 
178.0841 
[69] 

266 
Solanrubiellin A 
C 31 H 28 O 9 
544.1733 
[21] 

267 
Solacetal A 
C 27 H 40 O 7 
476.2774 
[26] 

268 
Solacetal B 
C 26 H 38 O 6 
446.2628 
[26] 

269 
Solacetal C 
C 27 H 42 O 7 
478.2931 
[26] 

270 
Solacetal D 
C 28 H 44 O 8 
508.3036 
[26] 

Fig. 17 Chemical structures of other compounds reported from S. lyratum 



## Table 13
13Pharmacological activities of S. lyratum In vitro Increasing expression of IκBa and fas protein, decreasing expression of NF-κB/ p65, Survivin, fasL and p-IκBa proteins, arresting the cell cycle at the GBioactivities 

Object 

In vitro / in vivo Mechanism 

Extracts/Compounds 

Refs. 

Anti-lung cancer 
mice with Lewis lung cancer 

In vivo 
Down-regulating the expression of Notch 

signaling pathway, improving the NK 

cell activity, increasing the number of 
CD 
4 cells, increasing sub-G 

1 peaks, and 

activating caspase-8, -9, and -3 protein, 

IC 

50 

= 170 μg/mL 

Total alkaloids, methanol and ethanol 
extracts 

[19, 82, 98] 

Balb/C mouse with A549 lung cancer 

In vivo/in vitro 
Up-regulating the expression of bid 

mRNA, caspase-9, and inhibiting the 
tumor angiogenesis in Balb/C mice 

50%, 80% ethanol extracts 

[99] 

A549 cells and tumor-derived vascular 
endothelial cells 

In vitro 
Interfering with cell membrane lipid rafts, 
inhibiting tumor angiogenesis, inhibiting 

the activity of A549-derived exosomes, 
increasing immunity, suppressing Td-ECs 
migration, invasion, and tube formation, 
inhibiting pathways proteins, IC 

50 

= 99.59-

100 μg/mL 

Compounds 1-4, 19, 31, 32, 37-41 

[33, 43] 

A549 cells 

2 phase, 

down-regulating the protein levels of 

PI3K, protein kinase B (Akt), Ras, micro-
tubule-associated protein2 (MAP2), and 

VEGF, activating caspase-8 and caspase-3 
proteins, IC 

50 

= 6.54-13.49 μg/mL 
Total alkaloids, ethanol and aqueous 
extracts, Compounds 42, 44, 55, 231 

[47, 82, 86, 100-102] 

SPC-A-1 cells 

In vitro 
Inhibiting cell proliferation, promoted 

cell apoptosis, decreasing the expression 
of Bcl-xl, increasing the expression of fas, 
caspase-3, and bid, IC 

50 

= 5-12.5 mg/mL 
Ethanol and aqueous extracts 

[103, 104] 

Anti-hepatoma 

Hep3B cells 

In vitro 
Inducing apoptosis and inhibit pro-
liferation, 140 IC 

50 

= 47.81 μM, 269 

IC 

50 

= 46.07 μM, 271 IC 

50 

= 45.39 μM 

Compounds 138, 267, 269 

[20, 26, 62] 

BEL-7402 cells 

In vitro 
Inducing apoptosis, activity similar to 
adriamycin and greater than 5-fluorouracil, 

IC 

50 

= 0.39-23.0 μM 

Compounds 36, 72, 73, 81-83, 86 

[22] 

Huh-7 cells 

In vitro 
Inducing apoptosis, activating p38 and 
Caspase-3 protein, IC 

50 

= 15 mg/mL 

Total alkaloids 

[105] 

SMMC-7721 cells 

In vitro 
Up-regulating Fas, caspase-8, caspase-3, 

and p53, down-regulating FasL, survivin 
and Bcl-2 in the mitochondrial pathway, 
IC 

50 

= 5 mg/L 

75% ethanol extracts 

[79] 



## Table 13 (continued)
13ing splenocytes proliferation, NK cell and Cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) activity, interleukin-2 and interferon-γ production from splenocytes, and increasing the thymus and spleen indices to a certain extentIn vitro Arresting the cell cycle at the G 1 /S phase, up-regulating the expression of caspase-3, caspase-9 mRNA anti-tumor effect, and increasing the lactate dehydrogenaseBioactivities 

Object 

In vitro / in vivo Mechanism 

Extracts/Compounds 

Refs. 

HepG2 cells 

In vitro 
Arresting the cell cycle at s-phase, 
inducing apoptosis, solamargine 

IC 

50 

= 10.8 
± 0.1 μM, solasodine 

IC 

50 

= 19.4 
± 0.4 μM, and solasonine 

IC 

50 

= 91.8 
± 9.4 μM 

Compounds 5, 8, 21 

[83] 

Anti-sarcoma 
S180 tumor-bearing mice 

In vivo 
Arresting the cell cycle at G 

0 /G 
1 phase, 

improving immune response, promot-

EtOAc fractions, total saponins, ethanol 
extracts 

[77, 80, 106] 

Anti-cervical cancer 

HeLa cells 

In vitro 
Up-regulating the expression of caspase-3 

mRNA, down-regulating the expression 

of survivin mRNA, activation of caspase-3, 
IC 

50 

= 14.53 μg/mL 

75% Ethanol and aqueous extracts, total 
saponins, compounds 44, 55, 59, 74, 75, 

177, 229, 231, 237 

[42, 47, 107-109] 

Anti-ovarian cancer 

A2780 cells 

In vitro 
Inducing cell cycle arrest, enhanced reac-

tive oxygen species (ROS) accumulation, 
activating the p53 signaling pathway, 
increasing the percentage of Cluster of 
Differentiation 86 (CD86 
+) cells, decreas-

ing the percentage of Cluster of Differen-
tiation 26 (CD26 
+) cells, and down-regu-

lating expression of Bcl-2 mRNA 

Ethanol and aqueous extracts 

[110] 

HO8910 cells 

In vitro 
Inducing apoptosis, inhibiting prolifera-

tion in a dose-dependent, IC 

50 

= 5 μg/mL 
75% Ethanol extracts 

[111] 

SKOV3 cells 

(LDH) release, IC 

50 

= 4.51-7.78 μg/mL 

90% Ethanol extracts 

[112] 

Anti-breast cancer 

CHO cells 

In vitro 
Arresting the cell cycle at G 

2 phase, and 

inhibiting proliferation of CHO cells, 

IC 

50 

= 0.5-1 g/mL 

Aqueous extracts 

[113] 

MCF-7 cell 

In vitro 
Up-regulating the expression of Bax 

mRNA and down-regulating the expres-
sion of survivin mRNA, IC 

50 

= 160 μg/mL 

Total saponins 

[114] 



## Table 13 (continued)
13In vitro Arresting the cell cycle at G0/G1 phase, suppressing the anti-apoptotic proteinsBcl-2 and Bcl-xl, increasing the pro-apoptotic proteins Bax and Bad, promoting the production of ROS and Ca 2+In vivo Inhibiting the precursors of T cells and Bcells, promoting the precursors of macrophages, increasing macrophage and NK cell activities, promoting the activity of macrophage phagocytosis in the periph-Bioactivities 

Object 

In vitro / in vivo Mechanism 

Extracts/Compounds 

Refs. 

Anti-oral cancer 
HSC-3, SAS, and CAL-27 cell 

, decreasing 

the mitochondrial membrane potential, 
stimulating NO production, and activating 
caspase-8, -9, and -3 proteins activities, 

IC 

50 

= 40 μg/mL 

Chloroform extracts 

[115] 

Anti-stomach cancer 

BGC823 cells 

In vitro 
Blocking the cell cycle in the G 

1 /M phase, 

inducing apoptosis and inhibiting prolif-
eration, IC 

50 

= 25 μg/mL 

Compounds 44, 55, 231 

[47] 

SGC-7901 cells 

In vitro 
Down-regulating expression of Bcl-xl 

mRNA and proteins, up-regulating expres-
sion of bid mRNA and proteins, caspase-9 
and bid genes, strengthening the activity 
of Caspase-3; blocking the cell cycle in the 
G 
2 /M phase, IC 

50 

= 12.45-47.65 g/L 
Aqueous extracts, total saponin, com-
pounds 8, 86 

[3, 116, 117] 

Anti-colon cancer 

HT-29 cells 

In vitro 
Down-regulating expression of survivin 

gene, up-regulating the expression of 
Caspase-3, 8, 9 mRNA and proteins; 
down-regulating the expression of Notch 

l mRNA, influencing the Notch signaling 
pathway to inhibit colorectal cancer cell 
proliferation and inducing apoptosis 

Aqueous extracts 

[118] 

CT-26 cells 

In vitro 
Increasing caspase-independent apop-

tosis associated with increased nuclear 
translocation of AIF, IC 

50 

= 3.5 μM 

Compounds 10, 105 

[74] 

HT-29 cells 

In vitro 
Inducing apoptosis and inhibiting prolif-
eration, ED 

50 

= 1.9-3.7 μg/mL 

Compounds 107, 116, 125, 127, 134, 

136, 142, 143 

[1, 60, 119] 

Anti-leukemia 

Leukemia mice 

eral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and 
peritoneal cells 

Ethanol extracts 

[78] 

HL-60 cells 

In vitro 
Up-regulating the expression of Bax 

mRNA, down-regulating expression of 
Bcl-2 mRNA, increasing Bax/ Bcl-2 protein 
ratio, IC 

50 

= 3.5 mg/mL 

Aqueous extracts 

[120] 

P-388 cells 

In vitro 
Inhibiting proliferation and inducing 
apoptosis, ED 

50 

= 2.7-3.1 μg/mL 

Compounds 134, 136 

[119] 



## Table 13 (continued)
13Anti-prostate cancer DU-145 cells and xenograft athymic nude mice In vitro/in vivo Blocking the expression of cell cycle proteins (Cyclin D1, Cyclin E1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, and P21) and inducing apoptosis via ROS and activation of the P38 pathway, IC promoting the production of ROS and NO, decreasing the levels of mitochondrial membrane potential and promoting the activations of caspase-8, 9, 3; promoting the Bax level and release of cytochrome C, IC In vitro Increasing the expression of Bcl-2 protein, and inhibiting the expression of Bax protein in tert-Butyl hydroperoxide (tBHP)induced SH-SY5Y cells. inhibiting tBHPinduced ROS production, IC 50 = 25-50 μM Total alkaloids, compounds 194-203 [20, 123] Anti-inflammatory SD rats In vivo Decreasing the content of PGE2 and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in serum Aqueous and ethanol extracts, total saponins In vitro Inhibiting the growth of Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, salmonella, and Candida albicans, MIC = 100 mg/mL; pseudomonas aeruginosa, MIC Gram-positive bacteria In vitro Inhibiting the S. aureus and E. faecalis, In vivo Inhibiting the histamine release, adding the level of cAMP, inhibiting overexpression of L-histamine decarboxylase mRNA In vitro Reducing the expression level of the mRNA of histidine decarboxylase (HDC), affecting IgE-mediated anaphylactic reaction and substance P-induced HDC mRNA over-expression In vivo Inhibiting the allergy to peritoneal mast cell histamine, delaying the kinetics of Low-Density Lipoprotein (LDL) oxidation, increasing the activity of peroxidase (POD)and superoxide dismutase (SOD), reducing the activity of malonaldehyde (MDA)Bioactivities 

Object 

In vitro / in vivo Mechanism 

Extracts/Compounds 

Refs. 

50 

= 32.18 μM 

Steroidal glycoalkaloid 

[121] 

Anti-bone cancer 

U-2 OS cells 

In vitro 
Arresting the cell cycle at the G 

1 phase, 

50 

= 25 μg/mL 

50% Ethanol extracts 

[122] 

Anti-neuroblastoma 

SH-SY5Y cells 

[85, 86, 124] 

polymorphonuclear leukocytes of rats 

In vivo 
Inhibiting the release of β-glucuronidase, 

IC 

50 

= 10 μM 

Compounds 252-255 

[73] 

Anti-microbial 
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Sal-

monella, Candida albicans, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa 

= 50 mg/mL 
Crude extracts, polysaccharides 

[90] 

MIC 
= 2-10 μM 

Compound 266 

[21] 

Anti-allergy 

Normal mice 

Aqueous extracts 

[2] 

Mast cells 

Aqueous extracts 

[93] 

Normal mice 

Aqueous extracts 

[88] 



## Table 13 (continued)
13= 6.73 mg/mL Ethanol and ethyl acetate extract of S. lyratum fruits, compounds 249, 251Bioactivities 

Object 

In vitro / in vivo Mechanism 

Extracts/Compounds 

Refs. 

Antioxidant activity 

SH-SYSY cells 

In vitro 
Preserving mitochondrial membrane 
potential and reducing oxidative stress, 

LC 

50 

= 4.64 μM, 457.12 μM, respectively; 
inhibiting tBHP-induced ROS production, 
oxidative stress, IC 

50 

= 20 mg/L 

Compounds 9,10 

Total alkaloids 

[87, 123] 

DPPH 

In vitro 
Scavenging activity of the stable DPPH 

free radical, IC 

50 

= 5.98-23.16 mg/L 
Ethyl acetate extracts, compounds 236, 
248, 249, 251, 258 

[70] 

DPPH 

In vitro 
Scavenging free radical, ethanol extract 

IC 

50 

= 0.23 mg/mL, ethyl acetate extract 

IC 

50 

= 1.01 mg/mL, 251 IC 

50 

= 3.30 mg/ 

mL, 253 IC 

50 

[89] 

Hepatoprotective activity CCl4 induce mice 

In vivo 
Decreasing alanine aminotransferase 

(ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 
and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) con-
tents, reducing CCl 
4 -induced liver injury, 

anti-lipid peroxidation effect, decreasing 
transaminase activities in serum 

Ethanol extracts 

[91, 92] 

Molluscicidal activity 

Snails 

In vitro 
Having a molluscicidal effect, 

IC 

50 

= 30-50 mg/mL 

Ethanol extracts, compound 21 

[95] 


AcknowledgementsThe authors are grateful to the staff of researchers at the State Key LaboraAuthor contributionsThe manuscript was prepared by Y. Zhao. Y. Zhao, W.-K. Gao, and X.-D. Wang completed the writing of this review. The research work was supported by the projects of H.-H. Wu. All the authors reviewed the final version of the manuscript and approve it for publication. To the best of our knowledge and belief, this manuscript has not been published in whole or in part nor is it being considered for publication elsewhere. All authors have seen the manuscript and approved to submit to your journal. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.DeclarationsCompeting interestsThe authors declare no conflict of interest.
Three new cytotoxic sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. F Yao, Q L Song, L Zhang, G S Li, S J Dai, Phytochem Lett. 6Yao F, Song QL, Zhang L, Li GS, Dai SJ. Three new cytotoxic sesquiterpe- noids from Solanum lyratum. Phytochem Lett. 2013;6:453-6.

Abolition of anaphylactic shock by Solanum lyratum Thunb. B Kang, E Lee, I Hong, J Lee, H Kim, Int J Immunopharmacol. 19Kang B, Lee E, Hong I, Lee J, Kim H. Abolition of anaphylactic shock by Solanum lyratum Thunb. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1997;19:729-34.

The primary study on the anti-tumor effect of total saponin of Solanum lyratum Thunb. J Ren, G Feng, M Wang, L Sun, Cancer Res Prevent Treat. 33Ren J, Feng G, Wang M, Sun L. The primary study on the anti-tumor effect of total saponin of Solanum lyratum Thunb. Cancer Res Prevent Treat. 2006;33:262-4.

A furostanol glucuronide from Solanum lyratum. Y Shoji, N Murakami, M Yamasaki, Phytochemistry. 24Shoji Y, Murakami N, Yamasaki M. A furostanol glucuronide from Sola- num lyratum. Phytochemistry. 1985;24:2748-50.

Steroidal saponins and their pharmacological activities in Solanum plants. F F Chen, Y W Zhang, X F Huang, Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 41Chen FF, Zhang YW, Huang XF. Steroidal saponins and their pharma- cological activities in Solanum plants. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2016;41:976-88.

Antifungal and antimicrobial proteins and peptides of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) tubers and their applications. V Bártová, J Bárta, M Jarošová, Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 103Bártová V, Bárta J, Jarošová M. Antifungal and antimicrobial proteins and peptides of potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) tubers and their appli- cations. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2019;103:5533-47.

The genus solanum: an ethnopharmacological, phytochemical and biological properties review. J S Kaunda, Y J Zhang, Nat Prod Bioprospect. 9Kaunda JS, Zhang YJ. The genus solanum: an ethnopharmacological, phytochemical and biological properties review. Nat Prod Bioprospect. 2019;9:77-137.

Solanum fruits: phytochemicals, bioaccessibility and bioavailability, and their relationship with their healthpromoting effects. C A Elizalde-Romero, L A Montoya-Inzunza, L A Contreras-Angulo, J B Heredia, E P Gutiérrez-Grijalva, Front Nutr. 8790582Elizalde-Romero CA, Montoya-Inzunza LA, Contreras-Angulo LA, Heredia JB, Gutiérrez-Grijalva EP. Solanum fruits: phytochemicals, bioac- cessibility and bioavailability, and their relationship with their health- promoting effects. Front Nutr. 2021;8: 790582.

Shanghai: Shanghai Scientific & Technical Publishers. J Xinxiu Su, Bencao, 174Su J. Xinxiu Bencao. Shanghai: Shanghai Scientific & Technical Publish- ers; 1957. p. 174.

Shanghai: Shanghai Classics Publishing House. S W Tang, Z J Shang, Zhenglei, Bencao, 176Tang SW, Shang ZJ. Zhenglei Bencao. Shanghai: Shanghai Classics Publishing House; 1991. p. 176.

Compendium of Materia Medica. Beijing: Scientific and technical documentation press. P Wu, X Y Sun, F Y Sun, 20Wu P, Sun XY, Sun FY. Compendium of Materia Medica. Beijing: Scien- tific and technical documentation press; 1996. p. 20.

Study on the material basis mechanism and preclinical safety of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum against NSCLC, Doctoral thesis. China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences. X Du, Du X. Study on the material basis mechanism and preclinical safety of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum against NSCLC, Doctoral thesis. China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences. 2020.

Comparison and identification of Solanum lyratum Thunb and Aristolochia mollissima Hance. X W Jiang, Q N Wu, J Jiangxi Univ Tradit Chin Med. 18Jiang XW, Wu QN. Comparison and identification of Solanum lyratum Thunb and Aristolochia mollissima Hance. J Jiangxi Univ Tradit Chin Med. 2006;18:35-6.

Solanum lyratum and its mixed varieties. X M Chen, Q H Chen, Zhong Yao Cai. 28Chen XM, Chen QH. Solanum lyratum and its mixed varieties. Zhong Yao Cai. 2005;28:462-3.

Study on pharmacognostic identification of Solanum lyratum. X B Liu, J Wu, J Sci Teachers' Univ. 41Liu XB, Wu J. Study on pharmacognostic identification of Solanum lyratum. J Sci Teachers' Univ. 2021;41:72-6.

A revision of the Dulcamaroid Clade of Solanum L. (Solanaceae). S Knapp, PhytoKeys. 22Knapp S. A revision of the Dulcamaroid Clade of Solanum L. (Solan- aceae). PhytoKeys. 2013;22:1-432.

Editorial Board of Flora of China. Flora of China. Beijing: China Science Publishing. Editorial Board of Flora of China. Flora of China. Beijing: China Science Publishing; 1978. p. 86-7.

Study on the ethnic medicine Solanum lyratum Thunb. and patent literature analysis. H Y Ming, E Wang, X P Ma, Asia-Pacific Tradit Med. 13Ming HY, Wang E, Ma XP. Study on the ethnic medicine Solanum lyratum Thunb. and patent literature analysis. Asia-Pacific Tradit Med. 2017;13:59-61.

A study on the inhibitory effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb extract on Lewis lung carcinoma lines. Z M Xiao, A M Wang, X Y Wang, S R Shen, Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 10Xiao ZM, Wang AM, Wang XY, Shen SR. A study on the inhibitory effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb extract on Lewis lung carcinoma lines. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2013;10:444-8.

Lignans and neolignans with isovaleroyloxy moiety from Solanum lyratum Thunb.: chiral resolution, configurational assignment and neuroprotective effects. S S Li, Z L Hou, G D Yao, R Guo, Y X Wang, B Lin, X X Huang, S J Song, Phytochemistry. 178112461Li SS, Hou ZL, Yao GD, Guo R, Wang YX, Lin B, Huang XX, Song SJ. Lignans and neolignans with isovaleroyloxy moiety from Solanum lyratum Thunb.: chiral resolution, configurational assignment and neuroprotective effects. Phytochemistry. 2020;178:112461.

Solanrubiellin A. a hydroanthraquinone dimer with antibacterial and cytotoxic activity from Solanum lyratum. H Chen, K Du, Y Sun, Z Hao, Y Zhang, J Bai, Q Wang, H Hu, W Feng, Nat Prod Res. 34Chen H, Du K, Sun Y, Hao Z, Zhang Y, Bai J, Wang Q, Hu H, Feng W, Solanrubiellin A. a hydroanthraquinone dimer with antibacte- rial and cytotoxic activity from Solanum lyratum. Nat Prod Res. 2020;34:3176-81.

New steroidal alkaloid and furostanol glycosides isolated from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxicity. Y L Xu, J Lv, W F Wang, Y Liu, Y J Xu, T H Xu, Chin J Nat Med. 16Xu YL, Lv J, Wang WF, Liu Y, Xu YJ, Xu TH. New steroidal alkaloid and furostanol glycosides isolated from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxic- ity. Chin J Nat Med. 2018;16:499-504.

Two new steroidal glucuronides from Solanum lyratum, II 1. Y Shoji, M Mitsuyuki, N Murakami, Planta med. 6Shoji Y, Mitsuyuki M, Murakami N. Two new steroidal glucuronides from Solanum lyratum, II 1 . Planta med. 1986;6:496-8.

Two new soladulcidine glycosides from Solanum lyratum. Y Lee, F L Hsu, T Nohara, Chem Pharm Bull. 45Lee Y, Hsu FL, Nohara T. Two new soladulcidine glycosides from Solanum lyratum. Chem Pharm Bull. 1997;45:1381-2.

Solalyratins A and B, new antiinflammatory metabolites from Solanum lyratum. D W Zhang, Y Yang, F Yao, Q Y Yu, S J Dai, J Nat Med-Tokyo. 66Zhang DW, Yang Y, Yao F, Yu QY, Dai SJ. Solalyratins A and B, new anti- inflammatory metabolites from Solanum lyratum. J Nat Med-Tokyo. 2012;66:362-6.

Oxylipin vanillyl acetals from Solanum lyratum. S S Li, Q B Liu, Y Y Zhang, S C Shi, R Guo, G D Yao, B Lin, X X Huang, S J Song, Fitoterapia. 143104559Li SS, Liu QB, Zhang YY, Shi SC, Guo R, Yao GD, Lin B, Huang XX, Song SJ. Oxylipin vanillyl acetals from Solanum lyratum. Fitoterapia. 2020;143: 104559.

Caspase and mitogen activated protein kinase pathways are involved in Solanum lyratum herba induced apoptosis. J H Lee, Y H Lee, H J Lee, H J Lee, E O Lee, K S Ahn, B S Shim, H Bae, S H Choi, K S Ahn, N I Baek, D K Kim, S H Kim, J Ethnopharmacol. 123Lee JH, Lee YH, Lee HJ, Lee HJ, Lee EO, Ahn KS, Shim BS, Bae H, Choi SH, Ahn KS, Baek NI, Kim DK, Kim SH. Caspase and mitogen activated protein kinase pathways are involved in Solanum lyratum herba induced apoptosis. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009;123:121-7.

Cytotoxic activity of steroidal glycosides from Solanum plants. T Ikeda, H Tsumagari, T Honbu, T Nohara, Biol Pharm Bull. 26Ikeda T, Tsumagari H, Honbu T, Nohara T. Cytotoxic activity of steroidal glycosides from Solanum plants. Biol Pharm Bull. 2003;26:1198-201.

. J S Yang, C C Wu, C L Kuo, Y H Lan, C C Yeh, C C Yu, J C Lien, Y M Hsu, W W Kuo, W G Wood, M Tsuzuki, J G Chung, 3335Solanum lyratum extracts induce PageYang JS, Wu CC, Kuo CL, Lan YH, Yeh CC, Yu CC, Lien JC, Hsu YM, Kuo WW, Wood WG, Tsuzuki M, Chung JG. Solanum lyratum extracts induce Page 33 of 35

. Zhao, Natural Products and Bioprospecting. 1239Zhao et al. Natural Products and Bioprospecting (2022) 12:39

extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis in WEHI-3 murine leukemia cells and inhibit allograft tumor. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 254960extrinsic and intrinsic pathways of apoptosis in WEHI-3 murine leuke- mia cells and inhibit allograft tumor. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2012;2012: 254960.

Precursor-feeding strategy for the production of solanine, solanidine and solasodine by a cell culture of Solanum lyratum. M H Lee, J J Cheng, C Y Lin, Y J Chen, M K Lu, Process Biochem. 42Lee MH, Cheng JJ, Lin CY, Chen YJ, Lu MK. Precursor-feeding strategy for the production of solanine, solanidine and solasodine by a cell culture of Solanum lyratum. Process Biochem. 2007;42:899-903.

Toxicological safety evaluation in acute and 21-day studies of ethanol extract from Solanum lyratum Thunb. Evid Based. X H Guo, L J Weng, L T Yi, D Geng, Complement Alternat Med. 318518324Guo XH, Weng LJ, Yi LT, Geng D. Toxicological safety evaluation in acute and 21-day studies of ethanol extract from Solanum lyratum Thunb. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2022;31:8518324.

Lignanoids from Solanum lyratum. Y L Xu, Y J Xu, H X Shi, Y Liu, T H Xu, J Chin Pharm Sci. 27Xu YL, Xu YJ, Shi HX, Liu Y, Xu TH. Lignanoids from Solanum lyratum. J Chin Pharm Sci. 2018;27:289-94.

Anti-angiogenic activities of glycoalkaloids isolated from Solanum lyratum in tumor-derived vascular endothelial cells. L Han, J N Wang, C X Sun, X Q Cao, X Du, Phytochem Lett. 29Han L, Wang JN, Sun CX, Cao XQ, Du X. Anti-angiogenic activities of glycoalkaloids isolated from Solanum lyratum in tumor-derived vascular endothelial cells. Phytochem Lett. 2019;29:212-9.

Solanum steroidal glycoalkaloids: structural diversity, biological activities, and biosynthesis. D K Zhao, Y Zhao, S Y Chen, E J Kennelly, Nat Prod Rep. 38Zhao DK, Zhao Y, Chen SY, Kennelly EJ. Solanum steroidal glycoalka- loids: structural diversity, biological activities, and biosynthesis. Nat Prod Rep. 2021;38:1423-44.

Study on antitumor active components of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences. Y L Zang, Zang YL. Study on antitumor active components of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences. 2008.

Studies on the chemical constitutents and bioactivities of three plants, Doctoral thesis. Y D Yang, Huazhong University of Science and TechnologyYang YD. Studies on the chemical constitutents and bioactivities of three plants, Doctoral thesis. Huazhong University of Science and Technology. 2014.

Simultaneous determination of four alkaloids in Solanum lyratum Thunb by UPLC-MS/ MS method. Y R Jia, X L Tian, K Liu, C Chen, X L Wang, C C Zhang, L X Sun, Pharmazie. 67Jia YR, Tian XL, Liu K, Chen C, Wang XL, Zhang CC, Sun LX. Simultaneous determination of four alkaloids in Solanum lyratum Thunb by UPLC-MS/ MS method. Pharmazie. 2012;67:111-5.

Steroidal glycoside and glycoalkaloid from Solanum lyratum. W C Ye, H Wang, S X Zhao, C T Che, Biochem Syst Ecol. 29Ye WC, Wang H, Zhao SX, Che CT. Steroidal glycoside and glycoalkaloid from Solanum lyratum. Biochem Syst Ecol. 2001;29:421-3.

Two new glycoalkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. T Wu, X Du, J N Wang, L Y Liu, Y K Yang, J Chin Pharm Sci. 30Wu T, Du X, Wang JN, Liu LY, Yang YK. Two new glycoalkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. J Chin Pharm Sci. 2021;30:518-23.

Study on the active constituents from Solanum indicum and Solanum lyratum for ANTI-HSN1 influenza virus, Doctoral thesis. H L Yin, Beijing University of TechnologyYin HL. Study on the active constituents from Solanum indicum and Solanum lyratum for ANTI-HSN1 influenza virus, Doctoral thesis. Beijing University of Technology. 2013.

Studies on the constituents of Solanum plants. V. The constituents of S. lyratum Thunb II. K Murakami, H Ezima, Y Takaishi, Y Takeda, T Fujita, A Sato, T Tomimatsu, Chem Pharm Bull. 33MurakamI K, Ezima H, Takaishi Y, Takeda Y, Fujita T, Sato A, Tomimatsu T. Studies on the constituents of Solanum plants. V. The constituents of S. lyratum Thunb II. Chem Pharm Bull. 1985;33:67-73.

Study on chemical constituents and pharmacokinetics of antitumor traditional Chinese medicine Solanum lyratum, master's thesis. W Qi, Shenyang Pharmaceutical UniversityQi W. Study on chemical constituents and pharmacokinetics of anti- tumor traditional Chinese medicine Solanum lyratum, master's thesis. Shenyang Pharmaceutical University. 2009.

Steroidal glycoalkaloids from Solanum lyratum inhibit the pro-angiogenic activity of A549-derived exosomes. X Du, J N Wang, J Sun, T Wu, X Q Cao, L Y Liu, Y K Yang, Fitoterapia. 141104481Du X, Wang JN, Sun J, Wu T, Cao XQ, Liu LY, Yang YK. Steroidal glycoal- kaloids from Solanum lyratum inhibit the pro-angiogenic activity of A549-derived exosomes. Fitoterapia. 2020;141: 104481.

Isolation and identification of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb. L X Sun, F Li, C Wang, W Li, M Wang, K Bi, J Shenyang Pharm Univ. 25Sun LX, Li F, Wang C, Li W, Wang M, Bi K. Isolation and identification of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb. J Shenyang Pharm Univ. 2008;25:36-46.

Features in the NMR spectra of the aglycones of Agave spp. saponins. HMBC method for aglycone identification (HMAI). A M Simonet, A G Durán, A J Pérez, F A Macías, Phytochem Anal. 32Simonet AM, Durán AG, Pérez AJ, Macías FA. Features in the NMR spectra of the aglycones of Agave spp. saponins. HMBC method for aglycone identification (HMAI). Phytochem Anal. 2021;32:38-61.

Studies on the constituents of Solanum plants. L. on the constituents of the stem parts of Solanum lyratum Thunb. K Murakami, R Saijo, T Nohara, T Tomimatsu, Yakugaku Zasshi. 101MurakamI K, Saijo R, Nohara T, Tomimatsu T. Studies on the constituents of Solanum plants. L. on the constituents of the stem parts of Solanum lyratum Thunb. Yakugaku Zasshi. 1981;101:275-9.

Study on chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb and its antitumor activity, Doctoral thesis. Y L Xu, Beijing University of Chinese MedicineXu YL. Study on chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb and its antitumor activity, Doctoral thesis. Beijing University of Chinese Medicine. 2019.

A phenolic glucoside and steroidal sapogenins of Solanum lyratum. S Y Kang, S H Sung, J H Park, J H Cho, Y C Kim, Yakhak Hoeji. 44Kang SY, Sung SH, Park JH, Cho JH, Kim YC. A phenolic glucoside and steroidal sapogenins of Solanum lyratum. Yakhak Hoeji. 2000;44:534-8.

Studies on the constituents of Aspidistra elatior Blume. I. on the steroids of the underground part. Y Hirai, T Konishi, S Sanada, Y Ida, J Hoji, Chem Pharm Bull. 30Hirai Y, Konishi T, Sanada S, Ida Y, Hoji J. Studies on the constituents of Aspidistra elatior Blume. I. on the steroids of the underground part. Chem Pharm Bull. 1982;30:3476-84.

Chemical constituents from herb of Solanum lyratum. L Yang, F Feng, Y Gao, Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 34Yang L, Feng F, Gao Y. Chemical constituents from herb of Solanum lyratum. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2009;34:1805-8.

Cytotoxic constituents from Solanum lyratum. L X Sun, W W Fu, J Ren, L Xu, K S Bi, M W Wang, Arch Pharm Res. 29Sun LX, Fu WW, Ren J, Xu L, Bi KS, Wang MW. Cytotoxic constituents from Solanum lyratum. Arch Pharm Res. 2006;29:135-9.

Some Sesquiterpenoids and 5α,8α-epidioxysterols from Solanum lyratum. S M Yu, H J Kim, E Woo, H Park, Arch Pharm Res. 17Yu SM, Kim HJ, Woo E, Park H. Some Sesquiterpenoids and 5α,8α- epidioxysterols from Solanum lyratum. Arch Pharm Res. 1994;17:1-4.

Steroidal saponins from fruits of Tribulus Terrestis. Y Wang, O Kazuhir, K Roji, Y Kazuo, Phytochemistry. 42Wang Y, Kazuhir O, Roji K, Kazuo Y. Steroidal saponins from fruits of Tribulus Terrestis. Phytochemistry. 1996;42:1417-22.

Assigning stereodiversity of the 27-Me group of furostane-type steroidal saponins via NMR chemical shifts. P K Agrawal, Steroids. 70Agrawal PK. Assigning stereodiversity of the 27-Me group of furostane-type steroidal saponins via NMR chemical shifts. Steroids. 2005;70:715-24.

Dependence of 1H NMR chemical shifts of geminal protons of glycosyloxy methylene (H2-26) on the orientation of the 27-methyl group of furostane-type steroidal saponins. P K Agrawal, Magn Reson Chem. 42Agrawal PK. Dependence of 1H NMR chemical shifts of geminal protons of glycosyloxy methylene (H2-26) on the orientation of the 27-methyl group of furostane-type steroidal saponins. Magn Reson Chem. 2004;42:990-3.

Sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. X D Yue, F Yao, L Zhang, G S Li, S J Dai, Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 39Yue XD, Yao F, Zhang L, Li GS, Dai SJ. Sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2014;39:453-6.

Study on sesquiterpenes from Solanum septemlobum. X P Nie, L Zhang, F Yao, K Xiao, S J Dai, Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 40Nie XP, Zhang L, Yao F, Xiao K, Dai SJ. Study on sesquiterpenes from Solanum septemlobum. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2015;40:1514-7.

Two new sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxic activities. Y Ren, L Shen, D W Zhang, S J Dai, Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 57Ren Y, Shen L, Zhang DW, Dai SJ. Two new sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxic activities. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2009;57:408-10.

New eudesmane-type sesquiterpenoid from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxic activity. X P Nie, F Yao, X D Yue, G S Li, S J Dai, Nat Prod Res. 28Nie XP, Yao F, Yue XD, Li GS, Dai SJ. New eudesmane-type sesquiter- penoid from Solanum lyratum with cytotoxic activity. Nat Prod Res. 2014;28:64-5.

Solajiangxins A-C, three new cytotoxic sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. F Yao, Q L Song, L Zhang, G S Li, S J Dai, Fitoterapia. 89Yao F, Song QL, Zhang L, Li GS, Dai SJ. Solajiangxins A-C, three new cytotoxic sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. Fitoterapia. 2013;89:200-4.

Two new cytotoxic sesquiterpenoids from Solanum lyratum. G T Li, F Yao, L Zhang, X D Yue, S J Dai, Chinese Chem Lett. 4Li GT, Yao F, Zhang L, Yue XD, Dai SJ. Two new cytotoxic sesquiterpe- noids from Solanum lyratum. Chinese Chem Lett. 2013;4:1030-2.

Sesquiterpenoids from the herbs of Solanum lyratum and their cytotoxicity on human hepatoma cells. S S Li, Z Y Cheng, Y Y Zhang, R Guo, X B Wang, X X Huang, L Z Li, S J Song, Fitoterapia. 139104411Li SS, Cheng ZY, Zhang YY, Guo R, Wang XB, Huang XX, Li LZ, Song SJ. Sesquiterpenoids from the herbs of Solanum lyratum and their cytotox- icity on human hepatoma cells. Fitoterapia. 2019;139: 104411.

14-Noreudesmane sesquiterpenes from leaves of Nicotiana tabacum and their antiviral activity. S Z Shang, W Zhao, J G Tang, J X Pu, D L Zhu, L Yang, H D Sun, G Y Yang, Y K Chen, Phytochem Lett. 17Shang SZ, Zhao W, Tang JG, Pu JX, Zhu DL, Yang L, Sun HD, Yang GY, Chen YK. 14-Noreudesmane sesquiterpenes from leaves of Nicotiana tabacum and their antiviral activity. Phytochem Lett. 2016;17:173-6.

New sesquiterpenoid derivatives from Solanum lyratum and their cytotoxicities. G S Li, F Yao, L Zhang, X D Yue, S J Dai, J Asian Nat Prod Res. 16Li GS, Yao F, Zhang L, Yue XD, Dai SJ. New sesquiterpenoid derivatives from Solanum lyratum and their cytotoxicities. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2014;16:129-34.

Nitrogen-containing compounds from Solanum lyratum Thunb. L X Sun, W Qi, H Y Yang, Y R Jia, L J Tong, Biochem Syst Ecol. 39Sun LX, Qi W, Yang HY, Jia YR, Tong LJ. Nitrogen-containing compounds from Solanum lyratum Thunb. Biochem Syst Ecol. 2011;39:203-4.

Amides and lignans from Solanum lyratum. X W Wang, Y Zhao, X Q Dong, X L Wu, H Y Yu, L H Zhang, L F Han, Y Zhang, T Wang, H H Wu, Phytochem Lett. 45Wang XW, Zhao Y, Dong XQ, Wu XL, Yu HY, Zhang LH, Han LF, Zhang Y, Wang T, Wu HH. Amides and lignans from Solanum lyratum. Phytochem Lett. 2021;45:25-9.

Study on the chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum. J Z Yang, G M Guo, L X Zhou, D Ning, Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 27Yang JZ, Guo GM, Zhou LX, Ning D. Study on the chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2002;27:46-7.

Extraction, isolation and structural identification of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. R L Li, Zhengzhou UniversityLi RL. Extraction, isolation and structural identification of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. Zhengzhou University. 2006.

Chemical constituents from Solanum lyratum Thunb. H L Yin, J L Li, J X Dong, Military Med Sci. 34Yin HL, Li JL, Dong JX. Chemical constituents from Solanum lyratum Thunb. Military Med Sci. 2010;34:65-7.

Chemical Constituents Having Antioxidant Activities of Solanum lyratum. H Ji, L H Hou, M Yuan, Chem Nat Compd+. 50Ji H, Hou LH, Yuan M. Chemical Constituents Having Antioxidant Activi- ties of Solanum lyratum. Chem Nat Compd+. 2014;50:179-80.

Studies on flavonoids and amides from herbs of Solanum lyratum. D W Zhang, G H Li, Q Y Yu, S J Dai, China J Chin Mat med. 34Zhang DW, Li GH, Yu QY, Dai SJ. Studies on flavonoids and amides from herbs of Solanum lyratum. China J Chin Mat med. 2009;34:721-3.

Study on chemical constituents of Chinese herbal medicine for anti-cancer and anti-malarial, Maeter's thesis. L J Wang, ZhengZhou UniversityWang LJ. Study on chemical constituents of Chinese herbal medicine for anti-cancer and anti-malarial, Maeter's thesis. ZhengZhou University. 2004.

New anti-inflammatory 4-hydroxyisoflavans from Solanum lyratum. D W Zhang, G H Li, Q Y Yu, S J Dai, Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 58Zhang DW, Li GH, Yu QY, Dai SJ. New anti-inflammatory 4-hydroxyisofla- vans from Solanum lyratum. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2010;58:840-2.

The tomato glycoalkaloid α-tomatine induces caspase-independent cell death in mouse colon cancer CT-26 cells and transplanted tumors in mice. S P Kim, S H Nam, M Friedman, J Agr Food Chem. 63Kim SP, Nam SH, Friedman M. The tomato glycoalkaloid α-tomatine induces caspase-independent cell death in mouse colon cancer CT-26 cells and transplanted tumors in mice. J Agr Food Chem. 2015;63:1142-50.

An-te-xiao capsule inhibits tumor growth in non-small cell lung cancer by targeting angiogenesis. L Han, J N Wang, X Q Cao, C X Sun, X Du, Biomed Pharmacother. 108Han L, Wang JN, Cao XQ, Sun CX, Du X. An-te-xiao capsule inhibits tumor growth in non-small cell lung cancer by targeting angiogenesis. Biomed Pharmacother. 2018;108:941-51.

A study on the inhibitory effect of Solanum lyratum thumb extract on lewis lung carcinoma lines. Z M Xiao, A M Wang, X Y Wang, S R Shen, Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 10Xiao ZM, Wang AM, Wang XY, Shen SR. A study on the inhibitory effect of Solanum lyratum thumb extract on lewis lung carcinoma lines. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2014;10:444-8.

Study on anti-tumor effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb. extract in S180 tumor-bearing mice. Y Guan, H Zhao, X Yan, J Meng, W L Wang, Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 10Guan Y, Zhao H, Yan X, Meng J, Wang WL. Study on anti-tumor effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb. extract in S180 tumor-bearing mice. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2013;10:345-51.

Solannm lyratum extract affected immune response in normal and leukemia murine animal in vivo. J S Yang, C C Wu, C L Kuo, C C Yeh, F S Chueh, C K Hsu, C K Wang, C Y Chang, S W Ip, Y M Hsu, W W Kuo, J G Chung, Hum Exp Toxicol. 29Yang JS, Wu CC, Kuo CL, Yeh CC, Chueh FS, Hsu CK, Wang CK, Chang CY, Ip SW, Hsu YM, Kuo WW, Chung JG. Solannm lyratum extract affected immune response in normal and leukemia murine animal in vivo. Hum Exp Toxicol. 2010;29:359-67.

Molecular mechanisms of apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells induced by ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thumb through the mitochondrial pathway. X Q Mo, H Y Wei, G R Huang, L Y Xu, Y L Chen, J Qi, W Xian, Y C Qin, L D Wei, L J Zhao, Y Q Huang, W Xing, H Q Pu, P Y Wei, C G Li, Q C Liang, World J Gastroentero. 23Mo XQ, Wei HY, Huang GR, Xu LY, Chen YL, Qi J, Xian W, Qin YC, Wei LD, Zhao LJ, Huang YQ, Xing W, Pu HQ, Wei PY, Li CG, Liang QC. Molecular mechanisms of apoptosis in hepatocellular carcinoma cells induced by ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thumb through the mitochondrial pathway. World J Gastroentero. 2017;23:1010-7.

Effect of the effective parts of total steroidal alkaloids from Solanum lyratum on tumor inhibition in vivo and immune regulation in vitro. T Wu, J Wang, X Du, Cent South Pham. 18Wu T, Wang J, Du X. Effect of the effective parts of total steroidal alka- loids from Solanum lyratum on tumor inhibition in vivo and immune regulation in vitro. Cent South Pham. 2020;18:1786-90.

Effect of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. combined with cisplatin on tumor growth in mice with Lewis lung cancer. X F Sun, S L Hu, F Zhou, Y Wang, Chin J Clin Pharmacol. 35Sun XF, Hu SL, Zhou F, Wang Y. Effect of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. combined with cisplatin on tumor growth in mice with Lewis lung cancer. Chin J Clin Pharmacol. 2019;35:1781-3.

Solanum lyratum Thunberg alkaloid induces human lung adenoearcinoma A549 cells apoptosis by inhibiting NF-κB signaling pathway. X Wei, C G Li, T Li, S Nong, W J Yan, Zhong Yao Cai. 36Wei X, Li CG, Li T, Nong S, Yan WJ. Solanum lyratum Thunberg alkaloid induces human lung adenoearcinoma A549 cells apoptosis by inhibit- ing NF-κB signaling pathway. Zhong Yao Cai. 2013;36:787-90.

Bioactive glycoalkaloides isolated from Solanum melongena fruit peels with potential anticancer properties against hepatocellular carcinoma cells. M I Fekry, S M Ezzat, M M Salama, O Y Alshehri, A M Al-Abd, Sci Rep-UK. 9Fekry MI, Ezzat SM, Salama MM, Alshehri OY, Al-Abd AM. Bioactive glycoalkaloides isolated from Solanum melongena fruit peels with potential anticancer properties against hepatocellular carcinoma cells. Sci Rep-UK. 2019;9:1-11.

Protective effect of notoginsenoside and tanshinone IIA on inflammation-related colorectal cancer mice and the inhibition effect on COX-2 expression. W Cao, X Q Zhou, Digit Chin Med. 4Cao W, Zhou XQ. Protective effect of notoginsenoside and tanshinone IIA on inflammation-related colorectal cancer mice and the inhibition effect on COX-2 expression. Digit Chin Med. 2021;4:54-63.

Anti-inflammatory activity of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum. S H Lin, Y Yi, N C Yu, China Pharm. 19Lin SH, Yi Y, Yu NC. Anti-inflammatory activity of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum. China Pharm. 2016;19:1263-6.

Studies on the separation of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb. and the interaction of pharmacodynamics, Master's thesis. X X Zhou, Huazhong Agricultural UniversityZhou XX. Studies on the separation of chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb. and the interaction of pharmacodynamics, Master's thesis. Huazhong Agricultural University. 2020.

Neuroprotective effect of steroidal alkaloids on glutamate-induced toxicity by preserving mitochondrial membrane potential and reducing oxidative stress. M Taveira, C Sousa, P Valentão, F Ferreres, J P Teixeira, P B Andrade, J Steroid Biochem. 140Taveira M, Sousa C, Valentão P, Ferreres F, Teixeira JP, Andrade PB. Neuro- protective effect of steroidal alkaloids on glutamate-induced toxicity by preserving mitochondrial membrane potential and reducing oxidative stress. J Steroid Biochem. 2014;140:106-15.

Crude extracts of Solanum lyratum protect endothelial cells against oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced injury by direct antioxidant action. W W Kuo, C Y Huang, J G Chung, S F Yang, K L Tsai, T H Chiu, S D Lee, H C Ou, J Vasc Surg. 50Kuo WW, Huang CY, Chung JG, Yang SF, Tsai KL, Chiu TH, Lee SD, Ou HC. Crude extracts of Solanum lyratum protect endothelial cells against oxidized low-density lipoprotein-induced injury by direct antioxidant action. J Vasc Surg. 2009;50:849-60.

Study on DPPH free radicals caventinct activity of Solanum lyratum Thunb fruit extractives. C J Chen, K Y Huang, C L Sun, Food Res Dev. 27Chen CJ, Huang KY, Sun CL. Study on DPPH free radicals caventinct activity of Solanum lyratum Thunb fruit extractives. Food Res Dev. 2006;27:45-8.

Extraction and in vitro antibacterial test of polysaccharide from Solanum lyratum Thunb. H L Yang, Z L Sun, R Ding, G Cao, J Tradit Chin Veterinary Med. 4Yang HL, Sun ZL, Ding R, Cao G. Extraction and in vitro antibacterial test of polysaccharide from Solanum lyratum Thunb. J Tradit Chin Veterinary Med. 2005;4:24-5.

Effect of Solanum lyratum extract on the hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride in rats. J H Yang, C U Choi, D K Kim, K R Lee, O P Zee, Saengyak Hakhoe Chi. 27Yang JH, Choi CU, Kim DK, Lee KR, Zee OP. Effect of Solanum lyratum extract on the hepatotoxicity of carbon tetrachloride in rats. Saengyak Hakhoe Chi. 1996;27:167-72.

Protective effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb ethanol extract for carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury. G T Li, Chin Pract Med. 10Li GT. Protective effect of Solanum lyratum Thunb ethanol extract for carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver injury. Chin Pract Med. 2015;10:8-9.

Solanum lyratum inhibits anaphylactic reaction and suppresses the expression of L-histidine decarboxylase mRNA. H M Kim, E J Lee, Immunopharm Immunot. 20Kim HM, Lee EJ. Solanum lyratum inhibits anaphylactic reaction and suppresses the expression of L-histidine decarboxylase mRNA. Immu- nopharm Immunot. 1998;20:135-46.

Abolition of anaphylactic shock by Solanum lyratum Thunb. B Kang, E Lee, I Hong, J Lee, H Kim, Int J Immunopharmacol. 19Kang B, Lee E, Hong I, Lee J, Kim H. Abolition of anaphylactic shock by Solanum lyratum Thunb. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1998;19:729-34.

Studies on extraction, purification, determination and molluscicidal effect of glycosidal steroid alkaloids in Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. S X Cai, Hunan Agricultural UniversityCai SX. Studies on extraction, purification, determination and mollus- cicidal effect of glycosidal steroid alkaloids in Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. Hunan Agricultural University. 2005.

Effect of Baiyingtang on inflammatory cytokines in patients with acute radiolectitis. L H Yin, J Zhang, X Y Pan, F D Zhao, Q M Liu, Jiangxi Med J. 55Yin LH, Zhang J, Pan XY, Zhao FD, Liu QM. Effect of Baiyingtang on inflammatory cytokines in patients with acute radiolectitis. Jiangxi Med J. 2020;55:1781-3.

Efficacy of the Baiying decoction plus chemotherapy on NSCLC. Y S Liu, X B Xin, Clin J Chin Med. 10Liu YS, Xin XB. Efficacy of the Baiying decoction plus chemotherapy on NSCLC. Clin J Chin Med. 2018;10:27-9.

Inhibitory effect of lung cancer cells total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. on the growth of transplanted Lewis in mice. L Han, Y Zhuo, C X Sun, J N Wang, Trad Chin Drug Res Clin Pharm. 26Han L, Zhuo Y, Sun CX, Wang JN. Inhibitory effect of lung cancer cells total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum Thunb. on the growth of trans- planted Lewis in mice. Trad Chin Drug Res Clin Pharm. 2015;26:573-6.

SLT screening of anticancer active site and researching of lung cancer A549 cell proliferation inhibition mechanism, Master's thesis. H W Fu, Nanchang UniversityFu HW. SLT screening of anticancer active site and researching of lung cancer A549 cell proliferation inhibition mechanism, Master's thesis. Nanchang University. 2008.

The influence of Solanum lyratum Thunb extract on apoptosis and the expression of Fas/Fasl, genes in human lung cancer A549 cells. S Tu, X Wei, X M Zhao, L H Yu, F S Wan, Lishizhen Med Mater Med Res. 19Tu S, Wei X, Zhao XM, Yu LH, Wan FS. The influence of Solanum lyratum Thunb extract on apoptosis and the expression of Fas/Fasl, genes in human lung cancer A549 cells. Lishizhen Med Mater Med Res. 2008;19:603-5.

Effect of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum on regulating apoptosis and cell cycle of A549 cells through VEGFrelated pathway. L Han, C X Sun, J N Wang, Trad Chin Drug Res Clin Pharm. 27Han L, Sun CX, Wang JN. Effect of total alkaloids from Solanum lyratum on regulating apoptosis and cell cycle of A549 cells through VEGF- related pathway. Trad Chin Drug Res Clin Pharm. 2016;27:509-13.

Solanum lyratum Thunberg alkaloid induces human lung adenoearcinoma A549 cells apoptosis by activating FAS-pathway. S Tu, F S Wan, X Wei, S Nong, J F Zhu, Z Q Liu, Lishizhen Med Mater Med Res. 24Tu S, Wan FS, Wei X, Nong S, Zhu JF, Liu ZQ. Solanum lyratum Thunberg alkaloid induces human lung adenoearcinoma A549 cells apoptosis by activating FAS-pathway. Lishizhen Med Mater Med Res. 2013;24:66-8.

Influence of extracts of Solanum lyratum thunb on apoptosis and Bcl-xl/Bid expression in human lung cancer SPC-A-1 cells. M F Wang, L H Yu, H F Wan, S S Tu, J Nanchang Univ Med Sci. 51Wang MF, Yu LH, Wan HF, Tu SS. Influence of extracts of Solanum lyratum thunb on apoptosis and Bcl-xl/Bid expression in human lung cancer SPC-A-1 cells. J Nanchang Univ Med Sci. 2013;51:8-12.

Experimental study on apoptosis induced by ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb in human lung cancer SPC-A-1 cells. X Wei, S Tu, X S Zhao, F M Wan, L H Yu, China Pharm. 19Wei X, Tu S, Zhao XS, Wan FM, Yu LH. Experimental study on apoptosis induced by ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb in human lung cancer SPC-A-1 cells. China Pharm. 2008;19:256-8.

Effects of Solanum lyratum thunberg alkaloid on the expression of p38 MAPK and Caspase-3 in hepatoma Huh-7cells. Y Huo, M Wang, X B Wang, Z F Han, X Dong, Global Tradit Chin Med. 11Huo Y, Wang M, Wang XB, Han ZF, Dong X. Effects of Solanum lyratum thunberg alkaloid on the expression of p38 MAPK and Caspase-3 in hepatoma Huh-7cells. Global Tradit Chin Med. 2018;11:987-90.

Immunomodulatory activity of butanol extract from Solanum lyratum in tumor-bearing mice. S H Liu, X H Shen, X F Wei, X H Mao, T Huang, Immunopharm Immunot. 33Liu SH, Shen XH, Wei XF, Mao XH, Huang T. Immunomodulatory activity of butanol extract from Solanum lyratum in tumor-bearing mice. Immu- nopharm Immunot. 2010;33:100-6.

Screening the antitumor active components of the Solanum lyratum Thunb. extract. W F Wang, Y Liu, G M Wu, T Yang, D Zhang, Y J Xu, J Changchun Univ Tradit Chin Med. 34Wang WF, Liu Y, Wu GM, Yang T, Zhang D, Xu YJ. Screening the anti- tumor active components of the Solanum lyratum Thunb. extract. J Changchun Univ Tradit Chin Med. 2018;34:8883-6.

Antiproliferative activity of the total saponin of Solanum lyratum Thunb in Hela cells by inducing apoptosis. H R Liu, X D Peng, H B He, Y H Wang, Y Li, G X He, Y L Liu, Y L Li, C J Zeng, Pharmazie. 63Liu HR, Peng XD, He HB, Wang YH, Li Y, He GX, Liu YL, Li YL, Zeng CJ. Antiproliferative activity of the total saponin of Solanum lyratum Thunb in Hela cells by inducing apoptosis. Pharmazie. 2008;63:836-42.

High-efficiency inhibitory effect of steroid saponin on HeLa cells proliferation and its mechanism. S H Liu, X H Mao, X F Wei, Shandong J Tradit Chin Med. 28Liu SH, Mao XH, Wei XF. High-efficiency inhibitory effect of steroid sapo- nin on HeLa cells proliferation and its mechanism. Shandong J Tradit Chin Med. 2009;28:724-6.

Ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb regulate ovarian cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via the ROS-mediated p53 Pathway. C Zhang, Z M Li, J L Wang, X T Jiang, M F Xia, J Wang, S Y Lu, S Y Li, H M Wang, J Immunol Res. 5569354Zhang C, Li ZM, Wang JL, Jiang XT, Xia MF, Wang J, Lu SY, Li SY, Wang HM. Ethanol extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb regulate ovarian cancer cell proliferation, apoptosis, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) via the ROS-mediated p53 Pathway. J Immunol Res. 2021;2021:5569354.

Effects of Solanun lyratum Thunb extracts on growth of HO8910 of ovarian cancer cells. H S Huang, X Wei, Y Q Huang, L D Wei, J Mod Oncol. 19Huang HS, Wei X, Huang YQ, Wei LD. Effects of Solanun lyratum Thunb extracts on growth of HO8910 of ovarian cancer cells. J Mod Oncol. 2011;19:1279-81.

Apoptosis induced by Solanum lyratum on ovarian carcinoma cell SKOV3. J Yan, J Luo, K Y He, R Pan, Q Hu, B Peng, X Liu, Moder Tradi Chin Med Mat Med-World Sci Tech. Yan J, Luo J, He KY, Pan R, Hu Q, Peng B, Liu X. Apoptosis induced by Solanum lyratum on ovarian carcinoma cell SKOV3. Moder Tradi Chin Med Mat Med-World Sci Tech. 2008;2008:60-3.

The damage effect of Chinese herb medicine Baimaoteng (Solanum lyratum) on G2-PC Chromosome in CHO cells. J Y Cao, X L Tan, Chin J Mod Appl Pharm. 5Cao JY, Tan XL. The damage effect of Chinese herb medicine Baim- aoteng (Solanum lyratum) on G2-PC Chromosome in CHO cells. Chin J Mod Appl Pharm. 1988;5:1-3.

Effect of total glycosides of Solamum lyratum survivin and bax in MCF-7 human breast on expression of cancer cells. X D Yang, J Zhang, R J Zhao, Chin J New Drags. 20Yang XD, Zhang J, Zhao RJ. Effect of total glycosides of Solamum lyra- tum survivin and bax in MCF-7 human breast on expression of cancer cells. Chin J New Drags. 2011;20:1123-6.

Chloroform extract of Solanum lyratum induced G0/G1 arrest via p21/p16 and induced apoptosis via reactive oxygen species, caspases and mitochondrial pathways in human oral cancer cell lines. C H Chiu, Y C Chou, J P Lin, C L Kuo, H F Lu, Y P Huang, C C Yu, M L Lin, J G Chung, Am J Chinese Med. 43Chiu CH, Chou YC, Lin JP, Kuo CL, Lu HF, Huang YP, Yu CC, Lin ML, Chung JG. Chloroform extract of Solanum lyratum induced G0/G1 arrest via p21/p16 and induced apoptosis via reactive oxygen species, caspases and mitochondrial pathways in human oral cancer cell lines. Am J Chinese Med. 2015;43:1453-69.

Study on chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Master's thesis. J Lv, Changchun University of Chinese MedicineLv J. Study on chemical constituents of Solanum lyratum Thunb, Mas- ter's thesis. Changchun University of Chinese Medicine. 2009.

Study on apoptosis of human stomach SGC-7901 cells induced by extracts of Solanum lyratum. F S Wan, J Wu, H Li, S Tu, L H Yu, Zhong Yao Cai. 32Wan FS, Wu J, Li H, Tu S, Yu LH. Study on apoptosis of human stomach SGC-7901 cells induced by extracts of Solanum lyratum. Zhong Yao Cai. 2009;32:245-9.

Study on apoptosis inducing effect of Solanuml lyratum water extract and its rnechanisrn on human colorectal cancer HT29 cells, Master's thesis. Nanchang Uiversity. C X Wan, Wan CX. Study on apoptosis inducing effect of Solanuml lyratum water extract and its rnechanisrn on human colorectal cancer HT29 cells, Master's thesis. Nanchang Uiversity. 2011.

Two new C13-norisoprenoids from Solanum lyratum. X D Yue, G W Qu, B F Li, C H Xue, G S Li, S J Dai, J Asian Nat Prod Res. 14Yue XD, Qu GW, Li BF, Xue CH, Li GS, Dai SJ. Two new C13-norisopre- noids from Solanum lyratum. J Asian Nat Prod Res. 2012;14:486-90.

Effects of Solanum lyratum Thunb on multiplication in human acute promyelocytic HL-60 Cells. W R Shi, Y Liu, J Fujian Univ Tradit Chin Med. 12Shi WR, Liu Y. Effects of Solanum lyratum Thunb on multiplication in human acute promyelocytic HL-60 Cells. J Fujian Univ Tradit Chin Med. 2002;12:36-9.

Inhibition of prostate cancer growth by solanine requires the suppression of cell cycle proteins and the activation of ROS/P38 signaling pathway. B Pan, W F Zhong, Z H Deng, C Y Lai, J Y Chu, G L Jiao, J F Liu, Q Z Zhou, Cancer Med. 5Pan B, Zhong WF, Deng ZH, Lai CY, Chu JY, Jiao GL, Liu JF, Zhou QZ. Inhi- bition of prostate cancer growth by solanine requires the suppression of cell cycle proteins and the activation of ROS/P38 signaling pathway. Cancer Med. 2016;5:3214-22.

Induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human osteosarcoma U-2 OS cells by Solanum lyratum extracts. Y T Lin, A C Huang, C L Kuo, J S Yang, Y H Lan, C C Yu, W W Huang, J G Chung, Nutr Cancer. 65Lin YT, Huang AC, Kuo CL, Yang JS, Lan YH, Yu CC, Huang WW, Chung JG. Induction of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human osteosarcoma U-2 OS cells by Solanum lyratum extracts. Nutr Cancer. 2013;65:469-79.

Study on the mechanisms of Solanum lyratum thunberg alkaloid against tert-butyl hydroperoxide-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in human neuroma metrocyte cell line SH-SYSY cells. Y Huo, C Wang, M Wang, X B Wang, Z F Han, X Dong, Chin Med. 13Huo Y, Wang C, Wang M, Wang XB, Han ZF, Dong X. Study on the mechanisms of Solanum lyratum thunberg alkaloid against tert-butyl hydroperoxide-induced oxidative stress and apoptosis in human neu- roma metrocyte cell line SH-SYSY cells. Chin Med. 2018;13:1738-41.

Experimental study of anti-inflamatory and analgesic effects of extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb. Y M Fei, C G Gong, J Pharm Pract. 27Fei YM, Gong CG. Experimental study of anti-inflamatory and anal- gesic effects of extracts of Solanum lyratum Thunb. J Pharm Pract. 2009;27:111-4.

The progress of researching into physiological and ecological activities of glycoalkaloid in Solanaceae. Z W Li, B L Zhou, X Liu, P Zhang, Acta Agric Shanghai. 27Li ZW, Zhou BL, Liu X, Zhang P. The progress of researching into physi- ological and ecological activities of glycoalkaloid in Solanaceae. Acta Agric Shanghai. 2011;27:129-34.

The steroidal glycoalkaloids solamargine and solasonine in Solanum plants. Al Sinani, Sss Eltayeb, E A , S Afr J Bot. 112Al Sinani SSS, Eltayeb EA. The steroidal glycoalkaloids solamargine and solasonine in Solanum plants. S Afr J Bot. 2017;112:253-69.

Development and optimisation of biosensors based on pH-sensitive field effect transistors and cholinesterases for sensitive detection of solanaceous glycoalkaloids. V N Arkhypova, S V Dzyadevych, A P Soldatkin, A V El&apos;skaya, C Martelet, N Jaffrezic-Renault, Biosens Bioelectron. 18Arkhypova VN, Dzyadevych SV, Soldatkin AP, El'Skaya AV, Martelet C, Jaffrezic-Renault N. Development and optimisation of biosensors based on pH-sensitive field effect transistors and cholinesterases for sensitive detection of solanaceous glycoalkaloids. Biosens Bioelectron. 2003;18:1047-53.

Publisher's Note. Publisher's Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in pub- lished maps and institutional affiliations.