# The thoracoabdominal wall abscess and sepsis caused by Porphyromonas pogonae: Case report and literature review

CorpusID: 257906730
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb00b0999c34bbec2e2a70f8218f5cf9d026c5f1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb00b0999c34bbec2e2a70f8218f5cf9d026c5f1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

The thoracoabdominal wall abscess and sepsis caused by Porphyromonas pogonae: Case report and literature review
Available online 31 March 2023

Xuming Wang 
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Hainan General Hospital
Affiliated Hainan Hospital of Hainan Medical College
HaikouChina

Lin Liu 
School of Tropical Medicine
Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education
NHC Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Control
The Second Affiliated Hospital
Hainan Medical University
571199HaikouHainanChina

Binghuai Lu 
Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine
Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases
Friendship Hospital
BeijingChina-Japan, China

Xuehan Duan 
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Hainan General Hospital
Affiliated Hainan Hospital of Hainan Medical College
HaikouChina

Xiaojun Zhou 
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Hainan General Hospital
Affiliated Hainan Hospital of Hainan Medical College
HaikouChina

Dongliang Huang 
Emergency Department
Armed Police Hospital of Hainan
HaikouChina

Hua Wu 
Department of Laboratory Medicine
Hainan General Hospital
Affiliated Hainan Hospital of Hainan Medical College
HaikouChina

The thoracoabdominal wall abscess and sepsis caused by Porphyromonas pogonae: Case report and literature review
Available online 31 March 202310.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14860Heliyon 9 (2023) e14860 2405-8440/ Case report A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords: Porphyromonas pogonae Coccobacillus Abscess Sepsis A B S T R A C T


## Introduction

Porphyromonas pogonae (P. pogonae) is the 16th species of the genus Porphyromonas, of which seven species were isolated mainly from humans, and the other eight were isolated from mammals or other animal species (Table 1). Porphyromonas species have been isolated from oral infections and many other bodily infections, such as abscesses in the buttock and groin areas, soft tissue infections, pelvic abscesses, and other infected tissues. Many of these isolation sites are supposed to be hypoxic regions. Porphyromonas species have been previously categorized as obligatorily anaerobic bacteria; however, P. pogonae adapted to microaerophilic conditions was reported in 2011 from polymicrobial infections in central bearded dragons [1], and it was officially named and confirmed in 2015 [2]. In addition, Bacteroides fragilis, a bacterium related to Porphyromonas, has been demonstrated to grow aerobically and consume oxygen [3]. Human infections caused by P. pogonae were quite rare. This report indicates that a novel Porphyromonas spp., P. pogonae, maybe a significant opportunistic bacterial pathogen in humans.


## Case presentation


### Patient information

On August 9, 2016, a 62-year-old female patient was admitted to Hainan General Hospital due to fever and bilateral chest pain for 6 days. The patient had a mass in the right lower abdominal wall, which was first identified in 2011 and had attracted little attention then, but the mass grew rapidly in 2014, leading to surgery in June 2014. In addition, the patient had undergone augmentation mammoplasty 10 years earlier and had been healthy without diabetes or other immunodeficiency diseases.


### Clinical findings and therapeutic intervention

Computed tomography prompts showed a chest wall abscess (Fig. 1). On the 2nd day of hospitalization, 2470 ml purulent secretion was collected from the right chest wall abscess incision and drainage for culture. The patient received the resection of the abdominal wall mass and debridement and drainage of the chest wall cystic mass under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. A subcutaneous cystic mass, about 25 × 15 cm 2 in size, was observed during the operation. The abdominal wall mass was surgically removed, transected, rinsed, drained, and debrided. On the 5th day after the operation, the skin around the drainage tube orifice was slightly red and swollen with pain. The patient was treated with meropenem and discharged after controlling the infection.


## Microbiological features of the pathogen

4 bottles from blood culture alerted on the 4th day (BacT/Alert FA/FN, BioMérieux), Gram-negative coccobacilli could be seen on broth smear from positive blood bottle (Fig. 2a). Gram stain of pus smears also showed many pus cells and Gram-negative coccobacillus. A pus culture taken on August 10, 2016, also grew bacteria in an anaerobic atmosphere (GENbag BioMérieux). Colonies on CDC Anaerobic blood agar (Autobio) from blood and pus seemed alike: with obvious β-hemolytic, grayish white, convex, with a neat edge, ranging in size from 0.5 to 1 mm after 24 h incubation (Fig. 3a). Enlarged significantly to 2 mm with the increased transparent hemolytic ring after 48 h incubation (Fig. 3b). Colony color turned to light yellow, and size ranged from 1 to 3 mm, with a larger, more thorough, and transparent hemolysis ring, but without obvious black or brown pigmentation after 96 h incubation (Fig. 3c). The microorganism could also grow under a 5% CO 2 environment, but colonies were too small to detect with the naked eye after 24 h incubation and were needle-shaped with a strong β-hemolysis ring after 48 h (Fig. 3d). Bacteria were gram-negative cocci (Fig. 2b), positive for catalase and negative for oxidase.

The antimicrobial susceptibility profile was determined by MIC Test Strip (MTS). The P. pogonae showed susceptibility to the antimicrobials tested, as indicated by the following MICs: ceftazidime (MIC 4 μg/ml), imipenem (MIC 0.19 μg/ml), piperacillin/ tazobactam (MIC ≤0.016 μg/ml), levofloxacin (MIC 0.19 μg/ml) and amoxycillin/clavulanic acid (MIC 0.094 μg/ml).


## Identification by Vitek2 GN card, 16S rRNA sequencing and MALDI-TOF MS

Vitek2 GN card was used for identification (code was 1420000000250001), and P. pogonae was suggested with a reliability of 93%. PCR for 16S rRNA genes was performed using universal primers [4]. The 16S rRNA sequencing was submitted to Genbank (GenBank number: ON797446.1) and was used for its identification. Sequence analysis of the 1412 bp segment of the 16S rRNA gene demonstrated an identity of 99% with P. pogonae strain PAGU 1787T HM583587 [2] (Fig. 4).

MALDI-TOF MS could not identify this strain. The molecular weight of most proteins ranged from 2 to 10 kDa. The highest pike was  4.568 kDa, followed by 5.464 and 7.12 kDa (Fig. 5).


## Discussion and conclusions

Porphyromonas gingivalis was once thought to be the only microaerophilic member of Porphyromonas [7] until P. pogonae was later found to have the ability to grow under both anaerobic and microaerophilic conditions (5% O 2 atmosphere) [2]. P. pogonae could be differentiated from most of the other species of the genus Porphyromonas due to the strong β-hemolytic colony (except P. gingivalis and P. catoniae) [8,9] and the ability to grow under both anaerobic and microaerobic conditions (except P. gingivalis) [10] and the characteristic of no obvious pigmentation (except P. catoniae and P. bennonis) [9,11]. Moreover, P. pogonae is distinguishable from its closely related species of Porphyromonas by several characteristics, including positive for fluorescence, pyroglutamic acid arylamidase, and glycine arylamidase, while P. gingivalis, P. gulae, and P. catoniae were negative [2]. The origin of P. pogonae remained elusive, although Porphyromonas was first and often reported from the oral cavity [12,13]. During the ten years after P. pogonae was first reported, its victims were only reported in Pogona vitticeps and humans from various areas, including Asia, North America, South America, and Europe.

We reported the 5th human P. pogonae infection in this review. Among human patients from the literature and our case, except one was attributed to trauma, the other four were nasopharyngeal flora related, two had sinusitis [2], one had cervical swelling [5], the last one had receipted reconstruction surgery near both trachea and esophagus, had late ascending aortic prosthesis infection [6]. In addition, skin and soft tissue infections, skin abscesses especially, were the most common infection caused by P. pogonae. Among three human cases of bacteremia, two patients died despite combined treatment of surgery and antimicrobials. Taking four other cases into consideration, we conclude that P. pogonae is an opportunistic and endogenous infectious pathogen and is likely to invade patients with underlying conditions, mostly causing soft tissue infection with purulent nature. Although only 16S rRNA sequencing can identify this species, the strong β can identify this species now. The stromicroaerobic conditions, positive fluorescence, pyroglutamic acid arylamidase, and glycine arylamidase help differentiate P. pogonae from its closely related species of the genus Porphyromonas.


## Declarations


## Ethics approval and consent to participate

The institutional review boards at the Hainan general hospital approved the study protocol.


## Consent to publish

Written informed consent for clinical details and identifying images was obtained from the patient for publication of this study. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. 


## Funding statement


## Data availability statement

Data associated with this study has been deposited at The 16S rRNA sequencing was submitted to GenBank, and GenBank number is ON797446.1.


## Additional information

No additional information is available for this paper.


## Availability of data and materials

All the data and material in the current study are available from the corresponding author at reasonable request.    5. MALDI-TOF MS spectra of P pogonae. The vertical axis represents the relative intensities of ions, and the horizontal axis represents the massto-charge ratio (m/z) or masses of ions (Da). MS spectra ranged from 2 to 10 kDa, most peaks were concentrated and distributed from 3.5 to 7.6 kDa, and the three highest peaks were 4.569, 5.464, and 7.122 kDa, respectively.

## Fig. 1 .
1Imaging of CT showed an abscess on the chest wall.

## Fig. 2 .
2Gram stain of smear from positive blood bottle (a) and colony (b) showed small gram-negative cocci.

## Fig. 3 .
3Colonies after 24 h (a), 48 h (b), 72 h (b) growth in an anaerobic environment, 48 h (d) growth in a 5% CO 2 environment, and 48 h wed small gram-negative cocci.


This work was supported by the Key Research and Development Program of Hainan Province (Grant No. ZDYF2022SHFZ050), Natural Science Foundation of Hainan (Grant No. 821MS130), and Hainan Provincial Clinical Medical Center.

## Funding
We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Key Research and Development Program of Hainan Province (Grant No. ZDYF2022SHFZ050), Natural Science Foundation of Hainan (Grant No. 821MS130), and Hainan Provincial Clinical Medical Center. The funding bodies had no role in the design of the study or collection, analysis, processing, or interpretation of data or writing the manuscript. Authors' contributions XW, LL, HW conceived and designed the experiments. XW, LL, HW, BL, XD, XZ, and DH performed the experiments. HW analyzed and interpreted the data. LL, HW, BL, XD, XZ, and DH contributed reagents, materials, analysis data. XW, LL, HW wrote the paper.

## Fig. 4 .
4Phylogenetic relatedness of query isolates to closest neighbors based on 16S rRNA homology. Neighbor-joining tree based on 16S rRNA (1412 bp) sequences, showing the phylogenetic relationship between query strain (Porphyromonas pogonae 1608) in the present study and other related members of the genus Porphyromonas.

## Fig.
Fig. 5. MALDI-TOF MS spectra of P pogonae. The vertical axis represents the relative intensities of ions, and the horizontal axis represents the massto-charge ratio (m/z) or masses of ions (Da). MS spectra ranged from 2 to 10 kDa, most peaks were concentrated and distributed from 3.5 to 7.6 kDa, and the three highest peaks were 4.569, 5.464, and 7.122 kDa, respectively.

## Table 1
1Clinical summary of Porphyromonas pogonae infected cases from the literature and our case.Reference 
Cases 
number 

Country 
Infected 
species 

Age(y)/Gender 
Underlying disease or 
history 

Presentation 
Sources 
Identification 

Antibiotic therapy 
Other therapy 
Duration Outcome 

2011 [1] 
3 
USA 
Pogona 
vitticeps 

8/female 
NA 
a 4 * 2 cm 2 left facial 
abscess, 

abscess wall 
butorphanol 
Debridement and 
flushing 

6 
months 

Died 

Adult 
(undetermined 
age)/female 

weakness, anorexia, 
and weight loss. 

Pulmonary bullae fenbendazole 
sulfadimethoxine 

NA 
2 
months 

Died 

8/male 
a 15 * 5cm area of 
thickened, darkened, 
and dry skin 

Subcutaneous 
tissue hepatic 
abscess 

Ceftiofur, itraconazole 
daily wound cleaning 
and flushing 

9 weeks Died 

2015 [2] 
6 
Japan 
USA 

human 
28/male 
NA 
acute sinusitis 
acute sinusitis 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Pogona 
vitticeps 

NA 
NA 
facial abscess 
facial abscess 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

Pogona 
vitticeps 

NA 
NA 
pulmonary infection 
lung 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

Pogona 
vitticeps 

NA 
NA 
dorsal skin abscess 
dorsal skin abscess NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

Pogona 
vitticeps 

NA 
NA 
NA 
gingival swab 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

Pogona 
vitticeps 

NA 
NA 
ventral skin abscess 
ventral skin 
abscess 

NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 

2016 [4] 
1 
South 
Korea 

human 
31/male 
crashing into a 
guardrail 

multiple traumas on the 
lower right leg 

pus specimens 
ampicillin/sulbactam, 
amikacin, tigecycline, 
ciprofloxacin rifampicin 

saline irrigation and 
curettage of necrotic 
tissue, surgical drainage 

2 
months 

recovered 

2017 [5] 
1 
Germany human 
62/male 
bronchial carcinoma 
fever, painful, 
reddened, unilateral 
and progressive cervical 
swelling, 

samples from the 
leukoplakia, blood 

penicillin G 
piperacillin/tazobactam 

aspiration and draining 
of cervical abscess and 
pus 

10 
weeks 

Died 

2019 [6] 
1 
Brazil 
human 
48/male 
hepatosplenic 
schistosomiasis and 
aortic dissection 

fever 
blood 
ciprofloxacin teicoplanin 
piperacillin/tazobactam 
meropenem 
metronidazole 

surgery 
41 days Died 

Our data 
(2016) 

1 
China 
human 
60/female 
right maxillary 
sinusitis 
post breast 
augmentation 

abdominal mass, fever, 
and bilateral chest pain 

blood, pus from 
chest wall abscess 

cefmetazole 
doxycycline 
meropenem 
vancomycin 

Abscess incision, 
debridement, drainage, 
foreign body removal 

2 years 
recovered 

Declaration of competing interestThe authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, author-ship, and/or publication of this article.Appendix A. Supplementary dataSupplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e14860.
Isolation of a variant Porphyromonas sp. from polymicrobial infections in central bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps). D A Bemis, C B Greenacre, M J Bryant, R D Jones, S A Kania, J. Vet. Diagn. Invest. 231D.A. Bemis, C.B. Greenacre, M.J. Bryant, R.D. Jones, S.A. Kania, Isolation of a variant Porphyromonas sp. from polymicrobial infections in central bearded dragons (Pogona vitticeps), J. Vet. Diagn. Invest. 23 (1) (2011) 99-104.

Porphyromonas pogonae sp. nov., an anaerobic but low concentration oxygen adapted coccobacillus isolated from lizards (Pogona vitticeps) or human clinical specimens, and emended description of the genus Porphyromonas Shah and Collins. Y Kawamura, S Kuwabara, S A Kania, H Kato, M Hamagishi, N Fujiwara, T Sato, J Tomida, K Tanaka, D A Bemis, Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 382Y. Kawamura, S. Kuwabara, S.A. Kania, H. Kato, M. Hamagishi, N. Fujiwara, T. Sato, J. Tomida, K. Tanaka, D.A. Bemis, Porphyromonas pogonae sp. nov., an anaerobic but low concentration oxygen adapted coccobacillus isolated from lizards (Pogona vitticeps) or human clinical specimens, and emended description of the genus Porphyromonas Shah and Collins 1988, Syst. Appl. Microbiol. 38 (2) (2015) 104-109.

The strict anaerobe Bacteroides fragilis grows in and benefits from nanomolar concentrations of oxygen. A D Baughn, M H Malamy, Nature. 4276973A.D. Baughn, M.H. Malamy, The strict anaerobe Bacteroides fragilis grows in and benefits from nanomolar concentrations of oxygen, Nature 427 (6973) (2004) 441-444.

Porphyromonas pogonae identification from a soft tissue infection: the first human case. B Kim, H Pai, K T Hwang, Y Lee, Anaerobe. 42B. Kim, H. Pai, K.T. Hwang, Y. Lee, Porphyromonas pogonae identification from a soft tissue infection: the first human case, Anaerobe 42 (2016) 37-39.

P Schröttner, K Heidrich, W W Rudolph, F Stölzel, E Jacobs, F Gunzer, First report on sepsis caused by Porphyromonas pogonae. 44P. Schröttner, K. Heidrich, W.W. Rudolph, F. Stölzel, E. Jacobs, F. Gunzer, First report on sepsis caused by Porphyromonas pogonae, Anaerobe 44 (2017) 96-98.

Late ascending aortic prosthesis infection by Porphyromonas pogonae: an unexpected infectious complication. A Romero De Oliveira, J M Nürmberger, M Issa, V Pinto, M M K Bond, J T Rabelato, M B Meirelles, L Miglioli, C S Abboud, Anaerobe. 56A. Romero de Oliveira, J.M. Nürmberger, M. Issa, V. Pinto, M.M.K. Bond, J.T. Rabelato, M.B. Meirelles, L. Miglioli, C.S. Abboud, Late ascending aortic prosthesis infection by Porphyromonas pogonae: an unexpected infectious complication, Anaerobe 56 (2019) 106-108.

Prevalence of Porphyromonas gingivalis and periodontal health status. A L Griffen, M R Becker, S R Lyons, M L Moeschberger, E J Leys, J. Clin. Microbiol. 3611A.L. Griffen, M.R. Becker, S.R. Lyons, M.L. Moeschberger, E.J. Leys, Prevalence of Porphyromonas gingivalis and periodontal health status, J. Clin. Microbiol. 36 (11) (1998) 3239-3242.

Hemolytic activity in the periodontopathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis: kinetics of enzyme release and localization. L Chu, T E Bramanti, J L Ebersole, S C Holt, Infect. Immun. 596L. Chu, T.E. Bramanti, J.L. Ebersole, S.C. Holt, Hemolytic activity in the periodontopathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis: kinetics of enzyme release and localization, Infect. Immun. 59 (6) (1991) 1932-1940.

Reclassification of Oribaculum catoniae (Moore and Moore 1994) as Porphyromonas catoniae comb. nov. and emendation of the genus Porphyromonas. A Willems, M D Collins, Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 453A. Willems, M.D. Collins, Reclassification of Oribaculum catoniae (Moore and Moore 1994) as Porphyromonas catoniae comb. nov. and emendation of the genus Porphyromonas, Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 45 (3) (1995) 578-581.

Adaptation of Porphyromonas gingivalis to microaerophilic conditions involves increased consumption of formate and reduced utilization of lactate. J P Lewis, D Iyer, C Anaya-Bergman, Microbiology. Pt 11J.P. Lewis, D. Iyer, C. Anaya-Bergman, Adaptation of Porphyromonas gingivalis to microaerophilic conditions involves increased consumption of formate and reduced utilization of lactate, Microbiology (Reading, England) 155 (Pt 11) (2009) 3758-3774.

Porphyromonas bennonis sp. nov., isolated from human clinical specimens. P H Summanen, P A Lawson, S M Finegold, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 597P.H. Summanen, P.A. Lawson, S.M. Finegold, Porphyromonas bennonis sp. nov., isolated from human clinical specimens, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 59 (Pt 7) (2009) 1727-1732.

Oral colonization by anaerobic bacteria during childhood: role in health and disease. E Könönen, Oral Dis. 54E. Könönen, Oral colonization by anaerobic bacteria during childhood: role in health and disease, Oral Dis. 5 (4) (1999) 278-285.

Anaerobes in the upper respiratory tract in infancy. E Könönen, Anaerobe. 113E. Könönen, Anaerobes in the upper respiratory tract in infancy, Anaerobe 11 (3) (2005) 131-136.