# Detectability and impact of repetitive surveys on threatened West African crocodylians

CorpusID: 264191379
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb7e8f2ea7bcab6cbfad2f44c3c0a3bc3889552d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb7e8f2ea7bcab6cbfad2f44c3c0a3bc3889552d)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Detectability and impact of repetitive surveys on threatened West African crocodylians


Michel N Ahizi 
Université Nangui-Abrogoua
Côte d'Ivoire 2 Project MecistopsAbidjan, SarasotaFloridaUSA

Christine Y Kouman 
Université Nangui-Abrogoua
Côte d'Ivoire 2 Project MecistopsAbidjan, SarasotaFloridaUSA

Allassane Ouattara 
Université Nangui-Abrogoua
Côte d'Ivoire 2 Project MecistopsAbidjan, SarasotaFloridaUSA

| N&apos;dri 
Pascal Kouamé 
Office Ivoirien des Parcs et Réserves
Côte d'Ivoire 4 Wildlife Conservation SocietyAbidjan, New YorkNew YorkUSA

| Azani Dede 
Office Ivoirien des Parcs et Réserves
Côte d'Ivoire 4 Wildlife Conservation SocietyAbidjan, New YorkNew YorkUSA

Emilie Fairet 
Matthew H Shirley 

Institute of Environment
Florida International University
North Miami, FloridaUSA


Rare Species Conservatory Foundation
Correspondence Michel N. Ahizi
Université Nangui Abrogoua
02 BP 801 Abidjan 02Loxahatchee, Abidjan, Côte d'IvoireFloridaUSA

Detectability and impact of repetitive surveys on threatened West African crocodylians
10.1002/ece3.8188Received: 21 April 2021 | Revised: 5 September 2021 | Accepted: 9 September 202115062 | Ecology and Evolution. 2021;11:15062-15076. www.ecolevol.org R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E Funding informationChristmas CrocFestSt Augustine Alligator FarmMinnesota ZooOklahoma City ZooFuture for Nature FoundationSan Diego ZooAZA Crocodilian Advisory GroupIUCN Save Our Species Fund K E Y W O R D S cataphractus, Côte d'Ivoire, Crocodylus, detection probability, Mecistops, niloticus, suchus, wariness
This is an open access article under the terms of the Creat ive Commo ns Attri bution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.AbstractWest African crocodylians are among the most threatened and least studied crocodylian species globally. Assessing population status and establishing a basis for population monitoring is the highest priority action for this region. Monitoring of crocodiles is influenced by many factors that affect detectability, including environmental variables and individual-or population-level wariness. We investigated how these factors affect detectability and counts of the critically endangered Mecistops cataphractus and the newly recognized Crocodylus suchus. We implemented 195 repetitive surveys at 38 sites across Côte d'Ivoire between 2014 and 2019. We used an occupancy-based approach and a count-based GLMM analysis to determine the effect of environmental and anthropogenic variables on detection and modeled crocodile wariness over repetitive surveys. Despite their rarity and level of threat, detection probability of both species was relatively high (0.75 for M. cataphractus and 0.81 for C. suchus), but a minimum of two surveys were required to infer absence of either species with 90% confidence. We found that detection of M. cataphractus was significantly negatively influenced by fishing net encounter rate, while high temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey increased C. suchus detection.Precipitation and aquatic vegetation had significant negative and positive influence, respectively, on M. cataphractus counts and showed the opposite effect for C. suchus counts. We also found that fishing encounter rate had a significant negative effect on C. suchus counts. Interestingly, survey repetition did not generally affect wariness for either species, though there was some indication that at least M. cataphractus was more wary by the fourth replicate. These results are informative for designing future survey and monitoring protocols for these threatened crocodylians in West Africa and for other endangered crocodylians globally. K E Y W O R D S cataphractus, Côte d'Ivoire, Crocodylus, detection probability, Mecistops, niloticus, suchus, wariness | 15063 AHIZI et Al.

# | INTRODUC TI ON

Monitoring programs are crucial for informing biodiversity management (Jones et al., 2011), especially for species of conservation concern. But inference of species population trends can be strongly influenced by imperfect detection, especially for cryptic and secretive species (Bauder et al., 2017). Species detectability is central to appropriate survey design (MacKenzie et al., 2002), but can vary widely among even closely related species (Wintle et al., 2005) and be heavily influenced by environmental factors (Burns et al., 2019), habitat features, and observer bias (Jeffress et al., 2011;Shirley et al., 2012).

Crocodylians are difficult species to survey and monitor (Bayliss, 1987) because they are principally nocturnal, behaviorally cryptic, and surveys are impeded by significant submersion bias (i.e., only a fraction of the population is at the surface and detectable at any given time; Bugbee, 2008). Previous studies have shown that environmental variables, ranging from moon phase, water level, cloud cover, wind speed, wave height, mean water temperature, and maximum temperature the day of the survey (Da Silveira et al., 2008;Hutton & Woolhouse, 1989;Pacheco, 1996a;Woodward & Marion, 1978), as well as observer-specific factors (Shirley et al., 2012), can have significant influence on crocodylian detectability (Table 1). For example, greater moonlight and higher water temperatures can increase detection, while high water levels and cloud cover can decrease detection (Bugbee, 2008). Bugbee (2008) and Carter (2010) showed that these environmental variables largely impact detection through increased or decreased emergence rates.

These previous studies, while comprehensive, are limited to a small number of species and mostly employed analytical methods that are under question, and thus, this issue should be revisited. For example, stepwise regression was a frequently employed analytical method thought useful for selecting explanatory variables in linear models, but has fallen under criticism (Derksen & Keselman, 1992;Weiss, 1995) because it suffers from a multiple testing problem and is biased (Mundry & Nunn, 2009). More recent efforts have utilized generalized linear mixed modeling (GLMM; Strickland et al., 2018) or occupancy models with occurrence data (Gardner et al. (2016), which overcome some of the issues with stepwise regression, to assess the impact of environmental variables on alligator counts and occupancy, respectively. Both studies, using these less controversial analytical methods, supported some previous findings that, for example, water temperature has a positive effect on crocodylian counts, while recent rainfall has a negative effect.

Virtually, all of these previous studies were conducted on Alligator mississippiensis, Caiman crocodilus, and Crocodylus niloticus-among the most abundant and well-studied crocodylians in the world. The crocodylians of West Africa, on the contrary, are among the most threatened and least researched species in the world. The West African slender-snouted crocodile (Mecistops cataphractus) is listed as Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List (Shirley, 2014), and the highest priority action for this species is to assess population status throughout its range as a basis for establishing in situ conservation programs (Shirley, 2010). This species inhabits rivers mainly covered by dense or shady vegetation (Shirley et al., 2018). Mecistops cataphractus displays some tolerance of forest replacement by agriculture when human and fishing pressure are absent (Shirley et al., 2009). It is highly aquatic, depending on the rainy season and high water levels for all phases of the reproduction cycle (Shirley et al., 2018). In contrast, the West African crocodile (Crocodylus suchus) is much more widely distributed and generalist in its use of habitats (Luiselli et al., 2012). Previously thought to be just odd populations of the Nile crocodile (Hekkala et al., 2011;Schmitz et al., 2003), this little researched species meets the criteria for Endangered on the IUCN Red List (M.H. Shirley, unpub. data), and there is a great need for more surveys and ecological studies (Fergusson, 2010). Both species are faced with extreme habitat loss, overfishing, and the increasing threat of artisanal mining activities.

Crocodylian surveys already underestimate population abundance due to the cryptic nature and behavior of the members of this Order. These effects are exacerbated for the rare, shy, and overexploited species-like M. cataphractus and C. suchus-for which the risk and bias from imperfect detection has real impacts on decisionmaking. For such elusive species, use of occupancy models based on occurrence data may be more appropriate than count data for monitoring programs (Ward et al., 2017). Occupancy methods that deal with imperfect detection are increasingly popular in the herpetological community (e.g., Chandler et al., 2020;Halstead et al., 2018;Petitot et al., 2014). Through data from repetitive surveys, occupancy models allow for the estimation of the probability of site occupancy and detection probability (Kery, 2002;Pellet & Schmidt, 2005). And, in fact, repetitive surveys are already regularly employed in crocodylian monitoring programs to overcome detection biases (Fukuda et al., 2013;Messel et al., 1981;Webb et al., 2000). However, it is not yet known whether repeat surveys over a relatively short period of time actually improve detectability of crocodylians or increase wariness, which could lead to decreases in detection probability (Fieberg et al., 2015) due to increased submergence and other fleeing/evasive behaviors. This is all further complicated by anthropogenic pressures on these species, which can drastically influence the behavior of crocodylians (Lang, 1987;Pacheco, 1996a).

We aimed to evaluate the factors influencing detection and wariness of M. cataphractus and C. suchus, two highly threatened West African crocodylians. To compare with previous studies using linear models and crocodylian counts, we implemented GLMM on our repetitive count data. However, due to the rarity of our studied species, we also evaluated these covariates in a single season occupancy modeling framework. We further sought to provide advice for future monitoring programs through an evaluation of the minimum survey effort needed to infer species absence and of how repetitive surveys impact wariness.


# | ME THODS


## | Study sites

From 2014 to 2019, we conducted surveys of M. cataphractus and C. suchus in different habitat types throughout Côte d'Ivoire. We sampled 38 sites across the major ecoregions of the country, which are representative of those of West Africa: Guinean forest (50% of the country), the Sudano-Guinean zone (19% of the country), and the Sudanian region (31% of the country; Figure 1). The Guinean forest zone is situated in the south and is characterized by high rainfall (>1600 mm/year) and predominantly Upper Guinea forest habitat.

The Sudano-Guinean zone is the transition zone between forest and savannah (Lauginie, 2007). Both zones are characterized by four seasons-long dry (November-February), long rainy (March-June), short dry (July-August), and short rainy (September-October).

The Sudanian zone is located in the north and is characterized as a savannah region with single rainy (May/June-November) and dry (December-May) seasons. Throughout the country, average temperatures range from 24 to 32℃ (Brou, 2005).


## | Crocodiles surveys

We surveyed crocodiles predominantly during the dry season to increase detection rates (Fukuda et al., 2013). We conducted standard nocturnal spotlight surveys (Chabreck, 1966) from an inflatable, outboard-powered boat with 15 hp engine at a cruising speed of about 5.0-6.0 km/h, by inflatable kayak, and/or on foot. A single observer conducted all surveys, who located crocodiles by their eyeshine using either a 78 lumen LED headlamp (80% of observations) or a 550 lumen LED spotlight (20% of observations), depending on the habitat, and approached individuals as close as possible to visually determine species and demographic class (i.e., by total length, TL). However, in this study, we did not include size class in any analyses. We classified crocodiles that submerged before species and total length could be determined TA B L E 1 Environmental and anthropogenic factors that have been shown to influence detectability of crocodylian species  
Precipitation •/− † • †/ † † − + Water Level −/− − † †/− − † † Water Temperature +/− • • •/ † † † † Presence/Absence Wind † • † †/ † † † † Wind speed †/− † • −/ † † • • Presence/Absence Waves † • † †/ † † † † Wave Height − † •/ † † • • Moon Phase +/+ • • •/+ • •

## | Environmental variables

We examined the influence of 10 environmental and anthropogenic variables that were previously shown to have significant influence on crocodile detection probability and are relevant to our study species and habitat (Table 1). We measured six of these variables in the field before or during each survey: moon phase (0-4), wave height and wind speed (0-3), precipitation the day prior to the survey (0, 1), the amount of vegetation present along the shoreline and fishing net encounter rate. We used a binary index of low or high vegetation where low vegetation denotes a visible shoreline with little to no overhanging vegetation and high aquatic vegetation denotes a shoreline completely covered by overhanging or aquatic vegetation (Gardner et al., 2016).

We counted the number of fishing nets seen on the survey as an index of the subsistence fishing threat (Shirley et al., 2009). We assessed mean night air temperature and mean daily precipitation both on the day of the survey and for the previous 48 h from remote sensed data accessed through MODIS (Wan et al., 2015) and CHIRPS (Funk et al., 2015), respectively. Despite that water temperature and water level are known factors influencing crocodylian detectability, we did not include them here because we surveyed sites predominantly during the dry season and over only 3-5 consecutive days per site, effectively resulting in no variation within sites and any between site variation largely being a question of occupancy and not detectability.

Prior to further analysis, we standardized all continuous covariates and tested for multicollinearity among independent variables using the VIF function in the R package car (Fox & Weisberg, 2019).

We found evidence of collinearity for wind speed with wave height and mean night air temperature the day of the survey with mean night temperature for the previous 48 h. Wave height is often correlated with wind speed (Woodward & Marion, 1978) and generally not significant in the small river systems where we surveyed, so we F I G U R E 1 Global distribution (a; Mecistops cataphractus = red dotted line, Crocodylus suchus =blue dotted line) and location of surveys sites (b) for M. cataphractus and C. suchus in Côte d'Ivoire, West Africa. Symbology on the (b) map represents: sites where only M. cataphractus was observed (red diamonds), sites where only C. suchus was observed (yellow diamonds), sites where both species were observed (black triangles), sites where no crocodiles were observed (orange stars), and cities (black dots). Green shaded polygons are national parks and blue shading is water removed wave height from subsequent models. Likewise, we retained mean night temperature for the previous 48 h over mean night air temperature the day of the survey because of its more significant individual effect in subsequent models (Couturier et al., 2013). We conducted all subsequent analyses for each species independently.


## | Influence of environmental and anthropogenic variables on detection probability

We assessed the influence of environmental and anthropogenic variables on crocodile detection probability using both an occupancy framework and with linear mixed models. For both model types, we included all data from all surveys in all years, though treated missing data for repetitions four and five in years 2014 to mid-2016 differently. We categorized missing values as NA in occupancy models, but used imputation methods to infer missing values in GLMM analyses (see below; Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008).

Within the occupancy framework, we used a single season occupancy model to estimate detection probabilities (p) (MacKenzie et al., 2006). To do this, we created a detection history (0 = nondetection, 1 = detection) for each site across all the survey repetitions. For this analysis, we hypothesized that the populations were closed during the survey period, no heterogeneity in detection occurred, and the detection process was independent at each site (MacKenzie et al., 2002). We used the method of "plausible combination" (Bromaghin et al., 2013) for model selection and covariate evaluation, which is increasingly recognized as a robust multistage strategy to assess the fit of single season occupancy models (Morin et al., 2020). To derive detection probability and better understand the influence of covariates on detection, we paired the most general submodel for occupancy (ψ) with all candidate submodels for detection probability (p) using the dredge function in the package MuMin (Barton, 2020) and returned the best model (i.e., ∆AIC threshold of 0) (Morin et al., 2020). Ultimately, we assessed all combinations of the best detection covariates. Because our focus was exclusively on detection probability, we held occupancy constant in the final analysis (i.e., (ψ.)p[covariate]) (Kroll et al., 2008;Moreira et al., 2016;Phumanee et al., 2020), a standard practice when focused on one component, or the other, in occupancy-based analyses (Cook et al., 2011;Jeffress et al., 2011;Wagner et al., 2019). We ranked models using Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size (AICc) and considered all models with ∆AICc ≤ 2 to be competitive models (Burnham & Anderson, 2002). We considered a covariate significant if the 95% CI did not include zero (Bauder et al., 2017). We conducted all analyses using the packages unmarked (Fiske et al., 2017) and AlCcmodavg (Mazerolle, 2015) in R v4.0.2 (R Development Core Team, 2020).

For GLMM analysis, as our surveys varied from three to five replicates, we replaced missing values (8.57% of the total dataset) in all sites with less than five replicates using a multiple imputation procedure (Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008). Specifically, we used multiple imputation to fill in 18 (of 210; 8.6%) missing values for each of crocodile encounter rate, moon phase, wind speed, amount of aquatic vegetation, fishing net encounter rate, and precipitation the day prior to the survey.

We preferred multiple imputation (MI) over single imputation (e.g., substituting missing values with global means) because of the small sample size and risk of underestimating the errors (Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008). Further, Nakagawa and Freckleton (2011) found that, with mixed linear models, replacing missing values through MI results in better estimates of Akaike weights and standard errors compared to leaving NAs in the dataset. We generated and combined 100 imputed datasets (Graham et al., 2007) using the R package mice (Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). After imputation, we determined whether the MICE algorithm has converged by plotting parameters against the iteration number and found no definite trends, indicating good convergence in the dataset including imputed values (Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). We modeled crocodile counts using the lmer function in the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015). We tested the same eight covariates included in the occupancy analysis as fixed effects with site as a random effect. We fit 256 combinations for each species, including the null and global models, without interaction terms and ranked models by AICc. We considered all models with ∆AICc ≤ 2 to be competitive models (Burnham & Anderson, 2002 


## | Estimating the minimum number of visits to infer absence

We used the mean estimate of detection probability from significant covariates of the occupancy-based models for each species to estimate the minimum number of repetitive surveys required to determine that the species is truly absent from a site with 90% (Sliwinski et al., 2016) and 95% confidence (Barata et al., 2017). We calculated N min using the expression of Pellet and Schmidt (2005):

where P denotes the detection probability, and CL is the desired probability of detecting the species at an occupied site on at least one of the N min repetitive surveys.

We also used an occupancy analysis to examine differences in detection probability over the survey replicates (e.g., from 1 to 5).

To do this, we fit an occupancy model using the most significant factors influencing each species detection (i.e., fishing encounter rate for M. cataphractus and mean temperature for the previous 48 h for C. suchus; see results) and survey replicate number as detection covariates. We then predicted from this model the replicate-specific detection probability for each species. We implemented this analysis in R using the package unmarked (Fiske et al., 2017).
N min = log (1 − CL) ∕ log (1 − p)

## | Effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness

We used proportion of "EO" and zero detections across repeated surveys as indexes to examine the effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness. We considered that a progressive reduction in the number of individuals seen or formally identified (i.e., increase in the number of "EO") during surveys to be a reflection of an increase  The mode of moon phase (no moon) and wind were both 0, and aquatic vegetation was generally low across all sites.


# | RE SULTS


## | Crocodile surveys and environmental variables


## | Environmental variables influencing detection

Detection probability for M. cataphractus ranged from 0.75 to 0.87 and for C. suchus from 0.76 to 0.9 across survey sites and

replicates. From our multistage model selection of occupancybased models, we found that two models for M. cataphractus (weight = 0.9) and four models for C. suchus (weight = 0.91) had ∆AICc ≤ 2 ( Table 2). We found a significant negative correlation between M. cataphractus detection and fishing net encounter rate   (Table 3).

The GLMM analysis revealed that six candidate models for M. cataphractus detection had strong support (∆AICc < 2) ( 


## | Minimum number of visits for confident detection

In In the models, fish/fishing net = fishing net encounter rate (nets/km), moon = moon phase, P_48 = precipitation for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, prior = precipitation the day prior to the survey, P_day = precipitation the day of the survey, T_48 = temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, aquatic = aquatic vegetation, and wind = wind speed, which were all included as fixed effects. K is the number of parameters, AICc: Akaike information criterion corrected for small sample, ΔAICc is the different from the best model's AICc, and Weight is the Akaike weight of the model.


## F I G U R E 2 Relationship between (a) Mecistops cataphractus and (b)

Crocodylus suchus detection probability and significant covariates identified from the best supported (AICc ≤ 2) occupancy model. In both tiles, solid lines represent the model-averaged predicted values and dotted lines indicate the 95% credible intervals minimum of two visits are required to conclude with 90% and 95%

confidence that the species was absent. We found a weak decrease in probability of detection from the first to the fifth replicate-from 0.80 to 0.67 for M. cataphractus and from 0.85 to 0.77 for C. suchus (Table 5).


## | Effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness

Globally, we found no effect of survey repetition on wariness for either species, except for M. cataphractus, which showed an increase in wariness for replicate four ( Table 5). None of environmental and anthropogenic factors nor abundance had significant effect on wariness of both species.


# | D ISCUSS I ON

Understanding species detectability and identifying environmental factors that influence species detection and, therefore, abundance or occupancy estimation are central to wildlife monitoring.

Using both occupancy and count-based approaches, we found that the environmental variables that best predict crocodylian species  detection probability and count variability differ substantially both as a result of the analytical approach itself and between species.

Despite their considerably more threatened status, we found higher detectability for M. cataphractus and C. suchus (0.75 and 0.81, respectively) than has been reported previously for abundant crocodylians like the American alligator (0.16-0.62; Gardner et al., 2016).

Though in both studies, crocodiles were surveyed during the best period for detection (June for Gardner et al., 2016 and dry season in our study), the fact that Gardner et al., 2016's study took place in the extreme limit of American alligator distribution, while ours was in the core distribution of our study species, could at least partially explain the observed differences. We also mostly detected juveniles and subadults (80% <1.5m TL), which typically have higher detection rates and, for threatened crocodylians, are often the only individuals encountered to indicate species presence as adults can be incredibly wary.

In terms of factors affecting detectability of M. cataphractus, we found that fishing net encounter rate had a significant negative relationship with encounters. This study is the first to quantify the effect of fishing activities on crocodylian detection and counts.

Overexploitation of freshwater fisheries is among the major threats to crocodiles in West Africa (Shirley et al., 2009). Mecistops cataphractus, in particular, is highly impacted by fishing because its longirostrine snout and tooth morphology drive a largely piscivorous prey base (Erickson et al., 2012), and they often drown in fishing nets (Shirley et al., 2018). Our results showed that precipitation the day of the survey and for the 48 h prior to the survey had significant negative effects on M. cataphractus counts. Precipitation is generally a key factor affecting ectotherm activity (Rozen-Rechels et al., 2019) and, in other crocodylians, has been shown to increase submergence behavior (Bugbee, 2008). For forest species, like Mecistops spp. and likely Tomistoma, Osteolaemus spp., and Paleosuchus spp., precipitation likely amplifies the strong cooling effect already present in forested areas (Li et al., 2015), creating unfavorable microclimatic conditions for ectotherm thermoregulation (Falcón et al., 2018;Seebacher & Franklin, 2005). Though some forested crocodylian species use climbing behavior to increase opportunities for thermoregulation (e.g., Dinets et al., 2014), M. cataphractus has not yet been observed employing this behavior, suggesting it may be more susceptible than other, ecologically similar species to postprecipitation cooling.

Contrary to previous findings indicating that aquatic vegetation negatively affects crocodylian detection (e.g., Cherkiss et al., 2006), we found that M. cataphractus detection increases with increased aquatic vegetation. We observed that shorelines of forested rivers (where most M. cataphractus were encountered) were extensively covered by overhanging tree limbs and stilt roots. Mecistops cataphractus uses these structures as both refuge sites and for feeding due to abundance of prey that also congregate around the submerged structures (C. Kouman, pers. comm., 2021), resulting in them being more detectable because the stilt roots do not reduce observer visibility and, instead, likely provide indicators for where to search for the species. This is in contract to larger rivers, which were often more choked by invasive species like water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), but which do not generally provide favorable habitat for M. cataphractus.

We recorded a significant positive effect of temperature for the previous 48 h of the survey on C. suchus detection. We surveyed crocodiles predominantly in the dry season, which is characterized by warmer temperatures during the day but cooler during the nightmeaning that individuals likely take advantage of the increased thermoregulatory opportunities on hotter days. Additionally, we mostly observed small individuals (TL < 1.5 m), which have been shown to be relatively more active during lower temperature periods in other crocodylians (e.g., Melanosuchus niger; (Pacheco, 1996a). It is interesting to see that even small temperature fluctuations influence behavior change in more stable/less heterogeneous thermal environments, like the tropics. Even more interesting is the lack of significant effect on M. cataphractus detection and counts. Slender-snouted crocodiles are predominantly associated with dense forested habitats, and though members of the genus are documented using fallen trees and such to bask in the absence of exposed banks (Dinets et al., 2014;Shirley et al., 2018), they are not typically associated with basking behavior like Crocodylus species. Further understanding of the thermoregulatory requirements of tropical, forest-dwelling crocodylian species is necessary. Similar to previous studies (e.g., Cherkiss et al., 2006), but in contrast to what we found for M. cataphractus, aquatic vegetation had a significant negative influence on C. suchus counts.

In large open rivers where we mostly found C. suchus, water hyacinth formed a compact floating vegetation mat along the riverbank that physically limits the ability of observers to see the crocodiles and may result in 50% or more of individuals going undetected (e.g., Thorbjarnarson, 1988). Surprisingly, we found that precipitation the day of the survey had significant positive effect on C. suchus counts.

We did not survey during active rainfall, though surveyed on several occasions after daytime precipitation. Some studies have suggested that invertebrates, and fish and aquatic birds as a result, are more active after rains (e.g., Williams, 1951), perhaps driving increased activity levels in C. suchus as they forage. Like for M. cataphractus, C. suchus counts were significantly negatively affected by fishing nets. Regardless of species, overfishing is a major threat for aquatic species throughout West Africa. Interestingly, we also found a positive correlation between moon phase and fishing net encounter rate (F = 3.821, df = 4, p = .005), suggesting that increased fishing efforts with increasing moonlight could be an important factor driving submergence and detectability of crocodiles in heavily fished areas.

It should be noted that previous studies have identified water level as an important factor affecting crocodile detection and counts (Da Silveira et al., 2008;Hutton & Woolhouse, 1989 Despite these factors impeding observation of these two crocodylian species in the field, and because of the relatively high detectability of both species, we estimated that relatively few visits (n = 3)

are necessary to infer that either is absent at a given site with 95%

confidence. This is confirmed by our field observation showing that, generally, we detected with 100% confidence either species after two surveys replicate. Even though C. suchus had greater detection probability, they were detected with 100% confidence at sites where they occurred by the fourth survey replicate. This was mostly driven by a drastic change in water level during our third survey at the Fresco lagoon, where the lagoon mouth was opened leading to a considerable decrease in water level and resulting in higher than expected detectability for replicates four and five. However, on average, we detected with 100% confidence either species after two surveys replicate. These results likely mean that we can conclude the true absence of M. cataphractus and C. suchus at all sites where we did not detect them-53% of our study sites. Another point which could reinforce this inference is the fact that we failed to detect any crocodiles in areas where fishing encounter rate was 2/km-further reinforcing the idea that these species are highly threatened by anthropogenic activities. However, because detection probability can be influenced by factors ranging from season (MacKenzie et al., 2003) to true population size (Tanadini & Schmidt, 2011) and survey effort (Jeffress et al., 2011), which were mostly unaccounted for in this work, this result should be interpreted with preliminary caution.

Our presence-absence versus count-based analyses revealed how analytical approach can influence our understanding of how some environmental factors influence species detection and counts.

Occupancy analysis, which addresses imperfect species detection, has garnered much attention because it allows for reliable and cost-effective analysis of population distribution, habitat use, and relative abundance, with less demanding data inputs compared to abundance estimation approaches (Casner et al., 2014;Noon et al., 2012). While not explicitly accounting for detectability, generalized linear models (GLMs) and generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) are also widely used due to their ease of application and ability to incorporate count data (Gorosito et al., 2018). For count data, Royle (2004) developed the N-mixture model to provide reliable estimates of abundance, which incorporates imperfect detection. However,

there have been cases illustrating poor fit of these models, especially to species with considerable detectability issues (e.g., Ward et al., 2017). In our case, our results showed that occupancy-based detection and GLMM based on counts are driven by different predictors suggesting they can be complementary, as has been seen in other studies (Gorosito et al., 2018). We suggest researchers and managers consider results from multiple modeling approaches whenever possible to obtain a complete picture of species ecology to implement effective management strategies.

Though repetitive surveys are frequently employed to survey crocodylians, there has as yet been no assessment of crocodylian response to repetitive surveys. Using proportion of EO observations as an index of wariness, we found that both West African crocodylian species generally exhibited no wariness response to repetitive surveys, which is also confirmed by the only weak decrease in detection probability from repetition one to five. Previous research has assessed wariness in crocodile populations and found this type of indicator to reliably represent wariness (Pacheco, 1996b;Webb & Messel, 1979). Despite wariness can be influenced by a multitude of factors, including hunting pressure, habitat type (Punzo, 2007), and environmental (Van Dongen et al., 2015), and can also vary between populations and species. In the present study, we found that no environmental variables affected wariness of either species.

This is similar to previous findings for other crocodylians (Pacheco, 1996b;Webb & Messel, 1979) and suggests that wariness is largely driven by interactions with people. Similarity of wariness response could be attributable to hunting pressure because crocodile hunting in West Africa is typically not species-specific, at least not between M. cataphractus and C. suchus, as the primary objective of the hunters is simply acquisition of whatever is available. In addition, hunting pressure in West Africa occurred in all our study sites, even in protected areas, and is exacerbated in aquatic environments due to the presence of both fishermen and poachers (Ferreguetti et al., 2018) and the relatively little attention paid to aquatic environments by anti-poaching teams. In spite of that, our models not find significant effect of fishing net encounter rate on crocodile wariness, suggesting that some other fishing/hunting related variable may be a better predictor of crocodylian wariness. Further research using another index of wariness, such as stress hormones, and other anthropogenic factors as covariates should be explored.


## | Implications for conservation

This study is the first to assess the effects of anthropogenic and environmental factors on M. cataphractus and C. suchus, two of the least known crocodylians worldwide, for management purposes.

Information obtained will enhance our understanding of the ecology of these species and help to develop strategies for their monitoring and conservation. In order to increase detection and counts, we recommend that crocodylian surveys are planned at a time that is optimal for detection (i.e., dry season; Fukuda et al., 2013), but will not be confounded by abundant aquatic vegetation, like water hyacinth.

Further, to optimize monitoring programs, a trade-off between the number of sampling occasions (number of visits) and the number of sites must be met. In general, fewer sites require more sampling occasions to increase precision on the total population (Mackenzie & Royle, 2005); however, the minimum number of sampling occasions must reliably predict species absence (Barata et al., 2017). We found that three surveys were necessary to infer species absence which, in light of decreasing detection probability to survey replicate five and increase in wariness associated with survey four, likely means that three visits for any given site is sufficient to obtain reliable information. Limiting surveys to three replicates can reduce the costs of the monitoring program and allow time and finances for surveys of additional sites. Additionally, though there will be temptation to plan to surveys for sympatrically distributed species simultaneously, the reality is that environmental variables like precipitation and temperature may differentially impact species detectability. At the very least, this must be accounted for during data analysis, but ideally monitoring will be designed to optimize detection of each target species. In West Africa, the unprecedented deforestation rate is seemingly increasing the availability of habitat for C. suchus, resulting in increasing contact, and potentially competition, with M. cataphractus. The use of multispecies occupancy models accounting for the biotic and abiotic factors that influence detection and occupancy of these two species may be useful in improving monitoring-based management decision-making for these two species (Devarajan et al., 2020). Our results additionally support that, beyond the influence of environmental factors on species detection and counts, crocodylian researchers need to account for anthropogenic factors which could have profound impacts on species behavior and habitat use. In West Africa, and elsewhere, where crocodylian monitoring programs are increasingly established, accounting for these factors both in the field and through use of appropriate analytical approaches, will provide reliable information on population status and trends without being financially overburdensome. Finally, our result suggests that the likelihood of encountering viable crocodile populations decreases with increasing fishing pressure. Overexploitation of fish in inland waterways is an increasingly recognized global problem (Allan et al., 2005). It is likely that sustainable inland fisheries management will be critical to successful crocodile conservation in regions like West Africa moving forward. parks, and authorization to work with these crocodiles throughout the Ivorian national territory. We thank Atsé, N'Diaye, and all our local field guides for their considerable assistance with data collection.


## ACK N OWLED G M ENTS


## CO N FLI C T O F I NTE R E S T

None declared. Writing-review & editing (equal). 


## AUTH O R CO NTR I B UTI O N


## DATA AVA I L A B I L I T Y S TAT E M E N T

## (
Figure 2A) (−3.12, 95% CI: −5.1 to −1.1), as well as a nonsignificant relationship with moon phase (−0.56, 95% CI: −1.3 to 0.18) (

## -
The parameter estimates from GLMM-based analysis and the replicate specific detection probability from occupancy analysis. Abundance= crocodile encounter rate (ind./km), Fishing = fishing encounter rate, Aquatic = aquatic vegetation, P_48 = precipitation for the previous 48 h of the survey, P_day = Precipitation the day of the survey, T_48 = average temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey. (-) indicates that the parameter was not included in the model for that species. Fixed factors in bold indicate those that had a significant effect (p < .05).


Michel N. Ahizi: Conceptualization (lead); Data curation (lead); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (lead); Software (lead); Writing-original draft (lead); Writing-review & editing (equal). Christine Y. Kouman: Conceptualization (supporting); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (supporting); Investigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Software (supporting); Writing-original draft (supporting); Writing-review & editing (equal). Allassane Ouattara: Supervision (equal); Validation ((equal). Emilie Fairet: Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Validation (equal); Writing-review & editing (equal). Matthew H. Shirley: Conceptualization (supporting); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Funding acquisition (lead); Investigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Project administration (equal); Supervision (equal); Validation (equal); Writing-original draft (equal);


). We obtained model-averaged coefficients using the Model.avg function in MuMin. Model-averaged coefficients offer more reliable and robust point and uncertainty estimations of parameters(Burnham & Anderson, 2002;Richards et al., 2011;Symonds & Moussalli, 2011). For each coefficient, we report associate 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and the coefficient estimate with shrinkage (also called "zero method"). We considered a covariate significant if the 95% CI did not include zero(Bauder et al., 2017).


in wariness. For each site where the presence of each crocodile species was confirmed, we determined the proportion of observations that were EO (EO/number of all observations) for each survey, where 0.0 represented no wariness and 1.0 (represented by either 100% EO observations or zero detections) represented complete wariness. For sites where the two studied species were sympatric, we partitioned the EO observations by the ratio of the number of individuals actually attributable to either species. Because our surveys varied from three to five replicates, we used multiple imputation as described above to estimate missing values for the following covariates: index of wariness, aquatic vegetation, fishing net encounter rate, and crocodile abundance for both species, resulting in 10.9% and 7.14% values derived from MI for M. cataphractus and C. suchus, respectively. We assessed crocodile wariness as a function of the survey replicate, the most important covariates for each species identified in both occupancy and count-based GLMM analyses above, and crocodile encounter rate as an index of abundance. We included encounter rate because we hypothesized that population abundance may represent unmeasured disturbance effects on individual wariness (i.e., for rare species, higher abundance sites likely have less impacted or threatened population histories, which may capture unmeasured/unmeasurable histories of disturbance or harassment of individuals). The M. cataphractus model included survey repetition, abundance, fishing net encounter rate, precipitation the day of the survey and for the previous 48 h, and aquatic vegetation as fixed factors. The model for C. suchus included survey repetition, abundance, fishing net encounter rate, precipitation the day of the survey, temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, and aquatic vegetation as fixed factors. Both species models included site as a random ef-fect. We used generalized linear mixed effects modeling, fit by re-

stricted maximum likelihood, using the package lme4 (Bates et al., 

2015) and Satterthawaite's approximation from package lmerTest 

(Kuznetsova et al., 2017) to assess each factor's significance in R 

v4.0.2 (R Development Core Team, 2020). 



## Table 3 )
3. Crocodylus suchus detection was significantly positively 

correlated with mean temperature for the previous 48 h of the day 

of the survey (Figure 2B) (0.49, 95% CI: 0.16 to 0.81), while moon 

phase (0.42 95% CI: −0.13 to 0.97) and wind (1.39, 95% CI: −0.31 

to 3.09) were not significant 

## Table 2 )# | INTRODUC TI ON

Monitoring programs are crucial for informing biodiversity management (Jones et al., 2011), especially for species of conservation concern. But inference of species population trends can be strongly influenced by imperfect detection, especially for cryptic and secretive species (Bauder et al., 2017). Species detectability is central to appropriate survey design (MacKenzie et al., 2002), but can vary widely among even closely related species (Wintle et al., 2005) and be heavily influenced by environmental factors (Burns et al., 2019), habitat features, and observer bias (Jeffress et al., 2011;Shirley et al., 2012).

Crocodylians are difficult species to survey and monitor (Bayliss, 1987) because they are principally nocturnal, behaviorally cryptic, and surveys are impeded by significant submersion bias (i.e., only a fraction of the population is at the surface and detectable at any given time; Bugbee, 2008). Previous studies have shown that environmental variables, ranging from moon phase, water level, cloud cover, wind speed, wave height, mean water temperature, and maximum temperature the day of the survey (Da Silveira et al., 2008;Hutton & Woolhouse, 1989;Pacheco, 1996a;Woodward & Marion, 1978), as well as observer-specific factors (Shirley et al., 2012), can have significant influence on crocodylian detectability (Table 1). For example, greater moonlight and higher water temperatures can increase detection, while high water levels and cloud cover can decrease detection (Bugbee, 2008). Bugbee (2008) and Carter (2010) showed that these environmental variables largely impact detection through increased or decreased emergence rates.

These previous studies, while comprehensive, are limited to a small number of species and mostly employed analytical methods that are under question, and thus, this issue should be revisited. For example, stepwise regression was a frequently employed analytical method thought useful for selecting explanatory variables in linear models, but has fallen under criticism (Derksen & Keselman, 1992;Weiss, 1995) because it suffers from a multiple testing problem and is biased (Mundry & Nunn, 2009). More recent efforts have utilized generalized linear mixed modeling (GLMM; Strickland et al., 2018) or occupancy models with occurrence data (Gardner et al. (2016), which overcome some of the issues with stepwise regression, to assess the impact of environmental variables on alligator counts and occupancy, respectively. Both studies, using these less controversial analytical methods, supported some previous findings that, for example, water temperature has a positive effect on crocodylian counts, while recent rainfall has a negative effect.

Virtually, all of these previous studies were conducted on Alligator mississippiensis, Caiman crocodilus, and Crocodylus niloticus-among the most abundant and well-studied crocodylians in the world. The crocodylians of West Africa, on the contrary, are among the most threatened and least researched species in the world. The West African slender-snouted crocodile (Mecistops cataphractus) is listed as Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List (Shirley, 2014), and the highest priority action for this species is to assess population status throughout its range as a basis for establishing in situ conservation programs (Shirley, 2010). This species inhabits rivers mainly covered by dense or shady vegetation (Shirley et al., 2018). Mecistops cataphractus displays some tolerance of forest replacement by agriculture when human and fishing pressure are absent (Shirley et al., 2009). It is highly aquatic, depending on the rainy season and high water levels for all phases of the reproduction cycle (Shirley et al., 2018). In contrast, the West African crocodile (Crocodylus suchus) is much more widely distributed and generalist in its use of habitats (Luiselli et al., 2012). Previously thought to be just odd populations of the Nile crocodile (Hekkala et al., 2011;Schmitz et al., 2003), this little researched species meets the criteria for Endangered on the IUCN Red List (M.H. Shirley, unpub. data), and there is a great need for more surveys and ecological studies (Fergusson, 2010). Both species are faced with extreme habitat loss, overfishing, and the increasing threat of artisanal mining activities.

Crocodylian surveys already underestimate population abundance due to the cryptic nature and behavior of the members of this Order. These effects are exacerbated for the rare, shy, and overexploited species-like M. cataphractus and C. suchus-for which the risk and bias from imperfect detection has real impacts on decisionmaking. For such elusive species, use of occupancy models based on occurrence data may be more appropriate than count data for monitoring programs (Ward et al., 2017). Occupancy methods that deal with imperfect detection are increasingly popular in the herpetological community (e.g., Chandler et al., 2020;Halstead et al., 2018;Petitot et al., 2014). Through data from repetitive surveys, occupancy models allow for the estimation of the probability of site occupancy and detection probability (Kery, 2002;Pellet & Schmidt, 2005). And, in fact, repetitive surveys are already regularly employed in crocodylian monitoring programs to overcome detection biases (Fukuda et al., 2013;Messel et al., 1981;Webb et al., 2000). However, it is not yet known whether repeat surveys over a relatively short period of time actually improve detectability of crocodylians or increase wariness, which could lead to decreases in detection probability (Fieberg et al., 2015) due to increased submergence and other fleeing/evasive behaviors. This is all further complicated by anthropogenic pressures on these species, which can drastically influence the behavior of crocodylians (Lang, 1987;Pacheco, 1996a).

We aimed to evaluate the factors influencing detection and wariness of M. cataphractus and C. suchus, two highly threatened West African crocodylians. To compare with previous studies using linear models and crocodylian counts, we implemented GLMM on our repetitive count data. However, due to the rarity of our studied species, we also evaluated these covariates in a single season occupancy modeling framework. We further sought to provide advice for future monitoring programs through an evaluation of the minimum survey effort needed to infer species absence and of how repetitive surveys impact wariness.


# | ME THODS


## | Study sites

From 2014 to 2019, we conducted surveys of M. cataphractus and C. suchus in different habitat types throughout Côte d'Ivoire. We sampled 38 sites across the major ecoregions of the country, which are representative of those of West Africa: Guinean forest (50% of the country), the Sudano-Guinean zone (19% of the country), and the Sudanian region (31% of the country; Figure 1). The Guinean forest zone is situated in the south and is characterized by high rainfall (>1600 mm/year) and predominantly Upper Guinea forest habitat.

The Sudano-Guinean zone is the transition zone between forest and savannah (Lauginie, 2007). Both zones are characterized by four seasons-long dry (November-February), long rainy (March-June), short dry (July-August), and short rainy (September-October).

The Sudanian zone is located in the north and is characterized as a savannah region with single rainy (May/June-November) and dry (December-May) seasons. Throughout the country, average temperatures range from 24 to 32℃ (Brou, 2005).


## | Crocodiles surveys

We surveyed crocodiles predominantly during the dry season to increase detection rates (Fukuda et al., 2013). We conducted standard nocturnal spotlight surveys (Chabreck, 1966) from an inflatable, outboard-powered boat with 15 hp engine at a cruising speed of about 5.0-6.0 km/h, by inflatable kayak, and/or on foot. A single observer conducted all surveys, who located crocodiles by their eyeshine using either a 78 lumen LED headlamp (80% of observations) or a 550 lumen LED spotlight (20% of observations), depending on the habitat, and approached individuals as close as possible to visually determine species and demographic class (i.e., by total length, TL). However, in this study, we did not include size class in any analyses. We classified crocodiles that submerged before species and total length could be determined TA B L E 1 Environmental and anthropogenic factors that have been shown to influence detectability of crocodylian species  
Precipitation •/− † • †/ † † − + Water Level −/− − † †/− − † † Water Temperature +/− • • •/ † † † † Presence/Absence Wind † • † †/ † † † † Wind speed †/− † • −/ † † • • Presence/Absence Waves † • † †/ † † † † Wave Height − † •/ † † • • Moon Phase +/+ • • •/+ • •

## | Environmental variables

We examined the influence of 10 environmental and anthropogenic variables that were previously shown to have significant influence on crocodile detection probability and are relevant to our study species and habitat (Table 1). We measured six of these variables in the field before or during each survey: moon phase (0-4), wave height and wind speed (0-3), precipitation the day prior to the survey (0, 1), the amount of vegetation present along the shoreline and fishing net encounter rate. We used a binary index of low or high vegetation where low vegetation denotes a visible shoreline with little to no overhanging vegetation and high aquatic vegetation denotes a shoreline completely covered by overhanging or aquatic vegetation (Gardner et al., 2016).

We counted the number of fishing nets seen on the survey as an index of the subsistence fishing threat (Shirley et al., 2009). We assessed mean night air temperature and mean daily precipitation both on the day of the survey and for the previous 48 h from remote sensed data accessed through MODIS (Wan et al., 2015) and CHIRPS (Funk et al., 2015), respectively. Despite that water temperature and water level are known factors influencing crocodylian detectability, we did not include them here because we surveyed sites predominantly during the dry season and over only 3-5 consecutive days per site, effectively resulting in no variation within sites and any between site variation largely being a question of occupancy and not detectability.

Prior to further analysis, we standardized all continuous covariates and tested for multicollinearity among independent variables using the VIF function in the R package car (Fox & Weisberg, 2019).

We found evidence of collinearity for wind speed with wave height and mean night air temperature the day of the survey with mean night temperature for the previous 48 h. Wave height is often correlated with wind speed (Woodward & Marion, 1978) and generally not significant in the small river systems where we surveyed, so we F I G U R E 1 Global distribution (a; Mecistops cataphractus = red dotted line, Crocodylus suchus =blue dotted line) and location of surveys sites (b) for M. cataphractus and C. suchus in Côte d'Ivoire, West Africa. Symbology on the (b) map represents: sites where only M. cataphractus was observed (red diamonds), sites where only C. suchus was observed (yellow diamonds), sites where both species were observed (black triangles), sites where no crocodiles were observed (orange stars), and cities (black dots). Green shaded polygons are national parks and blue shading is water removed wave height from subsequent models. Likewise, we retained mean night temperature for the previous 48 h over mean night air temperature the day of the survey because of its more significant individual effect in subsequent models (Couturier et al., 2013). We conducted all subsequent analyses for each species independently.


## | Influence of environmental and anthropogenic variables on detection probability

We assessed the influence of environmental and anthropogenic variables on crocodile detection probability using both an occupancy framework and with linear mixed models. For both model types, we included all data from all surveys in all years, though treated missing data for repetitions four and five in years 2014 to mid-2016 differently. We categorized missing values as NA in occupancy models, but used imputation methods to infer missing values in GLMM analyses (see below; Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008).

Within the occupancy framework, we used a single season occupancy model to estimate detection probabilities (p) (MacKenzie et al., 2006). To do this, we created a detection history (0 = nondetection, 1 = detection) for each site across all the survey repetitions. For this analysis, we hypothesized that the populations were closed during the survey period, no heterogeneity in detection occurred, and the detection process was independent at each site (MacKenzie et al., 2002). We used the method of "plausible combination" (Bromaghin et al., 2013) for model selection and covariate evaluation, which is increasingly recognized as a robust multistage strategy to assess the fit of single season occupancy models (Morin et al., 2020). To derive detection probability and better understand the influence of covariates on detection, we paired the most general submodel for occupancy (ψ) with all candidate submodels for detection probability (p) using the dredge function in the package MuMin (Barton, 2020) and returned the best model (i.e., ∆AIC threshold of 0) (Morin et al., 2020). Ultimately, we assessed all combinations of the best detection covariates. Because our focus was exclusively on detection probability, we held occupancy constant in the final analysis (i.e., (ψ.)p[covariate]) (Kroll et al., 2008;Moreira et al., 2016;Phumanee et al., 2020), a standard practice when focused on one component, or the other, in occupancy-based analyses (Cook et al., 2011;Jeffress et al., 2011;Wagner et al., 2019). We ranked models using Akaike's information criterion corrected for small sample size (AICc) and considered all models with ∆AICc ≤ 2 to be competitive models (Burnham & Anderson, 2002). We considered a covariate significant if the 95% CI did not include zero (Bauder et al., 2017). We conducted all analyses using the packages unmarked (Fiske et al., 2017) and AlCcmodavg (Mazerolle, 2015) in R v4.0.2 (R Development Core Team, 2020).

For GLMM analysis, as our surveys varied from three to five replicates, we replaced missing values (8.57% of the total dataset) in all sites with less than five replicates using a multiple imputation procedure (Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008). Specifically, we used multiple imputation to fill in 18 (of 210; 8.6%) missing values for each of crocodile encounter rate, moon phase, wind speed, amount of aquatic vegetation, fishing net encounter rate, and precipitation the day prior to the survey.

We preferred multiple imputation (MI) over single imputation (e.g., substituting missing values with global means) because of the small sample size and risk of underestimating the errors (Nakagawa & Freckleton, 2008). Further, Nakagawa and Freckleton (2011) found that, with mixed linear models, replacing missing values through MI results in better estimates of Akaike weights and standard errors compared to leaving NAs in the dataset. We generated and combined 100 imputed datasets (Graham et al., 2007) using the R package mice (Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). After imputation, we determined whether the MICE algorithm has converged by plotting parameters against the iteration number and found no definite trends, indicating good convergence in the dataset including imputed values (Buuren & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 2011). We modeled crocodile counts using the lmer function in the lme4 package (Bates et al., 2015). We tested the same eight covariates included in the occupancy analysis as fixed effects with site as a random effect. We fit 256 combinations for each species, including the null and global models, without interaction terms and ranked models by AICc. We considered all models with ∆AICc ≤ 2 to be competitive models (Burnham & Anderson, 2002 


## | Estimating the minimum number of visits to infer absence

We used the mean estimate of detection probability from significant covariates of the occupancy-based models for each species to estimate the minimum number of repetitive surveys required to determine that the species is truly absent from a site with 90% (Sliwinski et al., 2016) and 95% confidence (Barata et al., 2017). We calculated N min using the expression of Pellet and Schmidt (2005):

where P denotes the detection probability, and CL is the desired probability of detecting the species at an occupied site on at least one of the N min repetitive surveys.

We also used an occupancy analysis to examine differences in detection probability over the survey replicates (e.g., from 1 to 5).

To do this, we fit an occupancy model using the most significant factors influencing each species detection (i.e., fishing encounter rate for M. cataphractus and mean temperature for the previous 48 h for C. suchus; see results) and survey replicate number as detection covariates. We then predicted from this model the replicate-specific detection probability for each species. We implemented this analysis in R using the package unmarked (Fiske et al., 2017).
N min = log (1 − CL) ∕ log (1 − p)

## | Effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness

We used proportion of "EO" and zero detections across repeated surveys as indexes to examine the effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness. We considered that a progressive reduction in the number of individuals seen or formally identified (i.e., increase in the number of "EO") during surveys to be a reflection of an increase  The mode of moon phase (no moon) and wind were both 0, and aquatic vegetation was generally low across all sites.


# | RE SULTS


## | Crocodile surveys and environmental variables


## | Environmental variables influencing detection

Detection probability for M. cataphractus ranged from 0.75 to 0.87 and for C. suchus from 0.76 to 0.9 across survey sites and

replicates. From our multistage model selection of occupancybased models, we found that two models for M. cataphractus (weight = 0.9) and four models for C. suchus (weight = 0.91) had ∆AICc ≤ 2 ( Table 2). We found a significant negative correlation between M. cataphractus detection and fishing net encounter rate   (Table 3).

The GLMM analysis revealed that six candidate models for M. cataphractus detection had strong support (∆AICc < 2) ( 


## | Minimum number of visits for confident detection

In In the models, fish/fishing net = fishing net encounter rate (nets/km), moon = moon phase, P_48 = precipitation for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, prior = precipitation the day prior to the survey, P_day = precipitation the day of the survey, T_48 = temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, aquatic = aquatic vegetation, and wind = wind speed, which were all included as fixed effects. K is the number of parameters, AICc: Akaike information criterion corrected for small sample, ΔAICc is the different from the best model's AICc, and Weight is the Akaike weight of the model.


## F I G U R E 2 Relationship between (a) Mecistops cataphractus and (b)

Crocodylus suchus detection probability and significant covariates identified from the best supported (AICc ≤ 2) occupancy model. In both tiles, solid lines represent the model-averaged predicted values and dotted lines indicate the 95% credible intervals minimum of two visits are required to conclude with 90% and 95%

confidence that the species was absent. We found a weak decrease in probability of detection from the first to the fifth replicate-from 0.80 to 0.67 for M. cataphractus and from 0.85 to 0.77 for C. suchus (Table 5).


## | Effect of repetitive surveys on crocodile wariness

Globally, we found no effect of survey repetition on wariness for either species, except for M. cataphractus, which showed an increase in wariness for replicate four ( Table 5). None of environmental and anthropogenic factors nor abundance had significant effect on wariness of both species.


# | D ISCUSS I ON

Understanding species detectability and identifying environmental factors that influence species detection and, therefore, abundance or occupancy estimation are central to wildlife monitoring.

Using both occupancy and count-based approaches, we found that the environmental variables that best predict crocodylian species  detection probability and count variability differ substantially both as a result of the analytical approach itself and between species.

Despite their considerably more threatened status, we found higher detectability for M. cataphractus and C. suchus (0.75 and 0.81, respectively) than has been reported previously for abundant crocodylians like the American alligator (0.16-0.62; Gardner et al., 2016).

Though in both studies, crocodiles were surveyed during the best period for detection (June for Gardner et al., 2016 and dry season in our study), the fact that Gardner et al., 2016's study took place in the extreme limit of American alligator distribution, while ours was in the core distribution of our study species, could at least partially explain the observed differences. We also mostly detected juveniles and subadults (80% <1.5m TL), which typically have higher detection rates and, for threatened crocodylians, are often the only individuals encountered to indicate species presence as adults can be incredibly wary.

In terms of factors affecting detectability of M. cataphractus, we found that fishing net encounter rate had a significant negative relationship with encounters. This study is the first to quantify the effect of fishing activities on crocodylian detection and counts.

Overexploitation of freshwater fisheries is among the major threats to crocodiles in West Africa (Shirley et al., 2009). Mecistops cataphractus, in particular, is highly impacted by fishing because its longirostrine snout and tooth morphology drive a largely piscivorous prey base (Erickson et al., 2012), and they often drown in fishing nets (Shirley et al., 2018). Our results showed that precipitation the day of the survey and for the 48 h prior to the survey had significant negative effects on M. cataphractus counts. Precipitation is generally a key factor affecting ectotherm activity (Rozen-Rechels et al., 2019) and, in other crocodylians, has been shown to increase submergence behavior (Bugbee, 2008). For forest species, like Mecistops spp. and likely Tomistoma, Osteolaemus spp., and Paleosuchus spp., precipitation likely amplifies the strong cooling effect already present in forested areas (Li et al., 2015), creating unfavorable microclimatic conditions for ectotherm thermoregulation (Falcón et al., 2018;Seebacher & Franklin, 2005). Though some forested crocodylian species use climbing behavior to increase opportunities for thermoregulation (e.g., Dinets et al., 2014), M. cataphractus has not yet been observed employing this behavior, suggesting it may be more susceptible than other, ecologically similar species to postprecipitation cooling.

Contrary to previous findings indicating that aquatic vegetation negatively affects crocodylian detection (e.g., Cherkiss et al., 2006), we found that M. cataphractus detection increases with increased aquatic vegetation. We observed that shorelines of forested rivers (where most M. cataphractus were encountered) were extensively covered by overhanging tree limbs and stilt roots. Mecistops cataphractus uses these structures as both refuge sites and for feeding due to abundance of prey that also congregate around the submerged structures (C. Kouman, pers. comm., 2021), resulting in them being more detectable because the stilt roots do not reduce observer visibility and, instead, likely provide indicators for where to search for the species. This is in contract to larger rivers, which were often more choked by invasive species like water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes), but which do not generally provide favorable habitat for M. cataphractus.

We recorded a significant positive effect of temperature for the previous 48 h of the survey on C. suchus detection. We surveyed crocodiles predominantly in the dry season, which is characterized by warmer temperatures during the day but cooler during the nightmeaning that individuals likely take advantage of the increased thermoregulatory opportunities on hotter days. Additionally, we mostly observed small individuals (TL < 1.5 m), which have been shown to be relatively more active during lower temperature periods in other crocodylians (e.g., Melanosuchus niger; (Pacheco, 1996a). It is interesting to see that even small temperature fluctuations influence behavior change in more stable/less heterogeneous thermal environments, like the tropics. Even more interesting is the lack of significant effect on M. cataphractus detection and counts. Slender-snouted crocodiles are predominantly associated with dense forested habitats, and though members of the genus are documented using fallen trees and such to bask in the absence of exposed banks (Dinets et al., 2014;Shirley et al., 2018), they are not typically associated with basking behavior like Crocodylus species. Further understanding of the thermoregulatory requirements of tropical, forest-dwelling crocodylian species is necessary. Similar to previous studies (e.g., Cherkiss et al., 2006), but in contrast to what we found for M. cataphractus, aquatic vegetation had a significant negative influence on C. suchus counts.

In large open rivers where we mostly found C. suchus, water hyacinth formed a compact floating vegetation mat along the riverbank that physically limits the ability of observers to see the crocodiles and may result in 50% or more of individuals going undetected (e.g., Thorbjarnarson, 1988). Surprisingly, we found that precipitation the day of the survey had significant positive effect on C. suchus counts.

We did not survey during active rainfall, though surveyed on several occasions after daytime precipitation. Some studies have suggested that invertebrates, and fish and aquatic birds as a result, are more active after rains (e.g., Williams, 1951), perhaps driving increased activity levels in C. suchus as they forage. Like for M. cataphractus, C. suchus counts were significantly negatively affected by fishing nets. Regardless of species, overfishing is a major threat for aquatic species throughout West Africa. Interestingly, we also found a positive correlation between moon phase and fishing net encounter rate (F = 3.821, df = 4, p = .005), suggesting that increased fishing efforts with increasing moonlight could be an important factor driving submergence and detectability of crocodiles in heavily fished areas.

It should be noted that previous studies have identified water level as an important factor affecting crocodile detection and counts (Da Silveira et al., 2008;Hutton & Woolhouse, 1989 Despite these factors impeding observation of these two crocodylian species in the field, and because of the relatively high detectability of both species, we estimated that relatively few visits (n = 3)

are necessary to infer that either is absent at a given site with 95%

confidence. This is confirmed by our field observation showing that, generally, we detected with 100% confidence either species after two surveys replicate. Even though C. suchus had greater detection probability, they were detected with 100% confidence at sites where they occurred by the fourth survey replicate. This was mostly driven by a drastic change in water level during our third survey at the Fresco lagoon, where the lagoon mouth was opened leading to a considerable decrease in water level and resulting in higher than expected detectability for replicates four and five. However, on average, we detected with 100% confidence either species after two surveys replicate. These results likely mean that we can conclude the true absence of M. cataphractus and C. suchus at all sites where we did not detect them-53% of our study sites. Another point which could reinforce this inference is the fact that we failed to detect any crocodiles in areas where fishing encounter rate was 2/km-further reinforcing the idea that these species are highly threatened by anthropogenic activities. However, because detection probability can be influenced by factors ranging from season (MacKenzie et al., 2003) to true population size (Tanadini & Schmidt, 2011) and survey effort (Jeffress et al., 2011), which were mostly unaccounted for in this work, this result should be interpreted with preliminary caution.

Our presence-absence versus count-based analyses revealed how analytical approach can influence our understanding of how some environmental factors influence species detection and counts.

Occupancy analysis, which addresses imperfect species detection, has garnered much attention because it allows for reliable and cost-effective analysis of population distribution, habitat use, and relative abundance, with less demanding data inputs compared to abundance estimation approaches (Casner et al., 2014;Noon et al., 2012). While not explicitly accounting for detectability, generalized linear models (GLMs) and generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) are also widely used due to their ease of application and ability to incorporate count data (Gorosito et al., 2018). For count data, Royle (2004) developed the N-mixture model to provide reliable estimates of abundance, which incorporates imperfect detection. However,

there have been cases illustrating poor fit of these models, especially to species with considerable detectability issues (e.g., Ward et al., 2017). In our case, our results showed that occupancy-based detection and GLMM based on counts are driven by different predictors suggesting they can be complementary, as has been seen in other studies (Gorosito et al., 2018). We suggest researchers and managers consider results from multiple modeling approaches whenever possible to obtain a complete picture of species ecology to implement effective management strategies.

Though repetitive surveys are frequently employed to survey crocodylians, there has as yet been no assessment of crocodylian response to repetitive surveys. Using proportion of EO observations as an index of wariness, we found that both West African crocodylian species generally exhibited no wariness response to repetitive surveys, which is also confirmed by the only weak decrease in detection probability from repetition one to five. Previous research has assessed wariness in crocodile populations and found this type of indicator to reliably represent wariness (Pacheco, 1996b;Webb & Messel, 1979). Despite wariness can be influenced by a multitude of factors, including hunting pressure, habitat type (Punzo, 2007), and environmental (Van Dongen et al., 2015), and can also vary between populations and species. In the present study, we found that no environmental variables affected wariness of either species.

This is similar to previous findings for other crocodylians (Pacheco, 1996b;Webb & Messel, 1979) and suggests that wariness is largely driven by interactions with people. Similarity of wariness response could be attributable to hunting pressure because crocodile hunting in West Africa is typically not species-specific, at least not between M. cataphractus and C. suchus, as the primary objective of the hunters is simply acquisition of whatever is available. In addition, hunting pressure in West Africa occurred in all our study sites, even in protected areas, and is exacerbated in aquatic environments due to the presence of both fishermen and poachers (Ferreguetti et al., 2018) and the relatively little attention paid to aquatic environments by anti-poaching teams. In spite of that, our models not find significant effect of fishing net encounter rate on crocodile wariness, suggesting that some other fishing/hunting related variable may be a better predictor of crocodylian wariness. Further research using another index of wariness, such as stress hormones, and other anthropogenic factors as covariates should be explored.


## | Implications for conservation

This study is the first to assess the effects of anthropogenic and environmental factors on M. cataphractus and C. suchus, two of the least known crocodylians worldwide, for management purposes.

Information obtained will enhance our understanding of the ecology of these species and help to develop strategies for their monitoring and conservation. In order to increase detection and counts, we recommend that crocodylian surveys are planned at a time that is optimal for detection (i.e., dry season; Fukuda et al., 2013), but will not be confounded by abundant aquatic vegetation, like water hyacinth.

Further, to optimize monitoring programs, a trade-off between the number of sampling occasions (number of visits) and the number of sites must be met. In general, fewer sites require more sampling occasions to increase precision on the total population (Mackenzie & Royle, 2005); however, the minimum number of sampling occasions must reliably predict species absence (Barata et al., 2017). We found that three surveys were necessary to infer species absence which, in light of decreasing detection probability to survey replicate five and increase in wariness associated with survey four, likely means that three visits for any given site is sufficient to obtain reliable information. Limiting surveys to three replicates can reduce the costs of the monitoring program and allow time and finances for surveys of additional sites. Additionally, though there will be temptation to plan to surveys for sympatrically distributed species simultaneously, the reality is that environmental variables like precipitation and temperature may differentially impact species detectability. At the very least, this must be accounted for during data analysis, but ideally monitoring will be designed to optimize detection of each target species. In West Africa, the unprecedented deforestation rate is seemingly increasing the availability of habitat for C. suchus, resulting in increasing contact, and potentially competition, with M. cataphractus. The use of multispecies occupancy models accounting for the biotic and abiotic factors that influence detection and occupancy of these two species may be useful in improving monitoring-based management decision-making for these two species (Devarajan et al., 2020). Our results additionally support that, beyond the influence of environmental factors on species detection and counts, crocodylian researchers need to account for anthropogenic factors which could have profound impacts on species behavior and habitat use. In West Africa, and elsewhere, where crocodylian monitoring programs are increasingly established, accounting for these factors both in the field and through use of appropriate analytical approaches, will provide reliable information on population status and trends without being financially overburdensome. Finally, our result suggests that the likelihood of encountering viable crocodile populations decreases with increasing fishing pressure. Overexploitation of fish in inland waterways is an increasingly recognized global problem (Allan et al., 2005). It is likely that sustainable inland fisheries management will be critical to successful crocodile conservation in regions like West Africa moving forward. parks, and authorization to work with these crocodiles throughout the Ivorian national territory. We thank Atsé, N'Diaye, and all our local field guides for their considerable assistance with data collection.


## ACK N OWLED G M ENTS


## CO N FLI C T O F I NTE R E S T

None declared. Writing-review & editing (equal). 


## AUTH O R CO NTR I B UTI O N


## DATA AVA I L A B I L I T Y S TAT E M E N T

## (
Figure 2A) (−3.12, 95% CI: −5.1 to −1.1), as well as a nonsignificant relationship with moon phase (−0.56, 95% CI: −1.3 to 0.18) (

## -
The parameter estimates from GLMM-based analysis and the replicate specific detection probability from occupancy analysis. Abundance= crocodile encounter rate (ind./km), Fishing = fishing encounter rate, Aquatic = aquatic vegetation, P_48 = precipitation for the previous 48 h of the survey, P_day = Precipitation the day of the survey, T_48 = average temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey. (-) indicates that the parameter was not included in the model for that species. Fixed factors in bold indicate those that had a significant effect (p < .05).


Michel N. Ahizi: Conceptualization (lead); Data curation (lead); Formal analysis (equal); Investigation (equal); Methodology (lead); Software (lead); Writing-original draft (lead); Writing-review & editing (equal). Christine Y. Kouman: Conceptualization (supporting); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (supporting); Investigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Software (supporting); Writing-original draft (supporting); Writing-review & editing (equal). Allassane Ouattara: Supervision (equal); Validation ((equal). Emilie Fairet: Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Validation (equal); Writing-review & editing (equal). Matthew H. Shirley: Conceptualization (supporting); Data curation (equal); Formal analysis (equal); Funding acquisition (lead); Investigation (equal); Methodology (supporting); Project administration (equal); Supervision (equal); Validation (equal); Writing-original draft (equal);


). We obtained model-averaged coefficients using the Model.avg function in MuMin. Model-averaged coefficients offer more reliable and robust point and uncertainty estimations of parameters(Burnham & Anderson, 2002;Richards et al., 2011;Symonds & Moussalli, 2011). For each coefficient, we report associate 95% confidence intervals (CIs) and the coefficient estimate with shrinkage (also called "zero method"). We considered a covariate significant if the 95% CI did not include zero(Bauder et al., 2017).


in wariness. For each site where the presence of each crocodile species was confirmed, we determined the proportion of observations that were EO (EO/number of all observations) for each survey, where 0.0 represented no wariness and 1.0 (represented by either 100% EO observations or zero detections) represented complete wariness. For sites where the two studied species were sympatric, we partitioned the EO observations by the ratio of the number of individuals actually attributable to either species. Because our surveys varied from three to five replicates, we used multiple imputation as described above to estimate missing values for the following covariates: index of wariness, aquatic vegetation, fishing net encounter rate, and crocodile abundance for both species, resulting in 10.9% and 7.14% values derived from MI for M. cataphractus and C. suchus, respectively. We assessed crocodile wariness as a function of the survey replicate, the most important covariates for each species identified in both occupancy and count-based GLMM analyses above, and crocodile encounter rate as an index of abundance. We included encounter rate because we hypothesized that population abundance may represent unmeasured disturbance effects on individual wariness (i.e., for rare species, higher abundance sites likely have less impacted or threatened population histories, which may capture unmeasured/unmeasurable histories of disturbance or harassment of individuals). The M. cataphractus model included survey repetition, abundance, fishing net encounter rate, precipitation the day of the survey and for the previous 48 h, and aquatic vegetation as fixed factors. The model for C. suchus included survey repetition, abundance, fishing net encounter rate, precipitation the day of the survey, temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, and aquatic vegetation as fixed factors. Both species models included site as a random ef-fect. We used generalized linear mixed effects modeling, fit by re-

stricted maximum likelihood, using the package lme4 (Bates et al., 

2015) and Satterthawaite's approximation from package lmerTest 

(Kuznetsova et al., 2017) to assess each factor's significance in R 

v4.0.2 (R Development Core Team, 2020). 



## Table 3 )
3. Crocodylus suchus detection was significantly positively 

correlated with mean temperature for the previous 48 h of the day 

of the survey (Figure 2B) (0.49, 95% CI: 0.16 to 0.81), while moon 

phase (0.42 95% CI: −0.13 to 0.97) and wind (1.39, 95% CI: −0.31 

to 3.09) were not significant 

## Table 2 )
2for C. suchus counts and all included aquatic vegetation, fishing net encounter rate, and precipitation the day of the survey(Table 2).. All the 




the field, we detected M. cataphractus at 83.3% of sites during the first survey replicate and at 100% of sites where they occurred by thesecond survey replicate. Crocodylus suchus was detected at 86.6% of 

sites during the first survey replicate, at 93.3% by the second and 

third survey replicate, and at 100% of sites where they occurred by 
the fourth survey replicate. Based on significant covariates from the 

occupancy models, detection probability for M. cataphractus was 

0.75 (estimated with the mean value for each covariate), requiring 

a minimum of two visits to have 90% confidence and three visits to 

have 95% confidence that this species was not present at a site. The 

estimated mean detection probability for C. suchus was 0.81, and a 

TA B L E 2 Best supported models (ΔAICc ≤ 2) for occupancy and counts (GLMM) of Mecistops cataphractus and Crocodylus suchus 

Approach 
Model structure 
K 
AICc 
ΔAICc 
Weight 

Mecistops cataphractus 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(fishing net) 
3 
93.21 
0.00 
0.46 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(fishing net + moon phase) 
4 
93.28 
0.06 
0.44 

Crocodylus suchus 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(T_48 h + wind + moon) 
5 
134.19 
0.00 
0.30 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(T_48 h + wind) 
4 
134.65 
0.45 
0.24 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(T_48 h) 
3 
134.99 
0.79 
0.20 

Occupancy 
Ψ (.) p(T_48 h + moon) 
4 
135.28 
1.08 
0.17 

Mecistops cataphractus 

GLMM 
Aquatic + P_day + P_48 + fish 
7 
149.34 
0.00 
0.33 

GLMM 
Aquatic + P_day + P_48 + fish + moon 
8 
150.18 
0.83 
0.22 

GLMM 
Aquatic + P_day + P_48 
6 
150.39 
1.04 
0.20 

GLMM 
Aquatic + P_day + P_48 + fish + moon + prior 
8 
151.23 
1.89 
0.13 

GLMM 
Aquatic + P_day + P_48 + fish + moon + T_48 
8 
151.31 
1.97 
0.12 

Crocodylus suchus 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + P_day + T_48 
7 
−265.96 
0.00 
0.32 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + P_day 
6 
−264.62 
1.33 
0.16 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + P_day + T_48 + wind 
8 
−264.40 
1.56 
0.15 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + P_day + T_48 + prior 
8 
−264.22 
1.73 
0.13 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + P_day + T_48 + P_48 
8 
−264.03 
1.93 
0.12 

GLMM 
Aquatic + fish + T_48 
6 
−264.01 
1.94 
0.12 




Illustrated models are the top models only. Fishing = fishing net encounter rate (nets/km), P_48 = precipitation for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, Prior = precipitation the day prior to the survey, P_Day = precipitation the day of the survey, T_48 = average temperature for the previous 48 h of the day of the survey, aquatic vegetation, wind, and moon phase were all included as fixed effects. LCI: Lower confidence interval, UCI: upper confidence interval. The impact of repetitive surveys and environmental factors on Mecistops cataphractus and Crocodylus suchus warinessCovariates 

# of Models 
included 

Model-averaged 
estimate (95% CI) 

Mecistops cataphractus 

Fishing net encounter rate (nets/km) 
2 
−3.12 (−5.10 to −1.15) 

Moon phase 
2 
−0.56 (−1.30 to 0.18) 

Crocodylus suchus 

Moon phase 
4 
0.42 (−0.13 to 0.97) 

Wind 
4 
1.39 (−0.31 to 3.09) 

T_48 h 
4 
0.49 (0.16 to 0.81) 

TA B L E 3 Relative strength of 
association between detection of 
Mecistops cataphractus and Crocodylus 
suchus and each covariate included in the 
highest ranked occupancy models for 
each species. T_48 h = temperature for 
the previous 48 h of the day of the survey 

Parameters 
Estimate 
SE 

Estimate 
(shrinkage) 
LCI 
UCI 

Mecistops cataphractus 

Intercept 
0.06 
0.06 
0.06 
−0.06 
0.18 

Fishing 
−0.06 
0.03 
−0.04 
−0.13 
0.00 

P_48 
−0.06 
0.02 
−0.05 
−0.11 
−0.01 

P_day 
−0.08 
0.02 
−0.07 
−0.12 
−0.03 

Aquatic vegetation 
0.19 
0.08 
0.17 
0.04 
0.34 

Moon phase 
0.03 
0.03 
0.01 
−0.02 
0.08 

Prior 
0.03 
0.05 
0.01 
−0.07 
0.12 

T_48 
0.02 
0.04 
0.01 
−0.06 
0.09 

Crocodylus suchus 

(Intercept) 
0.11 
0.03 
0.11 
0.06 
0.16 

Fishing 
−0.03 
0.01 
−0.03 
−0.06 
−0.01 

P_day 
0.02 
0.01 
0.01 
0.00 
0.03 

T_48 
0.03 
0.02 
0.02 
−0.01 
0.06 

Aquatic vegetation 
−0.12 
0.03 
−0.12 
−0.18 
−0.06 

Wind 
−0.02 
0.03 
0.01 
−0.08 
0.04 

Prior 
0.01 
0.02 
0.00 
−0.02 
0.04 

P_48 
0.00 
0.01 
0.00 
−0.01 
0.02 

Estimate (shrinkage) refers to the estimated coefficient with shrinkage (also called "zero method"). 
Covariates in bold are those that had significant effect. 

TA B L E 4 Coefficients from each 
covariate identified as having an impact 
on Mecistops cataphractus and Crocodylus 
suchus counts through GLMM 
TA B L E 5 Effects 

Parameters 
Mecistops cataphractus 

Crocodylus suchus 

Estimate (SE) 

T-value 

p-
value 

Detection 
probability 

Estimate (SE) 

T-value 

p-
value 

Detection 
probability 

Random effect 

Site 

0.06 (0.24) 

.003 

0.04 (0.21) 

.04 

Fixed effect 

Survey 1 

0.27 (0.14) 

1.98 

.06 

.80 

1.93 (1.01) 

1.92 

.06 

.85 

Survey 2 

0.21 (0.13) 

1.55 

.13 

.77 

0.06 (0.15) 

0.41 

.69 

.83 

Survey 3 

−0.01 (0.14) 

−0.08 

.93 

.74 

−0.08 (0.16) 

−0.50 

.62 

.81 

Survey 4 

0.30 (0.14) 

2.18 

.04 

.71 

0.02 (0.15) 

0.14 

.89 

.79 

Survey 5 

0.19 (0.14) 

1.33 

.19 

.67 

0.15 (0.15) 

1.00 

.32 

.77 




This project was funded by the IUCN Save Our Species Fund, San Diego Zoo, Christmas CrocFest, St. Augustine Alligator Farm, Oklahoma City Zoo, Minnesota Zoo, Future for Nature Foundation, and the AZA Crocodilian Advisory Group. All research was authorized by permits issued by the Ministère de l'Enseignement Supérieur et de la Recherche Scientifique (Ref: 118/MESRS/DGRI). We thank the Office Ivoirien des Parcs et Réserves and the Ministère des Eaux et Forets for their considerable logistic support, access to national


Data used to generate the results and figures are available from the Dryad Digital Repository: https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.15dv4 1nz5. Matthew H. Shirley https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3095-7546O RCI D 

Michel N. Ahizi 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2211-8777 

Christine Y. Kouman 
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6684-8894 



Overfishing of inland waters. J D Allan, R Abell, Z Hogan, C Revenga, B W Taylor, R L Welcomme, K Winemiller, 10.1641/0006-3568BioScience. 5512Allan, J. D., Abell, R., Hogan, Z., Revenga, C., Taylor, B. W., Welcomme, R. L., & Winemiller, K. (2005). Overfishing of inland waters. BioScience, 55(12), 1041-1051. https://doi.org/10.1641/0006-3568

The power of monitoring: Optimizing survey designs to detect occupancy changes in a rare amphibian population. I M Barata, R A Griffiths, M S Ridout, 10.1038/s41598-017-16534-8Scientific Reports. 7116491Barata, I. M., Griffiths, R. A., & Ridout, M. S. (2017). The power of mon- itoring: Optimizing survey designs to detect occupancy changes in a rare amphibian population. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 16491. https:// doi.org/10.1038/s4159 8-017-16534 -8

MuMIn: Multi-Model inference. K Barton, R package version 1.43.17.Barton, K. (2020). MuMIn: Multi-Model inference. R package version 1.43.17. https://cran.r-proje ct.org/packa ge=MuMIn

Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. D Bates, M Mächler, B M Bolker, S C Walker, 10.18637/jss.v067.i01Journal of Statistical Software. 671Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B. M., & Walker, S. C. (2015). Fitting lin- ear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1-48. https://doi.org/10.18637/ jss.v067.i01

Occupancy of potential overwintering habitat on protected lands by two imperiled snake species in the coastal plain of the southeastern United States. J M Bauder, D J Stevenson, C S Sutherland, C L Jenkins, 10.1670/15-064Journal of Herpetology. 511Bauder, J. M., Stevenson, D. J., Sutherland, C. S., & Jenkins, C. L. (2017). Occupancy of potential overwintering habitat on protected lands by two imperiled snake species in the coastal plain of the south- eastern United States. Journal of Herpetology, 51(1), 73-88. https:// doi.org/10.1670/15-064

Survey methods and monitoring within crocodile management programs. P Bayliss, Wildlife management: Crocodiles and alligators. G. J. W. Webb, S. C. Manolis, & P. J. WhiteheadSurrey Beatty & Sons and the Conservation Commission of the Northern TerritoryBayliss, P. (1987). Survey methods and monitoring within crocodile management programs. In G. J. W. Webb, S. C. Manolis, & P. J. Whitehead (Eds.), Wildlife management: Crocodiles and alligators (pp. 157-175). Surrey Beatty & Sons and the Conservation Commission of the Northern Territory.

Plausible combinations: An improved method to evaluate the covariate structure of Cormack-Jolly-Seber mark-recapture models. J F Bromaghin, T L Mcdonald, S C Amstrup, 10.4236/oje.2013.31002Open Journal of Ecology. 31Bromaghin, J. F., McDonald, T. L., & Amstrup, S. C. (2013). Plausible combinations: An improved method to evaluate the covari- ate structure of Cormack-Jolly-Seber mark-recapture models. Open Journal of Ecology, 3(1), 11-22. https://doi.org/10.4236/ oje.2013.31002

La variabilité climatique en Côte d'Ivoire : entre perceptions sociales et réponses agricoles. Y T Brou, Cahiers Agricultures. 14Brou, Y. T. (2005). La variabilité climatique en Côte d'Ivoire : entre per- ceptions sociales et réponses agricoles. Cahiers Agricultures, 14, 533-540.

Emergence dynamics of american alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) in Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge: life history and application to statewide alligators surveys. C D Bugbee, University of FloridaBugbee, C. D. (2008). Emergence dynamics of american alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) in Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge: life history and application to statewide alligators surveys. University of Florida.

A practical information-theoretic approach. Model selection and multimodel inference. K P Burnham, D R Anderson, 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2003.11.004Springer22nd edBurnham, K. P., & Anderson, D. R. (2002). A practical information-theoretic approach. Model selection and multimodel inference, Vol. 2, 2nd ed. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolm odel.2003.11.004

Accounting for detectability and abundance in survey design for a declining species. P A Burns, C Mccall, K C Rowe, M L Parrott, B L Phillips, 10.1111/ddi.12966Diversity and Distributions. 2510Burns, P. A., McCall, C., Rowe, K. C., Parrott, M. L., & Phillips, B. L. (2019). Accounting for detectability and abundance in survey design for a declining species. Diversity and Distributions, 25(10), 1655-1665. https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12966

mice: Multivariate imputation by chained equations in R. S V Buuren, K Groothuis-Oudshoorn, 10.18637/jss.v045.i03Journal of Statistical Software. 453Buuren, S. V., & Groothuis-Oudshoorn, K. (2011). mice: Multivariate im- putation by chained equations in R. Journal of Statistical Software, 45(3), 1-67. https://doi.org/10.18637/ jss.v045.i03

Effects of habitat type and structure on detection probabilities of American alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) during night-light counts. C B Carter, University of FloridaCarter, C. B. (2010). Effects of habitat type and structure on detection probabilities of American alligators (Alligator mississippiensis) during night-light counts. University of Florida.

The utility of repeated presence data as a surrogate for counts: A case study using butterflies. K L Casner, M L Forister, K Ram, A M Shapiro, 10.1007/s10841-013-9610-8Journal of Insect Conservation. 181Casner, K. L., Forister, M. L., Ram, K., & Shapiro, A. M. (2014). The util- ity of repeated presence data as a surrogate for counts: A case study using butterflies. Journal of Insect Conservation, 18(1), 13-27. https://doi.org/10.1007/s1084 1-013-9610-8

Methods of determining the size and composition or alligator populations. R H Chabreck, Proceedings of the Southeastern Association of Game and Fish Commissione. the Southeastern Association of Game and Fish Commissione20Chabreck, R. H. (1966). Methods of determining the size and composition or alligator populations. Proceedings of the Southeastern Association of Game and Fish Commissione, 20, 105-112.

Understanding occupancy patterns in a low-density gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) population. H C Chandler, S J Goodman, J A Smith, T A Gorman, C A Haas, Herpetological Conservation and Biology. 153Chandler, H. C., Goodman, S. J., Smith, J. A., Gorman, T. A., & Haas, C. A. (2020). Understanding occupancy patterns in a low-density gopher tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) population. Herpetological Conservation and Biology, 15(3), 536-546.

Effects of shoreline vegetation on visibility of American crocodiles (Crocodylus acutus) during spotlight surveys. S M Cherkiss, J F Mazzotti, G K Rice, Herpetological Review. 371Cherkiss, S. M., Mazzotti, J. F., Rice, G. K. (2006). Effects of shoreline vegetation on visibility of American crocodiles (Crocodylus acutus) during spotlight surveys. Herpetological Review, 37(1), 37-40.

Effects of temperature and temporal factors on anuran detection probabilities at cape cod national seashore. R P Cook, T A Tupper, P W C Paton, B C Timm, Herpetological Conservation and Biology. 62: implications for long-term monitoringCook, R. P., Tupper, T. A., Paton, P. W. C., & Timm, B. C. (2011). Effects of temperature and temporal factors on anuran detection proba- bilities at cape cod national seashore, Massachusetts, USA: impli- cations for long-term monitoring. Herpetological Conservation and Biology, 6(2), 25-39.

Estimating abundance and population trends when detection is low and highly variable: A comparison of three methods for the Hermann's tortoise. T Couturier, M Cheylan, A Bertolero, G Astruc, A Besnard, 10.1002/jwmg.499The Journal of Wildlife Management. 773Couturier, T., Cheylan, M., Bertolero, A., Astruc, G., & Besnard, A. (2013). Estimating abundance and population trends when detection is low and highly variable: A comparison of three methods for the Hermann's tortoise. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 77(3), 454- 462. https://doi.org/10.1002/jwmg.499

Factors affecting the number of caimans seen during spotlight surveys in the Mamirauá reserve, Brazilian Amazonia. R Da Silveira, W E Magnusson, J B Thorbjarnarson, 10.1643/CE-06-035Copeia. 2Da Silveira, R., Magnusson, W. E., & Thorbjarnarson, J. B. (2008). Factors affecting the number of caimans seen during spotlight surveys in the Mamirauá reserve, Brazilian Amazonia. Copeia, 2, 425-430. https://doi.org/10.1643/CE-06-035

Backward, forward and stepwise automated subset selection algorithms: Frequency of obtaining authentic and noise variables. S Derksen, H J Keselman, 10.1111/j.2044-8317.1992.tb00992.xBritish Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology. 452Derksen, S., & Keselman, H. J. (1992). Backward, forward and stepwise automated subset selection algorithms: Frequency of obtaining authentic and noise variables. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology, 45(2), 265-282. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.2044-8317.1992.tb009 92.x

Multi-species occupancy models: Review, roadmap, and recommendations. K Devarajan, T L Morelli, S Tenan, 10.1111/ECOG.04957Ecography. 4311Devarajan, K., Morelli, T. L., & Tenan, S. (2020). Multi-species occu- pancy models: Review, roadmap, and recommendations. Ecography, 43(11), 1612-1624. https://doi.org/10.1111/ECOG.04957

Climbing behaviour in extant crocodilians. V Dinets, A Britton, M H Shirley, Herpetology Notes. 71Dinets, V., Britton, A., & Shirley, M. H. (2014). Climbing behaviour in ex- tant crocodilians. Herpetology Notes, 7(1), 3-7.

Insights into the Ecology and Evolutionary Success of Crocodilians Revealed through Bite-Force and Tooth-Pressure Experimentation. G M Erickson, P M Gignac, S J Steppan, A K Lappin, K A Vliet, J D Brueggen, B D Inouye, D Kledzik, G J W Webb, 10.1371/journal.pone.0031781PLoS One. 73Erickson, G. M., Gignac, P. M., Steppan, S. J., Lappin, A. K., Vliet, K. A., Brueggen, J. D., Inouye, B. D., Kledzik, D., & Webb, G. J. W. (2012). Insights into the Ecology and Evolutionary Success of Crocodilians Revealed through Bite-Force and Tooth-Pressure Experimentation. PLoS One, 7(3), e31781. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journ al.pone.0031781

Patterns of activity and body temperature of Aldabra giant tortoises in relation to environmental temperature. W Falcón, R P Baxter, S Furrer, M Bauert, J M Hatt, G Schaepman-Strub, A Ozgul, N Bunbury, M Clauss, D M Hansen, 10.1002/ece3.3766Ecology and Evolution. 84Falcón, W., Baxter, R. P., Furrer, S., Bauert, M., Hatt, J. M., Schaepman- Strub, G., Ozgul, A., Bunbury, N., Clauss, M., & Hansen, D. M. (2018). Patterns of activity and body temperature of Aldabra giant tortoises in relation to environmental temperature. Ecology and Evolution, 8(4), 2108-2121. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.3766

Nile crocodile, Crocodylus niloticus. R A Fergusson, Crocodiles. Status survey and conservation action plan. S. C. M.am, & C. StevensonDarwinCrocodile Specialist GroupFergusson, R. A. (2010). Nile crocodile, Crocodylus niloticus. In S. C. M.am, & C. Stevenson (Ed.), Crocodiles. Status survey and conservation ac- tion plan (pp. 84-89). Crocodile Specialist Group: Darwin.

One step ahead to predict potential poaching hotspots: Modeling occupancy and detectability of poachers in a neotropical rainforest. Á C Ferreguetti, J Pereira-Ribeiro, J A Prevedello, W M Tomás, C F D Rocha, H G Bergallo, 10.1016/j.biocon.2018.09.009Biological Conservation. 227Ferreguetti, Á. C., Pereira-Ribeiro, J., Prevedello, J. A., Tomás, W. M., Rocha, C. F. D., & Bergallo, H. G. (2018). One step ahead to predict potential poaching hotspots: Modeling occupancy and detectability of poachers in a neotropical rainforest. Biological Conservation, 227, 133-140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2018.09.009

Do capture and survey methods influence whether marked animals are representative of unmarked animals?. J R Fieberg, K Jenkins, S Mccorquodale, C G Rice, G C White, K White, 10.1002/wsb.591Wildlife Society Bulletin39Fieberg, J. R., Jenkins, K., McCorquodale, S., Rice, C. G., White, G. C., & White, K. (2015). Do capture and survey methods influence whether marked animals are representative of unmarked animals? Wildlife Society Bulletin, 39(4), 713-720. https://doi.org/10.1002/wsb.591

I Fiske, R Chandler, D Miller, A Royle, M Kery, J Hostetler, R Hutchinson, M A Royle, Package "unmarked" Title Models for Data from Unmarked Animals. Fiske, I., Chandler, R., Miller, D., Royle, A., Kery, M., Hostetler, J., Hutchinson, R., & Royle, M. A. (2017). Package "unmarked" Title Models for Data from Unmarked Animals. http://github.com/ianfi ske/unmarked

An R companion to applied regression. J Fox, S Weisberg, 3rd ed.Fox, J., & Weisberg, S. (2019). An R companion to applied regression (3rd ed.). Sage. https://socia lscie nces.mcmas ter.ca/jfox/Books/ Compa nion/

Estimating trends in alligator populations from nightlight survey data. I Fujisaki, F J Mazzotti, R M Dorazio, K G Rice, M S Cherkiss, B Jeffery, 10.1007/s13157-010-0120-0Wetlands. 311Fujisaki, I., Mazzotti, F. J., Dorazio, R. M., Rice, K. G., Cherkiss, M. S., & Jeffery, B. (2011). Estimating trends in alligator populations from nightlight survey data. Wetlands, 31(1), 147-155. https://doi. org/10.1007/s1315 7-010-0120-0

Standardised method of spotlight surveys for crocodiles in the tidal rivers of the Northern Territory. Y Fukuda, K Saalfeld, G Webb, C Manolis, R Risk, Australia. Northern Territory Naturalist. 241Fukuda, Y., Saalfeld, K., Webb, G., Manolis, C., & Risk, R. (2013). Standardised method of spotlight surveys for crocodiles in the tidal rivers of the Northern Territory. Australia. Northern Territory Naturalist, 24(1), 14-32.

The climate hazards infrared precipitation with stations -A new environmental record for monitoring extremes. C Funk, P Peterson, M Landsfeld, D Pedreros, J Verdin, S Shukla, G Husak, J Rowland, L Harrison, A Hoell, J Michaelsen, 10.1038/sdata.2015.66Scientific Data. 2Funk, C., Peterson, P., Landsfeld, M., Pedreros, D., Verdin, J., Shukla, S., Husak, G., Rowland, J., Harrison, L., Hoell, A., & Michaelsen, J. (2015). The climate hazards infrared precipitation with stations -A new environmental record for monitoring extremes. Scientific Data, 2, 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2015.66

Factors affecting occupancy and abundance of American alligators at the Northern extent of their range. B Gardner, L A Garner, D T Cobb, C E Moorman, 10.1670/15-147Journal of Herpetology. 504Gardner, B., Garner, L. A., Cobb, D. T., & Moorman, C. E. (2016). Factors affecting occupancy and abundance of American alligators at the Northern extent of their range. Journal of Herpetology, 50(4), 541- 547. https://doi.org/10.1670/15-147

Advantages of combining generalized linear models and occupancy models to find indicators of habitat selection: Small mammals in agroecosystems as a case study. I L Gorosito, M Marziali Bermúdez, M Busch, 10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.10.003Ecological Indicators. 85Gorosito, I. L., Marziali Bermúdez, M., & Busch, M. (2018). Advantages of combining generalized linear models and occupancy models to find indicators of habitat selection: Small mammals in agroecosys- tems as a case study. Ecological Indicators, 85, 1-10. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ecoli nd.2017.10.003

How many imputations are really needed? Some practical clarifications of multiple imputation theory. J W Graham, A E Olchowski, T D Gilreath, 10.1007/s11121-007-0070-9Prevention Science. 83Graham, J. W., Olchowski, A. E., & Gilreath, T. D. (2007). How many im- putations are really needed? Some practical clarifications of multi- ple imputation theory. Prevention Science, 8(3), 206-213. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s1112 1-007-0070-9

Time-to-detection occupancy modeling: An efficient method for analyzing the occurrence of amphibians and reptiles. B J Halstead, P M Kleeman, J P Rose, 10.1670/18-049Journal of Herpetology. 524Halstead, B. J., Kleeman, P. M., & Rose, J. P. (2018). Time-to-detection occupancy modeling: An efficient method for analyzing the occur- rence of amphibians and reptiles. Journal of Herpetology, 52(4), 416- 425. https://doi.org/10.1670/18-049

An ancient icon reveals new mysteries: Mummy DNA resurrects a cryptic species within the Nile crocodile. E Hekkala, M H Shirley, G Amato, J D Austin, S Charter, J B Thorbjarnarson, K A Vliet, M L Houck, R Desalle, M J Blum, 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05245Molecular Ecology. 2020Hekkala, E., Shirley, M. H., Amato, G., Austin, J. D., Charter, S., Thorbjarnarson, J. B., Vliet, K. A., Houck, M. L., Desalle, R., & Blum, M. J. (2011). An ancient icon reveals new myster- ies: Mummy DNA resurrects a cryptic species within the Nile crocodile. Molecular Ecology, 20(20), 4199-4215. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05245

Mark-recapture to assess factors affecting the proportion of a nile crocodile population seen during spotlight counts at Ngezi, Zimbabwe, and the use of spotlight counts to monitor crocodile abundance. J Hutton, M E J Woolhouse, 10.2307/2404068The Journal of Applied Ecology. 262Hutton, J., & Woolhouse, M. E. J. (1989). Mark-recapture to assess fac- tors affecting the proportion of a nile crocodile population seen during spotlight counts at Ngezi, Zimbabwe, and the use of spot- light counts to monitor crocodile abundance. The Journal of Applied Ecology, 26(2), 381-395. https://doi.org/10.2307/2404068

Factors affecting detectability of river otters during sign surveys. M R Jeffress, C P Paukert, B K Sandercock, P S Gipson, 10.1002/jwmg.12Journal of Wildlife Management. 751Jeffress, M. R., Paukert, C. P., Sandercock, B. K., & Gipson, P. S. (2011). Factors affecting detectability of river otters during sign sur- veys. Journal of Wildlife Management, 75(1), 144-150. https://doi. org/10.1002/jwmg.12

J P G Jones, B Collen, G Atkinson, P W J Baxter, P Bubb, J B Illian, T E Katzner, A Keane, J Loh, E Mcdonald-Madden, E Nicholson, H M Pereira, H P Possingham, A S Pullin, A S L Rodrigues, V Ruiz-Gutierrez, M Sommerville, E J Milner-Gulland, 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2010.01605.xThe why, what, and how of global biodiversity indicators beyond the 2010 target. 25Jones, J. P. G., Collen, B., Atkinson, G., Baxter, P. W. J., Bubb, P., Illian, J. B., Katzner, T. E., Keane, A., Loh, J., McDonald-Madden, E., Nicholson, E., Pereira, H. M., Possingham, H. P., Pullin, A. S., Rodrigues, A. S. L., Ruiz-Gutierrez, V., Sommerville, M., & Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2011). The why, what, and how of global biodiversity indicators beyond the 2010 target. Conservation Biology, 25(3), 450-457. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2010.01605.x

Inferring the absence of a species: A case study of snakes. M Kery, 10.2307/3803165The Journal of Wildlife Management. 662Kery, M. (2002). Inferring the absence of a species: A case study of snakes. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 66(2), 330-338. https:// doi.org/10.2307/3803165

Factors influencing stream occupancy and detection probability parameters of stream-associated amphibians in commercial forests of Oregon and Washington. A J Kroll, K Risenhoover, T Mcbride, E Beach, B J Kernohan, J Light, J Bach, 10.1016/j.foreco.2008.03.005USA. Forest Ecology and Management. 255Kroll, A. J., Risenhoover, K., McBride, T., Beach, E., Kernohan, B. J., Light, J., & Bach, J. (2008). Factors influencing stream occupancy and de- tection probability parameters of stream-associated amphibians in commercial forests of Oregon and Washington, USA. Forest Ecology and Management, 255, 3726-3735. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. foreco.2008.03.005

lmerTest package: Tests in linear mixed effects models. A Kuznetsova, P B Brockhoff, R H B Christensen, 10.18637/jss.v082.i13Journal of Statistical Software. 8213Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. B. (2017). lmerTest package: Tests in linear mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13), 1-26. https://doi.org/10.18637/ jss.v082.i13

Crocodilian behavior: Implications for management. J W Lang, Wildlife management: Crocodiles and alligators. G. J. W. Webb, S. C. Manolis, & P. J. WhiteheadSurvey BeattyLang, J. W. (1987). Crocodilian behavior: Implications for management. In G. J. W. Webb, S. C. Manolis, & P. J. Whitehead (Eds.), Wildlife management: Crocodiles and alligators (pp. 273-294). Survey Beatty.

Conservation de la nature et aires protégées en Côte d'Ivoire. F Lauginie, CEDA/NEILauginie, F. (2007). Conservation de la nature et aires protégées en Côte d'Ivoire. CEDA/NEI.

Local cooling and warming effects of forests based on satellite observations. Y Li, M Zhao, S Motesharrei, Q Mu, E Kalnay, S Li, 10.1038/NCOMMS7603Nature Communications. 66603Li, Y., Zhao, M., Motesharrei, S., Mu, Q., Kalnay, E., & Li, S. (2015). Local cooling and warming effects of forests based on satellite obser- vations. Nature Communications, 6, 6603. https://doi.org/10.1038/ NCOMM S7603

Macro-habitat preferences by the African manatee and crocodiles -Ecological and conservation implications. L Luiselli, G C Akani, N Ebere, F M Angelici, G Amori, E Politano, 10.5194/we-12-39-2012Web Ecology. 12Luiselli, L., Akani, G. C., Ebere, N., Angelici, F. M., Amori, G., & Politano, E. (2012). Macro-habitat preferences by the African manatee and crocodiles -Ecological and conservation implications. Web Ecology, 12, 39-48. https://doi.org/10.5194/we-12-39-2012

Estimating site occupancy, colonization, and local extinction when a species is detected imperfectly. D I Mackenzie, J D Nichols, J E Hines, M G Knutson, A B Franklin, 10.1890/02-3090Ecology. 848MacKenzie, D. I., Nichols, J. D., Hines, J. E., Knutson, M. G., & Franklin, A. B. (2003). Estimating site occupancy, colonization, and local extinc- tion when a species is detected imperfectly. Ecology, 84(8), 2200- 2207. https://doi.org/10.1890/02-3090

Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are less than one. D I Mackenzie, J D Nichols, G B Lachman, S Droege, A A Royle, C A Langtimm, 10.1890/0012-9658Ecology. 838MacKenzie, D. I., Nichols, J. D., Lachman, G. B., Droege, S., Royle, A. A., & Langtimm, C. A. (2002). Estimating site occupancy rates when de- tection probabilities are less than one. Ecology, 83(8), 2248-2255. https://doi.org/10.1890/0012-9658

Inferring patterns and dynamics of species occurrence. D I Mackenzie, J D Nichols, J A Royle, K H Pollock, L L Bailey, J E Hines, ElsevierMacKenzie, D. I., Nichols, J. D., Royle, J. A., Pollock, K. H., Bailey, L. L., & Hines, J. E. (2006). Inferring patterns and dynamics of species occur- rence. Elsevier.

Designing occupancy studies: general advice and allocating survey effort. D I Mackenzie, J A Royle, 10.1111/j.1365-2664.2005.01098.xJournal of Applied Ecology. 426Mackenzie, D. I., & Royle, J. A. (2005). Designing occupancy stud- ies: general advice and allocating survey effort. Journal of Applied Ecology, 42(6), 1105-1114. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1365-2664.2005.01098.x

Model Selection and Multimodel Inference Based on (Q)AIC(c). R package. M J Mazerolle, Mazerolle, M. J. (2015). Model Selection and Multimodel Inference Based on (Q)AIC(c). R package. https://cran.r-proje ct.org/web/packa ges/ AICcm odavg/ AICcm odavg.pdf

Surveys of tidal river systems in the Northern Territory of Australia and their crocodile populations. H Messel, G C Vorlicek, A G Wells, W J Green, Pergamon PressMessel, H., Vorlicek, G. C., Wells, A. G., & Green, W. J. (1981). Surveys of tidal river systems in the Northern Territory of Australia and their croc- odile populations. Monograph No. 1. Pergamon Press.

Stop and ask for directions: factors affecting anuran detection and occupancy in Pampa farmland ponds. L F B Moreira, R G Moura, L Maltchik, 10.1007/s11284-015-1316-9Ecological Research. 311Moreira, L. F. B., Moura, R. G., & Maltchik, L. (2016). Stop and ask for directions: factors affecting anuran detection and occupancy in Pampa farmland ponds. Ecological Research, 31(1), 65-74. https:// doi.org/10.1007/s1128 4-015-1316-9

Is your ad hoc model selection strategy affecting your multimodel inference?. D J Morin, C B Yackulic, J E Diffendorfer, D B Lesmeister, C K Nielsen, J Reid, E M Schauber, 10.1002/ecs2.2997Ecosphere11Morin, D. J., Yackulic, C. B., Diffendorfer, J. E., Lesmeister, D. B., Nielsen, C. K., Reid, J., & Schauber, E. M. (2020). Is your ad hoc model selec- tion strategy affecting your multimodel inference? Ecosphere, 11(1), https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2997

Stepwise model fitting and statistical inference: Turning noise into signal pollution. R Mundry, C L Nunn, 10.1086/593303American Naturalist. 1731Mundry, R., & Nunn, C. L. (2009). Stepwise model fitting and statistical inference: Turning noise into signal pollution. American Naturalist, 173(1), 119-123. https://doi.org/10.1086/593303

Missing inaction: the dangers of ignoring missing data. S Nakagawa, R P Freckleton, 10.1016/j.tree.2008.06.014Trends in Ecology and Evolution. 2311Nakagawa, S., & Freckleton, R. P. (2008). Missing inaction: the dangers of ignoring missing data. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 23(11), 592- 596. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2008.06.014

Model averaging, missing data and multiple imputation: a case study for behavioural ecology. S Nakagawa, R P Freckleton, 10.1007/S00265-010-1044-7Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 651Nakagawa, S., & Freckleton, R. P. (2011). Model averaging, missing data and multiple imputation: a case study for behavioural ecology. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(1), 103-116. https://doi. org/10.1007/S0026 5-010-1044-7

Efficient species-level monitoring at the landscape scale. B R Noon, L L Bailey, T D Sisk, K S Mckelvey, 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2012.01855.xConservation Biology. 263Noon, B. R., Bailey, L. L., Sisk, T. D., & Mckelvey, K. S. (2012). Efficient species-level monitoring at the landscape scale. Conservation Biology, 26(3), 432-441. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1523-1739.2012. 01855.x

Effects of environmental variables on black caiman counts in Bolivia. L F Pacheco, Wildlife Society Bulletin24Pacheco, L. F. (1996a). Effects of environmental variables on black cai- man counts in Bolivia. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 24(1), 44-49.

Wariness of caiman populations and its effect on abundance estimates. L F Pacheco, 10.2307/1564725Journal of Herpetology. 301Pacheco, L. F. (1996b). Wariness of caiman populations and its effect on abundance estimates. Journal of Herpetology, 30(1), 123-126. https://doi.org/10.2307/1564725

Monitoring distributions using call surveys: Estimating site occupancy, detection probabilities and inferring absence. J Pellet, B R Schmidt, 10.1016/j.biocon.2004.10.005Biological Conservation. 1231Pellet, J., & Schmidt, B. R. (2005). Monitoring distributions using call surveys: Estimating site occupancy, detection probabilities and in- ferring absence. Biological Conservation, 123(1), 27-35. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.biocon.2004.10.005

Optimizing occupancy surveys by maximizing detection probability: Application to amphibian monitoring in the Mediterranean region. M Petitot, N Manceau, P Geniez, A Besnard, 10.1002/ece3.1207Ecology and Evolution. 418Petitot, M., Manceau, N., Geniez, P., & Besnard, A. (2014). Optimizing oc- cupancy surveys by maximizing detection probability: Application to amphibian monitoring in the Mediterranean region. Ecology and Evolution, 4(18), 3538-3549. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1207

Occupancy-based monitoring of ungulate prey species in Thailand indicates population stability, but limited recovery. W Phumanee, R Steinmetz, R Phoonjampa, T Bejraburnin, M Grainger, T Savini, 10.1002/ECS2.3208Ecosphere. 119Phumanee, W., Steinmetz, R., Phoonjampa, R., Bejraburnin, T., Grainger, M., & Savini, T. (2020). Occupancy-based monitoring of ungulate prey species in Thailand indicates population stability, but lim- ited recovery. Ecosphere, 11(9), e03208. https://doi.org/10.1002/ ECS2.3208

Sprint speed and degree of wariness in two populations of whiptail lizards. F Punzo, Aspidoscelis tesselata. Squamata TeiidaePunzo, F. (2007). Sprint speed and degree of wariness in two popula- tions of whiptail lizards (Aspidoscelis tesselata) (Squamata Teiidae).

. 10.1080/08927014.2007.9522575Ethology Ecology and Evolution. 192Ethology Ecology and Evolution, 19(2), 159-169. https://doi. org/10.1080/08927 014.2007.9522575

R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing. R Development core teamR Development core team. (2020). R: A language and environment for sta- tistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing.

Model selection and model averaging in behavioural ecology: The utility of the IT-AIC framework. S A Richards, M J Whittingham, P A Stephens, 10.1007/S00265-010-1035-8Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 651Richards, S. A., Whittingham, M. J., & Stephens, P. A. (2011). Model se- lection and model averaging in behavioural ecology: The utility of the IT-AIC framework. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(1), 77-89. https://doi.org/10.1007/S0026 5-010-1035-8

N-Mixture models for estimating population size from spatially replicated counts. J A Royle, 10.1111/j.0006-341X.2004.00142.xBiometrics. 601Royle, J. A. (2004). N-Mixture models for estimating population size from spatially replicated counts. Biometrics, 60(1), 108-115. https://doi. org/10.1111/j.0006-341X.2004.00142.x

When water interacts with temperature: Ecological and evolutionary implications of thermo-hydroregulation in terrestrial ectotherms. D Rozen-Rechels, A Dupoué, O Lourdais, S Chamaillé-Jammes, S Meylan, J Clobert, J F Le Galliard, 10.1002/ECE3.5440Ecology and Evolution. 917Rozen-Rechels, D., Dupoué, A., Lourdais, O., Chamaillé-Jammes, S., Meylan, S., Clobert, J., & Le Galliard, J. F. (2019). When water in- teracts with temperature: Ecological and evolutionary implica- tions of thermo-hydroregulation in terrestrial ectotherms. Ecology and Evolution, 9(17), 10029-10043. https://doi.org/10.1002/ ECE3.5440

The influence of weather conditions on caiman night-counts. F Sarkis-Gonçalves, A Maria, V Castro, L M Verdade, Crocodiles. Proceedings of the 17th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group. Sarkis-Gonçalves, F., Maria, A., Castro, V., & Verdade, L. M. (2004). The influence of weather conditions on caiman night-counts. Crocodiles. Proceedings of the 17th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group (pp. 387-393).

Molecular evidence for species level divergence in African Nile Crocodiles Crocodylus niloticus. A Schmitz, P Mansfeld, E Hekkala, T Shine, H Nickel, G Amato, W Böhme, LaurentiSchmitz, A., Mansfeld, P., Hekkala, E., Shine, T., Nickel, H., Amato, G., & Böhme, W. (2003). Molecular evidence for species level divergence in African Nile Crocodiles Crocodylus niloticus (Laurenti, 1786).

. 10.1016/j.crpv.2003.07.002Comptes Rendus Palevol. 28Comptes Rendus Palevol, 2(8), 703-712. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. crpv.2003.07.002

Physiological mechanisms of thermoregulation in reptiles: A review. F Seebacher, C E Franklin, 10.1007/s00360-005-0007-1Journal of Comparative Physiology B: Biochemical, Systemic, and Environmental Physiology. 1758Seebacher, F., & Franklin, C. E. (2005). Physiological mechanisms of ther- moregulation in reptiles: A review. Journal of Comparative Physiology B: Biochemical, Systemic, and Environmental Physiology, 175(8), 533- 541. https://doi.org/10.1007/s0036 0-005-0007-1

Slender-snouted crocodile Crocodylus cataphractus. Crocodiles. Status survey and conservation action plan. M H Shirley, 10.1177/0040517511426615Shirley, M. H. (2010). Slender-snouted crocodile Crocodylus cataphractus. Crocodiles. Status survey and conservation action plan, 54-58. https://doi.org/10.1177/00405 17511 426615

Mecistops cataphractus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. M H Shirley, 8235Shirley, M. H. (2014). Mecistops cataphractus. The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, 8235, 1-9.

Systematic revision of the living African slender-snouted crocodiles (Mecistops gray, 1844). M H Shirley, A N Carr, J H Nestler, K A Vliet, C A Brochu, 10.11646/zootaxa.4504.2.1Zootaxa. 45042Shirley, M. H., Carr, A. N., Nestler, J. H., Vliet, K. A., & Brochu, C. A. (2018). Systematic revision of the living African slender-snouted crocodiles (Mecistops gray, 1844). Zootaxa, 4504(2), 151-193. https://doi.org/10.11646/ zoota xa.4504.2.1

A sampling design and model for estimating abundance of Nile crocodiles while accounting for heterogeneity of detectability of multiple observers. M H Shirley, R M Dorazio, E Abassery, A A Elhady, M S Mekki, H H Asran, 10.1002/jwmg.348The Journal of Wildlife Management. 765Shirley, M. H., Dorazio, R. M., Abassery, E., Elhady, A. A., Mekki, M. S., & Asran, H. H. (2012). A sampling design and model for estimating abundance of Nile crocodiles while accounting for heterogeneity of detectability of multiple observers. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 76(5), 966-975. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jwmg.348

Conservation status of crocodiles in Ghana. M H Shirley, W Oduro, H Y Beibro, 10.1017/S0030605309001586Oryx. 431Shirley, M. H., Oduro, W., & Beibro, H. Y. (2009). Conservation status of crocodiles in Ghana and Côte-d'ivoire, west Africa. Oryx, 43(1), 136-145. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030 60530 9001586

Research design considerations to ensure detection of all species in an avian community. M Sliwinski, L Powell, N Koper, M Giovanni, W Schacht, 10.1111/2041-210X.12506Methods in Ecology and Evolution. 74Sliwinski, M., Powell, L., Koper, N., Giovanni, M., & Schacht, W. (2016). Research design considerations to ensure detection of all species in an avian community. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 7(4), 456- 462. https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210X.12506

Long-term spotlight surveys of American alligators in Mississippi, USA. B A Strickland, F J Vilella, R D Flynt, Herpetological Conservation and Biology. 132Strickland, B. A., Vilella, F. J., & Flynt, R. D. (2018). Long-term spotlight surveys of American alligators in Mississippi, USA. Herpetological Conservation and Biology, 13(2), 331-340.

A brief guide to model selection, multimodel inference and model averaging in behavioural ecology using Akaike's information criterion. M R E Symonds, A Moussalli, 10.1007/S00265-010-1037-6Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology. 651Symonds, M. R. E., & Moussalli, A. (2011). A brief guide to model se- lection, multimodel inference and model averaging in behavioural ecology using Akaike's information criterion. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology, 65(1), 13-21. https://doi.org/10.1007/S0026 5-010-1037-6

Population size influences amphibian detection probability: Implications for biodiversity monitoring programs. L G Tanadini, B R Schmidt, 10.1371/journal.pone.0028244PLoS One. 612Tanadini, L. G., & Schmidt, B. R. (2011). Population size influences am- phibian detection probability: Implications for biodiversity moni- toring programs. PLoS One, 6(12), e28244. https://doi.org/10.1371/ journ al.pone.0028244

J B Thorbjarnarson, The status and ecology of the American crocodile in Haiti. Bulletin of the Florida Museum of Natural History. 33Thorbjarnarson, J. B. (1988). The status and ecology of the American crocodile in Haiti. Bulletin of the Florida Museum of Natural History, Biological Sciences, 33, 1-86.

Variation at the DRD4 locus is associated with wariness and local site selection in urban black swans. W F D Van Dongen, R W Robinson, M A Weston, R A Mulder, P J Guay, 10.1186/s12862-015-0533-8BMC Evolutionary Biology. 151Van Dongen, W. F. D., Robinson, R. W., Weston, M. A., Mulder, R. A., & Guay, P. J. (2015). Variation at the DRD4 locus is associated with wariness and local site selection in urban black swans. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15(1), 1-11. https://doi.org/10.1186/s1286 2-015-0533-8

Gear effectiveness and size selectivity for five cryptic madtom species (Noturus spp.). M D Wagner, D A Schumann, B J Smith, 10.1111/jai.13892Journal of Applied Ichthyology. 353Wagner, M. D., Schumann, D. A., & Smith, B. J. (2019). Gear effective- ness and size selectivity for five cryptic madtom species (Noturus spp.). Journal of Applied Ichthyology, 35(3), 673-682. https://doi. org/10.1111/jai.13892

MYD11A1 MODIS/Aqua land surface temperature/Emissivity daily L3 Global 1km SIN Grid V006. Z Wan, S Hook, G Hulley, 10.5067/MODIS/MYD11A1.006NASA EOSDIS Land Processes DAAC. Wan, Z., Hook, S., & Hulley, G. (2015). MYD11A1 MODIS/Aqua land sur- face temperature/Emissivity daily L3 Global 1km SIN Grid V006. NASA EOSDIS Land Processes DAAC, https://doi.org/10.5067/ MODIS/ MYD11 A1.006

Optimising monitoring efforts for secretive snakes: A comparison of occupancy and N-mixture models for assessment of population status. R J Ward, R A Griffiths, J W Wilkinson, N Cornish, 10.1038/s41598-017-18343-5Scientific Reports. 7118074Ward, R. J., Griffiths, R. A., Wilkinson, J. W., & Cornish, N. (2017). Optimising monitoring efforts for secretive snakes: A comparison of occupancy and N-mixture models for assessment of population status. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 18074. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s4159 8-017-18343 -5

Crocodiles : proceedings of the 15th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group of the Species Survival Commission of IUCN -the World Conservation Union. G J W Webb, A R C Britton, S C Manolis, B Ottley, S Stirrat, C. specialist GroupVaradero, CubaIUCN-The World Conservation UnionThe recovery of Crocodylus porosus in the Northern Territory of Australia: 1971-1998Webb, G. J. W., Britton, A. R. C., Manolis, S. C., Ottley, B., & Stirrat, S. (2000). The recovery of Crocodylus porosus in the Northern Territory of Australia: 1971-1998. In C. specialist Group (Ed.), Crocodiles : pro- ceedings of the 15th Working Meeting of the Crocodile Specialist Group of the Species Survival Commission of IUCN -the World Conservation Union convened at Varadero, Cuba, 17-20 January 2000 (pp. 195- 234). IUCN-The World Conservation Union.

G J W Webb, H Messel, 10.1071/WR9790227Wariness in Crocodylus porosus (Reptilia: Crocodilidae). 6Webb, G. J. W., & Messel, H. (1979). Wariness in Crocodylus porosus (Reptilia: Crocodilidae). Wildlife Research, 6(2), 227-234. https://doi. org/10.1071/WR979 0227

The influence of variable selection: A Bayesian diagnostic perspective. R E Weiss, 10.1080/01621459.1995.10476555Journal of the American Statistical Association. 90430Weiss, R. E. (1995). The influence of variable selection: A Bayesian diagnostic perspective. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90(430), 619-625. https://doi.org/10.1080/01621 459.1995.10476555

Changes in insect populations in the field in relation to preceding weather conditions. C B Williams, Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 138Williams, C. B. (1951). Changes in insect populations in the field in re- lation to preceding weather conditions. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 138, 130-156.

Estimating and dealing with detectability in occupancy surveys for forest owls and arboreal marsupials. B A Wintle, R P Kavanagh, M A Mccarthy, M A Burgman, 10.2193/0022-541xJournal of Wildlife Management. 693Wintle, B. A., Kavanagh, R. P., McCarthy, M. A., & Burgman, M. A. (2005). Estimating and dealing with detectability in occupancy surveys for forest owls and arboreal marsupials. Journal of Wildlife Management, 69(3), 905-917. https://doi.org/10.2193/0022-541x

An evaluation of factors affecting night-light counts of alligators. A R Woodward, W R Marion, Proc. Ann. Conf. S.E. Fish and Wildl, Agencies. Ann. Conf. S.E. Fish and Wildl, AgenciesWoodward, A. R., & Marion, W. R. (1978). An evaluation of factors affect- ing night-light counts of alligators. Proc. Ann. Conf. S.E. Fish and Wildl, Agencies, 291-302.

. M N Ahizi, C Y Kouman, A Ouattara, N P Kouamé, A Dede, E Fairet, M H Shirley, How to cite this article: Ahizi, M. N., Kouman, C. Y., Ouattara, A., Kouamé, N. P., Dede, A., Fairet, E., & Shirley, M. H. (2021).

Detectability and impact of repetitive surveys on threatened West African crocodylians. 10.1002/ece3.8188Ecology and Evolution. 11Detectability and impact of repetitive surveys on threatened West African crocodylians. Ecology and Evolution, 11, 15062-15076. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.8188