# Fake account detection in social media using machine learning methods: literature review

CorpusID: 265928847
 
tags: #Computer_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ae6eeba3711501965bb004760510f1979f4b52f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ae6eeba3711501965bb004760510f1979f4b52f)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | True |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Fake account detection in social media using machine learning methods: literature review


Nalia Graciella Kerrysa 
Data Science Technology
Department of Engineering
Faculty of Advanced Technology and Multidiscipline
Universitas Airlangga
SurabayaIndonesia

Ika Qutsiati Utami ika.q.utami@ftmm.unair.ac.id 
Data Science Technology
Department of Engineering
Faculty of Advanced Technology and Multidiscipline
Universitas Airlangga
SurabayaIndonesia

Graduate Institute of Network Learning Technology
National Central University of Taiwan
TaoyuanTaiwan


Data Science Technology
Department of Engineering Faculty of Advanced Technology and Multidiscipline
Universitas Airlangga Dr. Ir. Soekarno Rd
SurabayaIndonesia

Fake account detection in social media using machine learning methods: literature review
2302-92850EC151BDA52DC9DFF7D5C894B4B3B0C610.11591/eei.v12i6.5334Received Nov 26, 2022 Revised Apr 5, 2023 Accepted Jun 4, 2023Fake account Machine learning 975 Precision: 982 Recall: 975 F1 value: 979 Bharti and Pandey [33] Logistic with PSO Accuracy: 962 F1 value: 89 Kadam and Sharma [38] ANN Accuracy: 974 Chakraborty et al[36] XGBoost Accuracy: 996 Narayan [34] Decision tree Accuracy: 93 Pakaya et al[28] XGBoost Accuracy: 9555 Pashwan and Ravi [35] SVM Accuracy: 9733 Instagram Sheikhi [1] Bagging decision tree Accuracy: 9845 Recall: 992 F-score: 989 Raturi [21] SVM dan CNB Accuracy: 95 Purba et al[15] Decision tree 2-Class Accuracy: 7966 Precision: 80 Recall: 797
With the rapid development of emerging technologies in the industrial revolution 4.0 or 5.0, social media has become one of the social environments to carry out social activities, both socializing and advertising.However, since it is an open platform by nature, cybercrime occurrence in social media is inevitable.Currently, more than a million fake accounts are existing on Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook, intending to increase followers, spread hoaxes, and spam.On one hand, it is difficult to manually eliminate these accounts on social media platforms.On the other hand, research on automatic fake account detection has been carried out for more than a decade.This study provides literature reviews aiming to deliver information about several methods and machine learning algorithms with the performances measured in identifying fake accounts on three well-known social media platforms: Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook.

## INTRODUCTION

In the era of industry 4.0, social media has become one of the most preferable platforms to socialize and connect with other people.Interactive social media platforms such as Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook have become popular over a decade to share and find important information [1], [2].People can connect with others around the world without limitations of time and place.Currently, the purpose of social media interaction is not just for communication and online interaction, but also for conducting business activities such as advertising, promoting, and doing campaigns.Meanwhile, the government could use these platforms to deliver government services to citizens effectively [3].All of these activities require a lot of followers to be engaged with meaningful interaction to achieve a profitable business purpose.To achieve this, it is inevitable for business people or a company to utilize fake accounts on social media intentionally.Fake accounts are used in many different ways.Most businesses and institutions today choose social media as their main platform for marketing and advertising campaigns [4].Meanwhile, influencers receive many tangible profits from endorsing brands and sponsorship [5], [6].Both cases need a huge amount of followers and finding fake accounts provides the fastest solution for a bigger profit.Although they seemed to have no significant impact, fake accounts could also run a lot of devious activities over the internet such as launching massive online attacks [7], spreading hoaxes, review-bombing of products with misleading content, spreading spam, and even impersonating someone [8].Not only that cases, these fake accounts could take Bulletin of Electr Eng & Inf ISSN: 2302-9285  Fake account detection in social media using machine learning methods: … (Nalia Graciella Kerrysa) 3791 advantage of people by faking news or text messages to steal from innocent social media users [9], [10].These activities will affect the reputation of individuals or groups of people on a larger scale [11].One example is when a 17-year-old high school student's identity was stolen by a large company that sells Twitter followers to anyone that wants to become popular [12].The company claimed approximately 3.5 million automated accounts including stolen identities from which they profited.Another case is when Twitter faced a problem where fake accounts would get verified which slows down the verification of important and official accounts since the process needs to be improved [13].As mentioned by Elyusufi et al. [11], the existence of fake accounts is considered more dangerous than any other cybercrimes.Moreover, the existence of fake accounts in social media can't be tracked and removed easily.We need some techniques to automatically solve this problem.On the other hand, with the advancement of technology and algorithms, some fake accounts are trained to mimic the activities of a real social media user so that they can avoid deletion from the respected social media platform [14].People also make some traditions to purchase many fake accounts with affordable prices to meet their business purposes [15].This condition will lead to an increasing number of fake accounts over time.The inability to minimize these fake accounts automatically and effectively is the main reason for current research topics focused on this part.This literature review aims to summarize some of the research studies focusing on machine learning techniques to detect social media fake accounts.This study also provides information for a high-performance model that can be implemented in detecting fake accounts on Instagram, Facebook, and Twitter.


## METHOD

The method used for the literature review of this study refers to the method conducted by Zuhroh and Rakhmawati [16] which consists of 4 steps that include defining research questions, literature keywords and sources, study criteria selection, and the findings of the literature study.We also followed a guide to structure a literature review by Kitchenham and Charters [17].This literature review included 4 stages as follows: a. Setting up the literature review goals and questions

The objective of this stage is to find methods for fake account detection with better performance on 3 social media platforms e.g., Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook.We compose the research questions as follows:

-What are the attributes or features that can be used to effectively detect fake accounts in social media?-What are machine learning methods commonly used in fake account classification tasks?-What is the performance of each machine learning method in detecting fake accounts in social media?b.Research article selection

The keywords such as "machine learning", "online social network", "social media", "fake account detection", and "fake account classification" are used to search for some related articles from the database i.e., Google Scholar, IEEE, and Scopus.Articles regarding literature reviews are excluded from this study.The search process obtained 30 articles which are shown in Table 1.c. Discussion From the collected articles, three aspects of the research will be discussed.The first is to discuss the dataset used in the study.The second is to discuss the attributes selected by the study.The final task is to discuss the machine learning model used in the study.


## d. Data synthesis

After the discussion, the data from the respected study will be elaborated and summarized.The performance of the models will be mentioned with performance metrics used in the article.Aditionally, the evaluation of the results will be explained.


## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Several studies performed multiple steps to obtain the best model for fake accounts classification including: i) gathering datasets in several ways e.g., manually, automatically, and using an existing dataset; ii) applying feature selection for increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the model; iii) selecting a machine learning model to classify fake accounts; and iv) measure the performance of the model as well as evaluate the result.


### Dataset

Two types of datasets can be used for fake account detection: free datasets and self-made datasets.The majority of researchers chose to make their datasets that comprise fake and real accounts.One of the reasons to build their dataset is because of no available public open datasets for detecting fake accounts [24].Some researchers collected survey data using a questionnaire [21] or even hired a company to make a part of the dataset [23].For fake account classification, the dataset is collected from Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter (as shown in Tables 2 and 3).Other platforms are excluded from this literature review.1,162 accounts Gupta and Kaushal [7] 4,708 accounts Khalil et al. [19] Fake accounts: 13,000 Real accounts: 5,386 Twitter Ersahin et al. [8] Fake accounts: 501 Real accounts: 499 Cresci et al. [18] 13,101 accounts Walt and Eloff [20] 223,796 accounts Akyon and Kalfaoglu [24] Fake accounts: 700 Real accounts: 700 Bharti and Pandey [33] Real accounts: 1,103 Narayan [34] Fake accounts: 1,056 Real accounts: 1,176 Instagram Meshram et al. [14] Fake accounts: 3,231 Real accounts: 6,868 Purba et al. [15] Fake accounts: 32,869 Real accounts: 32,460 Sheikhi [1] Fake accounts: 3,132 Real accounts: 6,868 Durga and Sudhakar [40] Fake accounts: 201 Real accounts: 1,002  [29] The fake project dataset 11,737 accounts Khaled et al. [26] MIB dataset Fake accounts: 3,351 Real accounts: 1,950 Wang et al. [31] CLEF2019 dataset 7,120 accounts Bharti and Pandey [33] The fake project [18] 5.870 accounts Chakraborty et al. [36] MIB dataset Fake accounts: 3,474 Real accounts: 3,351 Kadam and Sharma [38] GitHub 2,820 accounts Instagram Kesharwani et al. [32] Fake, spammer, and genuine Instagram accounts 696 accounts Das et al. [37] Kaggle dataset 576 accounts

Various methods are used in gathering and compiling new datasets.Some of them take advantage of third-party websites [15], web data crawlers, and social media API.After data has been gathered, commonly the fake accounts and the real accounts are separated manually.There are also other methods to simplify the data-gathering process without classifying the accounts one by one.The method used by Khalil et al. [19] Bulletin of Electr Eng & Inf ISSN: 2302-9285  Fake account detection in social media using machine learning methods: … (Nalia Graciella Kerrysa) 3793 involved a university's Twitter account that has a lot of followers and verifies which accounts are real or not.Meanwhile, fake accounts are obtained by buying them from a website with affordable prices.


### Feature selection

According to Elyusufi et al. [11], the feature selection phase is a basic concept in machine learning that affects the performance of detection and classification, hence the features can provide a significant influence on the result.This phase can be done with a few techniques like using the spearman correlation test, dimensionality reduction, the markov blanket technique, and wrapper feature selection with support vector machine (SVM) [26].Furthermore, researchers can also choose many features that could be divided into multiple classes.Furthermore, they are inserted into the model to find the best class [18].Table 4 presents the results of the feature selection process from several studies which includes information about which features are important for training the model.The number of features varied ranging from 4 to 49 attributes.The most used feature is the features that can be obtained by the researcher without having permission from third-party software.Most of them are related to the number of followers, the number of following accounts, likes, profile pictures, status, posts, and account names.Table 4. Feature selection for fake account classification


## Reference

Features selected Total Gupta and Kaushal [7] Received likes, likes, received comments, comments, tags, tag user, tags from other users, page tags, tags in comments, page tags in the comments section, tags by other users in the comments section, shared posts, wall posts, like wall posts, comments in wall posts, used applications.17 Elyusufi et al. [11] Status, followers, friends, favorites.

4 Reddy [23] Profile ID, name, status, followers, friends, location, account creation date, shares, gender, language.Wang et al. [31] The average of mentions, emojis, stop words, topics, links, retweets, similar posts, post length, forwarded posts, and punctuations.


## 10

Walt and Eloff [20] Account age, duplicate accounts, follower and friend ratio, followers, friends, geographical

Mohammad et al. [27] Likes, favorites, followings, followers, location, status replies, user replies, amount of registration, hashtags, mentions, URL, profile picture, replies, shares, the status of the account that shared, status.


## 16

Khalil et al. [19] Status, followers, followings, favorites, ratio followings, and followers, registration.6 Jabardi and Hadi [29] Favorites, likes, status, location, followers, account age, friend tier, reputation, friendship, registration.10

Heidari et al. [30] Followers, friends, retweets, replies, hashtags, shared URL, text, show name, user ID, neutral posts, positive posts, negative posts, number of positive posts, number of negative posts, an average of positive posts, and an average of negative posts.


## 16

Ersahin et al. [8] Description, protected or not, followers, friends, status, favorites, public lists, verified, profile picture, contributors, affiliated profiles, affiliated profile picture, translator, hashtags, mentions, URL.


## 16

Cresci et al. [18] Profile feature (features consist of information in the follower's profile of the target account), timeline feature (information of tweets in the follower's timeline of the target account), relationships feature (features from accounts that has a connectiona with the target account's followers).


## 49

Sheikhi [1] Profile picture, followed accounts, whether the follower count is greater, and the number of posts.4 Purba et al. [15] Posts, following, followers, biography, link, length of description, the presence of a description, the presence of pictures, likes, comments, location, hashtags, keywords, followers, post similarities, posts per hour.17

Meshram et al. [14] Post count, followers, followings, profile picture, private or public account, biography, username length, numbers in the username.


## 8

Akyon and Kalfaoglu [24] Media number total, followers, following, numbers of integer in name, private or public account.5

Bharti and Pandey [33] Number of followers, friends, tweets per day, status count, mentions, and hashtags per tweet, added into a user's favorite list, has over 50 tweets, URL, followers to the following ratio, replies.


## 11

Chakraborty et al. [36] Number of friends, followers, status, favorites, listed count, language count, geo-enabled.7

Durga and Sudhakar [40] Numbers of followers, followings, media, biography count, profile picture, private account, username digit count, username length, biography emoji count.9

Pashwan and Ravi [35] Numbers of followers, friends, favorites, tweets, tweet frequency, location, verified account.7

Shreya et al. [39] User age, gender, account age, link in the description, status, friends count, location, location IP, status.9


### Machine learning model

Machine learning is used to perform the detection process of fake accounts on social media.The majority of research studies used more than one algorithm to find the best model.Combining 2 algorithms has been possible to increase the accuracy like a study conducted by Mohammad et al. [27].They combined a convolutional neural network (CNN) and an artificial neural networks (ANN) model.Another was by Khaled et al. [26] which integrated an SVM with an ANN model.[31] 1 Random forest [18], [20], [28], [30], [34], [36] 6 AdaBoost [18], [20], [28], [36] 4 XGBoost [28], [36] 2 SVM

[18]- [21], [26], [29], [30], [35], [38] 9 CNB

[21] 1 CNN

[27] 1 ANN [26], [27], [30], [38] 4 CNN-ANN

[27] 1 Simple logistic regression [18], [19], [28]- [30], [33] 6 SVM-ANN [26] 1 Naïve bayes [8], [29], [33], [34], [38] 5 Decorate

[18] 1 Decision tree [18], [33], [34], [

## 

ISSN: 2302-9285 Bulletin of Electr Eng & Inf, Vol. 12, No. 6, December 2023: 3790-3797 3792


## Table 1 .
1
The searching results
Publication yearAuthorsTotal2015Cresci et al. [18]12017Ersahin et al.
[7], Gupta and Kaushal[7], Khalil et al.[19] 3 2018 Walt and Eloff [20], Raturi [21], Chen and Wu [22] 3 2019 Elyusufi et al. [11], Reddy [23], Akyon and Kalfaoglu [24], Singh and Banerjee [25], Khaled et al. [26], Mohammad et al. [27], Pakaya et al. [28] 7 2020 Jabardi and Hadi [29], Purba et al. [15], Sheikhi [1] 7 2021 Meshram et al. [14], Heidari et al. [30], Wang et al. [31], Kesharwani et al. [32], Bharti and Pandey [33], Narayan [34], Pashwan and Ravi [35] 3 2022 Chakraborty et al. [36], Das et al. [37], Kadam and Sharma [38], Shreya et al. [39] 4 2023 Durga and Sudhakar [40], Reddy et al. [10] 2 Total 30


## Table 2 .
2
The original dataset
Social mediaReferenceSample sizeFacebookSingh and Banerjee [25]Fake accounts: 537Real accounts: 418Reddy [23]

## Table 3 .
3
The dataset from repositories
Social mediaReferenceDataset nameSample sizeFacebookElyusufi et al. [11]Facebook fake profile dataset2,816 accountsReddy et al. [10],Facebook profile dataset600 accountsShreya et al. [39]TwitterHeidari et al. [30]Cresci-2017 datasetFake accounts: 9,262Real accounts: 3,474Jabardi and Hadi

## Table 5 .
5
Table 5lists the algorithms used in several kinds of research to create a fake account classification model according to the target social media.From Table5, we can conclude that 38 algorithms can be used for the fake account classification task. 2 of them are a combination of 2 classification methods.According to the result, the most used method to detect fake Bulletin of Electr Eng & Inf, Vol. 12, No. 6, December 2023: 3790-3797 3794 accounts on Facebook is random forest.On the other hand, the SVM method is used commonly for Twitter.Instagram has several common approaches such as ANN, naïve bayes, random forest, and SVM.Classification algorithm used based on the social media platform

F1 value: 79.6 Meshram et al. [14] Random forest Accuracy: 96.94 Precision: 99 Recall: 98 F1 value: 98 Kesharwani et al. [32] ANN Accuracy: 93.63 Akyon and Kalfaoglu [24] SVM Precision: 91 Recall: 98 F1 value: 86 Das et al. [37] Random forest Accuracy: 98 Recall: 97 F1 value: 98 Durga and Sudhakar [40] Decision tree Precision: 96 Recall: 96 F1 value: 96The result shows that the dominant algorithms that have the highest performance are random forest (6 articles) and SVM (3 articles).Generally, fake account detection models can be classified with an accuracy of over 90%.The highest accuracy is obtained by the decision tree classifier (99.28%) for Facebook[11], XGBoost (99.6%) for Twitter[36], and bagging decision tree (98.45%) for Instagram[1].From this result, we can conclude that the decision tree is the best model to detect fake accounts compared to the other algorithms.Furthermore, the integration between two models can also produce a high-performance model.This approach can open opportunities to combine a variety of algorithms to increase the quality, speed, and efficiency of classification models.CONCLUSIONAs mentioned in the previous part, numerous researchers are aiming to create a fake account detection model using a machine learning model with a variety of algorithms.The majority of features used to train these models are gathered from data that is available from a user's profile and online activities.Using this information, researchers can identify some fake accounts that are used to commit cybercrime automatically.This literature review has found 39 algorithms that can be used as a classification model for fake account detection problems.The most used methods are random forest and SVM.From all algorithms, the combination of the decision tree and the CNN-ANN model can provide the highest performance for all three social media platforms (i.e., Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter) with an accuracy exceeding 98%.BIOGRAPHIES OF AUTHORSNalia Graciella Kerrysa is a bachelor's degree student in the Data Science Technology Study Program, Faculty of Advanced Technology and Multidiscipline, Universitas Airlangga, Indonesia.She is one of the active students with a passion for research.She can be contacted at email: naliagk.hulu@gmail.com.Ika Qutsiati Utamiis a doctoral degree student at the Graduate Institute of Network Learning Technology, National Central University, ROC, Taiwan.She also received an M.S. degree from the Graduate Institute of Network Learning Technology, National Central University, Taiwan, in 2018.She is currently working as a lecturer at the Faculty of Advanced Technology and Multidiscipline, Universitas Airlangga, Indonesia.Her research interests are in the areas of human-computer interaction, computer science in education, and AI/ML for future education.She can be contacted at email: ika.q.utami@ftmm.unair.ac.id.
An Efficient Method for Detection of Fake Accounts on the Instagram Platform. S Sheikhi, 10.18280/ria.340407Intelligence Artificielle. 344Sep. 2020Revue d

A Privacy-Preserved and User Self-Governance Blockchain-Based Framework to Combat COVID-19 Depression in Social Media. M Zirui, G Bin, 10.1109/access.2023.3264598IEEE Access. 112023

ANN based Fake User Profile Detection. D Sharma, E R S Madan, International Journal for Research in Engineering and Emerging Trends (IJREET). 622022

Fake identities in social media: A case study on the sustainability of the Facebook business model. K Krombholz, D Merkl, E Weippl, 10.1007/s12927-012-0008-zJournal of Service Science Research. 42Dec. 2012

Influencer Marketing with Fake Followers. A Anand, S Dutta, P Mukherjee, 10.2139/ssrn.3306088IIM Bangalore Research Paper. 2022

Fake Account Detection using Machine Learning and Data Science. R Nennuri, M G Yadav, B Shara, G A Kumar, M Shivani, Annals of the Romanian Society for Cell Biology. 256Jun. 2021

Towards detecting fake user accounts in facebook. A Gupta, R , 10.1109/iseasp.2017.79769962017 ISEA Asia Security and Privacy (ISEASP). IEEEJan. 2017

Twitter fake account detection. B Ersahin, O Aktas, D Kilinc, C Akyol, 10.1109/ubmk.2017.80934202017 International Conference on Computer Science and Engineering. IEEEOct. 2017

Identifying Fake Profile in Online Social Network. S Joshi, H G Nagariya, N Dhanotiya, S Jain, ACI'21: Workshop on Advances in Computational Intelligence at ISIC 2021. Feb. 2021

. D B S Reddy, D R A Nayana, G Sahaja, G S Priya, Artificial Intelligence Tool for Fake Account Detection from Online Social Networks. 1412023Turkish Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education (TURCOMAT)

Social networks fake profiles detection based on account setting and activity. Y Elyusufi, Z Elyusufi, M A Kbir, 10.1145/3368756.3369015Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Smart City Applications, ACM. the 4th International Conference on Smart City Applications, ACMOct. 2019

Social Media Identity Deception Detection. A Alharbi, H Dong, X Yi, Z Tari, I Khalil, 10.1145/3446372ACM Computing Surveys. 543May 2021

Twitter Usage Among Physicians From 2016 to 2020: Algorithm Development and Longitudinal Analysis Study. K Nakagawa, N T Yang, M Wilson, P Yellowlees, 10.2196/37752Journal of Medical Internet Research. 249Mar. 2022

Automatic Detection of Fake Profile Using Machine Learning on Instagram. E P Meshram, R Bhambulkar, P Pokale, K Kharbikar, A Awachat, 10.32628/ijsrst218330International Journal of Scientific Research in Science and Technology. May 2021

Classification of instagram fake users using supervised machine learning algorithms. K R Purba, D Asirvatham, R K Murugesan, 10.11591/ijece.v10i3.pp2763-2772International Journal of Electrical and Computer Engineering (IJECE). 103Jun. 2020

Clickbait detection: A literature review of the methods used. N A Zuhroh, N A Rakhmawati, 10.26594/register.v6i1.1561Jurnal Ilmiah Teknologi Sistem Informasi. 61Oct. 2019

Guidelines for performing Systematic Literature Reviews in Software Engineering. B Kitchenham, S Charters, IEEE Access. 2Jan. 2007

Fame for sale: Efficient detection of fake Twitter followers. S Cresci, R D Pietro, M Petrocchi, A Spognardi, M Tesconi, 10.1016/j.dss.2015.09.003Decision Support Systems. 80Dec. 2015

Detecting Fake Followers in Twitter: A Machine Learning Approach. A Khalil, H Hajjdiab, N Al-Qirim, 10.18178/ijmlc.2017.7.6.646International Journal of Machine Learning and Computing. 76Dec. 2017

Using Machine Learning to Detect Fake Identities: Bots vs Humans. E V D Walt, J Eloff, 10.1109/access.2018.2796018IEEE Access. 62018

Machine Learning Implementation for Identifying Fake Accounts in Social Network. R Raturi, International Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics. 11820Aug. 2018

FakeBuster: A Robust Fake Account Detection by Activity Analysis. Y. -C Chen, S F Wu, 10.1109/paap.2018.000262018 9th International Symposium on Parallel Architectures. IEEEDec. 2018

Fake Profile Identification using Machine Learning. S D P Reddy, International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET). 6122019

Instagram Fake and Automated Account Detection. F C Akyon, M E Kalfaoglu, 10.1109/asyu48272.2019.89464372019 Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications Conference (ASYU). IEEEOct. 2019

Fake (Sybil) Account Detection Using Machine Learning. Y Singh, S Banerjee, 10.2139/ssrn.3462933SSRN Electronic Journal. 2019

Detecting Fake Accounts on Social Media. S Khaled, N El-Tazi, H M O Mokhtar, 10.1109/bigdata.2018.86219132018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data. IEEEDec. 2018

Bot detection using a single post on social media. S Mohammad, M U S Khan, M Ali, L Liu, M Shardlow, R Nawaz, 10.1109/worlds4.2019.89039892019 Third World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems Security and Sustainablity (WorldS4). IEEEJul. 2019

Malicious Account Detection on Twitter Based on Tweet Account Features using Machine Learning. F N Pakaya, M O Ibrohim, I Budi, 10.1109/icic47613.2019.89858402019 Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Computing (ICIC). IEEEOct. 2019

Twitter Fake Account Detection and Classification using Ontological Engineering and Semantic Web Rule Language. M Jabardi, A S Hadi, 10.33640/2405-609x.2285Karbala International Journal of Modern Science. 64Dec. 2020

An Empirical Study of Machine learning Algorithms for Social Media Bot Detection. M Heidari, J H J Jones, O Uzuner, 10.1109/iemtronics52119.2021.94226052021 IEEE International IOT, Electronics and Mechatronics Conference (IEMTRONICS). IEEEApr. 2021

Detecting Social Media Bots with Variational AutoEncoder and k-Nearest Neighbor. X Wang, Q Zheng, K Zheng, Y Sui, S Cao, Y Shi, 10.3390/app11125482Applied Sciences. 1112Jun. 2021

Detecting Fake Social Media Account Using Deep Neural Networking. M Kesharwani, S Kumari, V Niranjan, International Research Journal of Engineering and Technology (IRJET). 87Jul. 2021

Fake account detection in twitter using logistic regression with particle swarm optimization. K K Bharti, S Pandey, 10.1007/s00500-021-05930-ySoft Computing. 2516Jun. 2021

Twitter Bot Detection using Machine Learning Algorithms. N Narayan, 10.1109/icecct52121.2021.96168412021 Fourth International Conference on Electrical, Computer and Communication Technologies (ICECCT). IEEESep. 2021

Fake Profile Detection on Twitter using SVM Classifier. V A Pashwan, D S Ravi, Indian Journal of Signal Processing. 11Feb. 2021IJSP)

Fake Profile Detection Using Machine Learning Techniques. P Chakraborty, M M Shazan, M Nahid, M K Ahmed, P C Talukder, 10.4236/jcc.2022.1010006Journal of Computer and Communications. 10102022

An Effecient Approach to Detect Fraud Instagram Accounts Using Supervised ML Algorithms. S Das, S Saha, S Vijayalakshmi, J , 10.1109/icac3n56670.2022.100743642022 4th International Conference on Advances in Computing, Communication Control and Networking (ICAC3N). IEEEDec. 2022

Social Media Fake Profile Detection Using Data Mining Technique. N Kadam, S K Sharma, 10.12720/jait.13.5.518-523Journal of Advances in Information Technology. 1352022

Identification of Fake accounts in social media using machine learning. K Shreya, A Kothapelly, D , H Shanmugasundaram, 10.1109/icerect56837.2022.100601942022 Fourth International Conference on Emerging Research in Electronics. IEEEDec. 2022Computer Science and Technology (ICERECT

The use of supervised machine learning classifiers for the detection of fake instagram accounts. P Durga, D T Sudhakar, 10.47750/pnr.2023.14.03.36Journal of Pharmaceutical Negative Results. Jan. 2023