# KERATOSIS BLENNORRHAGICA A CASE REPORT WITH A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 32215769
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01f0ca4cedb4f70bf0937940427d4504f3949674](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01f0ca4cedb4f70bf0937940427d4504f3949674)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

KERATOSIS BLENNORRHAGICA A CASE REPORT WITH A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE


mj&gt;., m.sEdward W Gault 
Christian Medical College
VelloreIndia

m.b., b.s., d.t.m.Edna I Gault 
Christian Medical College
VelloreIndia

KERATOSIS BLENNORRHAGICA A CASE REPORT WITH A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE



Sutton and Sutton in their classical book on skin diseases have excellent illustrations of the skin condition and quote Roth (1905) who records cases without arthritis. They also quote a case occurring in a young negress who had no arthritis. The following case is reported because of the severity and extent of the lesion.

History of findings.?A poorly-nourished female child, aged seven years, was carried by her mother into the outpatient department of the Christian Medical College Hospital on 13th June, 1947. The mother stated that the present illness started about one year previously with fever lasting for eight days. She then noticed ' blisters' which covered both the upper and lower lips. These subsided gradually during the next seven days, leaving hard crusts over the blistered areas. A week after the onset of the illness the mother noticed small blisters all over the body, which were most prominent on the buttocks, perineum, knees, elbows and palms. The lesions were treated with indigenous medicine in her village. The blisters on the body subsided without crusting but those on the buttocks, perineum, knees, elbows and palms remained, and these underwent crusting as had occurred already on the lips. She also noticed that ' blisters' had developed under the free margin of the nails of the hands and feet and following subsidence of the blisters the nails were found to be horny and. brittle. Two weeks after the onset of the lesions on the body surface generally, ' fissured sores were seen on the undersurface of the heels'; and a few days later crusts appeared in these positions also. Since the development of the lesions the child has been unable to walk. The lesions extended from the heels to the soles of the feet shortly after they had appeared on the heels. There was no history obtainable of urethritis or joint pains. She had had bilateral discharge from the ears for the previous two years.

On examination.?The lips were hard and cracked, with fissures between thickened, scaly epithelium which formed narrow ridges (figure 1, plate VII). The lesion was confined to the external surface of the mucous membrane of both lips. The gums were covered with sordes. In the centre of the forehead there was a knobbly horny mass about one cm/ in diameter. The lesions on the palm and dorsum of the hands (figures 2 and 3, plate VII), elbows, knees and the soles of the feet (figure 4, plate VII) resembled one another. ' They were knobbly horny masses with thick brown incrustations and relief map-like projections' (Rajan and Rangiah, 1941). These lesions were relatively clean and showed Jittle evidence of secondary infection. The heels and soles of the feet, the perineum, buttocks and inner aspects of the thigh were covered with hard cauliflower-like masses of horny material, THE INDIAN MEDICAL GAZETTE [March, 1948 which were deeply fissured. These fissures were filled with foul-smelling discharge (figure 5, plate VII). Clinical pathology Urine: Slight trace albumen, urates present. Blood : 7.5 g. haemoglobin per 100 c.c. blood.


## Kahn:

Both mother and child negative. Cold agglutinins : negative. Smear from vulva negative for gonococci. Scraping of skin for tinea?negative.

Histological report.?31st July, 1947. Pieces of tissue were taken for histological examination from the heel and the buttocks. They were fixed in 10 per cent formol saline and the sections stained with haematoxylin and eosin. The report on these specimens was as follows:? The papillae of the epidermis are markedly swollen and the downgrowths from the epithelium project a long way into the dermis (figure 6, plate VII). At one point there is disintegration of the roof of the epithelium and here the epithelium is considerably thinned and is covered at this point by a mass of polymorphonuclear leucocytes.

The superficial layers of the epithelium are undergoing desquamation and crust formation (figure 7, plate VII). The deeper layers of the epidermis at this point are heavily infiltrated with polymorphonuclear leucocytes. In the dermis there were numerous dilated capillaries from which polymorphonuclear leucocytes are passing out by diapedesis into the surrounding tissue. The endothelium of the capillaries is considerably thickened.

The tissue between the capillaries is densely infiltrated with inflammatory cells which are mainly small round cells and plasma cells, in one area there are numerous pigmented macrophages which appear to have removed the pigment from the deeper layers of the epidermis (figure 6, plate VII). In between these areas of inflammatory infiltration there are bands of proliferating fibroblasts. The section shows marked parakeratosis and acanthosis and the appearance is consistent with the diagnosis of keratosis blennorrhagica. Treatment 1. General.?The patient was admitted to the venereal ward on 13th June, 1947, and given sulphadiazine 0.5 gm. four-hourly day and night for 4 days followed by 0.25 g. four-hourly day and night for 3 days. At the same time T.A.B. vaccine was given intravenously in doses of 25 million, 50 million, 75 million, 100 million, 150 million, 200 million, on alternate days.

30th June, 1947. Penicillin 20,000 units threehourly day and night was given until 1,000,000 units had been given. During this period there was improvement as shown by a diminution of the crusting with falling off of the horny scales and a reduction in the size of the lesions in all areas but most marked on the feet and hands (figures 8, 9 and 10, plates VII and VIII).

The secondary infection except on the buttocks (figure 11, plate VIII) and around the vulva completely cleared up.

21st July, 1947. Penicillin was given again in the same dosage.

31st July, 1947. T.A.B. vaccine was given in the same dosage, but starting with 50 million. Ferri et ammon. cit. gr. xv t.d.g. was given for 7 days but discontinued because of diarrhoea.

2. Diet.?Milk, jagari, kanji, fruit, and glucose in addition to rice and vegetable diet.

3. Local.?Sitz baths twice daily since admission on 17th June, 1947. Sulphur emulsion 10 per cent daily on the body for one week. Mouth was cleaned with borax and glycerine and lanoline was applied to the lips.

26th June, 1947. Ears on examination showed central perforations in both ear drums and these were treated with hydrogen peroxide and mercurochrome drops.

7th July, 1947. Nails were cut and some horny growths removed. The crusts fell off after bathing in hot water.

10th July, 1947. Deep .r-ray therapy given daily for 5 days, then every second day, then gradually spaced out for seven more treatments until 6th August, 1947. The dosage was as follows: 150 K.V.P. 15 M.A. 25 cu. 10 al. 100 R. 10 X 10.7 size I and III areas. This greatly improved the hands and feet but the perineum and buttocks did not improve to the same extent.

12th July, 1947. Starch poultice for 24 hours followed by the application of Lassar's paste to left hand, right knee and foot were applied. No noticeable improvement was seen.

21st July, 1947. Penicillin cream was applied to lips twice daily.

28th July, 1947. Penicillin cream was applied to the left hand which was bandaged.

5th August, 1947. Penicillin cream was applied to the vulva, anus and thighs.

Discussion.?Rajan and Rangiah (1941) refer to the rareness of this condition when they state that up to 1940 only 93 cases had been reported in the literature. It is of interest that most cases reported were in men and only one case was reported in a child aged 4 years. They consider that urethritis and polyarthritis nearly always precede the cutaneous eruption. In this case urethritis may have passed unnoticed, or been concealed by the secondary infection seen around the vulva, perineum and buttocks on admission.

There was no history of polyarthritis, but it is reasonable to point out that arthritis is an uncommon complication of gonorrhoea in children. Rajan and Rangiah (1941) state that fever as in this case preceded the eruptions which appear most commonly on the palms, trunk, legs and mucous membranes of mouth.

The classical picture of vesicles leading to a crust formation (figure 7, plate VII) is well seen in this case and the covering of the greater part of the sole with horny masses is well shown in the photographs (figure 4, plate VII). The subungual keratoma is a characteristic finding which is seen in this case (figure 2, plate VII). Satulsky (1945) comments on the infrequency with which gramnegative diplococci can be found in the skin lesions, and suggests an allergic basis for the development of the lesions. Much discussion has centred around the relation between this disease and psoriasis, but Keim (1924) has pointed out a distinct histological picture.

Satulsky publishes photographs of hands and feet which show close resemblance to the skin lesions in the case reported. He also refers to the satisfactory result of penicillin, which we have also noticed. Herold and Smith (1941) have illustrations which closely correspond to those seen on the feet of this case and their photomicroscopic illustrations show the same destruction of the superficial layers of the epithelium (figure 7, plate VII). Downing (1934) shows in his illustrations marked changes around the nails, but _ less marked effects on the soles and feet. This is probably accounted for by the fact that the case which he reports is a fairly acute one. Sutton and Sutton (1939) give illustrations which resemble very closely those seen in our case.

They consider that gonorrhceal infection is the cause of the condition but the search for the organism has proved fruitless in the experience of many observers. They consider that arthritis is absent in 10 per cent of the cases.

They agree with Keim (1924) that the hyperkeratotic exanthem is peculiar to gonococcal infections and is entirely distinct from arthropathy psoriasis.  Fig. 10. Fig. 10. Fig. 11.


case is reputed of keratosis blennorrhagica occurring in a female child of seven years.2. Reference to the literature shows that the skin lesions are very typical of this condition.3. The absence of the other two classical symptoms of the triad?urethritis and arthritis? is discussed, and an explanation offered.4. The treatment is outlined and the responseis shown by the photographs.We wish to thank Dr. Ammini Philips and Dr. Krishna Iyer for their help with clinical notes and treatment; Dr. R. G. Cochrane for his help in interpreting the skin biopsies; Mr. James Laurence for the photomicrographs and Dr. E. V.

. J G Downing, Amer. Med. Assoc. Herold, W. C., and Arch. Dermat. and Syph., 44, Smith, D. C.102Downing, J. G. (1934). /. Amer. Med. Assoc., 102, w 829- -Herold, W. C., and Arch. Dermat. and Syph., 44, Smith, D. C. (1941).

. H L Reim, Reim, H. L. (1924) ..

. Ibid, 9423Ibid., 9, 423

. R V Kajan, Indian Med, Gaz, 76468Kajan, R. V., and Indian Med. Gaz., 76, 468.

. P N Rangiah, Rangiah, P. N. (1941).

. V Roth, Roth, V, (1905) ..

. Muenchner med. Woch. 52104Muenchner med. Woch., 52, 104.

. E M Satulsky, Amer. J. Syph. Gonor. and < Yen. Dis. 29361Satulsky, E. M. (1945). Amer. J. Syph. Gonor. and < Yen. Dis., 29, 361.

. R L Sutton, and Diseases of the Skin. C. VSutton, R. L., and Diseases of the Skin. C. V.

. R L Sutton, Sutton, R. L. (1939).

The reader may refer to the Special Venereal Disease Number. Mosby Co, St, Louis, 82for this diseaseMosby Co., St. Louis. [The reader may refer to the Special Venereal Disease Number, I.M.G., 82, No. 10, October 1947. for this disease.?Editor, I.M.G. 1