# Characteristics of Narrative Interventions and Health Effects: A Review of the Content, Form, and Context of Narratives in Health-related Narrative Persuasion Research

CorpusID: 3579097
 
tags: #Psychology, #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ecae0d4b3e61886bc7155937952b6cb98951f1c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ecae0d4b3e61886bc7155937952b6cb98951f1c)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Characteristics of Narrative Interventions and Health Effects: A Review of the Content, Form, and Context of Narratives in Health-related Narrative Persuasion Research
2016

Hans Hoeken j.a.l.hoeken@uu.nl 
José Sanders Center for Language Studies (CLS)
Utrecht Institute of Linguistics (UiL-OTS)
Radboud University Nijmegen
Utrecht University
NL, NL

Characteristics of Narrative Interventions and Health Effects: A Review of the Content, Form, and Context of Narratives in Health-related Narrative Persuasion Research
4201610.12840/issn.2255-4165.2016.04.01.011Received: Aug. 31 th , 2015 Open peer review: Sept. 13 th Accepted: Jan. 13 th Prepublished online: Jan. 15 thPDF hosted at the Radboud Repository of the Radboud University Nijmegen The following full text is a publisher's version. For additional information about this publication click this link. http://hdl.handle.net/2066/160401 Please be advised that this information was generated on 2019-02-18 and may be subject to change. OPEN ACCESS Top-Quality Science Peer Reviewed Open Peer Reviewed Freely available online Suggested citation: De Graaf, A., Sanders, J., & Hoeken, H. (2016). Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects: A review of the content, form, and context of narratives in health-related narrative persuasion research. Abstract Article edited by associate editor: Lijiang Shen, University of Pennsylvania, USA. Journal editor: Giorgio P. De Marchis, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Spain. 89Narrative persuasionHealthNarrative engagementPerspectiveFraming
Anneke de GraafCenter for Language Studies (CLS), Radboud University Nijmegen, NL a.degraaf@let.ru.nl In recent years, many studies have been conducted on persuasive effects of narratives in a health context. A striking feature of this research area is the diversity of the narratives that are used in the various studies. Narratives that convey a health message differ widely on a large number of dimensions related to the content, form and context. We expect that these characteristics are potential explanatory factors in the effectiveness of the narratives. To provide an overview of the different characteristics of narratives in health effects research and of the persuasive effects that were found, we review 153 experimental studies on health-related narrative persuasion with a focus on the narrative stimuli. The results show that: a) with regard to the content, showing the healthy behavior in a narrative (as opposed to the unhealthy behavior with negative consequences) may be associated with effects on intention. Narratives that contain high emotional content are more often shown to have effects. b) With regard to the form, for print narratives, a first-person perspective is a promising characteristic in light of effectiveness. c) With regard to the context, an overtly persuasive presentation format does not seem to inhibit narrative persuasion. And d) other characteristics, like character similarity or the presentation medium of the narrative, do not seem to be promising characteristics for producing health effects. In addition, fruitful areas for further research can be found in the familiarity of the setting and the way a health message is embedded in the narrative. Because of the diversity of narrative characteristics and effects that were found, continued research effort is warranted on which characteristics lead to effects. The present review provides an overview of the evidence for persuasive narrative characteristics so far.

## 89


## Content

• Health-related narrative persuasion studies show a wide variety of narrative materials in terms of content, form and context.

• As a content characteristic, showing the healthy behavior in the narrative seems to be associated with effects on intention.

• A promising form characteristic of print narratives is the use of a first-person perspective.

• An overtly persuasive context does not necessarily preclude narrative effects in a health context.

• The diversity of narrative characteristics and effects invites continued research on health-related narrative persuasion. 90 www.rcommunicationr.org differences. Because differences such as these are substantial, we expect that they can be important for explaining the contradictory results that were found for the effectiveness of narratives (cf. Shaffer & Zikmund-Fisher, 2013). Addressing these differences may shed light on why certain studies have found persuasive effects and others have not. In addition, when such differences are not controlled, they might constitute threats to the internal validity of research findings. To control for them, a systematic review is necessary. This study reviews the existing research on health-related narrative persuasion with a focus on the narrative materials. It provides an overview of the different characteristics of narratives in health effects research and of the persuasive effects that were found.


## Definition of Narrative

To delineate the research field, it is important to start with a definition of the key term: narrative. Several scholars who study narrative effects give different definitions, but most scholars agree that the definition of narrative includes at least one character, who experiences at least one event (Bal, 1997;Green, 2006;Kreuter et al., 2007;McDonald, 2014;Rimmon-Kenan, 2002). A character is an agent who is human or human-like in that they act with intentions to achieve goals (Bal, 1997, Rimmon-Kenan, 2002). An event is a transition from one state to another temporally and causally connected state (Bal, 1997;McDonald, 2014). Most narratives consist of multiple events that are also connected in such a sequential, causal way. The term causal here refers not only to causality in a strictly necessary way (e.g., Mary released the breaks of the car on top of the hill and thus it started rolling down), but also to reasons for events (e.g., Mary was mad at her friend and thus she started spreading rumors about her). Although events may be presented in a non-chronological order, the underlying structure is one of cause and effect or action and reaction, that connects the narrative events and characters in a story structure (Green, 2006;Rimmon-Kenan, 2002).

As narratives present characters experiencing events, they are set in a spatiotemporal framework (Herman, 2009;McDonald, 2014). The events take place at a certain time and place, also called the setting. These elements (i.e. characters, events, space and time) make narratives Narratives are increasingly used in health communication to reach public health goals, such as promoting behaviors that are aimed at the prevention and detection of illnesses (Frank, Mur phy, Chatterjee, Moran, & Baezconde-Garbanati, 2015; Thompson & Kreuter, 2014).

For instance, narratives, in which experiences of characters are presented, have been developed to promote health behaviors as diverse as smoking cessation , breast cancer screening (Kreuter et al., 2008), andHIV prevention (Berkley-Patton, Goggin, Liston, Bradley-Ewing, &Neville, 2009). Research has shown that narratives can serve as effective health interventions. Compared to other types of messages, some narratives are able to create story-consistent beliefs and attitudes, increase behavioral intentions, and stimulate healthy behaviors (e.g., Dillard, Fagerlin, Dal Cin, Zikmund-Fisher, & Ubel, 2010;Falzon, Radel, Cantor, & d'Arripe-Longueville, 2015;Lemal & Van den Bulck, 2010). However, not all research shows effects of narratives. Some narratives are found not to be powerful enough to create an effect on determinants of health behavior (e.g., Greene, Campo, & Banerjee, 2010;Nyhan, Reif ler, Richey, & Freed, 2014). Meta-analytic studies show that narratives have small effects on persuasive outcomes overall, but significant variation in these narrative effects is also detected (Braddock & Dillard, in press;Shen, Sheer, & Li, 2015;Zebregs, Van den Putte, Neijens, & De Graaf, 2015). These findings suggest that even though narratives can serve as a promising health communication tool, not all narratives are effective. Thus, it becomes an important question which narratives are used in this research area and which are the active ingredients of these narratives (cf. Green, 2008).

When surveying the area of health-related narrative persuasion research, it becomes apparent that the narrative materials that were used differ widely on a large Their results indicated that there was a difference in effects on beliefs and attitudes on one hand, and effects on intentions on the other, in that statistics were more effective for beliefs and attitudes, whereas narratives were more effective for intention. In contrast, Braddock and Dillard (in press) selected for their meta-analysis 74 studies that compared narratives to a control condition that included no (relevant) message. Their results showed that, compared to a zero-effect baseline, narrative had effects on story-consistent beliefs, attitudes and intentions. However, they also found indications for significant variation in the effects that were not due to the tested moderators: fictionality and medium. Therefore, they urged researchers to look for other moderators.

Other reviews have focused on the association of narrative engagement (Tukachinsky & Tokunaga, 2013) and transportation into a narrative world (Van Laer, De Ruyter, Visconti, & Wetzels, 2014) with narrative effects. Tukachinsky and Tokunaga (2013) concluded on the basis of 45 studies that engagement with the narrative and its characters was positively related to attitudes and intentions implied by the narrative. Van Laer et al. (2014) showed that the specific type of engagement with a story conceptualized as transportation, or the extent to which a story recipient imaginatively enters the story world, predicted beliefs, attitudes and intentions. Thus, the link between narrative engagement and persuasion has been firmly established by previous reviews. Therefore, we will include results on engagement variables in our review, but these will not be our primary focus. The emphasis of the present review is on narrative characteristics. We will do a systematic review of all relevant studies in order to give a complete overview of the narratives that have been used in research on narrative health communication, that can serve as a starting point for further research.


## Narrative Characteristics

In studies on health-related narrative persuasion, different types of narratives have been used. For instance, some studies have used narratives that mainly consist of positive events experienced by characters (e.g., Falzon et al., 2015;Lu, 2013), whereas other studies have used stories that focus on negative events for characters (e.g., De Wit, Das, & Vet, 2008;. As another specific and concrete. Narratives are about particular instances occurring to a specific person or persons in a certain setting. The focus on specific instances contrasts to, for instance, scientific explanations that give information on how the world tends to be, based on multiple instances and persons (Bruner, 1986;Herman, 2009). The presentation of individual cases of something that happened to certain characters in a certain situation (e.g., Sarah, aged 16, was vaccinated against HPV yesterday), is what sets narratives apart from other types of messages. Non-narrative messages like informational or statistical texts present more general information that is abstracted from multiple cases (e.g., 60% of girls between 14-18 have been vaccinated against HPV). Based on these considerations, the definition of narrative that is used in this review is: A presentation of concrete event(s) experienced by specific character(s) in a setting.


## Previous Reviews

Several previous reviews on narrative effects have shown that narratives can be effective in entertainmenteducation (Shen & Han, 2014) and persuasive contexts (Zebregs et al., 2015), providing valuable insight into the overall strength of narrative effects. However, these reviews have not distinguished between different types of narratives based on their characteristics, which is what this review sets out to add to the research field. Shen and Han (2014) meta-analyzed 22 studies on entertainmenteducation. They found that entertainment-education narratives had a small but significant effect on persuasion. Shen et al. (2015) assessed 25 studies comparing narrative to non-narrative messages. They found a small but significant effect of narrative, and identified the type of advocated behavior as a moderator. Narratives had effects for prevention and detection behaviors, but not for cessation behaviors (e.g., quitting smoking). We propose that, in addition to the type of behavior, characteristics of the narrative itself can also be factors responsible for variation in research results, and such knowledge on features of effective narratives should enable us to offer guidance for message design and production in health interventions and campaigns. Zebregs et al. (2015) included 15 studies that tested persuasive effects of narrative versus statistical texts. www.rcommunicationr.org of a text, or whether the presented information is predominantly positive or negative, can differ in narratives as well as in other text types like informational or argumentative texts (Updegraff & Rothman, 2013).

The present review will explore the characteristics of narrative stimuli in existing health-related narrative persuasion research as potential explanatory factors of their effectiveness. In this context, effectiveness refers to changes in story-consistent beliefs, attitudes, intentions, and behavior that are directed at the physical and mental health of a person. Of course, narrative characteristics are not the only factors that play a role in the effectiveness of a story. This process is also inf luenced by characteristics of the recipient and the situation in which the recipient is exposed to the narrative (Bilandzic & Busselle, 2013;Green & Brock, 2002). Research has shown that recipient factors can increase engagement and effectiveness, like transportability or the propensity to become engaged in narratives (Dal Cin, Zanna, & Fong, 2004), prior knowledge (Green, 2004), and need for affect (Appel & Richter, 2010). In addition, factors in the situation can distract the recipient and decrease engagement, like carrying out an added secondary task (De Graaf, Hoeken, Sanders, & Beentjes, 2009;Green & Brock, 2000) or being exposed to noise in the environment (Zwarun & Hall, 2012). Most likely, the full process of persuasion is determined by a joint function of narrative, recipient and situational factors. However, we isolate the narrative factor in this equation to achieve optimal clarity. In this way, we attempt to identify promising characteristics that seem to make narratives more effective in a health context.


## Method


## Search Strategy

We systematically searched for studies that tested the persuasive effects of narratives. The databases Communication and Mass Media Complete, PsycINFO, and MEDLINE were consulted. We used key terms related to the independent variable of narrative and synonyms such as story, testimonial, exemplar, and anecdot*. These were paired with search terms related to the dependent variable persuasion such as persuas*, belief, attitude, and example, a narrative can be told from different perspectives (Bal, 1997). In prior research, both first-person narratives, in which someone tells what happened to him-or herself (e.g., De Wit et al., 2008;Falzon et al., 2015), and third-person stories, in which a narrator tells about events that happened to someone else (e.g., Gray & Harrington, 2011), have been used. Since messages that differ on these sorts of characteristics still present specific cases of what happened to characters, they all fall under the definition of narrative. However, they exhibit such variety that their persuasive impact may depend on their specific characteristics. Narrative characteristics can vary along different dimensions. A fundamental distinction lies in the content and form of the narrative (see Bal, 1997;Rimmon-Kenan, 2002). Main elements of the content are the characters, events, and setting that are presented in the story. For instance, characters can be more or less similar to the target recipients and events can differ in their valence (Shaffer & Zikmund-Fisher, 2013). The form refers to the way the content is presented in the narrative. For instance, the view the reader is given on the story content can vary between different perspectives; and the events can either be presented chronologically or non-chronologically (Brewer & Liechtenstein, 1982). An additional dimension relevant to health-related narrative persuasion research is the context of the presentation of the narrative. For instance, the context of a narrative can consist of an entertainment format. In such a context, the reader is generally unaware that the narrative has a persuasive intention (Slater & Rouner, 2002). The context of a narrative can also consist of an advertisement or a health education brochure (e.g., Chang, 2008;Dillard et al., 2010), in which the persuasive intent is more explicit. These dimensions of narrative content, form and context are presented in Table 1 together with examples of characteristics. These dimensions will guide the review of narrative characteristics carried out in this paper.

As Table 1 shows, some of the characteristics are specific to narrative in that they are irrelevant to other text types. These characteristics are tied to the definition of narrative, with its characters, events and setting. Perspective for instance refers to the point of view from which the narrative events are presented (Bal, 1997 (Strasburger, Wilson, & Jordan, 2014). Therefore, narrative effects on children may be different and should be studied separately.

Applying the selection criteria to the papers found in the database search resulted in a total of 141 papers that reported 153 (quasi-)experimental studies in which participants were exposed to a narrative and health-related effects were measured (see references marked with * in reference list). When multiple articles reported on the same data, the article that reported the most relevant information was retained. When the same data were presented in both published (peer-reviewed journal articles) and unpublished reports (e.g., conference papers and dissertations), we included the published article. This selection covered a wide range of narratives from professionally produced audiovisual entertainment-education programs (e.g., Asbeek Brusse, Smit, & Neijens, 2010) to a few lines of anecdotal evidence embedded in a print advertisement (e.g., Cox & Cox, 2001). In addition, a variety of health topics and procedures were included, from mental health (e.g., Chang, 2008) to osteoporosis (e.g., Volkman & Parrott, 2012), and from inf luenza vaccination (e.g., Prati, Pietrantoni, & Zani, 2012) to HIV/Aids prevention (e.g., Igartua, Cheng, & Lopes, 2003). Finally, many different target groups were studied. Both student samples with a relatively high level of education (e.g., Banerjee & Greene, 2012a) and specific groups with a relatively low level of education (e.g., McQueen, Kreuter, Kalesan, & Alcaraz, 2011) were targeted with the narratives. In addition, both people who were already diagnosed with a certain disease (e.g., Falzon et al., 2015) and people who were not (yet) ill (e.g., Gray & Harrington, 2011) were studied.

The selected studies had one of two different designs.

Either the study compared a narrative condition to a control condition, such as a non-narrative message (e.g., In addition, prior review articles (e.g., Tukachinsky & Tokunaga, 2013;Van Laer et al., 2014) and central empirical articles were consulted for relevant references (e.g., Moyer-Gusé & Nabi, 2010;Murphy, Frank, Chatterjee, & Baezconde-Garbanati, 2013). Finally, we searched for articles that included references to central theoretical and empirical articles (e.g., Braverman, 2008;Green, 2006).


## Moyer


## Selection Criteria

From the search results, we selected studies for inclusion in the systematic review on the basis of several criteria. First, the study had to include participants who were exposed to a narrative. This criterion means that at least a part of the participants had to read, view or listen to a representation of events happening to specific character(s), thus including textual, as well as audio or audiovisual narratives. However, we excluded studies on interactive narratives (e.g., Downs, Murray, de Bruin, Penrose, Palmgren, & Fischoff, 2004), because in these studies the narrative elements presented to the participants were not stable within conditions. Second, the study had to measure persuasive effects of being exposed to the narrative. Persuasive effects could be effects on beliefs, attitudes, intentions or actual behaviors. Beliefs included different perceptions that persons can have about the real world, such as risk perceptions, beliefs in benefits of the health behavior, or self-efficacy. Third, the study had to address a health topic. Health was defined broadly, as any topic relating to the physical and psychological wellbeing of a person. Included topics could also concern the health of another person as the recipient, such as organ donation, or decisions for others (e.g., whether to vaccinate a child). Fourth, the study had to have a (quasi-) experimental design. Thus, the study exposed different groups of participants to different conditions, so that conclusions could be drawn about effects. Fifth, the study had to be published since the year 2000. This criterion was based on the publication of the founding article that coined the term narrative persuasion, by Green and Brock (2000). This article provided the impetus for the research field of this review. Finally, the study had to use either college-aged participants or older. Studies with children of high-school age or younger were excluded because they are still dewww.rcommunicationr.org more often add to the persuasiveness of narratives and which characteristics do not, and we will identify gaps in the literature of which characteristics have not been researched enough to draw clear conclusions.

To characterize the narratives used in the studies, we will discuss the characteristics they show based on the dimensions outlined in Table 1. We will provide an overview of the narrative characteristics in the studies and of the effects that were found on health-related beliefs, attitudes, intentions, and actual behavior. In this way, we aim to characterize the narratives in health-related narrative persuasion research and attempt to find patterns in the results of these studies. included multiple control conditions (e.g., a statistical message and a no message control), the control condition in which the least information was provided to participants was selected (e.g., no message, or a health warning without evidence), if sufficient information on this condition was provided in the report. The table shows that these studies employed a wide range of narratives, with print, audio and audiovisual narratives being represented. In the print narratives, there was generally one clear protagonist who carried out health-related actions and/or experienced health-related consequences. In the audiovisual narratives, it occurred more often that multiple characters were involved in the health-related sequence of events (e.g., discussing screening or urging others to get screened, . In some studies, it also occurred that participants were exposed to multiple (print or audiovisual) narratives with different protagonists (e.g., sions can be drawn about the effectiveness of the characteristic that the study manipulated. We will review both types of studies and compare results across research designs.


## Results


## Comparing Narratives to Control Conditions


## Review Strategy

To gain insight into the characteristics of the narrative stimuli, we reviewed the selected reports for inclusion of the materials that were used. Of 29 studies, the materials were available either in the report or in a digital appendix.

In addition, materials of 23 studies could be found in other sources, like a dissertation that reported the same experiment, or the episodes of entertainment programs that were used. Of 63 studies, we located authors and contacted them to request the materials that they had used. We obtained narrative materials of 36 studies in this way. In sum, we collected 88 narratives. Some of these narratives were used in multiple studies. Thus, we could analyze the narrative materials of 91 studies (59.5% of the 153 included studies). The stimuli of the remaining 62 studies included in the review were not obtained, either because we were unable to locate the authors, or the authors did not respond or were unable to provide us with the narrative materials. For the review of the characteristics of the latter narratives, the descriptions and exemplary passages in the reports will be used.

First, we will review the studies that compared a narrative condition to a non-narrative condition (or no message control). We will analyze the characteristics of the narratives used in the studies that found an effect and the ones that have not and try to discern a pattern. If certain types of narratives produce effects more often, this would be an indication that the characteristics of these narratives are promising for persuasion in a health context. Second, we will review the studies that compared different versions of a narrative. We will identify which characteristics have been manipulated and provide an overview of which version was more effective in the different studies. If a certain version is consistently more effective, this would be an indication that this type of narrative seems persuasive. Studies that combined manipulations of the narrative and comparisons of a narrative to a control condition will be included in the review of manipulations, because narrative characteristics varied within these studies. Finally, we will draw conclusions about which characteristics 2016, 4, 88-131 tive was less clear-cut. Audiovisual narratives often featured multiple characters and regular cuts in which the camera angle changes from one character to the other.

Almost all audiovisual narratives employed in these studies contained multiple characters, whether they found effects on beliefs and attitudes or not. Regarding the way a message was embedded in the narrative, almost all narratives integrated the message within the causal structure of the sequence of events, regardless of effects. A few narratives also included the message in dialogue between characters (e.g., . These characteristics did not show enough variation to allow for inferences about a pattern with regard to their effectiveness.

Regarding the context, the narratives that produced effects on beliefs and attitudes, showed substantial differences. Some were embedded in a public service announcement, which clearly had persuasive intent (e.g., Limon & Kazoleas, 2004), whereas others were presented in an isolated way, which made persuasive intent less clear (e.g., Greene & Brinn, 2003). The finding that narratives in contexts with as well as without explicit persuasive intent produced effects, suggests that it does not matter whether the context indicates clear persuasive intent for impact on beliefs and attitudes.


## Intention.

Approximately half of the studies that compared narrative to control conditions measured intentions. Several of these studies found effects of the narrative on at least one story-related intention. With regard to the content, the narratives that produced effects on intention differed in the events they present. In half of these narratives, the protagonist showed healthy behavior like exercising (Falzon et al., 2015) and in the other half, the protagonist showed unhealthy behavior like tanning (Greene & Brinn, 2003). However, when this was compared to the studies that did not find an effect on intention, only one of the narrative stimuli included a protagonist that showed healthy behavior. The other studies that did not find an effect on intention used narratives that presented unhealthy behavior. These results suggest that even though the majority of studies used narratives in which unhealthy behavior was shown (with negative consequences), the few studies in which the narratives showed healthy behavior more often found an effect on intention. Even though Jung Oh & LaRose, 2015; Shaffer, Templin, & Hulsey, 2013c). In addition, the narratives were presented in several different contexts, from advertisements in which the persuasive intent is clear to isolated texts with implicit persuasive intent. Several of the narratives in these studies produced persuasive effects on story-consistent beliefs and attitudes, intentions and/or actual behavior compared to the control group. We will discuss effects on each of these persuasive outcomes and the content, form, and context characteristics of the narratives that were used.


## Beliefs and attitudes.

Approximately half of the studies that measured healthrelated beliefs or attitudes found an effect of the narrative on story-consistent beliefs or attitudes. Regarding the content that was presented, the narrative stimuli in these studies differed in several respects. Some of the narratives showed the character's compliance with a recommended healthy behavior, like a protagonist who decided to get screened (Dillard et al., 2010), whereas other narratives showed noncompliance with a recommendation and hence negative consequences, like a protagonist who did not get Regarding the form of the narratives, equal numbers of print and audiovisual narratives were used in the studies that found effects on beliefs or attitudes and the studies that did not find effects, suggesting that the presentation medium of the narrative is not related to persuasion.

However, within the print narratives that produced effects on beliefs and attitudes, all were in the first-person perspective. Within the print narratives that did not find effects on beliefs and attitudes, about half used a firstperson perspective, whereas the other half used a thirdperson perspective. Thus, although a first-person perspective does not guarantee persuasive impact, it does seem to increase the chance of effects on predictors of behavior.

In narratives presented through other media, perspecwww.rcommunicationr.org mation instruction, which clearly indicated that the narrative was intended to help you form a healthy intention, whereas Lemal and Van den Bulck (2010) presented the narrative without an overtly persuasive context. These results again indicate that both overtly persuasive and covertly persuasive narratives can have persuasive effects.

Final observations on comparing narratives to control conditions.

Only two of the studies found a negative effect of narratives in the sense that the control messages appeared more persuasive than the narrative messages. Nyhan et al. (2014) showed that a narrative text about a young child who became very ill with a measles infection (that he contracted because he was not vaccinated) increased beliefs in the side-effects of the measles vaccination. It is possible that recipients of this narrative misinterpreted the consequences presented in the narratives as resulting from the vaccination.  found that cigarette label warnings in narrative form resulted in lower perceived effectiveness than cigarette label warnings in didactic form. However, this was also the only study that used a measure of perceived effectiveness instead of actual beliefs or attitudes. As single studies cannot give indications of systematic variation on their own, this finding cannot be used to infer a pattern.

With regard to the underlying process of persuasion, about a quarter of the studies included measures related to engagement with the narrative, such as transportation or identification. Most of these studies found an effect of the narrative on at least one of the measures. These studies that found effects on engagement-related variables included different content, form and contexts. Only two studies did not find differences between the narrative and the control condition, which also differed on most of the dimensions. Therefore, there was not enough systematic variation to identify a pattern in these results.

In sum, narratives can produce effects on several persuasive outcomes. The characteristics that seem promising for health-related persuasive effects are a first-person perspective and the presentation of healthy behavior. In addition, an overtly persuasive context does not seem to inhibit persuasive potential. Other characteristics, such as the matching of characters to the target group and the presentation medium of the narrative, appear to be unre-negative stories can also have effects on intention, positive stories showing healthy behavior and desirable consequences seem to be associated with effects more often.

Other characteristics varied within the narratives that produced effects as well as within the narratives that did not produce effects on intention. Many studies used narratives with student protagonists when participants were students, but some studies did not (Asbeek-Brusse, et al., 2010;. Medium as well as perspective also varied, regardless of whether effects on intention were found. The context was about equally divided between overtly indicating persuasive intent (e.g., being read from a script by a health educator in Larkey & Gonzales, 2007) and not clearly indicating persuasive intent.

Similar to the results for beliefs and attitudes, this indicates that context does not play a role in effects of the narrative.


## Behavior.

Only five studies measured actual behavior. Two of these studies found persuasive effects of the narrative With regard to the content that was presented, the narrative materials that were used in these studies differed in several respects. Lemal and van den Bulck (2010) exposed participants to one narrative with a single protagonist, whereas Jung Oh and LaRose (2015)  With regard to the form of the narratives, the studies that found effects on behavior both used print narratives in the first-person perspective, whereas two of the studies that did not find effects on behavior, used narratives in the third-person perspective (Greene & Brinn, 2003;Mazor, Baril, Dugan, Spencer, Burgwinkle, & Gurwitz, 2007). This result is in line with the results for beliefs and attitudes, suggesting that a first-person perspective increases the chance that persuasive effects are found. With regard to the context of the narratives, the studies that found effects differed. Jung Oh and LaRose (2015)  of the protagonist either as a college student who has typical college experiences or as an orphan who was raised by his older brother. This type of manipulation varied more than only character similarity, like the orphan character being more of an 'underdog', which could evoke more empathy. These additional differences may explain the findings. In sum, similarity of a character to recipients does not seem to be a very promising characteristic to increase persuasiveness of narratives. Only a character with a similar living location was found to lead to persuasive effects. This type of similarity is related to the setting of a story, suggesting that perhaps familiarity of the setting is a more promising characteristic to make a narrative more persuasive than similarity of the characters.


## Framing.

Another content characteristic that was tested in several studies combined variations of the character and the sequence of events. A character was either shown carrying out the healthy behavior that was promoted by the narrative, or a character was shown carrying out the unhealthy behavior that was discouraged, thus constituting either a positive or a negative role model (Bandura, 2001). Showing the recommended or discouraged behavior was often combined with the outcomes of these actions in that positive role models experienced positive consequences of their healthy behavior, whereas negative role models experienced negative consequences of their unhealthy behavior. These variations were contrasted in studies that used a manipulation of gain vs. loss framing.

This type of manipulation has been used extensively in studies about non-narrative health messages, in which a gain frame focuses on the benefits of engaging in a recommended behavior, whereas a loss frame focuses on the disadvantages of not engaging in this behavior (Updegraff & Rothman, 2013). Several studies have now also investigated gain and loss frames in narratives (see Table 4).

The results of the studies that compared a narrative that showed healthy behavior to a narrative that showed unhealthy behavior, were mixed. On one hand, Cox and Cox (2001) compared a narrative in which the protagonist lated to persuasive impact. However, the results also uncovered a wide variety of effects found using different narrative materials, making it hard to come to conclusions only on the basis of the analysis of studies comparing narrative to control groups. Another factor that may have inf luenced these results is the type of control group that was used. Some studies included a no message control group, in which participants were not exposed to any message, whereas other studies exposed participants in the control group to a non-narrative message. However, the non-narrative message may have had a persuasive effect as well (compared to no message), thus obscuring effects of the narrative and making it harder to identify which narrative characteristics are responsible for effects.

Therefore, this analysis is complemented by a review of studies that manipulated narrative characteristics to provide more evidence for promising narrative characteristics.


## Comparing Different Versions of Narratives: Content

Similarity.

Several studies compared versions of a narrative that differed on content characteristics like characters, events and setting. With regard to the characters, some studies tested the effects of similarity between character and recipient (see Table 3). Only two of the studies reported a higher persuasiveness for the condition with a similar participant (De Graaf, 2014;Knobloch, Zillmann, Gibson, & Karrh, 2002). Four studies found no differences between the similar and dissimilar conditions. With respect to the type of similarity that was manipulated, the studies that found effects seem to have focused more on the surroundings of the characters. De Graaf (2014) manipulated whether participants were similar in their living situation (i.e. whether they lived in student housing or not), and Knobloch et al. (2002) manipulated whether the location that characters lived in was similar to participants' living location. This tentatively suggests that similarity of the place where characters live may be most effective in increasing persuasion, whereas other aspects, such as similarity in pre-existing health beliefs between characters and recipients (Dillard & Main, 2013), seem less effective.

In contrast, two studies reported higher persuasiveness  Keer et al. (2013) found that including affective outcomes in a narrative increased persuasiveness compared to including instrumental outcomes in the narrative. On the other hand, the strategy of describing actual outcomes versus imagined outcomes did not affect narrative engagement or persuasive effects. Thus, it seems that descriptions of emotional experiences may be a promising characteristic to increase persuasiveness, whereas it matters less whether outcomes are described as actual or imagined.


## Final observations on content.

A final content characteristic that was manipulated in multiple studies was the level of responsibility the character had for their own health. The character could either be presented as being highly responsible for their own health status by deliberate actions, or as having low responsibility by having been inf luenced by factors out of their control, like government policies (see Table 6).

Some studies found that the cause presented in the story had an effect on the belief about the cause of the health issue in general. For instance, Boiarsky, Rouner, and Long (2013) found that a protagonist who took personal responsibility for her illness led to higher individual cause beliefs for the illness in general. Niederdeppe, Kim, Lundell, Fazili, and Frazier (2012) showed that a narrative with a protagonist who held the community responsible for her health produced higher societal cause beliefs. However, several other studies found no effects on causal beliefs of a responsibility manipulation, or further attitudes and intentions. Only Jansen, Croonen, and de Stadler (2005) found an effect of an exemplar who had low responsibility for contracting HIV on the attitude towards support- Emotional outcomes.

With regard to the sequence of events, the type of outcomes that were presented in the narrative could also play a role in narrative persuasion. Different studies tested the effects of different outcomes, but they had in common that they were related to the level of emotion that was expressed by the narrative. For instance, two studies compared actual outcomes to imagined outcomes (Appel & Richter, 2010;So & Nabi, 2013), with actual outcomes assumed to be more emotional than imagined outcomes. Therefore, they were termed high vs. low emotional (see Table 5). Results showed that in three studies, high emotional stories were more effective. The narrative materials in these studies expressed emotions by describing emotional outcomes of health behaviors by characters.

2016, 4, 88-131 increased persuasiveness of a first-person narrative compared to a third-person version (Nan, Dahlstrom, Richards, & Rangarajan, 2015) and another of a second-person narrative compared to a third-person version (Houska, 2010). These results suggest that a third-person perspective has a lower chance to produce effects. However, there were no differences between the first-and third-person perspectives in another study (Meadows III, 2012), indicating that a first-person perspective does not always increase persuasive effects. This conclusion is in line with findings on the comparison between narrative to control conditions, in which first-person narratives were associated with significant effects more often, even though it did not guarantee effectiveness.

Message embedding. In addition, several studies addressed the effect of different distributions of multiple narratives. For instance, Ubel, Jepson, and Baron (2001) varied the number of testimonials from patients who had benefitted from a treatment versus those who had not. However, since this is not a characteristic of a narrative but of a combination of narratives, these manipulations are beyond the scope of this review. We will next turn to the effects of form characteristics of narratives.


## Comparing Different Versions of Narratives: Form

Medium.

An important aspect of the form of a narrative is the medium through which it is presented. Some studies compared different media within an experiment (see Table 7). Braverman (2008)  Nevarez, 2013). These results indicate that medium is not likely to be a narrative characteristic that consistently inf luences persuasive effects.


## Perspective.

A form characteristic that could be important for narrative persuasion by print narratives is the perspective through which the narrative is told. Only four studies compared narratives in different perspectives in a healthrelated context (see Table 8). One of the studies found www.rcommunicationr.org in which information was given on how to perform the self-exam that was promoted by the narrative resulted in higher intentions to perform this exam (Morman, 2000).

However, two other studies did not find effects of efficacy information (Kim, Bigman, Leader, Lerman, & Cappella, 2012;Knobloch-Westerwick & Sarge, 2015).

Therefore, an efficacy message does not seem to be a promising way to increase persuasiveness of the narrative.

Finally, a few studies manipulated other factors in the context of a health-related narrative. For instance, some studies tested the effect of labeling the story as fictional or factual, without finding indications of persuasive effects (Caputo & Rouner, 2011;Green & Donahue, 2011).

Other studies compared instructions that either encouraged participants to become engaged in the story or not, and found inconsistent effects of these manipulations (Batson, Chang, Orr, & Rowland, 2002;Carpenter, 2013).

In sum, there are no systematic indications of factors in the narrative context that are associated with persuasiveness.


## Conclusion and Discussion

This paper set out to review studies on health-related narrative persuasion research with a focus on the narrative stimuli to provide an overview of the different characteristics of narratives in health effects research and of the persuasive effects that were found. We looked at narrative characteristics on three levels: the content, the form and the context of the narrative. With regard to the content, the analysis of studies comparing narrative to non-narrative materials suggested that narratives that presented the healthy behavior were more often associated with effects on the intention to carry out the healthy behavior than narratives that showed the unhealthy behavior. The studies that compared narratives with a gainframe in which the healthy behavior is presented to narratives with a loss-frame in which the unhealthy behavior is presented, also suggested that an effect on intention occurred more often for the gain frame. However, it is important to note that this pattern of results was not found for other persuasive outcomes, like beliefs and attitudes.

Therefore, the suggestion that presenting the healthy behavior seems to be a promising characteristic is only given for effects on intention.

indications on how a message should be embedded in a narrative.


## Final observations on form.

Another form characteristic that was manipulated in a few health-related narrative persuasion studies is the use of humor. The use of humor in a narrative can be distinguished from emotional outcomes because the outcomes are part of the narrative world in that they are emotional for characters, whereas humor is mainly apparent to the recipient. Weber, Martin, and Corrigan 


## Comparing Different Versions of Narratives: Context

No studies consistently varied the format in which a narrative was presented between for instance an advertising context with explicit persuasive intent and an entertainment context with implicit persuasive intent. The only characteristic of the context that has been manipulated in multiple studies is the presence of an efficacy message (see Table 9). One study found that an efficacy message 2016, 4, 88-131 suasive intent (Dal Cin et al., 2004;Green & Brock, 2002), such covertness of persuasive intent does not seem to be necessary in studies on narrative health communication effects. There were also several narratives in an entertainment context that produced effects, showing that in the absence of clear persuasive intent, narratives can also be persuasive. However, when the context is overtly persuasive, narratives can also produce effects.

It is important to note that the review shows large variation in the results of health-related narrative persuasion studies. Therefore, the suggestions about promising narrative characteristics are relative rather than absolute.

The characteristics of narratives, like first-person perspective and showing the healthy behavior, seem to be associated with effects more often, but they do not guarantee effectiveness. That is why this review can best be seen as a starting point for further research on this topic. More research is necessary to identify when certain characteristics are effective (e.g., in relation to the target group or the health topic of the narrative). In other words, future research should identify moderators of effects of characteristics. For instance, in research on gain and loss frames in non-narrative health messages, it has been suggested that for recipients who perceive a health behavior as risky, loss frames are more effective, whereas for recipients who perceive a health behavior as less risky, gain frames are more effective (Updegraff & Rothman, 2013). It is warranted to study this in a narrative context as well, by varying the riskiness of the promoted behavior (e.g., HIV testing as risky for people who have had unprotected sex vs. less risky for people who have not) and testing whether for people who perceive the behavior as risky, presenting the unhealthy behavior with negative consequences is more effective, and for the people who perceive the behavior as less risky, presenting the healthy behavior with positive consequences is more effective. Finally, with regard to the context, a notable pattern occurred. About half of the studies that found effects of a narrative compared to a non-narrative, used narratives in a clearly persuasive context like persuasive advertising or a session with a health educator. It is likely that recipients were aware of the persuasive intent of narratives in these contexts. Thus, even though it is sometimes assumed that narratives persuade because they mask perwww.rcommunicationr.org spective, the results indicate that a third-person perspective seems less likely to produce effects than both a first and a second-person perspective. It would also be interesting to compare a first-person to a second-person perspective to test which of these forms is more promising. In The review that has been carried out in this study has several limitations. First, several factors that may have played a role were not analyzed. For instance, we did not address whether a study was published in a peer-reviewed journal or unpublished and found in outlets like a dissertation or conference paper. We made this choice to deal with the file drawer problem as well as we could, which means that studies that did not find an effect are less likely to be published. By including unpublished studies, we avoid drawing too positive conclusions (i.e., publication bias), but rather give a nuanced picture of effects. In addition, factors like whether the design of the study was experimental or quasi-experimental, or whether the measures were validated were not included. Even though these factors may be an indication of quality, they also limit the evidence base, which is why we chose to provide an overview of a wide range of studies. Another limitation is that moderated effects were not included in the review.

Several studies found effects of a narrative for a particular group of participants, but not for another group. However, the moderators that were tested differed too much to provide a clarifying overview. This observation is in Therefore, future research should test interactions between narrative characteristics and other factors, like the age of the participants to gain further insight into narrative ef-


## fects.

A clear limitation is the fact that effect sizes were not sion have compared different orders of events (chronological vs. non-chronological), even though this can inf luence the emotions readers feel (Brewer & Liechtenstein, 1982) and thus may be hypothesized to produce effects.

The lack of research on the effects of chronological vs. non-chronological presentation is a research gap that presents an interesting avenue for further research. In addition, only some studies have been conducted that address the way a health message is embedded in a narrative. In research on non-health-related narrative persuasion, it has been shown that it is important whether the persuasive message is integrated in the causal structure of the narrative or not (Dahlstrom, 2010;, showing that it is relevant to study this for health narratives as well. With regard to the context, a presentation format with different levels of persuasive intent has not been addressed in health-related narrative persuasion studies.

It is important to directly compare different contexts, for instance between a narrative in an advertising context and an entertainment context, so that it can be tested whether a perception of persuasive intent has effects on engagement, resistance, and ultimately persuasive effects.

The results regarding the frame of the narrative also provide interesting avenues for further research. In analyzing the narrative materials used, it became apparent that some of the versions did not present a pure gain or loss frame, but rather showed a transition of the character from unhealthy to healthy behavior. Such a combination of frames may be especially beneficial (see Bandura, 2001).      Intention to act on advice:


## Not reported

Note: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given 


## Video = Print

Note: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.

www.rcommunicationr.org Third: Quoted students in news article were referred to with he/she (without quotation marks)

Risk perception:


## First > Third

Vaccination intention:


## Not reported

Note: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.


number of dimensions. For instance, on one hand, Dillard et al. (2010) used a print narrative about a person who decides to have a colonoscopy after having thought about the pros and cons. On the other hand, Dunlop et al. (2010) used a narrative of video stills with a voice-over about a woman who experiences negative consequences of smoking. These narratives differ in the type of behavior that they show (the promoted, healthy behavior vs. the discouraged, unhealthy behavior) and the presentation medium of the narrative (print vs. audio-visual), among other Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects 91 2016, 4, 88-131


-Gusé & Nabi, 2010) or a no message condition (e.g., Lapinski & Nwulu, 2008), or the study compared different versions of a narrative, in which a characteristic of the narrative or its context was manipulated (e.g., Hoeken & Sinkeldam, 2014). Some studies combined both possibilities (e.g., Keer, Van den Putte, De Wit, & Neijens, 2013). From the comparison of a narrative condition to a control condition, conclusions can be drawn about the effectiveness of the narrative used in the study. From the comparison of different versions of a narrative, conclu-intention. This search resulted in a list of possibly relevant journal publications, conference papers and dissertations.


vaccinated and thus contracted hepatitis B (De Wit, Das, & Vet, 2008). In addition, some of the characters had a background similar to the target group, resulting in a familiar setting (Hernandez & Organista, 2013), whereas other characters were not matched to the recipients (Bahk, 2001). These content characteristics also varied in the studies that did not find effects on story-consistent beliefs and attitudes, giving no clear indication of promising narrative characteristics.

## (
Jung Oh & LaRose, 2015; Lemal & Van den Bulck, 2010).


used four testimonials of different characters. In addition, the protagonist in the narrative used by Lemal and Van den Bulck showed unhealthy behavior with negative consequences, being diagnosed with skin cancer, whereas the characters in the stories of Jung Oh and LaRose showed healthy behavior with positive consequences, snacking fresh and nutritious food.


ing people with HIV. This finding could be related to the fact that Jansen et al.'s narrative was focused on the unhealthy behavior of contracting HIV, whereas for instance Niederdeppe, Shapiro, Kim, Bartolo, and Porticella (2014)'s narrative was focused on the healthy behavior of losing weight. In sum, the narrative characteristic of the level of character responsibility does not seem to have a consistent association to persuasiveness. Several other studies manipulated characteristics of the content, but these differed too much to review them systematically and find patterns in results. For instance, Chung and Slater (2013) varied whether a character was lived to see her grandchild grow up because she had an annual mammogram, to a narrative in which the protagonist may die because she did not have an annual mammogram. They found that the loss frame led to more positive attitudes towards the recommended behavior (mammography) than the gain frame. On the other hand, Gray and Harrington (2011) compared a story in which exercising regularly led to positive consequences, to a story in which not exercising regularly led to negative consequences. Their results showed that the gain-framed narrative produced a more positive intention to exercise.Even studies with similar topics showed opposite results, asWirtz and Kulpavaropas (2014) also used narratives to promote physical activity, but found that the loss frame was more persuasive than the gain frame, in contrast to the results ofGray and Harrington (2011) who addressed the similar topic of exercising.The lack of evidence for an advantage of either the gain or loss framed narratives contrasts to the results of the studies that compared narrative to control conditions, which suggested that showing the healthy behavior had a higher chance to produce effects. However, this result was specifically found for effects on intention. In the studies comparing gain and loss frames, intentions also seem to be inf luenced by gain frames more often. Perhaps showing the healthy behavior is a promising characteristic to increase intentions towards the behavior, but not to increase effectiveness on other outcome measures, such as beliefs and attitudes.


The way a message was embedded in a narrative was only investigated in three studies. Quintero Johnson,Harrison, and Quick (2013) used stories about avian f lu and chlamydia in which there either was a high degree of integration between the narrative and the educational content or in which there was a high degree of distance between the narrative and educational content. In the high integration conditions, the story was about a character that was afraid to be infected and went to the doctor to get checked for the disease, whereas in the low integration conditions, the story was about a character that was running late for work while hearing information about the disease. Results showed that participants in the high integration conditions recalled more health information from the story than participants in the low integration conditions. However, further persuasive outcomes were not reported.Cohen (2012) varied message implication by either adding a conclusion scene in which four characters persuaded another character to become an organ donor or not to an episode of a crime drama in which organ donation was advocated by showing the black market for organs that was fueled by the shortage of organ donors. There were no direct effects of the conclusion scene on beliefs or intentions towards organ donation. However, Moyer-Gusé, Jain, and Chung (2012) used a similar manipulation of adding an explicit persuasive appeal by an actor to the end of an episode discouraging drinking and driving and found an effect on the attitude towards this behavior. Thus, there are no consistent a member of a highly stigmatized group or not, whereas Hoeken and Sinkeldam (2014, Study 1) manipulated the likability of a character. Even though both are characteristics of the narrative characters, they cannot be meaningfully compared (see the references for a full list of the reports that were included in the review, marked with *).


compared printed narrative texts to audio versions of the same texts in three studies and found no differences between these media. Other studies found no differences between video and printed versions of narratives either on persuasive outcomes or on engagement variables. These studies included both videos that presented the same text as the printed version spoken by actors (e.g.,Winterbottom, Bekker, Conner, & Mooney, 2012) and videos that used drama formats in which the narrative events were acted out (e.g., Luna

## ( 2006 )
2006compared a public service announcement (PSA) about organ donation that used humor to advocate signing of an organ donor card to a PSA that used a sad story to convey the same message. They found that the humorous PSA was more effective at getting recipients to sign an organ donor card than the sad PSA. However, Moyer-Gusé, Mahood, and Brookes(2011)tested the effect of a situation comedy about an unplanned pregnancy compared to the same episode with the pregnancy-related humor edited out. Results showed that intentions to engage in unprotected sex were higher when the original episode with pregnancy-related humor was viewed. Their results indicate that humor resulted in boomerang effects, since the health message implied by an unplanned pregnancy is to use protection. Thus, humor can be a risky narrative characteristic to use in conveying a health message.Other form characteristics like the presence of music(Costabile & Terman, 2013) or of freedom threatening language(Quick, Scott & Ledbetter, 2011) were only addressed in single studies, making it impossible to review the results systematically. The final characteristic we focus on is the context in which the narrative is presented.


In addition, the results of this review show several gaps in the literature regarding health effects of narratives that should be filled with further research. With regard to the content, very few studies have investigated characteristics related to the setting of the narrative. Because the studies that found an effect of similarity of the protagonist to the recipient seemed to be related to familiarity of the setting of the narrative, this is an important characteristic to conduct further research on. With regard to the form, no studies on health-related narrative persua-Content characteristics related to the characters, such as the number of characters and the similarity of characters to the target group, were not found to have consistent effects. The only studies that showed effects of similarity addressed similarity in the surroundings of the characters, suggesting that familiarity of the setting may be more promising than other types of similarity. However, this was based on only two studies, which makes it necessary to explore this possibility more fully in future research. Another content characteristic that seemed promising in narrative persuasion is the expression of emotions in the narrative, by emotional adjectives and descriptions. This type of content increased persuasive effects in several studies. For a final content characteristic that was manipulated in several studies, the level of responsibility of the character, the results were too inconsistent to draw clear conclusions. With regard to the form of the narrative, a first-person perspective came across as a promising characteristic in the studies comparing narratives to non-narratives. All print narratives that produced effects on story-consistent beliefs and attitudes used a first-person perspective. Even though not all studies that compared different perspectives found an advantage of the first-person perspective, none of these studies showed an advantage of the thirdperson perspective. Thus, a first-person perspective seems to be a promising characteristic of print narratives with regard to persuasiveness. The form characteristic of medium did not show promise as an inf luential factor in whether narratives have persuasive effects or not. There were consistently no differences between narratives presented through different media, regardless of whether audiovisual narratives featured a character talking about their experiences or showed characters carrying out actions and experiencing consequences. For other form characteristics like the integration of the health message in the narrative and the use of humor, not enough evidence was yet available to identify a pattern.


addition, there is limited research on the role of perspective in narratives with multiple main characters. Prior research has shown that varying the perspective in a narrative in which there are two opposing main characters has an impact on narrative persuasion in the context of social issues (De Graaf, Hoeken, Sanders, & Beentjes, 2012).


line with the choice to not include recipient and situation factors as explanatory factors in narrative effects in this review. For instance, the exclusion of studies with children of primary or secondary school age limits our conclusions to the college-aged and older groups that we have included. On the other hand, research with college samples may have limited generalizability to adult samples as well.


To study this possibility, research should compare a pure gain frame only showing the healthy behavior and a pure loss frame only showing the unhealthy behavior to a transitional frame in which the character shows both types of behavior. In addition, analyzing the narratives used in the studies comparing narrative to control conditions showed that some narratives presented the healthy behavior without a focus on consequences. For instance,Dillard et al. (2010) used a testimonial about a person deciding to have a colonoscopy, but did not include information on the health outcome of whether colon cancer was detected early or not. Narratives that showed the unhealthy behavior did consistently focus on negative health outcomes of this behavior. These observed differences make it interesting to study whether showing the behavior or presenting consequences is more important for narrative persuasion. With regard to the form characteristic per-2016, 4, 88-131 that analyzed direct effects to ensure comparability between studies. Therefore, it would be good practice to report direct effects of manipulations in an experiment in addition to indirect effects.In conclusion, this review has shown a large amount of variation in the narratives that were used to convey a health message and the effects that were found in narrative persuasion research. Narratives as diverse as episodes of entertainment programs as well as print testimonials and stories told by a health educator in a face-to-face setting produced effects on beliefs, attitudes, intentions and even behavior of recipients. Within this diversity, certain patterns could be identified, suggesting that showing the healthy behavior and using a first-person perspective are promising narrative characteristics. In addition, the familiarity of the setting and the presentation format of the narrative are characteristics that should be investigated further. In this way, the diversity in characteristics and effects invites future research on health-related narrative persuasion. Hopefully, the present review supports a continued research effort on the role of narrative characteristics in health effects.statistically compared as in a meta-analysis. The aim of this review was to give a complete overview of different types of studies on health-related narrative persuasion.Studies that compared narratives to control conditions cannot be combined with studies that compared different versions of a narrative in one meta-analysis. In addition, a considerable amount of studies did not include enough information for effect size calculation, which would have severely limited the number of studies we could include in our review. However, now that promising narrative characteristics have been identified on the basis of a large base of studies, an interesting next step is to carry out a meta-analysis testing the effects of these narrative characteristics. Finally, a review largely depends on the studies it includes. Another limitation that we encountered was that a considerable amount of studies did not include the results relevant for this review. Quite some studies compared different versions of a narrative and measured persuasive outcomes, but did not include tests of the direct effects on these variables, because indirect effects were the focus of the report. The lack of information on direct effects limited the usefulness of the studies for the reviewReferencesReferences marked with * were included in the review.*Aldrich, R.S. (2009). Message strategies for suicide prevention. Unpublished dissertation, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY. *Andsager, J. L., Bemker, V., Choi, H. L., & Torwel, V. (2006). Perceived similarity of exemplar traits and behavior effects on message evaluation. Communication Research, 33(1), 3-18. doi: 10.1177/0093650205283099 *Appel, M., & Richter, T. (2010). Transportation and need for affect in narrative persuasion: A mediated moderation model. Media Psychology, 13(2), 101-135. doi: 10.1080/15213261003799847 *Asbeek Brusse, E., Smit, E. G., & Neijens, P. C. (2010, june). Understanding the process of narrative persuasion in entertainment-education. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Singapore. *Bagdasarov (2009). Developing and validating a measure of cognitive complexity: The role of cognitive complexity in processing of health messages. Unpublished dissertation, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ. *Bahk, C. M. (2001). Drench effects of media portrayal of fatal virus disease on health locus of control beliefs. Health Communication, 13(2), 187-204. doi: 10.1207/s15327027hc1302_4 www.rcommunicationr.org * Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Sarge, M. A. (2015). Impacts of exemplification and efficacy as characteristics of an online weight-loss message on selective exposure and subsequent weight-loss behavior. Communication Research, 42(4), 547-568. doi: 10.1177/0093650213478440 *Knobloch, S., Zillmann, D., Gibson, R., & Karrh, J. A. (2002). Effects of salient news items on information acquisition and issue perception. Zeitschrift für Medienpsychologie, 14(1), 14-22. doi: 10.1026//1617-6383.14.1.14 *Koordeman, R., Anschutz, D. J., van Baaren, R. B., & Engels, R. C. (2011). Effects of alcohol portrayals in movies on actual alcohol consumption: An observational experimental study. Addiction, 106(3), 547-554. doi: 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03224.x *Kreuter, M. W., Buskirk, T. D., Holmes, K., Clark, E. M., Robinson, L., Si, X., ... & Mathews, K. (2008). What makes cancer survivor stories work? An empirical study among African American women. Journal of Cancer Survivorship, 2(1), 33-44. Kreuter, M. W., Green, M. C., Cappella, J. N., Slater, M. D., Wise, M. E., Storey, D., ... & Woolley, S. (2007). Narrative communication in cancer prevention and control: A framework to guide research and application. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 33(3), 221-235. doi: 10.1007/BF02879904 *Lapinski, M. K., & Nwulu, P. (2008). Can a short film impact HIV-related risk and stigma perceptions? Results from an experiment in Abuja, Nigeria. Health Communication, 23, 403-412. doi: 10.1080/10410230802342093 *Larkey, L. K., & Gonzalez, J. (2007). Storytelling for promoting colorectal cancer prevention and early detection among Latinos. Patient Education and Counseling, 67, 272-278. doi:10.1016/j.pec.2007.04.003 *Larkey, L. K., Lopez, A. M., Minnal, A., & Gonzalez, J. (2009). Storytelling for promoting colorectal cancer screening among underserved Latina women: A randomized pilot study. Cancer Control, 16(1), 79-87. *Lee, M. J., & Bichard, S. L. (2006). Effective message design targeting college students for the prevention of bingedrinking: Basing design on rebellious risk-taking tendency. Health Communication, 20 (3), 299-308. doi: 10.1207/s15327027hc2003_9 *Lemal, M., & Van den Bulck, J. (2010). Testing the effectiveness of a skin cancer narrative in promoting positive health behavior: A pilot study. Preventive Medicine, 51(2), 178-181. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2010.04.019 *Limon, M. S., & Kazoleas, D. C. (2004). A comparison of exemplar and statistical evidence in reducing counterarguments and responses to a message. Communication Research Reports, 21(3), 291-298. doi: 10.1080/08824090409359991 *Lochbuehler, K., Kleinjan, M., & Engels, R. C. (2013). Does the exposure to smoking cues in movies affect adolescents' immediate smoking behavior? Addictive Behaviors, 38(5), 2203-2206. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2013.01.022 *Lochbuehler, K., Peters, M., Scholte, R. H., & Engels, R. C. (2010). Effects of smoking cues in movies on immediate smoking behavior. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 12(9), 913-918. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntq115 *Love, G. D., Mouttapa, M., & Tanjasiri, S. P. (2009). Everybody's talking: using entertainment-education video to reduce barriers to discussion of cervical cancer screening among Thai women. Health Education Research, 24(5), 829-838. doi: 10.1093/her/cyp019 *Love, G.D., & Tanjasiri, S.P. (2012). Using entertainment-education to promote cervical cancer screening in Thai women. Journal of Cancer Education, 27, 585-590. doi: 10.1007/s13187-012-0369-5 *Lu, A. S. (2013). An experimental test of the persuasive effect of source similarity in narrative and nonnarrative health blogs. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(7). doi: 10.2196/jmir.2386 *Luna Nevarez, C. (2013). Toward an understanding of multimodal narratives in marketing: A comparative analysis of videonarratives, graphic narratives and text-only narratives. Unpublished dissertation, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM. *Massi Lindsay, L. L., & Ah Yun, K. (2005). The relationship between narrative content variation, affective and cognitive reactions and a person's willingness to sign an organ donor card. Communication Research Reports, 22(4), 253-263. doi: 10.1080/00036810500317441 2016, 4, 88-131 Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects


). Other characteristics are non-specific to narratives and are present in other text types as well. For instance, the valence Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects93 

2016, 4, 88-131 

veloping their cognitive skills 

## Table 2
2describes studies that have compared a narrative to a non-narrative or no message control condition (and did not include an additional manipulation within the narrative). The table lists effects that were found in these studies on persuasion (beliefs, attitudes, intentions and behavior) and engagement variables (transportation, identification and related constructs). Only direct effects are included in the table. Moderated effects (by factors like participant group) are not reported. When the study


presented the materials after giving an implementation for-Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects 97 2016, 4, 88-131 for the condition with a dissimilar participant (Lee & Bichard, 2006; McKinley, 2010). Both these studies manipulated similarity by varying events that happened to the character. For instance, McKinley gave a description


De Graaf, Sanders & Hoeken 98 www.rcommunicationr.org For instance,

## Table 2 .
2Overview of studies that have compared a narrative to a control condition (without additional manipulations) by topic, sample, 
conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement. (back to text) 

Topic 
Sample 
Conditions 
Effects persuasion 
Effects engagement 

Asbeek Brusse, Smit, 

& Neijens, 2010 

Hearing damage 

by loud music 

179 undergraduate 

students in the Neth-

erlands 

Narrative: Internet soap in which protagonist 

has hearing damage from loud music 

Control: No message 

Attitude tow. protection: 

Narrative > Control 

Intention tow. protection: 

Narrative > Control 

Bagdasarov, 2009 
Alcohol use and 

lack of sleep 

562 undergraduate 

students in US 

Narrative: Texts in which protagonist gets 

injured from alcohol use or lack of sleep 

Control: Statistical text 

Attitude change: 

Narrative = Control 

Intention change: 

Narrative = Control 

Bahk, 2001 
Deadly virus 
132 undergraduate 

students in US 

Narrative: Edited version of film 'Outbreak' in 

which deadly virus spreads 

Control: No message 

Story-consistent beliefs: 

Narrative > Control 

Chang, 2008 
Depression 
264 undergraduate 

students in Taiwan 

Narrative: Print advertisement with a story 

about a day in the life of a student with 

depression 

Control: Print advertisement with arguments 

Willingness to seek help: 

Narrative > Control 

Immersion: 

Narrative > Control 

Sympathy : 

Narrative > Control 



## Table 1 .
1Levels of narrative characteristics with examples (back to text) Narrative: Video in which African American smokers tell about their experience with quitting Control: Video with non-narrative mini-lectures about non-tobacco-related health issues Narrative: Oral presentation of polio survivor talking about living with the disease Control: Didactic presentation about polio Story-consistent beliefs:Note: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.(Table 2. Back to text)Narrative-specific 
Non-specific 

Content 
Character similarity 

Familiarity of setting 

Valence 

Form 
Perspective 

Order of events 

Medium 

Context 
Presentation format 

Tables 


## Table 3 .
3Overview of studies that have compared a narrative with a similar character to a narrative with a dissimilar character by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text) Similar: protagonist is on the beach with friends and drinks alcoholDissimilar: protagonist is on the beach alone and does not drinkDissimilar: protagonist's living situation does not match participant's living situation Similar: protagonist's risk perceptions and health locus of control match those of participant Dissimilar: protagonist's risk perceptions and health locus of control do not match those of Similar related to health: protagonist matched to participant on factors related to running Similar: protagonist is identified as a student from the same university as the participants Dissimilar: protagonist is not identified as a student from the same university as the Similar: narrator of story is African American Dissimilar: narrator of story is Caucasian Similar: protagonist is recent graduate from the same university as participants and refersNote: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.Topic 
Sample 
Manipulation 
Effects persuasion 
Effects engagement 

Andsager et al., 2006 
Sun exposure 
196 undergraduate 

students in US 

alcohol 

Perceived message 

effectiveness: 

Not reported 

Banerjee & Greene, 

2012a 

Cocaine use 
500 undergraduate 

students in UK 

Similar: protagonist gender matches partici-

pant gender 

Dissimilar: protagonist gender does not match 

participant gender 

Expectancies of cocaine: 

Not reported 

Cocaine use intention: 

Not reported 

Transportation: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

De Graaf, 2014 
Colon cancer 
220 undergraduate 

students in the 

Netherlands 

Similar: protagonist's living situation matches 

participant's living situation 

Perceived risk: 

Similar > Dissimilar 

Perceived severity: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

Transportation: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

Identification: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

Dillard & Main, 2013 
Colonoscopy 
1297 individuals of 

49-60 who had not 

been screened 

before in US 

participant 

Intention to get colonos-

copy: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

Identification: 

Similar = Dissimilar 

Knobloch et al., 2002 
Fictitious skin 

disease 

240 undergraduate 

students in US 

Similar: location in which characters live 

matches participants' location 

Dissimilar: location in which characters live 

does not match participants' location 

Personal threat (risk): 

Similar > Dissimilar 

Lee & Bichard, 2006 
Binge drink-

ing 

82 undergraduate 

students in US 

Similar: content of story is matched to gender 

of participant (gender-consistent) 

Dissimilar: content of story is not matched to 

gender of participant (gender inconsistent) 

Intention to change drink-

ing behavior: 

Similar < Dissimilar 

www.rcommunicationr.org 



## Table 4 .
4Overview of studies that have compared a narrative with a gain frame to a narrative with a loss frame by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text)Gain: if patient receives new lungs, he will live Loss: if patient does not receive new lungs, he will die Gain: protagonist uses internet too much, but succeeds in reducing and stays in college Loss: protagonist uses internet too much , but fails in reducing and drops out of Gain: protagonist finds out early she has HIV by test and can thus stay healthy longer Loss: protagonist finds out late she has HIV by test and wishes she would have found out sooner to stay healthier longer Intention to get HIV-test: Gain: protagonist got a f lu shot last year and stayed healthy, so gets one this year again Loss: protagonist did not get a f lu shot last year and caught the f lu, so gets one Gain: protagonist thinks about the good things associated with a normal weight Loss: protagonist thinks about the bad things associated with obesity Intention to eat healthy:Gain: child is born without FASD because mother stopped drinking alcohol while pregnant Loss: child is born with FASD because mother drank alcohol while pregnant Note: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.Topic 
Sample 
Manipulation 
Effects persuasion 
Effects engagement 

Aldrich, 2009 
Suicide 
367 undergraduate stu-

dents in US 

Gain: protagonist intervenes when friends 

shows signs of suicide and friend lives 

Loss: protagonist does not intervene and 

friend commits suicide 

Intention to intervene: 

Gain = Loss 

Transportation: 

Gain = Loss Identification: 

Gain = Loss 

Banerjee & Greene, 

2012a 

Cocaine use 
500 undergraduate stu-

dents in UK 

Gain: protagonist uses cocaine, but stops 

and reaps benefits 

Loss: protagonist uses cocaine and 

experiences negative consequences 

Cocaine use intention: 

Not reported 

Expectancies: 

Not reported 

Transportation: 

Gain > Loss 

Cohen, 2010 
Organ 

donation 

181 undergraduate stu-

dents in US 

Intention to sign an organ 

donor card: 

Gain = Loss 

Cox & Cox, 2001 
Mammogra-

phy 

174 women over 50 in 

US 

Gain: tumor is detected early by having 

annual mammogram and protagonist 

lives 

Loss: tumor is detected late by not having 

an annual mammogram and protagonist 

may die 

Attitude towards mam-

mography: 

Gain < Loss 

Gray & 

Harrington, 2011 

Exercise 
345 undergraduate stu-

dents in US 

Gain: protagonists started working out 

regularly and felt great 

Loss: protagonists failed to work out 

regularly and felt bad 

Attitude tow. exercise: 

Gain = Loss 

Intention to exercise: 

Gain > Loss 

www.rcommunicationr.org 


## Table 5 .
5Overview of studies that have compared a narrative with high emotional content to a narrative with low emotional content by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text)High emotional: Protagonist gets hit by a car and dies right after having decided to become organ donor Low emotional: Protagonist thinks about getting hit by a car and decides to become High emotional: Narratives with high expressed emotions by features such as emotional adjectives, emoticons, emotional experience descriptions Low emotional: Narratives with low expressed can women in US High emotional: Narratives that describe the emotional benefits of screening (longer) Low emotional: Narratives that describe more general benefits (shorter) ate students in US Positive emotional: Narratives that express positive emotions by adjectives, descriptions Negative emotional: Narratives that express negative emotions by adjectives, descriptions Low emotional: Narratives that express no emotions by adjectives, descriptions High emotional: Narrative about coping with feelings of inadequacy when family member had late stage cancer Low emotional: Narrative about dealing with nausea from chemotherapyTopic 
Sample 
Manipulation 
Effects persuasion 
Effects engagement 

Appel & Richter, 

2010 

Organ dona-

tion 

133 adults recruit-

ed online in 

Austria 

organ donor 

Organ donation beliefs: 

High = Low 

Transportation: 

Not reported 

Banerjee & Greene, 

2013 

Alcohol 
501 undergraduate 

student in UK 

High emotional: Protagonist experiences 

emotional consequences of alcohol use 

Low emotional: Protagonist experiences 

physical consequences of alcohol use 

Attitude: 

Not reported 

Intention: 

Not reported 

Transportation: 

High = Low 

Betsch, Ulshöfer, 

Renkewitz, & Betsch 

2011 

Vaccination for 

child 

313 undergraduate 

students in 

Germany 

emotions 

Perceived risk: 

High > Low 

Intention to vaccinate: 

Not reported 

Frisby, 2006 
Breast cancer 

screening 

59 African Ameri-

Willingness to screen: 

High > Low 

www.rcommunicationr.org 


## Table 7 .
7Overview of studies that have compared a narrative presented through different media by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text)Print: Text in which the protagonist loses weight by drinking more water Audio: Audio-recorded version of above text Print: Text in which the protagonist starts drinking less and feels better Audio: Audio-recorded version of above text Print: Text in which the protagonist loses weight by drinking more water Audio: Audio-recorded version of above text Video: Film in which a teen is diagnosed with type 2 diabetes and decides to adopt healthier lifestyle Print: Text-only version of above narrative Video: Videotaped interviews with breast cancer patients about their experiences Print: Transcribed versions of above narratives Video: Film in which a survivor looks back at a fatal car accident because of drunk driving Print: Text based on a transcription of the Video: Videotaped scripts of patients who are on dialysis Print: Text versions of above narrative Treatment choice:Topic 
Sample 
Manipulation 
Effects persuasion Effects engagement 

Braverman, 2008, 

study 1 

Weight loss by 

drinking water 

240 adults recruited 

online in US 

Perceived persua-

siveness: 

Print = Audio 

Braverman, 2008, 

study 2 

Binge drinking 
118 undergraduate 

students recruited 

online in US 

Perceived persua-

siveness: 

Print = Audio 

Transportation: 

Print = audio 

Braverman, 2008, 

study 3 

Weight loss by 

drinking water 

158 adults recruited 

online in US 

Perceived persua-

siveness: 

Print = Audio 

Transportation: 

Not reported 

Luna Nevarez, 2013 
Diabetes 
236 undergraduate 

students in US 

Risk perception: 

Video = Print 

Intention: 

Video = Print 

Transportation: 

Video = Print 

Shaffer, Owens, & 

Zikmund-Fisher, 2013b 

Breast cancer 
56 women who were 

not diagnosed with 

breast cancer 

Treatment prefer-

ence: 

Not reported 

Stitt & Nabi, 2005 
Drinking and 

driving 

197 adults around 

college campus in US 

video 

Story-consistent 

beliefs: 

Video = Print 

Transportation: 

Video = Print 

Winterbottom et al., 2012 Kidney dialysis 
784 students and 

staff of universities 

in UK 



## Table 8 .
8Overview of studies that have compared a narrative presented through different perspectives by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text) First: In four stories, protagonists who are addicted to drugs are referred to with I Third: In four stories protagonists who are addicted to drugs are referred to with he/she Second: Protagonist who is approached by a stranger to have a mole checked is referred to with you Third: Protagonist who is approached by a stranger to have a mole checked is referred to with he/she First: Audio public service announcements in which protagonists are referred to with I Third: Audio public service announcements in which protagonists are referred to with he/she First: Quoted students in news article were referred to with I (within quotation marks)Topic 
Sample 
Manipulation 
Effects persuasion 
Effects engagement 

Banerjee & 

Greene, 2012b 

Cocaine 
500 undergraduate 

students in UK 

Cocaine expectancies: 

Not reported 

Intention to use cocaine: 

Not reported 

Transportation: 

First = Third 

Houska, 2010 
Skin cancer 60 adults recruited 

on campus in US 

Intent to use sunscreen: 

Second = Third 

Take sunscreen coupons: 

Second > Third 

Transportation: 

Not reported 

Meadows III, 

2012 

Binge 

drinking, 

smoking, 

HIV 

80 undergraduate 

students in US 

Story-consistent 

intention: 

First = Third 

Transportation: 

First = Third 

Nan et al., 

2015 

HPV 
174 undergraduate 

students in US 


, 4, 88-131   
www.rcommunicationr.org
Table 6. Overview of studies that have compared a narrative with high character responsibility to a narrative with low character responsibility by topic, sample, conditions that are compared, and direct effects on persuasion and engagement (back to text)TopicSample Manipulation Effects persuasion Effects engagementBarry, Brescoll, & Gollust, 2013Childhood obesity 500 non-student adults in USHigh > LowNote: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given. Low efficacy: Slimming down is presented as tough in headline of news article with exemplar.Promoted behavior :High = LowNote: Only direct effects are included. When a result is 'not reported', the variable was measured in the study, but the difference between the conditions on this variable was not included in the report, nor the significance test given.
Narratology: Introduction to the theory of narrative. M Bal, University of Toronto PressToronto2nd ed.Bal, M. (1997). Narratology: Introduction to the theory of narrative (2nd ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

Social cognitive theory of mass communication. A Bandura, 10.1207/S1532785XMEP0303_03Media Psychology. 33Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory of mass communication. Media Psychology, 3(3), 265-299. doi: 10.1207/S1532785XMEP0303_03

I quit' versus 'I'm sorry I used': A preliminary investigation of variations in narrative ending and transportation. S C Banerjee, K Greene, 10.1080/08870446.2012.675063Psychology & Health. 2711*Banerjee, S. C., & Greene, K. (2012a). 'I quit' versus 'I'm sorry I used': A preliminary investigation of variations in narrative ending and transportation. Psychology & Health, 27(11), 1308-1322. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2012.675063

Role of transportation in the persuasion process: Cognitive and affective responses to antidrug narratives. S C Banerjee, K Greene, 10.1080/10810730.2011.635779Journal of Health Communication. 175*Banerjee, S. C., & Greene, K. (2012b). Role of transportation in the persuasion process: Cognitive and affective re- sponses to antidrug narratives. Journal of Health Communication, 17(5), 564-581. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2011.635779

Examining narrative transportation to anti-alcohol narratives. S C Banerjee, K Greene, 10.3109/14659891.2012.661020Journal of Substance Use. 183*Banerjee, S. C., & Greene, K. (2013). Examining narrative transportation to anti-alcohol narratives. Journal of Substance Use, 18(3), 196-210. doi: 10.3109/14659891.2012.661020

Framing childhood obesity: How individualizing the problem affects public support for prevention. C L Barry, V L Brescoll, S E Gollust, 10.3109/14659891.2012.661020Political Psychology. 343*Barry, C. L., Brescoll, V. L., & Gollust, S. E. (2013). Framing childhood obesity: How individualizing the problem affects public support for prevention. Political Psychology, 34(3), 327-349. doi: 10.3109/14659891.2012.661020

Empathy, attitudes, and action: Can feeling for a member of a stigmatized group motivate one to help the group. C D Batson, J Chang, R Orr, J Rowland, 10.1177/014616702237647Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin. 2812*Batson, C. D., Chang, J., Orr, R., & Rowland, J. (2002). Empathy, attitudes, and action: Can feeling for a member of a stigmatized group motivate one to help the group. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(12), 1656-1666. doi: 10.1177/014616702237647

Adapting effective narrative-based HIV-prevention interventions to increase minorities' engagement in HIV/AIDS services. J Berkley-Patton, K Goggin, R Liston, A Bradley-Ewing, S Neville, 10.1080/10410230902804091Health Communication. 243Berkley-Patton, J., Goggin, K., Liston, R., Bradley-Ewing, A., & Neville, S. (2009). Adapting effective narrative-based HIV-prevention interventions to increase minorities' engagement in HIV/AIDS services. Health Communication, 24(3), 199-209. doi: 10.1080/10410230902804091

Effect of narrative reports about vaccine adverse events and biasawareness disclaimers on vaccine decisions: A simulation of an online patient social network. C Betsch, F Renkewitz, N Haase, 10.1177/0272989x12452342Medical Decision Making. 331*Betsch, C., Renkewitz, F., & Haase, N. (2013). Effect of narrative reports about vaccine adverse events and bias- awareness disclaimers on vaccine decisions: A simulation of an online patient social network. Medical Decision Making, 33(1), 14-25. doi: 10.1177/0272989x12452342

The inf luence of narrative v. statistical information on perceiving vaccination risks. C Betsch, C Ulshöfer, F Renkewitz, T Betsch, 10.1177/0272989x11400419Medical Decision Making. 315*Betsch, C., Ulshöfer, C., Renkewitz, F., & Betsch, T. (2011). The inf luence of narrative v. statistical information on perceiving vaccination risks. Medical Decision Making, 31(5), 742-753. doi: 10.1177/0272989x11400419

The Sage handbook of persuasion: Developments in theory and practice. H Bilandzic, R Busselle, J. P. Dillard & L. ShenSageThousand Oaks, CANarrative persuasion. nd ed.Bilandzic, H., & Busselle, R. (2013). Narrative persuasion. In J. P. Dillard & L. Shen (Eds.), The Sage handbook of persuasion: Developments in theory and practice (2 nd ed.) (pp. 200-219). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Effects of responsibility attribution and message source on young adults' health attitudes and behaviors. G Boiarsky, D Rouner, M Long, 10.1080/10810730.2012.757389Journal of Health Communication. 187*Boiarsky, G., Rouner, D., & Long, M. (2013). Effects of responsibility attribution and message source on young adults' health attitudes and behaviors. Journal of Health Communication, 18(7), 881-894. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2012.757389

Exemplification of HAART and HIV/AIDS: A news experiment. Health Communication. A R Boyson, R S Zimmerman, S Shoemaker, 10.1080/10410236.2014.90322230*Boyson, A. R., Zimmerman, R. S., & Shoemaker, S. (2015). Exemplification of HAART and HIV/AIDS: A news experiment. Health Communication, 30(9), 901-910. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.903222

Meta-analytic evidence for the persuasive effect of narratives on beliefs, attitudes, intentions, and behaviors. K H Braddock, J P Dillard, Communication Monographs. in pressBraddock, K. H., & Dillard, J. P. (in press). Meta-analytic evidence for the persuasive effect of narratives on beliefs, attitudes, intentions, and behaviors. Communication Monographs.

Testimonials versus informational persuasive messages: The moderating effect of delivery mode and personal involvement. J Braverman, 10.1177/0093650208321785Communication Research. 355*Braverman, J. (2008). Testimonials versus informational persuasive messages: The moderating effect of delivery mode and personal involvement. Communication Research, 35(5), 666-694. doi: 10.1177/0093650208321785

Narrative "f low": A model of narrative processing and its impact on information processing, knowledge acquisition and persuasion. Unpublished dissertation. J *brechman, Philadelphia, PAUniversity of Pennsylvania*Brechman, J. (2010). Narrative "f low": A model of narrative processing and its impact on information processing, knowledge acquisition and persuasion. Unpublished dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

Stories are to entertain: A structural-affect theory of stories. W F Brewer, E H Lichtenstein, 10.1016/0378-2166(82)90021-2Journal of Pragmatics. 65Brewer, W. F., & Lichtenstein, E. H. (1982). Stories are to entertain: A structural-affect theory of stories. Journal of Pragmatics, 6(5), 473-486. doi: 10.1016/0378-2166(82)90021-2

Actual minds, possible worlds. J S Bruner, Harvard University PressCambridge, MABruner, J. S. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Perceived realism and engagement as predictors of enjoyment and persuasion: The case of a medical drama program about mental illness. R W Busselle, J M Quintero Johnson, C Yang, H Bilandzic, Phoenix, AZPaper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association*Busselle, R. W., Quintero Johnson, J. M., Yang, C., & Bilandzic, H. (2012, may). Perceived realism and engagement as predictors of enjoyment and persuasion: The case of a medical drama program about mental illness. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Phoenix, AZ.

Narrative processing of entertainment media and mental illness stigma. N M Caputo, D Rouner, 10.1080/10410236.2011.560787Health Communication. 267*Caputo, N. M., & Rouner, D. (2011). Narrative processing of entertainment media and mental illness stigma. Health Communication, 26(7), 595-604. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.560787

Forewarning, defensive strategies and narrative persuasion. J Carpenter, Carolina, Chapel Hill, NCUniversity of NorthUnpublished dissertation*Carpenter, J. (2013). Forewarning, defensive strategies and narrative persuasion. Unpublished dissertation, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Increasing mental health literacy via narrative advertising. C Chang, 10.1080/10810730701807027Journal of Health Communication. 131*Chang, C. (2008). Increasing mental health literacy via narrative advertising. Journal of Health Communication, 13(1), 37-55. doi:10.1080/10810730701807027

Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects 105. 4Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects 105 2016, 4, 88-131

Reducing stigma and out-group distinctions through perspective-taking in narratives. A H Chung, M D Slater, 10.1111/jcom.12050Journal of Communication. 635*Chung, A. H., & Slater, M. D. (2013). Reducing stigma and out-group distinctions through perspective-taking in narratives. Journal of Communication, 63(5), 894-911. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12050

The role of message frame, perceived risk, and ambivalence in individuals' decisions to become organ donors. E L Cohen, 10.1080/10410236.2010.521923Health Communication. 258*Cohen, E. L. (2010). The role of message frame, perceived risk, and ambivalence in individuals' decisions to become organ donors. Health Communication, 25(8), 758-769. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2010.521923

Exploring subtext processing in narrative persuasion: The role of eudaimonic entertainment use motivation and a supplemental conclusion scene. Unpublished dissertation. E L Cohen, Atlanta, GAGeorgia State University*Cohen, E. L. (2012). Exploring subtext processing in narrative persuasion: The role of eudaimonic entertainment use motivation and a supplemental conclusion scene. Unpublished dissertation, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA.

Testing the effect of framing and sourcing in health news stories. R Coleman, E Thorson, L Wilkins, 10.1080/10810730.2011.561918Journal of Health Communication. 169*Coleman, R., Thorson, E., & Wilkins, L. (2011). Testing the effect of framing and sourcing in health news stories. Journal of Health Communication, 16(9), 941-954. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2011.561918

Effects of film music on psychological transportation and narrative persuasion. K A *costabile, A W Terman, 10.1080/01973533.2013.785398Basic and Applied Social Psychology. 353*Costabile, K. A., & Terman, A. W. (2013). Effects of film music on psychological transportation and narrative per- suasion. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 35(3), 316-324. doi: 10.1080/01973533.2013.785398

Communicating the consequences of early detection: the role of evidence and framing. D Cox, A D Cox, /10.1509/jmkg.65.3.91.18336Journal of Marketing. 65*Cox, D., & Cox, A. D. (2001). Communicating the consequences of early detection: the role of evidence and framing. Journal of Marketing, 65, 91-103. doi: /10.1509/jmkg.65.3.91.18336

The role of causality in information acceptance in narratives: An example from science communication. M F Dahlstrom, 10.1177/0093650210362683Communication Research. 376Dahlstrom, M. F. (2010). The role of causality in information acceptance in narratives: An example from science communication. Communication Research, 37(6), 857-875. doi: 10.1177/0093650210362683

The persuasive inf luence of narrative causality: Psychological mechanism, strength in overcoming resistance, and persistence over time. M F Dahlstrom, 10.1080/15213269.2012.702604Media Psychology. 153Dahlstrom, M. F. (2012). The persuasive inf luence of narrative causality: Psychological mechanism, strength in overcoming resistance, and persistence over time. Media Psychology, 15(3), 303-326. doi: 10.1080/15213269.2012.702604

Smoking in movies, implicit associations of smoking with the self, and intentions to smoke. S Dal Cin, B Gibson, M P Zanna, R Shumate, G T Fong, 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01939.xPsychological Science. 187*Dal Cin, S., Gibson, B., Zanna, M. P., Shumate, R., & Fong, G. T. (2007). Smoking in movies, implicit associations of smoking with the self, and intentions to smoke. Psychological Science, 18(7), 559-563. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01939.x

Narrative persuasion and overcoming resistance. S Dal Cin, M P Zanna, G T Fong, Resistance and persuasion. E. S. KnowlesMahwah, NJErlbaumDal Cin, S., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2004). Narrative persuasion and overcoming resistance. In E. S. Knowles (Ed.), Resistance and persuasion (pp. 175-191). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

The effectiveness of adaptation of the protagonist in narrative impact: Similarity inf luences health beliefs through self-referencing. A *de Graaf, 10.1111/hcre.12015Human Communication Research. 401*De Graaf, A. (2014). The effectiveness of adaptation of the protagonist in narrative impact: Similarity inf luences health beliefs through self-referencing. Human Communication Research, 40(1), 73-90. doi: 10.1111/hcre.12015

The role of dimensions of narrative engagement in narrative persuasion. A De Graaf, H Hoeken, J Sanders, H Beentjes, 10.1515/comm.2009.024Communications. 344De Graaf, A., Hoeken, H., Sanders, J., & Beentjes, H. (2009). The role of dimensions of narrative engagement in narrative persuasion. Communications, 34(4), 385-405. doi: 10.1515/comm.2009.024

Identification as a mechanism of narrative persuasion. A De Graaf, H Hoeken, J Sanders, J W Beentjes, 10.1177/0093650211408594Communication Research. 396De Graaf, A., Hoeken, H., Sanders, J., & Beentjes, J. W. (2012). Identification as a mechanism of narrative persua- sion. Communication Research, 39(6), 802-823. doi: 10.1177/0093650211408594

What works best: objective statistics or a personal testimonial? An assessment of the persuasive effects of different types of message evidence on risk perception. J B *de Wit, E Das, R Vet, 10.1037/0278-6133.27.1.110Health Psychology. 271*De Wit, J. B., Das, E., & Vet, R. (2008). What works best: objective statistics or a personal testimonial? An assess- ment of the persuasive effects of different types of message evidence on risk perception. Health Psychology, 27(1), 110-115. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.27.1.110

Love means never having to be careful: The relationship between reading romance novels and safe sex behavior. A B Diekman, M Mcdonald, W L Gardner, 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2000.tb00199.xPsychology of Women Quarterly. 24*Diekman, A. B., McDonald, M., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). Love means never having to be careful: The relationship between reading romance novels and safe sex behavior. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 24, 179-188. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-6402.2000.tb00199.x

Using a health message with a testimonial to motivate colon cancer screening associations with perceived identification and vividness. A J Dillard, J L Main, 10.1177/1090198112473111Health Education & Behavior. 406*Dillard, A. J., & Main, J. L. (2013). Using a health message with a testimonial to motivate colon cancer screening associations with perceived identification and vividness. Health Education & Behavior, 40(6), 673-682. doi: 10.1177/1090198112473111

Narratives that address affective forecasting errors reduce perceived barriers to colorectal cancer screening. A J Dillard, A Fagerlin, S Dal Cin, B J Zikmund-Fisher, P A Ubel, 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.02.038Social Science & Medicine. 711*Dillard, A. J., Fagerlin, A., Dal Cin, S., Zikmund-Fisher, B. J., & Ubel, P. A. (2010). Narratives that address affec- tive forecasting errors reduce perceived barriers to colorectal cancer screening. Social Science & Medicine, 71(1), 45-52. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.02.038

Interactive video behavioral intervention to reduce adolescent females' STD risk: A randomized controlled trial. J S Downs, P J Murray, W De Bruin, J Penrose, C Palmgren, B Fischhoff, 10.1016/j.socscimed.2004.01.032Social Science & Medicine. 598Downs, J. S., Murray, P. J., de Bruin, W., Penrose, J., Palmgren, C., & Fischhoff, B. (2004). Interactive video behav- ioral intervention to reduce adolescent females' STD risk: A randomized controlled trial. Social Science & Medicine, 59(8), 1561-1572. doi: 10.1016/j.socscimed.2004.01.032

Predictors and consequences of conversations about health promoting media messages. S M Dunlop, Y Kashima, M Wakefield, 10.1080/03637751.2010.502537Communication Monographs. 774*Dunlop, S. M., Kashima, Y., & Wakefield, M. (2010). Predictors and consequences of conversations about health promoting media messages. Communication Monographs, 77(4), 518-539. doi: 10.1080/03637751.2010.502537

Pathways to persuasion: Cognitive and experiential responses to health-promoting mass media messages. S M Dunlop, M Wakefield, Y Kashima, 10.1177/0093650209351912Communication Research. 371*Dunlop, S. M., Wakefield, M., & Kashima, Y. (2010). Pathways to persuasion: Cognitive and experiential respons- es to health-promoting mass media messages. Communication Research, 37(1), 133-164. doi: 10.1177/0093650209351912

Reducing the inf luence of anecdotal reasoning on people's health care decisions: Is a picture worth a thousand statistics. A *fagerlin, C Wang, P A Ubel, 10.1177/0272989x05278931Medical Decision Making. 254*Fagerlin, A., Wang, C., & Ubel, P. A. (2005). Reducing the inf luence of anecdotal reasoning on people's health care decisions: Is a picture worth a thousand statistics? Medical Decision Making, 25(4), 398-405. doi: 10.1177/0272989x05278931

Understanding narrative effects in physical activity promotion: The inf luence of breast cancer survivor testimony on exercise beliefs, self-efficacy, and intention in breast cancer patients. C * Falzon, R Radel, A Cantor, F Arripe-Longueville, 10.1007/s00520-014-2422-xSupportive Care in Cancer. 233* Falzon, C., Radel, R., Cantor, A., & d'Arripe-Longueville, F. (2015). Understanding narrative effects in physical activity promotion: The inf luence of breast cancer survivor testimony on exercise beliefs, self-efficacy, and inten- tion in breast cancer patients. Supportive Care in Cancer, 23(3), 761-768. doi: 10.1007/s00520-014-2422-x

Sexual intercourse on television: Do safe sex messages matter. K M Farrar, 10.1207/s15506878jobem5004_4Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media. 504*Farrar, K. M. (2006). Sexual intercourse on television: Do safe sex messages matter? Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 50(4), 635-650. doi: 10.1207/s15506878jobem5004_4

Reactions to narrative and statistical written messages promoting organ donation. T H Feeley, H M Marshall, A M Reinhart, 10.1080/08934210600918758Communication Reports. 192*Feeley, T. H., Marshall, H. M., & Reinhart, A. M. (2006). Reactions to narrative and statistical written messages promoting organ donation. Communication Reports, 19(2), 89-100. doi: 10.1080/08934210600918758

Telling stories, saving lives: Creating narrative health messages. Health Communication. L B Frank, S T Murphy, J S Chatterjee, M B Moran, L Baezconde-Garbanati, 10.1080/10410236.2014.97412630Frank, L. B., Murphy, S. T., Chatterjee, J. S., Moran, M. B., & Baezconde-Garbanati, L. (2015). Telling stories, sav- ing lives: Creating narrative health messages. Health Communication, 30(2), 154-163. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.974126

A matter of life and death: Effects of emotional message strategies on African American women's attitudes about preventative breast cancer screenings. C M Frisby, 10.1177/0021934705277499Journal of Black Studies. 371*Frisby, C. M. (2006). A matter of life and death: Effects of emotional message strategies on African American women's attitudes about preventative breast cancer screenings. Journal of Black Studies, 37(1), 103-126. doi: 10.1177/0021934705277499

Ease the resistance: The role of narrative and other-referencing in attenuating psychological reactance to persuasive diabetes messages. Unpublished dissertation. E Gardner, Colombia, MOUniversity of Missouri-Columbia*Gardner, E. (2010). Ease the resistance: The role of narrative and other-referencing in attenuating psychological reactance to persuasive diabetes messages. Unpublished dissertation, University of Missouri-Columbia, Colombia, MO.

Narrative and framing: A test of an integrated message strategy in the exercise context. J B Gray, N G Harrington, 10.1080/10810730.2010.529490Journal of Health Communication. 163Gray, J. B., & Harrington, N. G. (2011). Narrative and framing: A test of an integrated message strategy in the ex- ercise context. Journal of Health Communication, 16(3), 264-281. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2010.529490

Transportation into narrative worlds: The role of prior knowledge and perceived realism. M C Green, 10.1207/s15326950dp3802_5Discourse Processes. 38Green, M. C. (2004). Transportation into narrative worlds: The role of prior knowledge and perceived realism. Discourse Processes, 38(2), 247-266. doi: 10.1207/s15326950dp3802_5

Narratives and cancer communication. M C Green, 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2006.00288.xJournal of Communication. 56s1Green, M. C. (2006). Narratives and cancer communication. Journal of Communication, 56(s1), S163-183. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2006.00288.x

Research challenges in narrative persuasion. M C Green, 10.1075/idj.16.1.07greInformation Design Journal. 161Green, M. C. (2008). Research challenges in narrative persuasion. Information Design Journal, 16(1), 47-52. doi: 10.1075/idj.16.1.07gre

The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives. M C Green, T C Brock, 10.1037/0022-3514.79.5.701Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 795Green, M. C., & Brock, T. C. (2000). The role of transportation in the persuasiveness of public narratives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(5), 701-721. doi: 10.1037//0022-3514.79.5.701

In the mind's eye: Transportation-imagery model of narrative persuasion. M C Green, T C Brock, T. Green, M. C., & Brock, T. C. (2002). In the mind's eye: Transportation-imagery model of narrative persuasion. In T.

Narrative impact: Social and cognitive foundations. C. Brock, J. J. Strange & M. C. GreenMahwah, NJErlbaumC. Brock, J. J. Strange & M. C. Green (Eds.), Narrative impact: Social and cognitive foundations (pp. 315-341). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Persistence of belief change in the face of deception: The effect of factual stories revealed to be false. M C Green, J K Donahue, 10.1080/15213269.2011.598050Media Psychology. 143*Green, M. C., & Donahue, J. K. (2011). Persistence of belief change in the face of deception: The effect of factual stories revealed to be false. Media Psychology, 14(3), 312-331. doi: 10.1080/15213269.2011.598050

Messages inf luencing college women's tanning bed use: statistical versus narrative evidence format and a self-assessment to increase perceived susceptibility. K Greene, L S Brinn, 10.1080/713852118Journal of Health Communication. 85*Greene, K., & Brinn, L. S. (2003). Messages inf luencing college women's tanning bed use: statistical versus narrative evidence format and a self-assessment to increase perceived susceptibility. Journal of Health Communication, 8(5), 443-461. doi: 10.1080/713852118

Comparing normative, anecdotal, and statistical risk evidence to discourage tanning bed use. K Greene, S Campo, S C Banerjee, 10.1080/01463371003773366Communication Quarterly. 582*Greene, K., Campo, S. & Banerjee, S. C. (2010). Comparing normative, anecdotal, and statistical risk evidence to discourage tanning bed use. Communication Quarterly, 58(2), 111-132. doi: 10.1080/01463371003773366

Perceived effectiveness of pictorial health warnings among Mexican youth and adults: A population-level intervention with potential to reduce tobacco-related inequities. D Hammond, J Thrasher, J L Reid, P Driezen, C Boudreau, E A Santillán, 10.1007/s10552-012-9902-4Cancer Causes & Control. 231*Hammond, D., Thrasher, J., Reid, J. L., Driezen, P., Boudreau, C., & Santillán, E. A. (2012). Perceived effectiveness of pictorial health warnings among Mexican youth and adults: A population-level intervention with potential to reduce tobacco-related inequities. Cancer Causes & Control, 23(1), 57-67. doi: 10.1007/s10552-012-9902-4

The drug resistance strategies intervention: Program effects on substance use. M L Hecht, J W Graham, E Elek, 10.1207/s15327027hc2003_6Health Communication. 203*Hecht, M. L., Graham, J. W., & Elek, E. (2006). The drug resistance strategies intervention: Program effects on substance use. Health Communication, 20(3), 267-276. doi: 10.1207/s15327027hc2003_6

Basic elements of narrative. D Herman, WileyChichester, UKHerman, D. (2009). Basic elements of narrative. Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Entertainment-education? A fotonovela? A new strategy to improve depression literacy and help-seeking behaviors in at-risk immigrant Latinas. M Y Hernandez, K C Organista, 10.1007/s10464-013-9587-1American Journal of Community Psychology. 523-4*Hernandez, M. Y., & Organista, K. C. (2013). Entertainment-education? A fotonovela? A new strategy to improve depression literacy and help-seeking behaviors in at-risk immigrant Latinas. American Journal of Community Psychology, 52(3-4), 224-235. doi: 10.1007/s10464-013-9587-1

The inf luence of exemplars in fear appeals on the perception of self-efficacy and message acceptance. H *hoeken, D Geurts, 10.1075/idjdd.13.3.09hoe13Information Design Journal+ Document Design*Hoeken, H., & Geurts, D. (2005). The inf luence of exemplars in fear appeals on the perception of self-efficacy and message acceptance. Information Design Journal+ Document Design, 13(3), 238-248. doi: 10.1075/idjdd.13.3.09hoe

The role of identification and perception of just outcome in evoking emotions in narrative persuasion. H *hoeken, J Sinkeldam, org/10.1111/jcom.12114Journal of Communication. 645*Hoeken, H., & Sinkeldam, J. (2014). The role of identification and perception of just outcome in evoking emotions in narrative persuasion. Journal of Communication, 64(5), 935-955. doi: org/10.1111/jcom.12114

Culture-centric narratives as health message design strategy: Developing an HPV vaccine intervention for college-aged women. Unpublished dissertation. S Hopfer, State College, PAThe Pennsylvania State University*Hopfer, S. (2009). Culture-centric narratives as health message design strategy: Developing an HPV vaccine intervention for college-aged women. Unpublished dissertation, The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA.

The inf luence of perspective and gender on the processing of narratives. Unpublished dissertation. J A Houska, Las Vegas, NVUniversity of Nevada*Houska, J. A. (2010). The inf luence of perspective and gender on the processing of narratives. Unpublished dissertation, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV.

The art and science of patient storytelling-harnessing narrative communication for behavioral interventions: The ACCE project. T K Houston, A Cherrington, H L Coley, K M Robinson, J A Trobaugh, J H Williams, . . Allison, J J , 10.1080/10810730.2011.551997Journal of Health Communication. 167Houston, T. K., Cherrington, A., Coley, H. L., Robinson, K. M., Trobaugh, J. A., Williams, J. H., ... & Allison, J. J. (2011). The art and science of patient storytelling-harnessing narrative communication for behavioral interven- tions: The ACCE project. Journal of Health Communication, 16(7), 686-697. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2011.551997

Risky business: An examination of the relationship between message frame, risk perceptions and intentions to seek HIV-antibody testing. Unpublished dissertation. S J Hull, Philadelphia, PAUniversity of Pennsylvania*Hull, S. J. (2010). Risky business: An examination of the relationship between message frame, risk perceptions and intentions to seek HIV-antibody testing. Unpublished dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.

To think or not to think: Two pathways towards persuasion by short films on AIDS prevention. J J Igartua, L Cheng, O Lopes, 10.1080/716100420Journal of Health Communication. 86* Igartua, J. J., Cheng, L., & Lopes, O. (2003). To think or not to think: Two pathways towards persuasion by short films on AIDS prevention. Journal of Health Communication, 8(6), 513-528. doi: 10.1080/716100420

Processes and mechanisms of narrative persuasion in entertainment-education interventions through audiovisual fiction: the role of identification with characters. J J Igartua, J Vega, Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality. the Second International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality* Igartua, J. J., & Vega, J. (2014). Processes and mechanisms of narrative persuasion in entertainment-education in- terventions through audiovisual fiction: the role of identification with characters. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (pp. 311-316).

Exploring transportation, narrative persuasion, and enjoyment: effects on global attitudes and story-specific beliefs about organ donation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association. S *janicke, A Raney, Phoenix, AZ*Janicke, S., & Raney, A. (2012, may). Exploring transportation, narrative persuasion, and enjoyment: effects on global attitudes and story-specific beliefs about organ donation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, Phoenix, AZ.

Take John, for instance': Effects of exemplars in public information documents on HIV/AIDS in South Africa. C Jansen, M Croonen, L Stadler, 10.1075/idjdd.13.3.04janInformation Design Journal+ Document Design. 133*Jansen, C., Croonen, M., & de Stadler, L. (2005). 'Take John, for instance': Effects of exemplars in public informa- tion documents on HIV/AIDS in South Africa. Information Design Journal+ Document Design, 13(3), 194-210. doi: 10.1075/idjdd.13.3.04jan

The inf luence of narrative risk communication on feelings of cancer risk. E Janssen, L Van Osch, H De Vries, L Lechner, 10.1111/j.2044-8287.2012.02098.xBritish Journal of Health Psychology. 182*Janssen, E., van Osch, L., de Vries, H., & Lechner, L. (2013). The inf luence of narrative risk communication on feelings of cancer risk. British Journal of Health Psychology, 18(2), 407-419. doi: 10.1111/j.2044-8287.2012.02098.x

The delay hypothesis: The manifestation of media effects over time. J D Jensen, J K Bernat, K M Wilson, J Goonewardene, 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2011.01415.xHuman Communication Research. 374*Jensen, J. D., Bernat, J. K., Wilson, K. M., & Goonewardene, J. (2011). The delay hypothesis: The manifestation of media effects over time. Human Communication Research, 37(4), 509-528. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2011.01415.x

A randomized controlled trial of soap opera videos streamed to smartphones to reduce risk of sexually transmitted human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in young urban African American women. R Jones, D R Hoover, L J Lacroix, 10.1016/j.outlook.2013.03.006Nursing Outlook. 614*Jones, R., Hoover, D. R., & Lacroix, L. J. (2013). A randomized controlled trial of soap opera videos streamed to smartphones to reduce risk of sexually transmitted human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in young urban African American women. Nursing Outlook, 61(4), 205-215. doi: 10.1016/j.outlook.2013.03.006

Tell me a story about healthy snacking and I will follow: Comparing the effectiveness of self-generated versus message-aided implementation intentions on promoting healthy snacking habits among college students. H Jung Oh, R Larose, 10.1080/10410236.2014.910289Health Communication. 3010*Jung Oh, H., & LaRose, R. (2015). Tell me a story about healthy snacking and I will follow: Comparing the effective- ness of self-generated versus message-aided implementation intentions on promoting healthy snacking habits among college students. Health Communication, 30(10), 962-974. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.910289

The effects of integrating instrumental and affective arguments in rhetorical and testimonial health messages. M Keer, B Van Den Putte, J De Wit, P Neijens, 10.1080/10810730.2013.768730Journal of Health Communication. 189*Keer, M., van den Putte, B., de Wit, J. & Neijens, P. (2013). The effects of integrating instrumental and affective arguments in rhetorical and testimonial health messages. Journal of Health Communication, 18(9), 1148-1161. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2013.768730

Exploring attributions and emotional reactions in processing narratives about obesity. H K Kim, D Bartolo, J Niederdeppe, Journal of Health & Mass Communication. 31-4*Kim, H. K., Bartolo, D., & Niederdeppe, J. (2011). Exploring attributions and emotional reactions in processing narratives about obesity. Journal of Health & Mass Communication, 3(1-4), 170-178.

Narrative health communication and behavior change: The inf luence of exemplars in the news on intention to quit smoking. H S Kim, C A Bigman, A E Leader, C Lerman, J N Cappella, 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01644.xJournal of Communication. 623*Kim, H. S., Bigman, C. A., Leader, A. E., Lerman, C. & Cappella, J. N. (2012). Narrative health communication and behavior change: The inf luence of exemplars in the news on intention to quit smoking. Journal of Communication, 62(3), 473-492. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01644.x

An alcohol message beneath the surface of ER: How implicit memory inf luences viewers' health attitudes and intentions using Entertainment-Education. K Kim, M Lee, W Macias, 10.1080/10810730.2013.837556Journal of Health Communication. 198*Kim, K., Lee, M., & Macias, W. (2014). An alcohol message beneath the surface of ER: How implicit memory inf lu- ences viewers' health attitudes and intentions using Entertainment-Education. Journal of Health Communication, 19(8), 876-892. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2013.837556 2016, 4, 88-131

Patient education about anticoagulant medication: Is narrative evidence or statistical evidence more effective?. K M Mazor, J Baril, E Dugan, F Spencer, P Burgwinkle, J H Gurwitz, 10.1016/j.pec.2007.08.010Patient Education and Counseling. 691*Mazor, K. M., Baril, J., Dugan, E., Spencer, F., Burgwinkle, P., & Gurwitz, J. H. (2007). Patient education about anticoagulant medication: Is narrative evidence or statistical evidence more effective? Patient Education and Counseling, 69(1), 145-157. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2007.08.010

The effects of framing and action instructions on whether older adults obtain f lu shots. K D Mccaul, R J Johnson, A J Rothman, /10.1037/0278-6133.21.6.624Health Psychology. 216624*McCaul, K. D., Johnson, R. J., & Rothman, A. J. (2002). The effects of framing and action instructions on whether older adults obtain f lu shots. Health Psychology, 21(6), 624. doi: /10.1037//0278-6133.21.6.624

Narrative research in communication: Key principles and issues. D G Mcdonald, 10.12840/issn.2255-4165.2014.02.01.005Review of Communication Research. 21McDonald, D. G. (2014). Narrative research in communication: Key principles and issues. Review of Communication Research, 2(1), 115-132. doi: 10.12840/issn.2255-4165.2014.02.01.005

Vicarious experience: Experimentally testing the effects of empathy for media characters with severe depression and the intervening role of perceived similarity, Health Communication. R Mckeever, 10.1080/10410236.2014.92196930*McKeever, R. (2015). Vicarious experience: Experimentally testing the effects of empathy for media characters with severe depression and the intervening role of perceived similarity, Health Communication, 30(11), 1122-1134. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.921969

Examining dimensions of character involvement as contributing factors in television viewers' binge drinking perceptions. Unpublished dissertation. C Mckinley, Tuscon, AZUniversity of Arizona*McKinley, C. (2010). Examining dimensions of character involvement as contributing factors in television viewers' binge drinking perceptions. Unpublished dissertation, University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ.

Understanding narrative effects: The impact of breast cancer survivor stories on message processing, attitudes, and beliefs among African American women. Health Psychology. A Mcqueen, M W Kreuter, B Kalesan, K I Alcaraz, 10.1037/a002539530*McQueen, A., Kreuter, M. W., Kalesan, B., & Alcaraz, K. I. (2011). Understanding narrative effects: The impact of breast cancer survivor stories on message processing, attitudes, and beliefs among African American women. Health Psychology, 30(6), 674-682. doi: 10.1037/a0025395

The effects of narrative elements and individual attributes on transportation in health communications. Unpublished dissertation. Iii Meadows, C W , Tuscaloosa, ALThe University of Alabama*Meadows III, C.W. (2012). The effects of narrative elements and individual attributes on transportation in health communications. Unpublished dissertation, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL.

The ability of narrative communication to address health-related social norms. M B Moran, S T Murphy, L Frank, L Baezconde-Garbanati, doi: irsr-2013-0014International Review of Social Research. 32*Moran, M. B., Murphy, S. T., Frank, L., & Baezconde-Garbanati, L. (2013). The ability of narrative communication to address health-related social norms. International Review of Social Research, 3(2), 131-149. doi: irsr-2013-0014

A kernel of truth? The impact of television storylines exploiting myths about organ donation on the public's willingness to donate. S E Morgan, A J King, J R Smith, R Ivic, 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2010.01523.xJournal of Communication. 604*Morgan, S. E., King, A. J., Smith, J. R., & Ivic, R. (2010). A kernel of truth? The impact of television storylines exploiting myths about organ donation on the public's willingness to donate. Journal of Communication, 60(4), 778- 796. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2010.01523.x

The inf luence of fear appeals, message design and masculinity on men's motivation to perform the testicular self examination. M T *morman, 10.1080/00909880009365558Journal of Applied Communication Research. 282*Morman, M. T. (2000). The inf luence of fear appeals, message design and masculinity on men's motivation to per- form the testicular self examination. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 28 (2), 91-116. doi: 10.1080/00909880009365558

Explaining the effects of narrative in an entertainment television program: Overcoming resistance to persuasion. * Moyer-Gusé, E Nabi, R L , 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2009.01367.xHuman Communication Research. 361*Moyer-Gusé, E., & Nabi, R. L. (2010). Explaining the effects of narrative in an entertainment television program: Overcoming resistance to persuasion. Human Communication Research, 36(1), 26-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2009.01367.x

Comparing the effects of entertainment and educational television programming on risky sexual behavior. * Moyer-Gusé, E Nabi, R L , 10.1080/10410236.2011.552481Health Communication. 265*Moyer-Gusé, E., & Nabi, R. L. (2011). Comparing the effects of entertainment and educational television program- ming on risky sexual behavior. Health Communication, 26(5), 416-426. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.552481

Identification with characters and discussion of taboo topics after exposure to an entertainment narrative about sexual health. * Moyer-Gusé, E Chung, A H Jain, P , 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01551.xJournal of Communication. 613*Moyer-Gusé, E., Chung, A. H., & Jain, P. (2011). Identification with characters and discussion of taboo topics after exposure to an entertainment narrative about sexual health. Journal of Communication, 61(3), 387-406. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01551.x

Reinforcement or reactance? Examining the effect of an explicit persuasive appeal following an entertainment-education narrative. * Moyer-Gusé, E Jain, P Chung, A H , 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01680.xJournal of Communication. 626*Moyer-Gusé, E., Jain, P., & Chung, A. H. (2012). Reinforcement or reactance? Examining the effect of an explicit persuasive appeal following an entertainment-education narrative. Journal of Communication, 62(6), 1010-1027. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01680.x

Entertainment-education in the context of humor: Effects on safer sex intentions and risk perceptions. * Moyer-Gusé, E Mahood, C Brookes, S , 10.1080/10410236.2011.566832Health Communication. 268*Moyer-Gusé, E., Mahood, C., & Brookes, S. (2011). Entertainment-education in the context of humor: Effects on safer sex intentions and risk perceptions. Health Communication, 26(8), 765-774. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.566832

Narrative versus nonnarrative: The role of identification, transportation, and emotion in reducing health disparities. S Murphy, L B Frank, J S Chatterjee, L Baezconde-Garbanati, 10.1111/jcom.12007Journal of Communication. 631*Murphy, S., Frank, L.B., Chatterjee, J.S., & Baezconde-Garbanati, L. (2013). Narrative versus nonnarrative: The role of identification, transportation, and emotion in reducing health disparities. Journal of Communication, 63(1), 116-137. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12007

HPV vaccine information in the blogosphere: How positive and negative blogs inf luence vaccine-related risk perceptions, attitudes, and behavioral intentions. X *nan, K Madden, 10.1080/10410236.2012.661348Journal of Health Communication. 278*Nan, X., & Madden, K. (2012). HPV vaccine information in the blogosphere: How positive and negative blogs inf lu- ence vaccine-related risk perceptions, attitudes, and behavioral intentions. Journal of Health Communication, 27(8), 829-836. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2012.661348

Inf luence of evidence type and narrative type on HPV risk perception and intention to obtain the HPV vaccine. X * Nan, M F Dahlstrom, A Richards, S Rangarajan, 10.1080/10410236.2014.888629Health Communication. 303* Nan, X., Dahlstrom, M. F., Richards, A., & Rangarajan, S. (2015). Inf luence of evidence type and narrative type on HPV risk perception and intention to obtain the HPV vaccine. Health Communication, 30(3), 301-308. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2014.888629

Let's blog about health! Exploring the persuasiveness of a personal HIV blog compared to an institutional HIV website. Health Communication. G Neubaum, N C Krämer, 10.1080/10410236.2013.85674230*Neubaum, G., & Krämer, N. C. (2015). Let's blog about health! Exploring the persuasiveness of a personal HIV blog compared to an institutional HIV website. Health Communication, 30(9), 872-883. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2013.856742

Beyond counterarguing: Simple elaboration, complex integration, and counterelaboration in response to variations in narrative focus and sidedness. J *niederdeppe, H K Kim, H Lundell, F Fazili, B Frazier, J Niederdeppe, M A Shapiro, N Porticella, 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01671doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2011.01409Human Communication Research. 625Journal of Communication*Niederdeppe, J., Kim, H. K., Lundell, H., Fazili, F., & Frazier, B. (2012). Beyond counterarguing: Simple elabora- tion, complex integration, and counterelaboration in response to variations in narrative focus and sidedness. Journal of Communication, 62(5), 758-777. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2012.01671.x *Niederdeppe, J., Shapiro, M. A., & Porticella, N. (2011). Attributions of responsibility for obesity: Narrative com- munication reduces reactive counterarguing among liberals. Human Communication Research, 37(3), 295-323. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2011.01409

Narrative persuasion, causality, complex integration, and suppor t for obesit y policy. J *niederdeppe, M A Shapiro, H K Kim, D Bartolo, N Porticella, 10.1080/10410236.2012.761805Health Communication. 295*Niederdeppe, J., Shapiro, M. A., Kim, H. K., Bartolo, D., & Porticella, N. (2014). Narrative persuasion, causality, complex integration, and suppor t for obesit y policy. Health Communication, 29 (5), 431-4 4 4. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2012.761805

Effective messages in vaccine promotion: A randomized trial. B *nyhan, J Reif Ler, S Richey, G L Freed, 10.1542/peds.2013-2365Pediatrics. 1334*Nyhan, B., Reif ler, J., Richey, S., & Freed, G.L. (2014). Effective messages in vaccine promotion: A randomized trial. Pediatrics, 133(4), e835-842. doi: 10.1542/peds.2013-2365

Statistics or stories, black or white? Examining inf luences of African American organ donation. * O&apos;mally, A K Worrell, T R , 10.1080/10646175.2014.864209Howard Journal of Communications. 251*O'Mally, A. K., & Worrell, T. R. (2014). Statistics or stories, black or white? Examining inf luences of African American organ donation. Howard Journal of Communications, 25(1), 98-114. doi: 10.1080/10646175.2014.864209

Exemplification 2.0. C Peter, C Rossmann, T Keyling, 10.1027/1864-1105/a000103Journal of Media Psychology: Theories, Methods, and Applications. 261*Peter, C., Rossmann, C., & Keyling, T. (2014). Exemplification 2.0. Journal of Media Psychology: Theories, Methods, and Applications, 26(1), 19-28. doi: 10.1027/1864-1105/a000103

Inf luenza vaccination: The persuasiveness of messages among people aged 65 years and older. G Prati, L Pietrantoni, B Zani, 10.1080/10410236.2011.606523Health Communication. 275*Prati, G., Pietrantoni, L., & Zani, B. (2012). Inf luenza vaccination: The persuasiveness of messages among people aged 65 years and older. Health Communication, 27(5), 413-420. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2011.606523

A close examination of trait reactance and issue involvement as moderators of psychological reactance theory. B L Quick, A M Scott, A M Ledbetter, 10.1080/10810730.2011.551989Journal of Health Communication. 166*Quick, B. L., Scott, A. M., & Ledbetter, A. M. (2011). A close examination of trait reactance and issue involvement as moderators of psychological reactance theory. Journal of Health Communication, 16(6), 660-679. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2011.551989

An examination of character similarity and message elaboration on psychological reactance within an entertainment education (EE) context. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Communication Association. B Quick, J Quintero Johnson, Chicago, IL*Quick, B., & Quintero Johnson, J. (2009). An examination of character similarity and message elaboration on psychological reactance within an entertainment education (EE) context. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Communication Association, Chicago, IL.

Understanding the effectiveness of the entertainment-education strategy: An investigation of how audience involvement, message processing, and message design influence health information recall. J *quintero Johnson, J M Harrison, K Quick, L Brian, 10.1080/10810730.2012.688244Journal of Health Communication. 18*Quintero Johnson, J., Harrison, J.M., Quick, K., & Brian, L. (2013). Understanding the effectiveness of the enter- tainment-education strategy: An investigation of how audience involvement, message processing, and message design influence health information recall. Journal of Health Communication, 18, 160-178. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2012.688244

Impact of diet-related cancer prevention messages written with cognitive and affective arguments on message characteristics, stage of change, and self-efficacy. L M Quintiliani, E T Carbone, 10.1016/s1499-4046(06Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 371*Quintiliani, L. M., & Carbone, E. T. (2005). Impact of diet-related cancer prevention messages written with cogni- tive and affective arguments on message characteristics, stage of change, and self-efficacy. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 37(1), 12-19. doi: 10.1016/s1499-4046(06)60254-6

An exploration of transportation and psychological reactance in organ donation PSAs. A M Reinhart, A E Anker, 10.1080/08824096.2012.704601Communication Research Reports. 294*Reinhart, A. M., & Anker, A. E. (2012). An exploration of transportation and psychological reactance in organ donation PSAs. Communication Research Reports, 29(4), 274-284. doi: 10.1080/08824096.2012.704601

S Rimmon-Kenan, Narrative fiction: Contemporary poetics. New York, NYRoutledgend ed.Rimmon-Kenan, S. (2002). Narrative fiction: Contemporary poetics (2 nd ed.). New York, NY: Routledge.

Addressing media stigma for people experiencing mental illness using an entertainment-education strategy. U *ritterfeld, S A Jin, 10.1177/1359105306061185Journal of Health Psychology. 112*Ritterfeld, U., & Jin, S. A. (2006). Addressing media stigma for people experiencing mental illness using an enter- tainment-education strategy. Journal of Health Psychology, 11(2), 247-267. doi: 10.1177/1359105306061185

Impacts of efficacy and exemplification in an online message about weight loss on weight management self-efficacy, satisfaction, and personal importance. M A Sarge, S Knobloch-Westerwick, 10.1080/10810730.2012.757392Journal of Health Communication. 187*Sarge, M. A., & Knobloch-Westerwick, S. (2013). Impacts of efficacy and exemplification in an online message about weight loss on weight management self-efficacy, satisfaction, and personal importance. Journal of Health Communication, 18(7), 827-844. doi: 10.1080/10810730.2012.757392

16 and pregnant": Examining the role of transportation and persuasive intent in the effects of an entertainmenteducation narrative. Unpublished dissertation. A Shafer, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC*Shafer, A. (2011). "16 and pregnant": Examining the role of transportation and persuasive intent in the effects of an entertainment- education narrative. Unpublished dissertation, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

All stories are not alike: A purpose-, content-, and valence-based taxonomy of patient narratives in decision aids. V A Shaffer, B J Zikmund-Fisher, 10.1177/0272989X12463266Medical Decision Making. 331Shaffer, V. A., & Zikmund-Fisher, B. J. (2013). All stories are not alike: A purpose-, content-, and valence-based tax- onomy of patient narratives in decision aids. Medical Decision Making, 33(1), 4-13. doi: 10.1177/0272989X12463266

The effects of process-focused versus experience-focused narratives in a breast cancer treatment decision task. V A Shaffer, L Hulsey, B J Zikmund-Fisher, 10.1016/j.pec.2013.07.013Patient Education and Counseling. 932*Shaffer, V. A., Hulsey, L., & Zikmund-Fisher, B. J. (2013a). The effects of process-focused versus experience-focused narratives in a breast cancer treatment decision task. Patient Education and Counseling, 93(2), 255-264. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2013.07.013

The effect of patient narratives on information search in a web-based breast cancer decision aid: An eye-tracking study. V A Shaffer, J Owens, B J Zikmund-Fisher, 10.2196/jmir.2784Journal of Medical Internet Research. 1512*Shaffer, V. A., Owens, J., & Zikmund-Fisher, B. J. (2013b). The effect of patient narratives on information search in a web-based breast cancer decision aid: An eye-tracking study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(12), 273-285. doi: 10.2196/jmir.2784

The effect of narrative information in a publicly available patient decision aid for early stage breast cancer. V A Shaffer, S Templin, L Hulsey, 10.1080/10410236.2012.717341Health Communication. 291*Shaffer, V. A., Templin, S., & Hulsey, L. (2013c). The effect of narrative information in a publicly available patient decision aid for early stage breast cancer. Health Communication, 29(1), 64-73. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2012.717341

Effectiveness of entertainment education in communicating health information: a systematic review. F Shen, J Han, 10.1080/01292986.2014.927895Asian Journal of Communication. 246Shen, F., & Han, J. (2014). Effectiveness of entertainment education in communicating health information: a system- atic review. Asian Journal of Communication, 24(6), 605-616. doi: 10.1080/01292986.2014.927895

Impact of narratives on persuasion in health communication: A meta-analysis. F Shen, V C Sheer, R Li, Journal of Advertising. 442Shen, F., Sheer, V. C., & Li, R. (2015). Impact of narratives on persuasion in health communication: A meta-analysis. Journal of Advertising, 44(2), 105-113.

Distracted by details: Narrative inf luence following conf licting stories. J P Simons, M C Green, 10.1080/15213269.2013.784694Media Psychology. 162*Simons, J. P., & Green, M. C. (2013). Distracted by details: Narrative inf luence following conf licting stories. Media Psychology, 16(2), 221-243. doi: 10.1080/15213269.2013.784694

A test of conversational and testimonial messages versus didactic presentations of nutrition information. M D Slater, D B Buller, E Waters, M Archibeque, M Leblanc, 10.1016/s1499-4046(06)60056-0Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 355*Slater, M. D., Buller, D. B., Waters, E., Archibeque, M., & LeBlanc, M. (2003). A test of conversational and testi- monial messages versus didactic presentations of nutrition information. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 35(5), 255-259. doi: 10.1016/s1499-4046(06)60056-0

Entertainment-Education and elaboration likelihood: Understanding the processing of narrative persuasion. M D Slater, D Rouner, 10.1093/ct/12.2.173Communication Theory. 122Slater, M. D., & Rouner, D. (2002). Entertainment-Education and elaboration likelihood: Understanding the pro- cessing of narrative persuasion. Communication Theory, 12(2), 173-191. doi: 10.1093/ct/12.2.173

Reduction of perceived social distance as an explanation for media's inf luence on personal risk perceptions: A test of the risk convergence model. J So, R Nabi, 10.1111/hcre.12005Human Communication Research. 393*So, J., & Nabi, R. (2013). Reduction of perceived social distance as an explanation for media's inf luence on per- sonal risk perceptions: A test of the risk convergence model. Human Communication Research, 39(3), 317-338. doi: 10.1111/hcre.12005

All blogs are not created equal: The role of narrative formats and user-generated comments in health prevention. C D Stavrositu, J Kim, 10.1080/10410236.2013.867296Health Communication. 305*Stavrositu, C. D., & Kim, J. (2015). All blogs are not created equal: The role of narrative formats and user-generat- ed comments in health prevention. Health Communication, 30(5), 485-495. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2013.867296

Differences in theoretical constructs of processing health information in narrative entertainment television messages. Unpublished dissertation. C R Stitt, Tuscon, AZUniversity of Arizona*Stitt, C. R. (2008). Differences in theoretical constructs of processing health information in narrative entertainment television messages. Unpublished dissertation, University of Arizona, Tuscon, AZ.

The persuasive impact of narratives: A comparison across message types and modalities. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association. C R Stitt, R Nabi, New York, NY* Stitt, C. R., & Nabi, R. (2005, may). The persuasive impact of narratives: A comparison across message types and modalities. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the International Communication Association, New York, NY.

V C Strasburger, B J Wilson, A B Jordan, Children, adolescents, and the media. Newbury Park, CASageStrasburger, V. C., Wilson, B. J., & Jordan, A. B. (2014). Children, adolescents, and the media (3 rd ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Sometimes stories sell: When are narrative appeals most likely to work?. R Thompson, G Haddock, 10.1002/ejsp.850European Journal of Social Psychology. 421*Thompson, R., & Haddock, G. (2012). Sometimes stories sell: When are narrative appeals most likely to work? European Journal of Social Psychology, 42(1), 92-102. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.850

Using written narratives in public health practice: A creative writing perspective. T Thompson, M W Kreuter, 10.5888/pcd11.130402Preventing Chronic Disease. 11Thompson, T., & Kreuter, M. W. (2014). Using written narratives in public health practice: A creative writing per- spective. Preventing Chronic Disease, 11, 1-7. doi: 10.5888/pcd11.130402

Can pictorial warning labels on cigarette packages address smoking-related health disparities? Field experiments in Mexico to assess pictorial warning label content. J F Thrasher, E Arillo-Santillán, V Villalobos, R Pérez-Hernández, D Hammond, J Carter, . . Regalado-Piñeda, J , 10.1007/s10552-012-9899-8Cancer Causes & Control. 231*Thrasher, J. F., Arillo-Santillán, E., Villalobos, V., Pérez-Hernández, R., Hammond, D., Carter, J., ... & Regalado- Piñeda, J. (2012). Can pictorial warning labels on cigarette packages address smoking-related health disparities? Field experiments in Mexico to assess pictorial warning label content. Cancer Causes & Control, 23(1), 69-80. doi: 10.1007/s10552-012-9899-8

The effects of engagement with entertainment. R Tukachinsky, R S Tokunaga, Communication Yearbook. 37Tukachinsky, R., & Tokunaga, R. S. (2013). The effects of engagement with entertainment. Communication Yearbook, 37, 287-322.

The inclusion of patient testimonials in decision aids effects on treatment choices. P A Ubel, C Jepson, J Baron, 10.1177/0272989x0102100108Medical Decision Making. 211*Ubel, P. A., Jepson, C., & Baron, J. (2001). The inclusion of patient testimonials in decision aids effects on treatment choices. Medical Decision Making, 21(1), 60-68. doi: 10.1177/0272989x0102100108

Health message framing: Moderators, mediators, and mysteries. Social and Personality Psychology Compass. J A Updegraff, A J Rothman, 10.1111/spc3.120567Updegraff, J. A., & Rothman, A. J. (2013). Health message framing: Moderators, mediators, and mysteries. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 7(9), 668-679. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12056

The extended transportation-imagery model: A meta-analysis of the antecedents and consequences of consumers' narrative transportation. T Van Laer, K De Ruyter, L M Visconti, M Wetzels, 10.1086/673383Journal of Consumer Research. 405Van Laer, T., De Ruyter, K., Visconti, L. M., & Wetzels, M. (2014). The extended transportation-imagery model: A meta-analysis of the antecedents and consequences of consumers' narrative transportation. Journal of Consumer Research, 40(5), 797-817. doi: 10.1086/673383

Expressing emotions as evidence in osteoporosis narratives: effects on message processing and intentions. J E Volkman, R L Parrott, 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2012.01433.xHuman Communication Research. 384*Volkman, J. E., & Parrott, R. L. (2012). Expressing emotions as evidence in osteoporosis narratives: effects on mes- sage processing and intentions. Human Communication Research, 38(4), 429-458. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2012.01433.x

An investigation of online health support groups: Effects of narrative exposure and social support on the experience of sympathy, self-disclosure and cognitive changes. Unpublished dissertation. W Wang, State College, PAPennsylvania State University*Wang, W. (2010). An investigation of online health support groups: Effects of narrative exposure and social support on the expe- rience of sympathy, self-disclosure and cognitive changes. Unpublished dissertation, Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA.

Health information, credibility, homophily, and inf luence via the Internet: Web sites versus discussion groups. Z Wang, J B Walther, S Pingree, R P Hawkins, 10.1080/10410230802229738Health Communication. 234*Wang, Z., Walther, J. B., Pingree, S., & Hawkins, R. P. (2008). Health information, credibility, homophily, and inf luence via the Internet: Web sites versus discussion groups. Health Communication, 23(4), 358-368. doi: 10.1080/10410230802229738

Developing and testing the anti-drinking and driving PSA. K Weber, M R Dillow, K A Rocca, 10.1080/01463373.2011.597285Communication Quarterly. 594*Weber, K., Dillow, M. R., & Rocca, K. A. (2011). Developing and testing the anti-drinking and driving PSA. Communication Quarterly, 59(4), 415-427. doi: 10.1080/01463373.2011.597285

Creating persuasive messages advocating organ donation. K Weber, M M Martin, M Corrigan, 10.1080/01463370500270413Communication Quarterly. 541*Weber, K., Martin, M. M., & Corrigan, M. (2006). Creating persuasive messages advocating organ donation. Communication Quarterly, 54(1), 67-87. doi: 10.1080/01463370500270413

Telepresence and exemplification in health messages: The relationships among spatial and social presence and exemplars and exemplification effects. D *westerman, P R Spence, X Lin, 10.1080/08934215.2014.971838Communication Reports. 282*Westerman, D., Spence, P. R., & Lin, X. (2015). Telepresence and exemplification in health messages: The relation- ships among spatial and social presence and exemplars and exemplification effects. Communication Reports, 28(2), 92-102. doi: 10.1080/08934215.2014.971838

Stories to communicate risks about tobacco: Development of a brief scale to measure transportation into a video story-The ACCE Project. J H Williams, M C Green, C Kohler, J J Allison, T K Houston, 10.1177/0017896910373171Health Education Journal. 702*Williams, J. H., Green, M. C., Kohler, C., Allison, J. J., & Houston, T. K. (2011). Stories to communicate risks about tobacco: Development of a brief scale to measure transportation into a video story-The ACCE Project. Health Education Journal, 70(2), 184-191. doi: 10.1177/0017896910373171

Changing attitudes towards polio vaccination: A randomized trial of an evidence-based presentation versus a presentation from a polio survivor. K Wilson, E J Mills, G Norman, G Tomlinson, 10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.12.002Vaccine. 23*Wilson, K., Mills, E. J., Norman, G., & Tomlinson, G. (2005). Changing attitudes towards polio vaccination: A randomized trial of an evidence-based presentation versus a presentation from a polio survivor. Vaccine, 23, 3010- 3015. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2004.12.002

Patient stories about their dialysis experience biases others' choices regardless of doctor's advice: An experimental study. A E Winterbottom, H L Bekker, M Conner, A F Mooney, 10.1093/ndt/gfr266Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation. 271* Winterbottom, A. E., Bekker, H. L., Conner, M., & Mooney, A. F. (2012). Patient stories about their dialysis expe- rience biases others' choices regardless of doctor's advice: An experimental study. Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation, 27(1), 325-331. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfr266

The effects of narrative and message framing on engagement and eating intention among a sample of adult Hispanics. J G Wirtz, S Kulpavaropas, 10.1016/j.jneb.2013.12.005Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior. 465*Wirtz, J. G., & Kulpavaropas, S. (2014). The effects of narrative and message framing on engagement and eating intention among a sample of adult Hispanics. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 46(5), 396-400. doi: 10.1016/j.jneb.2013.12.005

Effects of using online narrative and didactic information on healthcare participation for breast cancer patients. M Wise, J Y Han, B Shaw, F Mctavish, D H Gustafson, 10.1016/j.pec.2007.11.009Patient Education and Counseling. 703*Wise, M., Han, J. Y., Shaw, B., McTavish, F., & Gustafson, D. H. (2008). Effects of using online narrative and di- dactic information on healthcare participation for breast cancer patients. Patient Education and Counseling, 70(3), 348-356. doi: 10.1016/j.pec.2007.11.009

Understanding narrative effects: The role of discrete negative emotions on message processing and attitudes among low-income African American women. J H Yoo, M W Kreuter, C Lai, Q Fu, doi: 10.1080/1Health Communication. 295*Yoo, J. H., Kreuter, M. W., Lai, C., & Fu, Q. (2014). Understanding narrative effects: The role of discrete negative emotions on message processing and attitudes among low-income African American women. Health Communication, 29(5), 494-504. doi: 10.1080/1

Communicating the risks of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: Effects of message framing and exemplification. N Yu, L A Ahern, C Connolly-Ahern, F Shen, 10.1080/10410236.2010.521910Health Communication. 258*Yu, N., Ahern, L. A., Connolly-Ahern, C. & Shen, F. (2010). Communicating the risks of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder: Effects of message framing and exemplification. Health Communication, 25(8), 692-699. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2010.521910

The differential impact of statistical and narrative evidence on beliefs, attitude, and intention: A meta-analysis. Health communication. S Zebregs, B Van Den Putte, P Neijens, A De Graaf, 10.1080/10410236.2013.84252830Zebregs, S., van den Putte, B., Neijens, P., & de Graaf, A. (2015). The differential impact of statistical and narrative evidence on beliefs, attitude, and intention: A meta-analysis. Health communication, 30 (3), 282-289. doi: 10.1080/10410236.2013.842528

Examining the Impact of Exposure to a Bipolar Disorder Storyline Using the Entertainment Overcoming Resistance Model. Unpublished dissertation. D Zhao, Tallahassee, FLFlorida State University*Zhao, D. (2014). Examining the Impact of Exposure to a Bipolar Disorder Storyline Using the Entertainment Overcoming Resistance Model. Unpublished dissertation, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL.

Narrative persuasion, transportation, and the role of need for cognition in online viewing of fantastical films. L Zwarun, A Hall, 10.1080/15213269.2012.700592Media Psychology. 153Zwarun, L., & Hall, A. (2012). Narrative persuasion, transportation, and the role of need for cognition in online viewing of fantastical films. Media Psychology, 15(3), 327-355. doi: 10.1080/15213269.2012.700592

Copyrights and Repositories This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-3.0 Unported License. Copyrights and Repositories This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-3.0 Unported License.

This license allows you to download this work and share it with others as long as you credit the author and the journal. You cannot use it commercially without the written permission of the author and the journal. Review of Communication Research. This license allows you to download this work and share it with others as long as you credit the author and the jour- nal. You cannot use it commercially without the written permission of the author and the journal (Review of Communication Research).

The licensor permits others to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work for non-commercial purposes only, unless you get the written permission of the author and the journal. The above rules are crucial and bound to the general license agreement. that you can read atThe licensor permits others to copy, distribute, display, and perform the work for non-commercial purposes only, unless you get the written permission of the author and the journal. The above rules are crucial and bound to the general license agreement that you can read at:

Attached is a list of permanent repositories where you can find the articles published by RCR: Academia. collection "community textsAttached is a list of permanent repositories where you can find the articles published by RCR: Academia.edu @ http://independent.academia.edu/ReviewofCommunicationResearch Internet Archive @ http://archive.org (collection "community texts")

. Social Science Open Access Repository. Social Science Open Access Repository, SSOAR @ http://www.ssoar.info/en/home.html

Hoeken Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects Review of Communication Research. De Graaf, &amp; Sanders, 4De Graaf, Sanders & Hoeken Characteristics of narrative interventions and health effects Review of Communication Research 2016, 4, 88-131