# THE HOSPITAL. 355 THE MALARIAL SURVEY IN ENGLAND

CorpusID: 43972880
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40b0ec9a2cc5a2e53ea7ebb1665d6eaa1db4cdee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40b0ec9a2cc5a2e53ea7ebb1665d6eaa1db4cdee)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

THE HOSPITAL. 355 THE MALARIAL SURVEY IN ENGLAND
July 3j 19o0

THE HOSPITAL. 355 THE MALARIAL SURVEY IN ENGLAND
July 3j 19o0


A Review of Interest to Health Workers. rW0 circumstances prompt us to make special in v contribution to public health matters ^ England, the basis of which is recounted in e new book on malaria by Col. S. P. James as re-,e^V?(l elsewhere (p. 358). The "first is that whatt r the forecasts of last year may have been with th frd t? malaria in this country, the fact remains ^ t to-day all central laboratories are meeting a ofry large increase of " positives " in the samples ^ 3^?cd sent to them for malarial examination.

. e second is that malaria as a disease has been eonj.(, ered to belong so essentially' to the realms of epical medicine that it is doubtful whether the eit}raRe health worker in this country fully realises "th ^1G frequency with which he may come across a0f Prions agencies concerned in its spread or even ual instances of early infection in men, women, "r children. and their larvae were abundant in ds, ditches, and flooded areas near the outskirts ^le town; that these insects differed in any Gntial respect from their sub-tropical brothers was amply disproved by deliberately feeding them on malarial patients and proving that they were perfectly efficient hosts for tho benign tertian parasite. A full account of this work was published in the journal of the R.A.M.C., November 1917, p. 615, and it is unnecessary here to detail the relatively obvious methods which were taken to counteract the menace locally. But with this example so strikingly proved it is not surprising that similar investigations were carried out as rapidly as possible in other districts. To the wider distribution thus determined we shall return in a later paragraph, and for the moment confine our attention to the house-to-house incidence.

Malarial Houses.

It is extremely important to note, however, that cases were not scattered at random throughout the town, but were definitely localised to certain streets and houses. So noticeable was this that the findings provided some striking examples of " malarious houses," which were aptly compared with the j^ellow fever houses '' that so long puzzled epidemiologists before this fever was known to be carried by the domestic or stegomyia, mosquitoes. In one instance a landlady proved to be an apparently healthy carrier, and indirectly infected at intervals a number of lodgers at her house. Such transference is not in itself surprising, but combined with the distributional evidence it brings us to realisation that the '' localised character of distribution of cases of malaria in England, and particularly the incidence in houses and families, indicates that the mosquito concerned (A. maculipennis) has the habit of remaining most of its life within or in the immediate vicinity of the house where it obtained its first meals of blood.'' Herein lies the first great difference to the corresponding tropical situation where the insects travel far and wide, and Tor this we would suggest a climatic explanation. But the lesson which it carries for the health worker is that there are a set of conditions likely to arise in poorerclass dwellings which constitutes them " dangerous." It is beyond the scope of this note to describe them in more detail than low-pitched, dark houses, having plentiful day-time resting corners for the insects.

Colonel James has entered very fully into the subject, and the point we would emphasise is that the health worker has to be on the look-out for mosquito-favouring circumstances in such dwellings, and where possible examples of family infection have occurred they must essentially search for all such " malarious houses," and, apart from preventing undue entry of troops or strangers, do all in their power to bring about local improvement.

The Malarial Map.

If we look at a map of England charted to show the past and present distribution of the disease, there are a number of interesting points to be made July 3, 1920, The Malarial Survey in England?(continued). out. The distribution of " ague " in the nineteenth century seems to have been mainly along the East Coast and in .the Eastern and South-Eastern Counties. A certain amount occurred in Hampshire, opposite the Isle of Wight, and isolated areas near some of the older ports on the West are also marked in. But when this incidence is compared with the findings of the most recent survey (1917)(1918), it is noticed that although cases ol apparently indigenous malaria occurred over similarly distributed but more widely separated localities, yet in only one county (Kent) was there any considerable local spread of the disease. This circumstance is difficult to explain on grounds other than the fact that around the mouth of the Thames and the partially reclaimed marshes was found the last real stronghold of the original English ague, but it can be claimed thai; in this district definite proof has been obtained that there do remain in England a few areas where true indigenous English malaria persists.

Soueces of Actual Infection.

Thus we must conclude that there are both insects capable of carrying the disease and circumstgjaces in which only a century ago they quite success^ did so. Hence the obvious danger of the malap carrier in this country and the need for his eariie"| possible detection. With regard to cases return^ to the country from the East, although each relap of malaria in these men can be quickly cured W quinine, no present treatment suffices to effect permanent cure in a reasonably short period of titff From the map showing the present distribution of returned Ministry of Pensions cases, it is at 0ll_, realised that these men are now scattered broadc3:_ throughout the country.

Notification since ?

Ministry of Health's regulations of March 1, has done much to keep accurate the official kn?^ ledge of the whereabouts of these possible carri#5. but we know the limitations of such circumsta0^ in practice, and it is for this reason that we call the attention of the humblest health worker the absolute necessity that he or she should acq1111, a reasonably practical knowledge of malaria aS. disease, and should bear in mind that it is at ^ moment of as great importance to the health retu^j of the future as many of those classical conditi0,1"' which time and custom have made the espeCl;! concern of the public health services in England


The Meaning of a Survey. ^ summary the main features of this survey are W <??rnec^ with, (1) discovering the disease in any inf ? ' (^) searching out the human sources of ?n; (3) ascertaining the particular species of le, S^to which is transmitting the disease, and the finer points in its life history;(4)-tio 

the circumstances which make a popula-

a 

11 susceptible; (5) correlating the results to give 

?an i 

r picture of the distribution of the disease 

^ 

the manner in which it has arisen; (6) on this 

?acti^' ^ormu^ate a precise plan of preventive 

Historical. 

}^n August 21, 1917, at an Epsom hospital 

jjj "o11 tertian malarial parasites were found in the 

~ 

of a soldier who had never been out of 

j. ^'land, and whose history suggested that he con-
folj 

'ed the disease in camp near Sheerness. Then 

?Wed the famous investigation at the Kentish 

it, and in a very short time a number of similar 

e"lnfected military cases were discovered. As 
^ estigation extended to the local civil population 

<lef 

Sanie thing was discovered, and, besides certain 

i(.., 

'"te foci of infection, a seasoned incidence, with 
Maximum in September, was also proved. 
(] !?tber point of even greater importance was eluci-
namely> that at least one of the cases had 

Seated before any troops whatever had returned 

th ^ ^le East, and on these findings, together with 
^ local knowledge that as late as 1870 " 

nearly 

ly?ne in Queenborough suffered from ague," it 

\v !S Conchaded that among the civilian cases there 

di? 

e 

some definite examples of true indigenous 

L 

i 

^ which had never quite disappeared from the 

-c , !|ty. At this time no difficulty was found in 

fi 

^ a number of adult Anopheles maculipennis 

Po i