# Stillbirth in the African Great Lakes region: A pooled analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys

CorpusID: 52120466
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b62af7736f4ca2ea370ac9934585459a82a0d670](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b62af7736f4ca2ea370ac9934585459a82a0d670)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Stillbirth in the African Great Lakes region: A pooled analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys


Blessing Jaka Akombi *b.akombi@westernsydney.edu.au 
School of Science and Health
Western Sydney University
PenrithNew South WalesAustralia

PrameshRaj Ghimire 
School of Science and Health
Western Sydney University
PenrithNew South WalesAustralia

Kingsley Emwinyore Agho 
School of Science and Health
Western Sydney University
PenrithNew South WalesAustralia

Andre Masumbuko Renzaho 
School of Social Sciences and Psychology
Western Sydney University
PenrithNew South WalesAustralia

Stillbirth in the African Great Lakes region: A pooled analysis of Demographic and Health Surveys
RESEARCH ARTICLE
BackgroundThe aim of this study was to estimate the rate and predisposing factors associated with stillbirth in the African Great Lakes region (Burundi, Congo Democratic Republic, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda).Methods and findingsCross-sectional data from the most recent Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) of countries in the African Great Lakes region were used in this study. DHS from Congo Democratic Republic was not included in the analyses because data was not collected for stillbirth in the country survey. A pooled sample of 57046 pregnancies of 7+ months' duration and 1002 stillbirths were included in the final analysis. The analyses were restricted to stillbirths reported in the 5 years preceding the surveys. Stillbirth was defined as foetal death in the third trimester (! 28 weeks' gestation). Multilevel logistic regression analyses that adjusted for cluster and survey weights were used to determine the factors associated with stillbirth in the Africa Great Lakes region. Health service variables and maternal medical condition variables were not included in the analysis because DHS do not collect data on these variables for pregnancies that did not result in a live birth. Burundi had the highest stillbirth rate per 1000 births [23% (95% CI: 20, 25)] within the region. Factors associated with stillbirth across the region were: no schooling [1.85 (95%Cl: 1.44, 2.38)] and primary education [1.64 (1.32, 2.05)], advanced maternal age [2.39 (95% CI: 1.59, 3.59)], smoking [1.99 (95% CI: 1.19, 3.32)] and drinking water from unimproved sources [1.18 (95% CI: 1.01, 1.37)].

## Conclusion

To achieve Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP) stillbirth target of 12 per 1000 births or less by 2030, policy interventions to prevent stillbirth should focus on promoting communitybased socio-educational programmes which encourages a healthy lifestyle especially among uneducated women in the advanced age spectrum. a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 a1111111111 Introduction organizations to structure effective interventions targeted at improving maternal health from conception through to delivery.


## Methods

This study utilized datasets from the most recent DHS conducted in countries within the African Great Lakes region (Burundi, Congo DR, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda). These datasets were pooled to ascertain the most significant factors associated with stillbirth across the Great Lakes region. However, DHS conducted in Congo DR did not collect data on stillbirth as a result Congo DR was excluded from the analysis. The DHS is a nationally representative survey which collect data on mortality, fertility, family planning and maternal and child health. The DHS programme uses standardized methods in their surveys to ensure uniformity of results from different countries. The survey employs a stratified, multi-stage (cluster), random sampling design. Information was obtained from eligible women aged 15-49 who participated in the survey in each country. Detailed survey methodology and sampling methods used in gathering the data have been reported elsewhere [9][10][11][12][13].

The analyses were restricted to stillbirths reported in the 5 years preceding the surveys in order to limit differential recall of events by the mothers. A birth history with reproductive calendar was used to estimate stillbirth in all the individual country DHS.


## Outcome measure

The main outcome measure for this study was stillbirth which refers to a baby born with no signs of life at or after 28 weeks' gestation [1]. The study outcome was reported as a binary variable with 'Stillbirth' coded as 1 and 'Live birth' coded as 0. Stillbirth was identified using reproductive calendar information such as duration of pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes.


## Study variables

The study variables used in this analysis were classified based on Mosley and Chen framework of factors influencing child survival in developing countries [20] into country and community level factors, socioeconomic level factors, maternal level factors, media level factors and environmental level factors as shown in Fig 1. Country and community level factors included the DHS country of survey and type of residence. The socioeconomic level factors were maternal education, maternal literacy, wealth index, maternal occupation, and maternal working status. The household wealth index serves as an indicator of the economic status of the household which is consistent with household assets, income and expenditure measures. The household assets and facilities used in calculating this index include: television (TV), refrigerator, bicycle, radio, motorcycle, car, electricity, type of toilet facility and type of building materials used in the place of dwelling. The index was represented as a score of household assets via the principle components analysis (PCA) method [21] and was categorized into five national-level wealth quintiles: poorest, poor, middle, rich and richest with the bottom 40% being referred to as the poorest and poor households, the next 20% as the middle-class households, and the top 40% as rich and richest households. Media level factors consist of listening to radio, reading newspaper and watching of TV. Maternal level factors were mother's age at first birth, maternal body mass index (BMI), previous death of baby, maternal smoking status and use of contraceptives. Maternal BMI and watching of TV were excluded from the modelling because of large number of missing values which if included might bias the results. Environmental level factors were source of drinking water and type of cooking fuel. Source of drinking water was categorized into improved and unimproved sources according to WHO/UNICEF guidelines [22]. Improved water sources include piped water in a dwelling, plot or yard, public taps or standpipes, tube wells or boreholes, protected dug wells, protected springs and rainwater collection. Unimproved water sources include unprotected dug well, unprotected spring, cart with small tank/drum, tanker truck, bottled water and surface water (river, dam, lake, pond, stream, canal, and irrigation channels). Type of cooking fuel was classified as solid fuel and non-solid fuel. Solid fuels include (i) traditional biomass (wood, charcoal, agricultural residues, and dung), (ii) processed biomass (pellets, briquettes); and (iii) other solid fuels (such as coal and lignite). Nonsolid fuels include (i) liquid fuels (kerosene, ethanol, or other biofuels), (ii) gaseous fuels (natural gas, Liquefied petroleum gas, and biogas), and (iii) electricity [23].


## Data analysis

This study was based on secondary data analysis. The stillbirth rate and 95% confidence interval were estimated using the number of pregnancy losses during or after the seventh month of pregnancy for the 5 years preceding the interview, divided by the number of live births multiplied by 1,000.

Generalized linear latent and mixed models (GLLAMM) with the logit link and binomial family [24] that adjusted for cluster and survey weights were used to determine the factors significantly associated with stillbirth. A multivariable analysis was conducted using a five staged conceptual model as shown in Fig 1. Country and community level factors were first entered into the baseline model to assess their association with the study outcome and factors significantly associated with the study outcome were retained. In the second stage, socioeconomic level factors were added to the significant factors retained from the first model and factors significantly associated with the study outcome in the combined models were retained. This procedure was repeated for the third, fourth and fifth modelling stages with the inclusion of maternal level factors, media level factors and environmental level factors respectively. At each modelling stage, only factors with p-values <0.05 were retained. The adjusted risk of independent variables was determined by estimating the odds ratios with 95% confidence interval (Cl) and those with p < 0.05 were retained in the final model. In the GLLAMM analysis, the intracluster correlation (ICC) with standard errors (SE) were obtained for the final model. Collinearity was also tested and reported in the final model. To avoid any statistical bias, the results from the analysis were double checked by: (1) entering only potential risk factors with a p-value < 0.20 obtained in the univariable analysis for backward elimination process, and (2) testing the backward elimination method by including all potential risk factors.


## Ethics

This study was based on the analysis of existing datasets in the DHS repository that are freely available online with all identifier information removed. Hence, no ethics approval was required. However, the first author communicated with MEASURE DHS/ICF International, and permission was granted to download and use the datasets.  Table 2 shows the stillbirth rates and 95% Confidence Intervals (CI) by study variable within each country in the African Great Lakes region. Stillbirth was significantly higher in rural areas than urban areas in Burundi. Stillbirth was significantly higher among mothers with no schooling and mothers with secondary or higher education in Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda. Likewise, stillbirth was significantly higher among the poor households compared to the rich households in Burundi. Stillbirth was also significantly among mothers <20 years and 30+ in Burundi, Rwanda and Tanzania. Stillbirth was significantly higher among smokers across all 5 countries. Stillbirth was higher among mothers who did not use contraceptives in Kenya, Burundi, Tanzania and Uganda.


## Results


## Distribution of study variables


## Factors associated with stillbirth

In the univariate analysis, stillbirth was significantly associated with country of survey (Burundi and Tanzania), type of residence (rural), maternal education (primary and no schooling), maternal literacy (illiterate), wealth index (middle class), maternal occupation (agriculture), maternal working status (currently working), maternal age at first birth (30+), maternal smoking status (smokers), use of contraceptives and source of drinking water (unimproved).

In the multivariate analysis, Burundi was more susceptible to stillbirth compared with other countries in the region. Mothers with no schooling and with primary education are more likely to have stillbirth compared with mothers with secondary or higher education. Mothers who are above 30 years of age were more prone to stillbirth than those below 20 years. Mothers who smoke were more susceptible to stillbirth than non-smokers. Mothers who drank water from unimproved sources were more likely to have stillbirth than mothers who drank from improved water sources as shown in Table 3.

In the final model, maternal education was replaced with wealth index and a significant association was reported between the poor [1.29 (95%CI: 1.04, 1.61)], the middle class [1.45 


## Discussion

This study examined the rate of stillbirth across the African Great Lakes region to ascertain the intra-regional distribution of stillbirth in order to assist in the prioritization of interventions for countries with a higher burden of stillbirth. Burundi reported the highest rate of stillbirth in the region. The recent political instability in Burundi has resulted in a severely damaged health sector. Burundi's health system suffers from a lack of adequate medical infrastructure and human resources to meet urgent community health needs [25]. The high rate of stillbirth in Burundi could be addressed by targeting the quality of healthcare services provided by the health system during the antenatal period. However, the country's government capacity to invest in the health sector is limited which grossly affects health service delivery. Therefore, to improve birth outcomes in Burundi, government and non-governmental organizations should focus on reinforcing the overall health system. In this study, lack of maternal education was reported as a significant factor associated with stillbirth. Previous studies have shown that an increase in maternal education could lead to a corresponding improvement in healthy behaviors such as the timely decision to seek appropriate medical care during pregnancy [26,27]. Studies have also shown that a higher maternal education could also increase health service utilization such as antenatal care services which involves serologic screening for syphilis, iron-folic acid supplementation, malaria treatment and prophylaxis, diagnoses and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria, blood pressure monitoring, anti-tetanus immunization, and the prevention of mother-to-child transmission of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) thereby leading to a reduction in stillbirth [28][29][30][31]. Thus, this study provides supportive evidence that a lack of maternal education is associated with an increased susceptibility to stillbirth across the African Great Lakes region. This present study also reported that advanced maternal age was significantly associated with stillbirth across the African Great Lakes region. This finding is consistent with results from other studies which show that advanced maternal age was associated with a range of pregnancy complications such as: placental abruption, fetal growth restriction, pre-term birth and preeclampsia which are known modifiable causes of stillbirth [32][33][34]. A systematic review conducted on the strength of association between advanced maternal age and stillbirth also reported a positive relationship between increasing maternal age and the magnitude of risk of stillbirth [35]. Contrary to the findings of this study, teenage mothers (>20 years) have been reported as being at a higher risk of stillbirth. Young mothers are prone to many health-related complications which arise not only from medical causes but have underlying sociocultural influences. These influences could result from lack of education, limited autonomy to make decisions due to family pressure and poor health-seeking behaviours [36][37][38][39]. Studies have reported a lower rate of early registration of pregnancy, use of health services, and frequency of routine antenatal check-ups and consumption of the recommended dosage of prophylactic iron-folic acid supplements among young pregnant women indicating that these mothers tend to be more negligent about their pregnancy either due to lack of awareness or immaturity [37][38][39][40][41]. However, a systematic review conducted on the predictors of stillbirth in low and middle income countries (LMICs) reported a high risk of stillbirths among mothers over 40 years of age which gradually decreased to its lowest point among mothers of 25-29 years old before   (11,15) 23 (21,26) 15 (14,17) 20 (17,22) 17 (15,19) 


## Maternal education

Secondary or higher 11 (10,13) 14 (12,16) 12 (10,13) 15 (13,16) 12 (10,14) Primary 14 (13,16) 24 (22,27) 14 (12,16) 19 (17,21) 18 (16,20) No schooling 13 (12,15) 23 (21,25) 24 (22,27) 20 (18,22) 20 (18,22) Maternal literacy 


## Previous death of baby

No previous death 14 (12,16) 23 (21,25) 15 (13,17) 20 (18,23) 17 (15,19) Had previous death 10(8, 11) 22 (20,24) 17 (15,19) 13 (11,14) 15 (13,17) 


## Maternal smoking status

Non-smoker 13 (12,15) 22 (20,25) 15 (13,17) 18 (16,20) 16 (14,18) Smoker 0(0, 0) 33 (30,35) 85(81, 90) 30 (28,33) 26 (24,29) Use of contraceptives Currently using 9 (8,10) 19 (17,21) 14 (12,16) 14 (12,16) 13 (12,15) Currently not using 18 (16,20) 24 (22,26) 17 (15,19) 21 (19,23) 18 (16,20) Listening to radio Yes 14 (12,15) 23 (21,25) 16 (14,18) 19 (17,21) 17 (15,19) No 12 (10,14) 22 (20,24) 13 (11,15) 16 (14,18) 14 (12,15) 


## Reading newspaper

Yes 12 (11,14) 43 (39,46) 9 (8,11) 17 (15,19) 15 (13,16) No 14 (12,15) 22 (20,24) 15 (14,17) 19 (17,21) 17 (15,19) Watching television (Continued) increasing again among younger mothers [42]. Therefore interventions to reduce stillbirth should focus on both young and older mothers. Maternal smoking during pregnancy has been well documented as being significantly associated with a range of obstetrics complications and poor pregnancy outcomes including stillbirth [43][44][45][46]. A systematic review of observational studies that measured the association between maternal smoking during pregnancy and the risk of stillbirth reported a doseresponse effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy on risk of stillbirth indicating the more a mother smokes during pregnancy, the higher the risk of stillbirth [47]. Our finding adds to the body of research providing evidence that support the need to educate women on the risks of smoking to their unborn child.

Mothers who drank water from unimproved sources were more likely to have stillbirth. This may be as a result of environmental contamination of drinking water by chemical compounds which adversely affects birth outcomes [48]. It could also be due to suboptimal environmental sanitation which exposes underground water sources to bacterial contamination which on consumption could have adverse consequences on the foetus.


## Strengths and limitations

This study has a number of strengths. First, this study is population-based with a large sample size and a high response rate (> 90%) thus reducing a likely chance of selection bias. Second, the datasets used in this study are from nationally representative surveys and the variables are similarly defined in all surveys, hence comparable across all countries. Third, this study applied appropriate statistical adjustments to pooled data obtained from 5 nationally representative surveys and was able to identify the significant factors associated with stillbirth across the region to inform policies formulation.

Despite these merits, this study also has some limitations. First, due to the cross-sectional nature of the study design, this paper is unable to establish a causal relationship between stillbirth and the independent variables. Second, the diagnosis of stillbirth was from retrospective data based on self-report from mothers and this could be a source of recall and misclassification bias. Third, DHS do not collect data on modifiable risk factors associated with stillbirths which include maternal lifestyle such as maternal alcohol use or maternal obstetric complications such as antepartum haemorrhage, intra-uterine growth retardation, eclampsia, preeclampsia, congenital anomalies or maternal medical condition such as gestational diabetes, chronic hypertension, HIV, malaria, and genetic abnormality as well as maternal health service utilization such as folate supplementation and timing of commencement of antenatal care. Therefore, these factors could not be adjusted for during the analysis. A study by Tshibumbu  (10,13) 17 (15,19) 16 (14,18) 18 (16,20) N/A No 14 (12,16) 23 (21,25) 15 (13,17) 19 (16,21) N/A


## Types of cooking fuel

Non-solid fuel 17 (15,19) 0(0, 0) 0(0, 0) 6(5, 7) 60(56, 64) Solid fuel 13 (11,15) 22 (20,25) 16 (14,18) 19 (17,21) 16 (14,18) Source of drinking water Improved 11 (10,13) 22 (19,24) 14 (13,16) 20 (17,22) 14 (13,16) Unimproved 17 (15,19) 26 (24,29) 18 (16,20) 17 (15,19) 22 (20,25)  and Blitz [18] examining modifiable antenatal risk factors for stillbirth amongst pregnant women in Namibia found that among a total of 14 modifiable risk factors included in the study, 11 (or 78.6%) were prevalent amongst women who had a stillbirth. It is possible that these factors also play an important role in explaining the burden of stillbirth in the Great Lake region; however, further studies are required to elucidate this. Finally, information on the limitations of the DHS data availability for stillbirth has been described elsewhere [49,50]. Notwithstanding the above limitations, this study is useful and timely in identifying the factors associated with stillbirth across the African Great Lakes region to assist in proper public health planning. This is particularly important as the region is recovering from wars and our findings should inform development initiatives addressing maternal and child health to reduce socioeconomic inequalities in stillbirths. These findings will inform policy formulation around cost-effective socio-educational interventions aimed at improving foetal survival by increasing maternal education especially among women of advanced reproductive age in the African Great Lakes region.


## Conclusions

Stillbirth is a public health problem; however, it is highly preventable. This study shows the most significant factors associated with stillbirth across the African Great Lakes region were: maternal education (no schooling and primary education), advanced maternal age (30 + years), mother's smoking status (smokers) and source of drinking water (unimproved). Therefore, community-based programmes promoting family planning initiatives and a healthy lifestyle are urgently needed to assist women in the proper timing of their pregnancies and to encourage healthy living especially among women with low education. This intervention will enable the region to achieve the Every Newborn Action Plan (ENAP) stillbirth target of 12 per 1000 births or less by 2030.

Supporting information S1 


## Author Contributions

Conceptualization: Blessing Jaka Akombi.

Formal analysis: Pramesh Raj Ghimire. 

## Fig 2 .
2Stillbirth rates by country in the African Great Lakes Region. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202603.g002

## Table 1
1shows the number of pregnancies of 7+ months' duration by country and the distribution of the study variables in the African Great Lakes region. Kenya and Burundi reported 9,484 and 13,835 pregnancies respectively. Rwanda and Tanzania reported 8,127 and 10,163 pregnancies respectively, while Uganda reported 15,437 pregnancies. A total sample of 57046 pregnancies of 7+ months' duration was reported across the region. Fig 2 shows stillbirth rate per 1000 births for countries in the African Great Lakes region. Burundi [23% (95% CI: 20, 25)] and Tanzania [18% (95% CI: 16, 21)] reported the highest stillbirth rate. However, the rate did not differ statistically because their confidence interval overlapped. Compared to Burundi, stillbirth rate was statistically lower in Kenya 13% [95% CI: 11, 16], Rwanda 15% [95% CI: 13, 18] and Uganda 16% [95% CI: 14, 18].

## Table 1 .
1Distribution of study variables (N = 57046).Study Variables 
N 
% 

Country and community level factors 

Country of survey 

Kenya 
9484 
17 

Burundi 
13835 
24 

Rwanda 
8127 
14 

Tanzania 
10163 
18 

Uganda 
15437 
27 

Type of residence 

Urban 
12061 
21 

Rural 
44984 
79 

Socioeconomic level factors 

Maternal education 

Secondary or higher 
11198 
20 

Primary 
33158 
58 

No schooling 
12690 
22 

Maternal literacy (N = 57037) 

Literate 
38636 
68 

Illiterate 
18381 
32 

Wealth index 

Rich 
12215 
21 

Middle 
23208 
41 

Poor 
21623 
38 

Maternal occupation (N = 56987) 

Not working 
8601 
15 

Skilled/Professional 
13060 
23 

Agriculture 
35326 
62 

Maternal working status (N = 57028) 

Currently not working 
11744 
21 

Currently working 
45284 
79 

Maternal level factors 

Mother's age at first birth (N = 56899) 

<20 
29717 
52 

20-29 
26279 
46 

30+ 
903 
2 
ÃÃ Maternal BMI (N = 35499) 

18.5 
1935 
3 

18-25 
25486 
45 

25+ 
8078 
14 

Previous death of baby 

No previous death 
42599 
75 

Had previous death 
14446 
25 

Maternal smoking status 

Non-smoker 
56568 
99 

Smoker 
478 
1 

Use of contraceptives 

Currently using 
22558 
40 

Currently not using 
34487 
60 

(Continued) 


## Table 1 .
1(Continued) Ã Percentages did not add up to 100% because of missing values. ÃÃ Large number of missing values, variable was excluded from modelling. † YES = Listens to the radio at least once a week, † NO = Does not listen to the radio at least once a week. ¶ YES = Reads the newspaper, ¶ NO = Does not read the newspaper. YES = Watches television at least once a week, Δ NO = Does not watch television at least once a week https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202603.t001Study Variables 
N 
% 

Media level factors 

Listening to radio (N = 57028) 
 † Yes 
38951 
68 
 † No 
18076 
32 

Reading newspaper (N = 57028) 
 ¶ Yes 
11235 
20 
 ¶ No 
45793 
80 
ÃÃ Watching of TV (N = 41592) 

Δ 

Yes 
12348 
22 

Δ 

No 
29244 
51 

Environmental level factors 
Ã Types of cooking fuel (N = 55675) 

Non-solid fuel 
966 
2 

Solid fuel 
54709 
96 
Ã Source of drinking water (N = 55675) 

Improved 
39680 
70 

Unimproved 
15994 
28 

Δ 

Stillbirth in the African Great Lakes region 



## Table 2 .
2Stillbirth rates and 95% CI in five countries in the African Great Lakes Region.Kenya (N = 9484) 
Burundi (N = 13835) 
Rwanda (N = 8127) 
Tanzania 
(N = 10163) 

Uganda (N = 15437) 

Study variables 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 

Type of residence 

Urban 
14(12, 16) 
16(14, 18) 
16(14, 18) 
16(14, 18) 
14(12, 16) 

Rural 
13

## Table 2 .
2(Continued)    Kenya (N = 9484) 
Burundi (N = 13835) 
Rwanda (N = 8127) 
Tanzania 
(N = 10163) 

Uganda (N = 15437) 

Study variables 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 
Rate(95%CI) 

Yes 
12

## Table 3 .
3Unadjusted and adjusted Odd Ratios (OR) for factors associated with stillbirths in the African Great Lakes region.Study Variables 
OR (95% CI) 
P-Value 
OR (95% CI) 
P-Value 

Country of survey 

Kenya 
1.00 
1.00 

Burundi 
1.72 (1.32, 2.25) 
<0.001 
1.78 (1.38, 2.30) 
<0.001 

Rwanda 
1.17 (0.87, 1.57) 
0.312 
1.23 (0.92, 1.65) 
0.153 

Tanzania 
1.4 (1.06, 1.85) 
0.019 
1.43 (1.10, 1.88) 
0.008 

Uganda 
1.23 (0.94, 1.62) 
0.136 
1.51 (1.17, 1.93) 
0.001 

Type of residence 

Urban 
1.00 

Rural 
1.25 (1.01, 1.54) 
0.038 

Maternal education 

Secondary or higher 
1.00 
1.00 

Primary 
1.46 (1.16, 1.83) 
0.001 
1.64 (1.32, 2.05) 
<0.001 

No Schooling 
1.74 (1.36, 2.22) 
<0.001 
1.85 (1.44, 2.38) 
<0.001 

Maternal literacy level 

Literate 
1.00 

Illiterate 
1.21 (1.04, 1.41) 
0.014 

Wealth index 

Rich 
1.00 

Middle 
1.31 (1.04, 1.64) 
0.020 

Poor 
1.21 (0.97, 1.52) 
0.088 

Maternal occupation 

Not working 
1.00 

Skilled/Professional 
1.14 (0.88, 1.48) 
0.330 

Agriculture 
1.35 (1.07, 1.7) 
0.012 

Maternal working status 

Currently not working 
1.00 

Currently working 
1.25 (1.03, 1.53) 
0.026 

Mother's age at first birth 

<20 
1.00 
1.00 

20-29 
1.10 (0.95, 1.29) 
0.214 
1.14 (0.99, 1.32) 
0.077 

30+ 
2.09 (1.36, 3.21) 
0.001 
2.39 (1.59, 3.59) 
<0.001 

Previous death of baby 

No previous death 
1.00 

Had previous death 
0.89 (0.75, 1.06) 
0.190 

Maternal smoking status 

Non-smoker 
1.00 
1.00 

Smoker 
2.16 (1.24, 3.75) 
0.006 
1.99 (1.19, 3.32) 
0.009 

Use of contraceptives 

Currently using 
1.00 

Currently not using 
1.52 (1.29, 1.78) 
<0.001 

Listening to radio 

Yes 
1.00 

No 
0.97 (0.83, 1.14) 
0.739 

Reading newspaper 

Yes 
1.00 

No 
1.09 (0.9, 1.32) 
0.404 

Types of cooking fuel 

(Continued) 



Table. STROBE checklist. (DOCX)

## Table 3 .
3(Continued)    Study Variables 
OR (95% CI) 
P-Value 
OR (95% CI) 
P-Value 

Non-solid fuel 
1.00 

Solid fuel 
1.01 (0.41, 2.44) 
0.989 

Source of drinking water 

Improved 
1.00 
1.00 

Unimproved 
1.19 (1.01, 1.39) 
0.036 
1.18 (1.01, 1.37) 
0.035 

PLOS ONE | https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202603August 29, 2018  
AcknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful to Measure DHS, ICF International, Rockville, Maryland, USA for granting access to the datasets used in this analysis.Supervision: Andre Masumbuko Renzaho.Writing -original draft: Blessing Jaka Akombi.Writing -review & editing:Kingsley Emwinyore Agho.
World Health Organization. Maternal newborn child and adolescent health. World Health Organization. Maternal newborn child and adolescent health, 2015. Available from: http:// www.who.int/maternal_child_adolescent/epidemiology/stillbirth/en/

Determinants of stillbirths in Ghana: does quality of antenatal care matter?. P A Afulani, 10.1186/s12884-016-0925-9BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth. 1627255155Afulani PA. Determinants of stillbirths in Ghana: does quality of antenatal care matter? BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth. 2016; 16:132. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-016-0925-9 PMID: 27255155

Stillbirths: what difference can we make and at what cost?. Z A Bhutta, M Y Yakoob, J E Lawn, A Rizvi, I K Friberg, E Weissman, 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62269-621496906Lancet. 37710Bhutta ZA, Yakoob MY, Lawn JE, Rizvi A, Friberg IK, Weissman E, et al. Stillbirths: what difference can we make and at what cost? Lancet. 2011; 377:1523-1538. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(10) 62269-6 PMID: 21496906

The relationship of intrapartum and antepartum stillbirth rates to measures of obstetric care in developed and developing countries. R L Goldenberg, E M Mcclure, C M Bann, 10.1080/0001634070164487617963057Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 86Goldenberg RL, McClure EM, Bann CM. The relationship of intrapartum and antepartum stillbirth rates to measures of obstetric care in developed and developing countries. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand. 2007; 86:1303-9. https://doi.org/10.1080/00016340701644876 PMID: 17963057

Counting stillbirths and achieving accountability: A global health priority. PLoS medicine. Z A Bhutta, 10.1371/journal.pmed.10023642876344214Bhutta ZA. Counting stillbirths and achieving accountability: A global health priority. PLoS medicine. 2017 Aug 1; 14(8):e1002364. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1002364 PMID: 28763442

L Bernis, M V Kinney, W Stones, P Hoope-Bender, D Vivio, S H Leisher, 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00954-XThe Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths Series study group, The Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths Series Advisory Group. Stillbirths: ending preventable deaths by 2030. 387Bernis L, Kinney MV, Stones W, Hoope-Bender P, Vivio D, Leisher SH, et al, The Lancet Ending Pre- ventable Stillbirths Series study group, The Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths Series Advisory Group. Stillbirths: ending preventable deaths by 2030. The Lancet. 2016; 387(10019):703-716. https:// doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00954-X

J F Frøen, I K Friberg, J E Lawn, Z A Bhutta, R C Pattinson, E R Allanson, 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00818-1for The Lancet Ending Preventable Stillbirths Series study group. Stillbirths: progress and unfinished business. 387Frøen JF, Friberg IK, Lawn JE, Bhutta ZA, Pattinson RC, Allanson ER, et al, for The Lancet Ending Pre- ventable Stillbirths Series study group. Stillbirths: progress and unfinished business. The Lancet. 2016; 387 (10018): 574-586. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00818-1

Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework. 2016-2017. UN; 2016: S/2016/255United NationsUnited Nations. Great Lakes Regional Strategic Framework 2016-2017. UN; 2016: S/2016/255

Ministry of Health Public Health and the Fight against AIDS. Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies of Burundi (ISTEEBU), and ICF. 2017. Third Demographic and Health Survey. ISTEEBU, MSPLS, and ICFBujumbura, BurundiMinistry to the Presidency in charge of Good Governance and Planning [Burundi] (MPBGP)Ministry to the Presidency in charge of Good Governance and Planning [Burundi] (MPBGP), Ministry of Health Public Health and the Fight against AIDS [Burundi] (MSPLS), Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies of Burundi (ISTEEBU), and ICF. 2017. Third Demographic and Health Survey. Bujumbura, Burundi: ISTEEBU, MSPLS, and ICF.

Kenya Medical Research Institute, National Council for Population and Development, and The DHS Program. National AIDS Control Council. Kenya National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of HealthKenya Demographic and Health SurveyKenya National Bureau of Statistics, Ministry of Health, National AIDS Control Council, Kenya Medical Research Institute, National Council for Population and Development, and The DHS Program, ICF International Rockville, Maryland, USA. 2015. Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 2014, Nairobi, Kenya.

Ministry of Health (MOH) [Rwanda], and ICF International. 2015. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-15. Moh Nisr, Rockville, Maryland, USANational Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) [Rwanda]National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR) [Rwanda], Ministry of Health (MOH) [Rwanda], and ICF International. 2015. Rwanda Demographic and Health Survey 2014-15. Rockville, Maryland, USA: NISR, MOH, and ICF International.

Office of the Chief Government Statistician (OCGS), and ICF. 2016. Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey (TDHS-MIS) 2015-16. Mohcdgec, Moh, Ocgs Nbs, Icf, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Rockville, Maryland, USAMinistry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC) [Tanzania Mainland], Ministry of Health (MoH) [Zanzibar], National Bureau of Statistics (NBSMinistry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children (MoHCDGEC) [Tanzania Mainland], Ministry of Health (MoH) [Zanzibar], National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), Office of the Chief Government Statistician (OCGS), and ICF. 2016. Tanzania Demographic and Health Survey and Malaria Indicator Survey (TDHS-MIS) 2015-16. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and Rockville, Maryland, USA: MoHCDGEC, MoH, NBS, OCGS, and ICF.

Uganda Demographic and Health Survey. Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and ICF. UBOS and ICFUganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) and ICF. 2018. Uganda Demographic and Health Survey 2016. Kampala, Uganda and Rockville, Maryland, USA: UBOS and ICF.

Determinants of Stillbirth in Zambia. E M Stringer, B Vwalika, W P Killam, M J Giganti, R Mbewe, B H Chi, 10.1097/AOG.0b013e318216762721508755Obstetrics & Gynecology. 1175Stringer EM, Vwalika B, Killam WP, Giganti MJ, Mbewe R, Chi BH, et al. Determinants of Stillbirth in Zambia. Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2011; 117:(5)1151-1159. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG. 0b013e3182167627 PMID: 21508755

3.2 million stillbirths: epidemiology and overview of the evidence review. J E Lawn, M Y Yakoob, R A Haws, T Soomro, G L Darmstadt, Z A Bhutta, 10.1186/1471-2393-9-S1-S219426465S2. 9SupplLawn JE, Yakoob MY, Haws RA, Soomro T, Darmstadt GL, Bhutta ZA. 3.2 million stillbirths: epidemiol- ogy and overview of the evidence review. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2009; 9(Suppl 1):S2. https://doi. org/10.1186/1471-2393-9-S1-S2 PMID: 19426465

Risk factors for stillbirth in developing countries: a systematic review of the literature. Di Mario, S Say, L Lincetto, O , 10.1097/01.olq.0000258130.07476.e317592385Sex Transm Dis. 347SupplDi Mario S, Say L, Lincetto O. Risk factors for stillbirth in developing countries: a systematic review of the literature. Sex Transm Dis. 2007;34(7 Suppl):S11-21. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.olq.0000258130. 07476.e3 PMID: 17592385

Stillbirths: how can health systems deliver for mothers and babies?. R Pattinson, K Kerber, E Buchmann, I K Friberg, M Belizan, S Lansky, 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)62306-9Lancet. 3771021496910Pattinson R, Kerber K, Buchmann E, Friberg IK, Belizan M, Lansky S, et al. Stillbirths: how can health systems deliver for mothers and babies? Lancet. 2011; 377:1610-1623. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140- 6736(10)62306-9 PMID: 21496910

Can available interventions end preventable deaths in mothers, newborn babies, and stillbirths, and at what cost?. Z A Bhutta, J K Das, R Bahl, J E Lawn, R A Salam, V K Paul, 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60792-324853604Lancet. 3849940Bhutta ZA, Das JK, Bahl R, Lawn JE, Salam RA, Paul VK, et al. Can available interventions end pre- ventable deaths in mothers, newborn babies, and stillbirths, and at what cost? Lancet. 2014; 384 (9940):347-70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60792-3 PMID: 24853604

Modifiable antenatal risk factors for stillbirth amongst pregnant women in the Omusati region, Namibia. African journal of primary health care & family medicine. D D Tshibumbu, J Blitz, 8Tshibumbu DD, Blitz J. Modifiable antenatal risk factors for stillbirth amongst pregnant women in the Omusati region, Namibia. African journal of primary health care & family medicine. 2016; 8(1):1-6.

An analytic framework for the study of child survival in developing countries. W H Mosley, L C Chen, Population and Development Review. 10Mosley WH, Chen LC. An analytic framework for the study of child survival in developing countries. Pop- ulation and Development Review 1984; 10:25-45.

Estimating wealth effects without expenditure data-Or tears: An application to educational enrolments in states of India. D Filmer, L H Pritchett, 11227840Demography. 381Filmer D, Pritchett LH. Estimating wealth effects without expenditure data-Or tears: An application to educational enrolments in states of India. Demography. 2001; 38(1):115-32. PMID: 11227840

Progress on drinking water and sanitation. Unicef Who, Update. Geneva: World Health OrganizationWHO, UNICEF. Progress on drinking water and sanitation: 2014 Update. Geneva: World Health Orga- nization; 2014.

Tracking Access to Nonsolid Fuel for Cooking. Ghosh Banerjee, S Portale, E Adair-Rohani, H Bonjour, S , Ghosh Banerjee S, Portale E, Adair-Rohani H, Bonjour S. Tracking Access to Nonsolid Fuel for Cooking.

Multilevel modelling of complex survey data. S Rabe-Hesketh, A Skrondal, J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat Soc. 1694Rabe-Hesketh S, Skrondal A. Multilevel modelling of complex survey data. J R Stat Soc Ser A Stat Soc. 2006; 169(4):805-27.

Burundi: a population deprived of basic health care. M Philips, G Ooms, S Hargreaves, A Durrant, 15517690Br J Gen Pract. 54505Philips M, Ooms G, Hargreaves S, Durrant A. Burundi: a population deprived of basic health care. Br J Gen Pract. 2004 Aug; 54(505):634-5. PMID: 15517690

. Usaid, Health, Burundi, USAID. Global Health. Burundi. Available at https://www.usaid.gov/burundi/global-health

Predictors of stillbirths in Bangladesh: evidence from the 2004-2014 nation-wide household surveys. Global Health Action. T Abir, K E Agho, F A Ogbo, G J Stevens, A Page, M A Hasnat, 10.1080/16549716.2017.141004829261451101410048Abir T, Agho KE, Ogbo FA, Stevens GJ, Page A, Hasnat MA, et al. Predictors of stillbirths in Bangla- desh: evidence from the 2004-2014 nation-wide household surveys. Global Health Action. 2017 Jan 1; 10(1):1410048. https://doi.org/10.1080/16549716.2017.1410048 PMID: 29261451

Socio-economic predictors of stillbirths in Nepal. P R Ghimire, K E Agho, A Renzaho, A Christou, M K Nisha, M Dibley, 10.1371/journal.pone.0181332PLoS ONE. Ghimire PR, Agho KE, Renzaho A, Christou A, Nisha MK, Dibley M, et al. Socio-economic predictors of stillbirths in Nepal (2001-2011). PLoS ONE. 2017 July 13. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0181332

Health seeking behaviour and health service utilization in Pakistan: challenging the policy makers. B T Shaikh, J Hatcher, 10.1093/pubmed/fdh20715590705Journal of public health. 27Shaikh BT, Hatcher J. Health seeking behaviour and health service utilization in Pakistan: challenging the policy makers. Journal of public health. 2005 Mar; 27: 49±54. https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/ fdh207 PMID: 15590705

Determinants of the use of maternal health services in rural Bangladesh. Health promotion international. N Chakraborty, M A Islam, R I Chowdhury, W Bari, H H Akhter, 1469536418Chakraborty N, Islam MA, Chowdhury RI, Bari W, Akhter HH. Determinants of the use of maternal health services in rural Bangladesh. Health promotion international. 2003 Dec 1; 18: 327±337. PMID: 14695364

Antenatal care in developing countries. Promises, achievements and missed opportunities. An analysis of trends, levels and differentials. World Health Organization. UNICEF. Antenatal care in developing countries. Promises, achievements and missed opportunities. An analysis of trends, levels and differentials, 1990-2001. 2003.

Strategies for reducing maternal mortality: getting on with what works. O M Campbell, W J Graham, 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69381-117027735Lancet. 368Campbell OM, Graham WJ. Strategies for reducing maternal mortality: getting on with what works. Lan- cet. 2006; 368:1284-1299. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69381-1 PMID: 17027735

Advanced maternal age and adverse pregnancy outcome: evidence from a large contemporary cohort. PloS one. L C Kenny, T Lavender, R Mcnamee, S M O&apos;neill, T Mills, A S Khashan, 10.1371/journal.pone.005658323437176856583Kenny LC, Lavender T, McNamee R, O'Neill SM, Mills T, Khashan AS. Advanced maternal age and adverse pregnancy outcome: evidence from a large contemporary cohort. PloS one. 2013 Feb 20; 8 (2):e56583. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0056583 PMID: 23437176

Maternal age and adverse pregnancy outcome: a cohort study. A Khalil, A Syngelaki, N Maiz, Y Zinevich, K H Nicolaides, Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology. 426Khalil A, Syngelaki A, Maiz N, Zinevich Y, Nicolaides KH. Maternal age and adverse pregnancy out- come: a cohort study. Ultrasound in Obstetrics & Gynecology. 2013 Dec 1; 42(6):634-43.

Advanced maternal age and obstetric outcome. A Giri, V R Srivastav, A Suwal, A S Tuladhar, Nepal Med Coll J. 152Giri A, Srivastav VR, Suwal A, Tuladhar AS. Advanced maternal age and obstetric outcome. Nepal Med Coll J. 2012; 15(2):87-90.

Advanced maternal age and adverse pregnancy outcomes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. S C Lean, H Derricott, R L Jones, Aep Heazell, 10.1371/journal.pone.018628729040334PLoS One. 1210186287Lean SC, Derricott H, Jones RL, Heazell AEP. Advanced maternal age and adverse pregnancy out- comes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2017; 12(10): e0186287. https://doi.org/10. 1371/journal.pone.0186287 PMID: 29040334

Observations of stillbirths, birthweight and maternal haemoglobin in teenage pregnancy in Ibadan, Nigeria. M Onadeko, F Avokey, T Lawoyin, 9110059Afr J Med Med Sci. 25Onadeko M, Avokey F, Lawoyin T. Observations of stillbirths, birthweight and maternal haemoglobin in teenage pregnancy in Ibadan, Nigeria. Afr J Med Med Sci. 1996; 25:81-86. PMID: 9110059

Hospital-based perinatal outcomes and complications in teenage pregnancy in India. P Mukhopadhyay, R Chaudhuri, B Paul, 20941901J Health Popul Nutr. 28494Mukhopadhyay P, Chaudhuri R, Paul B. Hospital-based perinatal outcomes and complications in teen- age pregnancy in India. J Health Popul Nutr. 2010; 28:494. PMID: 20941901

Predictors of term stillbirths in an inner-city maternity hospital in Lagos. B O Olusanya, O A Solanke, 10.3109/0001634090328747419900141Nigeria. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 88Olusanya BO, Solanke OA. Predictors of term stillbirths in an inner-city maternity hospital in Lagos, Nigeria. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2009; 88: 1243-1251. https://doi.org/10.3109/ 00016340903287474 PMID: 19900141

Determinants of stillbirths in Northern Ghana: a case control study. A B Badimsuguru, K M Nyarko, E A Afari, S O Sackey, C Kubio, 10.11604/pamj.supp.2016.25.1.616828149443Pan Afr Med J. 25118SupplBadimsuguru AB, Nyarko KM, Afari EA, Sackey SO, Kubio C. Determinants of stillbirths in Northern Ghana: a case control study. Pan Afr Med J. 2016; 25(Suppl 1): 18. https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj. supp.2016.25.1.6168 PMID: 28149443

Pregnancy in adolescents: study of risks and outcome in eastern Nepal. A K Sharma, K Verma, S Khatri, A T Kannan, 11752740Indian Pediatr. 38Sharma AK, Verma K, Khatri S, Kannan AT. Pregnancy in adolescents: study of risks and outcome in eastern Nepal. Indian Pediatr. 2001; 38:1405-9. PMID: 11752740

Study of some epidemiological factors in teenage pregnancy hospital based case comparison study. M S Chahande, A R Jadho, S K Wadhva, S Udhade, Indian J Community Med. 27Chahande MS, Jadho AR, Wadhva SK, Udhade S. Study of some epidemiological factors in teenage pregnancy hospital based case comparison study. Indian J Community Med. 2002; 27:106-9.

Association between stillbirth and illicit drug use and smoking during pregnancy. Obstetrics and gynecology. M W Varner, R M Silver, C J Hogue, M Willinger, C B Parker, V R Thorsten, 10.1097/AOG.000000000000005224463671123113Varner MW, Silver RM, Hogue CJ, Willinger M, Parker CB, Thorsten VR, et al. Association between still- birth and illicit drug use and smoking during pregnancy. Obstetrics and gynecology. 2014 Jan; 123 (1):113. https://doi.org/10.1097/AOG.0000000000000052 PMID: 24463671

The influence of maternal smoking habits on the risk of subsequent stillbirth: is there a causal relation. L Högberg, S Cnattingius, BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 1146Högberg L, Cnattingius S. The influence of maternal smoking habits on the risk of subsequent stillbirth: is there a causal relation?. BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics & Gynaecology. 2007 Jun 1; 114(6):699-704.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Smoking during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth. Eyes on Evidence. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Smoking during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth. Eyes on Evidence. 2016 Feb.

Maternal smoking during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth: results from a nationwide Danish register-based cohort study. Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica. S M Bjørnholt, M Leite, V Albieri, S K Kjaer, A Jensen, 10.1111/aogs.130112758036995Bjørnholt SM, Leite M, Albieri V, Kjaer SK, Jensen A. Maternal smoking during pregnancy and risk of stillbirth: results from a nationwide Danish register-based cohort study. Acta obstetricia et gynecologica Scandinavica. 2016 Nov 1; 95(11):1305-12. https://doi.org/10.1111/aogs.13011 PMID: 27580369

Maternal smoking and the risk of still birth: systematic review and meta-analysis. T C Marufu, A Ahankari, T Coleman, S Lewis, BMC Public Health15239Marufu TC, Ahankari A, Coleman T, Lewis S. Maternal smoking and the risk of still birth: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Public Health. 2015 Dec; 15(1):239.

The effect of an increase in lead in the water system on fertility and birth outcomes: The case of Flint, Michigan. West Virginia University College of Business and Economics Working Paper Series. D S Grossman, D J Slusky, Grossman DS, Slusky DJ. The effect of an increase in lead in the water system on fertility and birth out- comes: The case of Flint, Michigan. West Virginia University College of Business and Economics Work- ing Paper Series. 2017 Aug 7(17-25).

Beyond counting stillbirths to understanding their determinants in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic assessment of stillbirth data availability in household surveys. Tropical Medicine & International Health. A Christou, M J Dibley, C Raynes-Greenow, 22Christou A, Dibley MJ, Raynes-Greenow C. Beyond counting stillbirths to understanding their determi- nants in low-and middle-income countries: a systematic assessment of stillbirth data availability in household surveys. Tropical Medicine & International Health. 2017 Mar 1; 22(3):294-311.

Contraceptive use and perinatal mortality in the DHS: An assessment of the quality and consistency of calendars and histories. S E Bradley, W Winfrey, T N Croft, DHS Methodological Reports. 17ICF InternationalRockvilleBradley SE, Winfrey W, Croft TN. Contraceptive use and perinatal mortality in the DHS: An assessment of the quality and consistency of calendars and histories. DHS Methodological Reports No. 17. Rock- ville, Maryland, USA: ICF International. 2015.