# Original Article Work Group for Rhinitis, the Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Pollen-Food Allergy Syndrome in Korean Pollinosis Patients: A Nationwide Survey

CorpusID: 52955245
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0710c9e10fc63d86bd933e9fde3de8b85d99c024](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0710c9e10fc63d86bd933e9fde3de8b85d99c024)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Original Article Work Group for Rhinitis, the Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Pollen-Food Allergy Syndrome in Korean Pollinosis Patients: A Nationwide Survey


Mi-Ae Kim 
Department of Pulmonology, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine
CHA Bundang Medical Center
CHA University
SeongnamKorea

† 
Dong-Kyu Kim 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
Hallym University Chuncheon Sacred Heart Hospital and Nano-Bio Regenerative Medical Institute
Hallym University College of Medicine
ChuncheonKorea

† Hyeon-Jong Yang 
Department of Pediatrics
Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Center
Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine
SeoulKorea

Young Yoo 
Department of Pediatrics
Korea University Anam Hospital
SeoulKorea

Youngmin Ahn 
Department of Pediatrics Eulji Hospital
Eulji University
SeoulKorea

Hae-Sim Park 
Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
Ajou University School of Medicine
SuwonKorea

Hyun Jong Lee 
Lee & Hong ENT, Sleep and Cosmetic Center
SeongnamKorea

Yi Yeong Jeong 
Department of Internal Medicine
Gyeongsang National University Hospital
Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine
JinjuKorea

Bong-Seong Kim 
Department of Pediatrics
Gangneung Asan Hospital
University of Ulsan College of Medicine
GangneungKorea

Woo Yong Bae 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery
Dong-A University College of Medicine
BusanKorea

An-Soo Jang 
Department of Internal Medicine
Soonchunhyang University Bucheon Hospital
BucheonKorea

Yang Park 
Department of Pediatrics
Wonkwang University Sanbon Hospital
Wonkwang University College of Medicine
GunpoKorea

Young-Il Koh 
Department of Internal Medicine
Chonnam National University Medical School & Hospital
GwangjuKorea

Jaechun Lee 
Department of Internal Medicine
Jeju National University School of Medicine
JejuKorea

Dae Hyun Lim 
Department of Pediatrics
Inha University Hospital
Inha University College of Medicine
IncheonKorea

Jeong Hee Kim 
Department of Pediatrics
Inha University Hospital
Inha University College of Medicine
IncheonKorea

Sang Min Lee 
Department of Internal Medicine
Gil Medical Center
Division of Pulmonology and Allergy
Gachon University College of Medicine
IncheonKorea

Yong Min Kim 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
Chungnam National University College of Medicine
DaejeonKorea

Young Joon Jun 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery
College of Medicine
SoonChunHayng University Hospital
GumiKorea

Hyo Yeol Kim 
Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery
Samsung Medical Center
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine
SeoulKorea

Yunsun Kim 
SCH Biomedical Informatics Research Unit
Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital
SeoulKorea

Jeong-Hee Choi 
Department of Pulmonology and Allergy
Department of Pulmonology and Allergy
Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital
Hallym University College of Medicine
HwaseongKorea

Department of Pediatrics
Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Center
Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital
Hallym University College of Medicine
7 Keunjaebong-gil18450HwaseongKorea

Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital
Soonchunhyang University College of Medicine
59 Daesagwan-ro, Yongsan-gu04401SeoulKorea

MDJeong-Hee Choi 
MDHyeon-Jong Yang 
Mi-Ae Kim 
Dong-Kyu Kim 
Original Article Work Group for Rhinitis, the Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy and Clinical Immunology Pollen-Food Allergy Syndrome in Korean Pollinosis Patients: A Nationwide Survey
10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648Received: Apr 8, 2018 Revised: May 20, 2018 Accepted: Jun 1, 2018648 Correspondence to contributed equally to this work.
Purpose: Pollen-food allergy syndrome (PFAS) is an immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated allergy in pollinosis patients caused by raw fruits and vegetables and is the most common food allergy in adults. However, there has been no nationwide study on PFAS in Korea. In this study, we investigated the prevalence and clinical characteristics of PFAS in Korea. Methods: Twenty-two investigators participated in this study, in which patients with allergic rhinoconjunctivitis and/or bronchial asthma with pollen allergy were enrolled. The Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2018 Nov;10(6):648-661 https://doi.

## INTRODUCTION

Pollen-food allergy syndrome (PFAS) is a class 2 food allergy caused by respiratory exposure to pollen; in contrast, class 1 food allergies are sensitized by the gastrointestinal tract. The pathogenesis of PFAS is related to cross-allergenicity between pollen and foods such as fruits and vegetables. 1,2 The term oral allergy syndrome (OAS) is traditionally used for PFAS, but can be confusing. OAS indicates immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated immediate allergy symptoms restricted to the oral mucosa, which is the most common clinical presentation of PFAS. 2 Since OAS in pollinosis patients was first reported in 1942 as labile antigen in fresh fruit extracts, 3 many subsequent studies reported that OAS can involve systemic symptoms such as urticaria, nausea, vomiting and anaphylaxis. [4][5][6] In 1982, the first investigation of PFAS in European pollinosis patients reported a prevalence of more than 70%. Indeed, 19% of pollinosis patients sensitized to mugwort or grass pollen have a food hypersensitivity. 4 The prevalence of PFAS in pollinosis patients is around 40%-50% in Europe [5][6][7] and 20% in the Mediterranean region (a birch-and ragweed-free area). 8 The prevalence of PFAS in pediatric pollinosis patients is around 9%-12%; e.g., 9.6%-12.2% in Mexico and 12.1% in Australia. [9][10][11] In Japan, 7%-17% of OAS occurs in cedar pollinosis patients. 12,13 In another study in Japan, the overall prevalence of OAS was 4.1% in the pollensensitized population, comprising 4% in Japanese cedar pollen, 11.5% in alder, 5.5% in orchard grass, 7.4% in ragweed and 6.4% in mugwort, where the most common causes were apple, peach and melon. 14 Thus, few studies of the epidemiology and clinical characteristics of PFAS have involved children or been performed in Asian countries.

The sole previous study of PFAS in Korea reported a PFAS prevalence of 34.6% in pollensensitized patients in a single general hospital (48% in tree pollen-and 13% in grass or weed pollen-sensitized patients), and apple was the most common causative food. 15 However, this was a small retrospective study involving only 81 subjects. Therefore, we investigated the prevalence and clinical features of PFAS in Korean pollinosis patients by means of a nationwide survey.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS


## Study design

This was a nationwide cross-sectional study in 20 institutes (18 university hospitals and 2 allergy clinics). The protocol was reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of each institute (Hallym University Dongtan Sacred Heart Hospital, HDT-2016-04-155-003, etc.). Written informed consent was obtained from each patient or their parents.


## Patients

Pollinosis patients were enrolled from March to December 2016. The inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) diagnosis with one or more of allergic rhinitis (AR), allergic conjunctivitis (AC) and/or bronchial asthma (BA); 2) sensitization to the pollen of 1 or more trees, grasses and/or weeds; and 3) aggravated symptoms of rhinitis, conjunctivitis and/or asthma when exposed to sensitized pollens. Patients who fulfilled at least one of the following criteria were regarded as being sensitized to pollen: 1) allergen wheal size greater or equal to that of histamine (A/H ratio ≥3+) or mean allergen wheal diameter of at least 3 mm by skin prick test (SPT); 16,17 2) a multiple allergen simultaneous test (MAST) result of at least 2+; and 3) a serum specific IgE level of at least 0.35 kU/L measured by the ImmunoCAP ® system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden). The pollens investigated comprised tree pollens (birch, alder, hazel, beech, oak, willow, poplar, pine and tree mix), grass pollens (Bermuda, meadow, orchard, rye, timothy and grass mix) and weed pollens (mugwort, ragweed and Hop Japanese).


## Clinical data collection

Clinical data were collected by questionnaire and chart review, and included demographic characteristics, underlying allergic diseases, and results of allergic tests. The demographic data included sex, birth date, birthplace, present residence area, height, body weight, family history of allergic diseases, smoking status (current, former, or never-smoker), and history of second-hand smoking. AR severity and symptom duration were classified using the Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) system. 18 Briefly, severity was classified as mild or moderate-severe, and symptom duration as intermittent or persistent. Moderatesevere rhinitis symptoms were defined as 1 or more bothersome symptoms such as sleep disturbance, impairment of daily activity, impairment of school or work, and troublesome symptoms. Persistent rhinitis was defined as symptoms on more than 4 days per week for at least 4 consecutive weeks. The results of allergy tests for house dust mite, cat, dog and fungus allergens were also obtained.


## Questionnaires about PFAS

All subjects completed questionnaires about PFAS. The questionnaires included the following questions: 1) Have you experienced any symptoms after ingesting any of the foods listed below? and 2) If any, which symptoms have you had? The food list contained common fruits and vegetables in South Korea -apple, pear, peach, apricot, plum, cherry, watermelon, melon, Korean melon, banana, kiwi, orange, mandarin, pineapple, strawberry, mango, avocado, grape, carrot, potato, sweet potato, celery, crown daisy, perilla leaf, lettuce, kale, chicory, taro/taro stem, ginseng, deodeok (Codonopsis lanceolata), bellflower root, kudzu, lotus root, Chinese yam, eggplant, zucchini, cucumber, tomato, jujube, chestnut, peanut, walnut, pine nut and soy. The patients were also asked to record any other fruits or vegetables that caused allergy symptoms. The cooking status of the fruits and vegetables (raw and cooked) was also checked.

Symptoms of food allergy were evaluated according to the affected system -oral allergy symptoms (tingling/itching sense or edema of the lips, oral cavity, and/or throat), dermatologic symptoms (itching, urticaria or angioedema), respiratory symptoms (rhinorrhea, cough, dyspnea, wheezing, cyanosis or hypoxia), cardiovascular symptoms (chest pain, hypotension, pale, sweating or cardiac arrest), gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea or vomiting, diarrhea or abdominal pain), neurologic and systemic symptoms (dizziness, unconsciousness, anxiety, change of sense or death) and anaphylaxis.


## Statistical analysis

Statistical analyses were performed using R version 3.4.0 (R Foundation, Vienna, Austria). The Wilcoxon rank-sum test and χ 2 test were used to compare continuous and categorical clinical variables, respectively, according to PFAS. The CORRPLOT package was used to conduct Yules' Q correlation analysis to identify associations among ordinal variables, and P values were calculated by the χ 2 test. The variables were ordered by the complete-linkage hierarchical clustering method.


## RESULTS


## Clinical characteristics

A total of 648 pollinosis patients were enrolled. Four hundred four patients (62.3%) were males, and 300 (42.7%) were less than or equal to 18 years of age. All of the patients had AR (90.1%), AC (45.7%) and/or BA (39.2%), the symptoms of which showed seasonal aggravation; 65.6% in spring, 28.7% in summer, 49.2% in autumn, 32.4% in winter and 17.3% perennially. Of the patients, 68.8% had a family history of allergic diseases.


## Prevalence and clinical characteristics of PFAS patients

Of the 648 pollinosis patients, 270 (41.7%) had PFAS. The prevalence of PFAS did not differ significantly according to age (range, 36.3%-50%), except in those ≤5 (20%) and >60 (27.3%) years of age ( Fig. 1). The prevalence of PFAS in subjects ≤18 and >18 years of age was 42.7% (128/300) and 40.8% (142/348), respectively. The prevalence of PFAS differed significantly according to current residence area (P < 0.001), and birthplace (P = 0.012), and was highest in Gyeonggi, Seoul and Jeolla Provinces (Supplementary Fig. S1). The prevalence of PFAS was not different according to birth month (P > 0.05).

The clinical characteristics of the patients with PFAS are listed in Table 1. Pollinosis patients with PFAS showed higher proportions of female, allergic diseases (such as AR, AC, atopic dermatitis, drug allergy and food allergy), and family history of allergic diseases than those without PFAS. Moderate to severe AR was more prevalent in patients with than in those without PFAS (57.5% vs. 48.4%, P = 0.028), while there was no significant difference in the AR symptom duration according to PFAS (P > 0.05).

Patients with PFAS had a significantly higher rate of sensitization to alder, birch, beech, hazel, oak, mugwort and cat dander than those without (P<0.01, Fig. 2). The patients were classified according to the type of pollen to which they were sensitized: only tree pollens (T), only grass pollens (G), only weed pollens (W), tree + grass pollens (TG), tree + weed pollens (TW), grass + weed pollens (GW), or tree, grass, + weed pollens (TGW). Among the 648 pollinosis patients, 174 (26.9%) were classified as T, 36 (5.6%) as G, 52 (8.0%) as W, 51 (7.9%) as TG, 136 (21.0%) as TW, 28 (4.3%) as GW and 171 (26.4%) as TGW. The most frequent patterns were T, TGW and TW. The prevalence of PFAS was 39.7%, 25%, 21.2%, 33.3%, 55.1%, 28.6% and 47.4% in patients classified as T, G, W, TG, TW, GW and TGW, respectively. Approximately half of the patients classified as TW or TGW had PFAS.

In a subanalysis according to the strength of sensitization to birch, oak, mugwort, ragweed and Hop Japanese, the prevalence of PFAS increased significantly with increasing strength of sensitization to birch, oak and mugwort (P < 0.05; Fig. 3 


## Clinical manifestations of PFAS

All of the patients had oropharyngeal symptoms, and some had other clinical manifestations of PFAS ( Table 2). Cutaneous manifestations such as pruritus, urticaria and angioedema were most frequent (43.0%), followed by respiratory (20.0%), gastrointestinal (10.7%), neurologic (4.8%) and cardiovascular (3.7%) symptoms. Interestingly, 8.9% of the PFAS patients experienced anaphylaxis.


## Causative foods

The causative foods of PFAS are shown in Table 3    Ninety patients (13.9%) showed PFAS to only 1 type of fruit or vegetable, followed by 55 patients (8.5%) to 2, 37 patients (5.7%) to 3, 33 patients (5.1%) to 4, and 82 patients (12.7%) to 5 or more types of foods.


## Associations of causative foods with pollen types

The causative foods according to pollen type are shown in Table 4 and Supplementary Table S1. In patients classified as T (n = 174), the causative foods were apple (60.9%), peach (46.4%), kiwi (36.2%), plum (21.7%), walnut (20.3%), peanut (18.8%), chestnut (17.4%), jujube (15.9%), taro/taro stem (14.5%), pear (13%), cherry (13%), Korean melon (13%), pine nut (13%), apricot (11.6%), melon (11.6%), pineapple (11.6%) and tomato (11.6%). Apple and peach were the foods most frequently associated with PFAS in patients classified as T, TG, TW or TGW. Kiwi was the food most frequently associated with PFAS in patients classified as W or GW.

The correlations among inhalant allergens and causative foods are shown in Fig. 4. There were significant correlations among Chinese yam, taro, ginseong, jujube and chestnut; pine nut, peanut and walnut; pear, apricot, plum, cherry, apple and peach; and Korean melon, watermelon, melon, kiwi and pineapple (P < 0.05). Tree pollens were significantly associated with the Rosaceae family and nuts (P < 0.05) as well as chestnut, taro/tarostem, ginseong, jujube, Korean melon, melon and kiwi (P < 0.05). Weed pollens were associated with peanut, peach, watermelon and kiwi (P < 0.05). These data suggest that cross-allergenicity between pollens and foods is involved in the pathogenesis of PFAS in addition to cross-allergenicity among food types.  response to a pollen allergen by allergy skin test (AST) or serum specific IgE measurement. Previous studies enrolled subjects based on only one of these criteria. Also, we employed questionnaires comprising 44 common foods, and identified several unique and regionspecific causative foods not previously implicated in PFAS. Moreover, we compared the clinical characteristics of pollinosis patients with and without PFAS to identify risk factors for PFAS. Finally, we assessed systemic symptoms of PFAS; of the PFAS patients, 8.9% had anaphylaxis.


## DISCUSSION

Among the pollinosis patients, 41.7% had PFAS (42.7% in patients ≤18 years vs. 40.8% in those >18 years of age). This is comparable to the prevalence in Western countries, 5-7 but higher than that in Japan. 12,13 Interestingly, the prevalence of PFAS in pediatric pollinosis patients (≤18 years of age) was higher than previously reported in Western countries and Japan. [9][10][11][12][13][14] Three of the PFAS patients were less than 6 years of age, which is unusual. 19 However, 1 study in the United States reported that allergy specialists estimated the https://e-aair.org https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648  prevalence of PFAS to be 5% in children and 8% in adults, indicating that the prevalence of PFAS is underestimated in clinical practice. 9 Pollinosis patients with PFAS had higher proportions of females, allergic diseases, and family history of allergic diseases. Patients with PFAS had more severe AR, but the duration of AR was not different. The prevalence of PFAS was significantly positively correlated with the strength of sensitization to birch, oak and mugwort pollen similar to a previous study of birch pollinosis. 4 Therefore, the presence of allergic diseases, family history of allergic diseases, severity of AR and the strength of pollen sensitization are implicated in the development of PFAS in pollinosis patients. The most frequent causative foods of PFAS were peach, apple and kiwi ( Table 3). These were common causative foods in patients classified as T, while kiwi predominated in patients classified as W or GW (Table 4). Notably, PFAS to Korean melon was noted in 12.6%. The following local fruits and vegetables were also found to cause PFAS: taro/taro stem (8.9%), ginseong (8.2%), Chinese yam (7%), perilla leaf (4.4%), bellflower root (4.4%), deodeok (3.3%), crown daisy (3.0%), kudzu (3.3%), lotus root (2.6%) and lettuce (1.1%). In Korea, perilla leaf, crown daisy and lettuce are frequently ingested raw, wrapped around rice or pork. Such foods are known as "Ssam" and are popular in Korea. Therefore, these frequent causative foods of PFAS represent Korean eating habits. Moreover, various Korean foods are reportedly implicated in diverse clinical manifestations of PFAS; e.g., bronchospasm and urticaria caused by shiso leaf (Perilla frutescens), 21 anaphylaxis by Chinese bellflower root, 22 crown daisy-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis, 23 and PFAS caused by celery, lettuce, chicory, radish sprouts, ginseng, mango, kiwi, tomato, crown daisy and perilla leaf. [24][25][26][27] Cross-allergenicity between foods and pollen allergens is linked to the pathogenesis of PFAS. 28 The major allergen of birch pollen, Bet v 1, exhibits cross-reactivity with many food allergens, particularly the Rosaceae family (e.g., apple, peach, pear, cherry, plum and apricot). 29 Bet v 1 is a pathogenesis-related (PR) protein and panallergen present in many plant species. In addition to Bet v 1 homologs, cross-reactive panallergens including profilin, lipid transfer protein and crossreactive carbohydrate determinants (CCDs) are implicated in PFAS. 2,29 In this study, although we did not identify cross-reactive allergens between foods and pollens, we evaluated the associations between pollen types and culprit foodstuffs. Tree pollens were significantly associated with the Rosaceae family and nuts as well as chestnut, taro/tarostem, ginseong, jujube, Korean melon, melon and kiwi. Weed pollens were associated with peanut, peach, watermelon and kiwi. However, this association could be influenced by tree pollen as 26.4% of PFAS patients were classified as TGW. Further studies are needed to identify the cross-reactive allergens.


## Pollen-food Allergy Syndrome in Korea

This study has several limitations. First, we defined PFAS according to clinical history based on questionnaires and the results of pollen allergy tests. Food-specific IgE levels were not determined, and provocation tests were not performed. However, oral provocation tests or specific IgE tests may not guarantee true PFAS due to the antigenic lability of commercial antigens. Instead, a careful clinical history can be sufficient to diagnose PFAS. Anhoej et al. 30 found that a good clinical history of PFAS to apple had a negative and positive predictive value of 100% and 92%, respectively, compared to the results of food challenge tests. In this study, the diagnosis of PFAS was reliable because allergy specialists took a clinical history using questionnaires and identified positive results of allergy tests by chart review. Secondly, there is a possibility of selection bias because all but two of the institutes were university hospitals; therefore, patients with severe pollinosis may have been included in the study. In addition, recall bias could be accompanied with completion of the questionnaires. Because the questionnaires were based on the self-reporting data, the allergic reactions and symptoms might be exaggerated. However, our results are similar to those of previous reports.

In conclusion, the overall prevalence of PFAS in Korea was 41.7%, and the foods most frequently associated with PFAS were peach, apple and kiwi. Moreover, Korean foods (e.g., taro/taro stem, ginseong, perilla leaf, bellflower root, crown daisy, deodeok, kudzu root and lotus root) were also associated with PFAS, as would be expected in a study performed in Korea. A substantial proportion of the PFAS patients exhibited systemic symptoms including anaphylaxis. Physicians should be aware of the risk of PFAS in pollinosis patients and advise them to avoid the most frequently implicated foods.

## Fig. 2 .Fig. 3 .
23Sensitization rate to inhalant allergens according to PFAS. Patients with PFAS had a higher rate of sensitization to alder, birch, beech, hazel, oak, mugwort and cat dander than those without. PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome. Prevalence of PFAS according to strength of sensitization in each pollen. The prevalence of PFAS increased with increasing strength of sensitization. X-axis, strength of sensitization (A/H ratio); Y-axis, prevalence of PFAS (%). PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome.


This is the first nationwide study of the prevalence and clinical characteristics of PFAS in Korean pollinosis patients. Pollinosis was defined as 1) the presence of AR, AC or BA; and 2) a positive656 https://e-aair.org https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648 Pollen-food Allergy Syndrome in Korea

## Fig. 4 .
4Correlations among inhalant allergens and causative foods of PFAS. Significant correlations were found among Chinese yam, taro, ginseong, jujube and chest nut; pine nut, peanut and walnut; pear, apricot, plum, cherry, apple and peach; and Korean melon, watermelon, melon, kiwi and pineapple. PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome.

## ) .
)652 https://e-aair.org https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648 Fig. 1. Prevalence of PFAS in various age groups. The prevalence of PFAS did not differ according to age, with the exception of patients less than 5 or more than 60 years of age. PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome. Table 1. Clinical characteristics of pollinosis patients according to PFAS Data are means ± standard deviation or number (%). PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome; BA, bronchial asthma; AR, allergic rhinitis; AC, allergic conjunctivitis. https://e-aair.org https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648 Pollen-food Allergy Syndrome in KoreaPollen-food Allergy Syndrome in Korea 

Patient number 

Age (years old) 

≤ 
≥ 
0 

160 

120 

80 

40 

100 

140 

60 

20 
20.0% 

41.4% 

45.4% 

50.0% 

42.3% 

45.9% 
36.3% 

40.3% 

27.3% 

PFAS 
PFAS 

Variables 
PFAS (n = 270) 
No PFAS (n = 378) 
P value 
Age 
26.1 ± 16.9 
27.2 ± 18.4 
0.672 
Sex (male) 
146 (54.1) 
258 (68.3) 
< 0.001 
Allergic diseases 
BA 
117 (43.3) 
137 (36.2) 
0.082 
AR 
259 (95.9) 
325 (86.0) 
< 0.001 
AC 
150 (55.6) 
146 (38.6) 
< 0.001 
Atopic dermatitis 
80 (29.6) 
67 (17.7) 
< 0.001 
Chronic urticaria 
18 (6.7) 
23 (6.1) 
0.892 
Drug allergy 
28 (10.4) 
18 (4.8) 
0.010 
Food allergy 
209 (76.7) 
53 (14.0) 
< 0.001 
Family history of allergic disease 
201 (74.4) 
245 (64.8) 
0.012 
Severity of AR 
0.028 
Mild 
113/266 (42.5) 
192/372 (51.6) 
Moderate/severe 
153/266 (57.5) 
180/372 (48.4) 
Duration of AR 
0.698 
Intermittent 
118/266 (44.4) 
172/372 (46.2) 
Persistent 
148/266 (55.6) 
200/372 (53.8) 
Birch 
Hazel 
Willow 
Japanese 
cedar 

Bermuda 
Orchard 
Timothy 
Mugwort 
Hop 
japanicus 

D. farinae 
Dog 
Alternaria 

Beech 
Oak 
Poplar 
Pine 
Meadow 
Rye 
Grass mix 
Ragweed 
D. pteronyssinus 
Cat 
Aspergillus 
Alder 

Sensitization rate (%) 



## Table 2 .
2Clinicalmanifestations of PFAS 
Clinical manifestations 
No. (%) 
Cutaneous manifestations 
116 (43.0) 
Pruritus 
79 (68.1) 
Urticaria 
59 (50.9) 
Angioedema 
21 (18.1) 
Respiratory manifestations 
54 (20.0) 
Rhinorrhea 
12 (22.2) 
Cough 
23 (42.6) 
Dyspnea 
27 (50.0) 
Wheezing 
5 (9.3) 
Cyanosis 
2 (3.7) 
Gastrointestinal manifestations 
29 (10.7) 
Nausea/vomiting 
20 (69.0) 
Diarrhea 
8 (27.6) 
Abdominal pain 
9 (31.0) 
Cardiovascular manifestations 
10 (3.7) 
Chest pain 
2 (20.0) 
Hypotension 
6 (60.0) 
Pallor 
1 (10.0) 
Sweating 
5 (50.0) 
Neurologic manifestations 
13 (4.8) 
Dizziness 
5 (38.5) 
Loss of consciousness 
4 (30.8) 
Anxiety 
3 (23.1) 
Paresthesia 
4 (30.8) 
Anaphylaxis 
24 (8.9) 
PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome. 



## Table 3 .
3Causative foods of PFASPollen-food Allergy Syndrome in KoreaFoods 


## Table 3 .
3(Continued) Causative foods of PFAS

## Table 4 .
4Causative foods of PFAS in pollen-sensitized patientsTree only 
Grass only 
Weed only 
Foods 
No. (%) 
Foods 
No. (%) 
Foods 
No. (%) 
Apple 
42 (60.9) 
Pineapple 
3 (33.3) 
Kiwi 
5 (45.5) 
Peach 
32 (46.4) 
Peach 
2 (22.2) 
Apple 
3 (27.3) 
Kiwi 
25 (36.2) 
Kiwi 
1 (11.1) 
Pineapple 
3 (27.3) 
Plum 
15 (21.7) 
Grapes 
1 (11.1) 
Peach 
2 (18.2) 
Walnut 
14 (20.3) 
Taro/tarostem 
1 (11.1) 
Watermelon 
2 (18.2) 
Peanut 
13 (18.8) 
Ginseong 
1 (11.1) 
Grapes 
2 (18.2) 
Chestnut 
12 (17.4) 
Lotus root 
1 (11.1) 
Tomato 
2 (18.2) 
Jujube 
11 (15.9) 
Chestnut 
1 (11.1) 
Apricot 
1 (9.1) 
Taro/tarostem 
10 (14.5) 
Peanut 
1 (11.1) 
Plum 
1 (9.1) 
Pear 
9 (13.0) 
Watnut 
1 (11.1) 
Melon 
1 (9.1) 
Cherry 
9 (13.0) 
Pinenut 
1 (11.1) 
Korean melon 
1 (9.1) 
Korean melon 
9 (13.0) 
Chilli 
1 (11.1) 
Banana 
1 (9.1) 
Pine nut 
9 (13.0) 
Orange 
1 (9.1) 
Apricot 
8 (11.6) 
Mandalin 
1 (9.1) 
Melon 
8 (11.6) 
Mango 
1 (9.1) 
Pineapple 
8 (11.6) 
Potato 
1 (9.1) 
Tomato 
8 (11.6) 
Crown daisy 
1 (9.1) 
Strawberry 
6 (8.7) 
Pine nut 
1 (9.1) 
Ginseong 
5 (7.3) 
Cacao 
1 (9.1) 
Soy 
5 (7.3) 
PFAS, pollen-food allergy syndrome. 




7%) symptoms of PFAS. Of the PFAS patients, 8.9% had anaphylaxis. Our results suggest that physicians and patients should be aware of the clinical significance of PFAS and that patients may wish to consider carrying an epinephrine auto-injector.The symptoms of PFAS are not limited to the oropharynx. Indeed, 8.7% of PFAS patients 
reportedly have systemic symptoms outside the gastrointestinal tract, 3% have systemic 
symptoms outside the oropharynx, and 1.7% have anaphylactic shock. 9,20 In the present 
study, the patients exhibited cutaneous (43%), respiratory (20%), gastrointestinal (10.7%), 
neurologic (4.8%) and cardiovascular (3.
https://e-aair.org https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2018.10.6.648 Pollen-food Allergy Syndrome in Korea
Pollen-food Allergy Syndrome in Korea
ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThis study was supported by a grant from the Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy, and Clinical Immunology (2016).SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS Supplementary Table S1Causative foods of PFAS according to type of pollen Click here to viewSupplementary Fig. S1Total number of study subjects and prevalence of PFAS according to present residence area (A) and birthplace (B).Click here to view
Oral allergy syndrome: a clinical, diagnostic, and therapeutic challenge. C M Webber, R W England, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 104Webber CM, England RW. Oral allergy syndrome: a clinical, diagnostic, and therapeutic challenge. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;104:101-8.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/j.anai.2009.11.007PUBMED | CROSSREF

Oral allergy syndrome. Y Kondo, A Urisu, Allergol Int. 58Kondo Y, Urisu A. Oral allergy syndrome. Allergol Int 2009;58:485-91.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.2332/allergolint.09-RAI-0136PUBMED | CROSSREF

Studies in food allergy: II. Sensitization to fresh fruits: clinical and experimental observations. L Tuft, G I Blumstein, J Allergy. 13Tuft L, Blumstein GI. Studies in food allergy: II. Sensitization to fresh fruits: clinical and experimental observations. J Allergy 1942;13:574-82.

Food hypersensitivity in patients with pollen allergy. N E Eriksson, H Formgren, E Svenonius, Allergy. 37Eriksson NE, Formgren H, Svenonius E. Food hypersensitivity in patients with pollen allergy. Allergy 1982;37:437-43.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1398-9995.1982.tb02323.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

Oral allergy syndrome (OAS): symptoms of IgEmediated hypersensitivity to foods. P L Amlot, D M Kemeny, C Zachary, P Parkes, M H Lessof, Clin Allergy. 17Amlot PL, Kemeny DM, Zachary C, Parkes P, Lessof MH. Oral allergy syndrome (OAS): symptoms of IgE- mediated hypersensitivity to foods. Clin Allergy 1987;17:33-42.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1987.tb02317.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

IgE to food allergens is highly prevalent in patients allergic to pollens, with and without symptoms of food allergy. A J Bircher, G Van Melle, E Haller, B Curty, P C Frei, Clin Exp Allergy. 24Bircher AJ, Van Melle G, Haller E, Curty B, Frei PC. IgE to food allergens is highly prevalent in patients allergic to pollens, with and without symptoms of food allergy. Clin Exp Allergy 1994;24:367-74.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1994.tb00248.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

The clinical relevance of sensitization to pollenrelated fruits and vegetables in unselected pollen-sensitized adults. M Osterballe, T K Hansen, C G Mortz, C Bindslev-Jensen, Allergy. 60Osterballe M, Hansen TK, Mortz CG, Bindslev-Jensen C. The clinical relevance of sensitization to pollen- related fruits and vegetables in unselected pollen-sensitized adults. Allergy 2005;60:218-25.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2005.00674.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

Allergy to plantderived fresh foods in a birch-and ragweed-free area. J Cuesta-Herranz, M Lázaro, E Figueredo, J M Igea, A Umpiérrez, M De-Las-Heras, Clin Exp Allergy. 30Cuesta-Herranz J, Lázaro M, Figueredo E, Igea JM, Umpiérrez A, De-Las-Heras M. Allergy to plant- derived fresh foods in a birch-and ragweed-free area. Clin Exp Allergy 2000;30:1411-6.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2000.00868.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

A survey on the management of pollen-food allergy syndrome in allergy practices. S Ma, S H Sicherer, A Nowak-Wegrzyn, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 112Ma S, Sicherer SH, Nowak-Wegrzyn A. A survey on the management of pollen-food allergy syndrome in allergy practices. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2003;112:784-8.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/S0091-6749(03)02008-6PUBMED | CROSSREF

The prevalence of the oral allergy syndrome and pollen-food syndrome in an atopic paediatric population in south-west Sydney. C E Brown, C H Katelaris, J Paediatr Child Health. 50Brown CE, Katelaris CH. The prevalence of the oral allergy syndrome and pollen-food syndrome in an atopic paediatric population in south-west Sydney. J Paediatr Child Health 2014;50:795-800.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/jpc.12658PUBMED | CROSSREF

Prevalence of oral allergy syndrome in children with allergic diseases. M Bedolla-Barajas, A Kestler-Gramajo, G Alcalá-Padilla, J Morales-Romero, Allergol Immunopathol (Madr). 45Bedolla-Barajas M, Kestler-Gramajo A, Alcalá-Padilla G, Morales-Romero J. Prevalence of oral allergy syndrome in children with allergic diseases. Allergol Immunopathol (Madr) 2017;45:127-33.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/j.aller.2016.04.017PUBMED | CROSSREF

Food and food additives hypersensitivity in adult asthmatics. II. Oral allergy syndrome in adult asthmatic with or without Japanese cedar hay fever. Y Arai, C Ogawa, M Ohtomo, Y Sano, K Ito, Arerugi. 47PUBMEDArai Y, Ogawa C, Ohtomo M, Sano Y, Ito K. Food and food additives hypersensitivity in adult asthmatics. II. Oral allergy syndrome in adult asthmatic with or without Japanese cedar hay fever. Arerugi 1998;47:715-9. PUBMED

Investigation of patients suffering from Japanese cedar pollinosis conducted through a questionnaire. H Namba, N Sahashi, M Yamamoto, T Yoshida, K Yanagawa, N Hiroki, 10.24524/jjpal.50.2_73Jpn J Palynol. 50CROSSREFNamba H, Sahashi N, Yamamoto M, Yoshida T, Yanagawa K, Hiroki N, et al. Investigation of patients suffering from Japanese cedar pollinosis conducted through a questionnaire. Jpn J Palynol 2004;50:73-82. CROSSREF

Correlation of oral allergy syndrome due to plantderived foods with pollen sensitization in Japan. N Maeda, N Inomata, A Morita, M Kirino, Z Ikezawa, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 104Maeda N, Inomata N, Morita A, Kirino M, Ikezawa Z. Correlation of oral allergy syndrome due to plant- derived foods with pollen sensitization in Japan. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2010;104:205-10.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/j.anai.2009.11.049PUBMED | CROSSREF

Oral allergy syndrome in pollen-sensitized patients. Y S Cho, Y J Lim, J C Lee, S H Kim, M K Lim, B Yoo, J Asthma Allergy Clin Immunol. 18Cho YS, Lim YJ, Lee JC, Kim SH, Lim MK, Yoo B, et al. Oral allergy syndrome in pollen-sensitized patients. J Asthma Allergy Clin Immunol 1998;18:458-65.

Practical guide to skin prick tests in allergy to aeroallergens. J Bousquet, L Heinzerling, C Bachert, N G Papadopoulos, P J Bousquet, P G Burney, Allergy. 67Bousquet J, Heinzerling L, Bachert C, Papadopoulos NG, Bousquet PJ, Burney PG, et al. Practical guide to skin prick tests in allergy to aeroallergens. Allergy 2012;67:18-24.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2011.02728.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

Asthma and allergic diseases. Allergy, and Clinical Immunology. Korean Academy of Asthma1st ed. SeoulKorean Academy of Asthma, Allergy, and Clinical Immunology. Asthma and allergic diseases. 1st ed. Seoul: Ryo Moon Gak; 2012.

Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines-2016 revision. J L Brożek, J Bousquet, I Agache, A Agarwal, C Bachert, S Bosnic-Anticevich, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 140Brożek JL, Bousquet J, Agache I, Agarwal A, Bachert C, Bosnic-Anticevich S, et al. Allergic Rhinitis and its Impact on Asthma (ARIA) guidelines-2016 revision. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2017;140:950-8.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.03.050PUBMED | CROSSREF

The pattern of food hypersensitivity in patients with onset after 10 years of age. S Kivity, K Dunner, Y Marian, Clin Exp Allergy. 24Kivity S, Dunner K, Marian Y. The pattern of food hypersensitivity in patients with onset after 10 years of age. Clin Exp Allergy 1994;24:19-22.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1994.tb00911.xPUBMED | CROSSREF

IgE-mediated allergy from vegetable allergens. C Ortolani, E A Pastorello, L Farioli, M Ispano, V Pravettoni, C Berti, Ann Allergy. 71PUBMEDOrtolani C, Pastorello EA, Farioli L, Ispano M, Pravettoni V, Berti C, et al. IgE-mediated allergy from vegetable allergens. Ann Allergy 1993;71:470-6. PUBMED

A case of bronchospasm and urticaria caused by Shiso ingestion. Y S Shin, G S Choi, H J Park, Y M Ye, H S Park, Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 102169Shin YS, Choi GS, Park HJ, Ye YM, Park HS. A case of bronchospasm and urticaria caused by Shiso ingestion. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2009;102:169.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)60250-5PUBMED | CROSSREF

Chinese bellflower root anaphylaxis: IgEbinding components and cross-reactivity with mugwort and birch. S H Kim, S M Lee, H W Park, S H Cho, K U Min, Y Y Kim, Korean J Intern Med. 24Kim SH, Lee SM, Park HW, Cho SH, Min KU, Kim YY, et al. Chinese bellflower root anaphylaxis: IgE- binding components and cross-reactivity with mugwort and birch. Korean J Intern Med 2009;24:279-82.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.3904/kjim.2009.24.3.279PUBMED | CROSSREF

Crown daisy-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis in a patient with mugwort-sensitized pollinosis. T Y Yoon, K H Choi, K M Lee, J Y Ahn, M K Kim, Korean J Asthma Allergy Clin Immunol. 31Yoon TY, Choi KH, Lee KM, Ahn JY, Kim MK. Crown daisy-dependent exercise-induced anaphylaxis in a patient with mugwort-sensitized pollinosis. Korean J Asthma Allergy Clin Immunol 2011;31:63-6.

Oral allergy syndrome associated with weed pollinosis. S C Lee, Y W Son, D W Sim, K H Park, J H Lee, J W Park, Allergy Asthma Respir Dis. 4Lee SC, Son YW, Sim DW, Park KH, Lee JH, Park JW. Oral allergy syndrome associated with weed pollinosis. Allergy Asthma Respir Dis 2016;4:458-61.

Oral allergy syndrome caused by crown daisy and sesame leaf. G N Hong, M Kim, M K Yoon, S H Lee, H S Park, Allergy Asthma Respir Dis. 2Hong GN, Kim M, Yoon MK, Lee SH, Park HS. Oral allergy syndrome caused by crown daisy and sesame leaf. Allergy Asthma Respir Dis 2014;2:306-9.

Oral allergy syndrome to watermelon and melon. J H Kim, Y S Yang, S I Cho, C W Park, C H Lee, Kim Ho, Korean J Dermatol. 51Kim JH, Yang YS, Cho SI, Park CW, Lee CH, Kim HO. Oral allergy syndrome to watermelon and melon. Korean J Dermatol 2013;51:730-3.

A retrospective study of Korean adults with food allergy: differences in phenotypes and causes. S H Lee, G Y Ban, K Jeong, Y S Shin, H S Park, S Lee, Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 9Lee SH, Ban GY, Jeong K, Shin YS, Park HS, Lee S, et al. A retrospective study of Korean adults with food allergy: differences in phenotypes and causes. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res 2017;9:534-9.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.4168/aair.2017.9.6.534PUBMED | CROSSREF

Molecular and biochemical classification of plant-derived food allergens. H Breiteneder, C Ebner, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 106Breiteneder H, Ebner C. Molecular and biochemical classification of plant-derived food allergens. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2000;106:27-36.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1067/mai.2000.106929PUBMED | CROSSREF

IgE to Bet v 1 and profilin: cross-reactivity patterns and clinical relevance. M Wensing, J H Akkerdaas, W A Van Leeuwen, S O Stapel, C A Bruijnzeel-Koomen, R C Aalberse, J Allergy Clin Immunol. 110Wensing M, Akkerdaas JH, van Leeuwen WA, Stapel SO, Bruijnzeel-Koomen CA, Aalberse RC, et al. IgE to Bet v 1 and profilin: cross-reactivity patterns and clinical relevance. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2002;110:435-42.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1067/mai.2002.126380PUBMED | CROSSREF

Diagnostic evaluation of grass-and birch-allergic patients with oral allergy syndrome. C Anhoej, V Backer, H Nolte, Allergy. 56Anhoej C, Backer V, Nolte H. Diagnostic evaluation of grass-and birch-allergic patients with oral allergy syndrome. Allergy 2001;56:548-52.

. Pubmed | Crossref, 10.1034/j.1398-9995.2001.056006548.xPUBMED | CROSSREF