# Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome: An Overview

CorpusID: 57815307
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a0c991fb3477544a3d2853e1b6a03d014c9a78e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a0c991fb3477544a3d2853e1b6a03d014c9a78e)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome: An Overview


Sma Sadat an_sadat@yahoo.com 
N M Chowdhury 
Rba Baten 
Abmf Uddin 
S N Rita 
DrS M Anwar Sadat 
DrB Naim 
Lecturer,Mahmud Chowdhury 
ProfE Sufia 
Professor and Head,Nasrin Rita 
DrS M Anwar Sadat 

Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery
Sher-E-Bangla Medical College Dental Unit
Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery
Dept. of Prosthodontics, Dental Unit
REVIEW ARTICLES a
Chattagram International Dental College
Barisal, ChittagongBangladesh, Bangladesh


Dept. of Orthodontics
Chittagong Medical College
ChittagongBangladesh


Dept. of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery
E-Bangla Medical College Dental Unit, Barisal, Bangladesh. Contact No. +880 1711156023
Sapporo Dental College
SherDhakaBangladesh

Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome: An Overview
Received: 20 Nov. 2016 Accepted: 17 July 2017c. Dr. Redwan Bin Abdul Baten, Dental Surgeon, Upazilla Health Complex, Nabinagar, Brahmanbaria, Bangladesh d. Dr. A.B.M. Farid Uddin, Assistant Professor, Address of Correspondence:
Temporomandibular joint dysfunction is a complex and multifactorial disorder of oro-facial region. It is one of the most common disorders in maxillofacial region. The usual complain of the patients with this syndrome are pain in the area of the jaw and associated muscles, eating problem, chewing and locking of the jaw. It is more common in female than male. It's etiology is not yet well established. However it's successful management depends on identification andcontrolling of the etiological factors. (J Bangladesh Coll Phys Surg 2017; 35: 133-141)

• Aggravating factors as parafunction, hormonal or psychosocial. (28)(29)(30)(31)(32)(33)(34) Factors that interfere with healing or enhance the progression of temporomandibular disorder are called "Perpetuating factors."The following may be included in the perpetuating factors: (35) a The following occlusal factors had a slight relation in patient with TMD symptoms: (35) a. Open bite b. Overjet greater than 6-7 mm c. Retruded contact position/intercuspal position with sliding greater than 4 mm d. Unilateral lingual cross-bite e. Five or more missing posterior teeth f. Faulty restorations and ill-fitting prosthesis.

Aplasia, hypoplasia, hyperplasia, dysplasia, neoplasia can lead to TMJ problems and trauma, anatomic, systemic, pathophysiological and emotional causes can make the disorder more severe. (26,36,37) Classification: Classification of TMD is very important for proper diagnosis of the disease because of similarities with numerous diseases and pain in the head and neck region. Following are the differential diagnosis of TMD: (36) 


## Clinical Presentation:

TMD has many similarities to musculoskeletal disorders of other parts of the body and therapeutic approaches for other musculoskeletal disorders generally apply to this disorder as well. 12,13,40 The typical signs and symptoms of TMD arepain in the joint (preauricular region), headaches behindand around the eyes, and pain radiating from the joint tothe temple, ears, side of neck and upper shoulder. Thepain is typically aggravated by wide opening, chewingor other joint activities, such as clenching and bruxism.There are clicking, popping or "locking" because of disc interference, which results in reflex masticatory muscle spasm. (41)(42)(43)(44) Symptoms of TMD are also associated with jaw movement (e.g., opening and closing the mouth, chewing) and pain in the pre-auricular, masseter, or temple region. Another cause of oro-facial pain should be identified if pain is not associated with jaw movement. (45) Patients with TMD symptomsusually report that their pain is aggravated by stress, clenching, and eating, while it is relieved by relaxing, applying heat to the painful area, and taking analgesics. 12,40,46,47 Differential Diagnosis: For proper diagnosis of TMD some another cause for oro-facial pain should carefully excluded as dental caries or abscess, oral lesions (e.g., herpes zoster, herpes sim-plex, oral ulcerations, lichen planus), conditions resulting from muscle overuse (e.g., clenching, bruxism, exces-sive chewing, spasm), trauma or dislocation, maxillary sinusitis, salivary gland disorders, Neuropathic pain (e.g., trigeminal neuralgia, postherpetic neuralgia, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, giant cell arteritis, primary headache syndrome, and pain associated with cancer) autoimmune diseases (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, and rheumatoid arthritis). (48,49) The differential diagno-sis and associated clinical findings are presented in Table-1 50 In differential diagnosis of TMJ disorders and pains, problems such as neoplasms, migraine,neuralgia and mental disorders should be considered. Practitioners must be alert for unusual pain locations, pain qualities, pain-aggravating and pain-relieving events, and other factors (e.g., unexplained fever) suggestive of disorders that may mimic TMD symptoms (e.g., infection, giant cell arteritis, meningitis, etc.). (13,46) Investigations:

Imaging plays an important role in the diagnosis of TMD when his-tory and physical examination findings are equivocal. (51) The usual radiographs are plain radiograph, panoramic view, and tomograms (frontaland lateral). Magnetic resonanceimaging (MRI) or arthrography canbe done for evaluation of the disc and associated soft tissuestructures. Other radiological studies mayalso be done if necessary. (52)(53)(54)(55)(56) The importance of different imaging study are given below:-A. Plain radiograph:Evaluation of plain radiography (trans-cranial and trans-max-illary views) or panoramic radiography should be done first. Acute fractures, dislocations, and severe degenerative articular disease are often visible in these radiographs.


## B. Computed Tomography:

To assessbone abnormalities such as ankylosis, dysplasias,growth abnormalities, fractures, and osseous tumors. (57) C. Magnetic resonance imaging:Is useful to analysis soft tissues, bone marrow changes, disc position, morphology, mobility, and jointeffusion. 53 Diagnostic injections include:- (36) 1. Nerve block (auriculotemporal nerve)


## Trigger points injection


## TMJ injections


## Treatment:

Spontaneous resolution of symptoms occurs in 40% of the patients and only 5% to 10% of patients require treat-ment for TMD.A study shows that 50% to 90% of patients get relief from pain after con-servative therapy. (64,65) Successful manage-ment of TMD can be done with multidisciplinary approach. Initial treatment goals should focus on resolving pain and dys-function.


## Non-Pharmacological Management:

Selective treatmentsinclude:- (36)  C. Physiotherapy:"Active and passive oral exercises and exercises to improve posture are effective interventions to reduce symptoms associated with TMD". (69) Specialized physical therapy such as ultrasound, iontophoresis, electrother-apy, or lowlevel laser therapy have been used in the management of TMD, despite the lack of evidence that support their use. (70) D. Splint Therapy:Occlusal splints may be used to pre-vent degenerative forces placed on the TMJ, articular disk, and dentition. (71) The usual maxillomandibular appliances used are-1. Flat plane stabilization appliance:The flat plane stabilization appliance (also known as the Michigan splint, muscle relaxation appliance, or gnathologic splint) is generally fabricated for the maxillary arch. This is the most commonly used type of intraoral appliance. (72) 2. Traditional anterior bite plane:It is a horseshoe shape appliance with an occlusal platform covering six or eight maxillary anterior teeth to prevent clenching (e.g., Hawley, Sved, Shore).


## Mini anterior appliances:Itengage only a small number of maxillary anterior teeth (usually twofour incisors)

4. Anterior repositioning appliance:This is used to treat the patients with internal derangements (usually anterior disk displacements with reduction). (73) 5. Neuromuscular appliances:Jaw muscle stimulators and jaw-tracking machines are used to maintain the ideal vertical and horizontal position of the mandible relative to the cranium. (74) 6. Posterior bite plane appliances:It is fabricated for the mandibular arch to maintain vertical and horizontal maxillomandibular relationship 7. Pivot appliances:This is constructed with hard acrylic resin that covers either the maxillary or mandibular arch and is recommended for patients with internal derangements and/or osteoarthritis.

8. Hydrostatic appliance:It consists of bilateral waterfilled plastic chambers attached to an acrylic palatal appliance to occlude patient's posterior teeth on the plastic chambers E. Occlusal Adjustment:It is the selective removal of enamel from the occlusal contacts of teeth to maintain the maximum number of teeth in the intercuspal position.

F. Acupuncture:Acupuncture may be an adjunctive treatment, producing a short-term analgesic effect in patients with painful TMJ symptoms. (75) It's sessions typically last 15 to 30 minutes, and the mean number of sessions is six to eight. (76) Pharmacological Management: Drug management isonly used when other somatic symptoms, such as sleepdisorders, chronic pain, arthralgias, inflammatory diseases,myalgias or neuropathies are associated with TMD. (77) Varieties of medications are used to treat the pain associated with TMD. The most commonly used medicationsare muscle relaxants, non-steroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs (NSAIDs), analgesics, tricyclic antidepressants, benzodiazepines and corticosteroids. (77) NSAIDs are first-line management given for 10 to 14 days for initial treatment of acute pain. (78)(79)(80) Despite the multiple choices of NSAIDs available, only naproxen has proven benificial in reduction of pain. (79) Muscle relaxants can be prescribed with NSAIDs if there is evidence of a muscular cause of TMD. (80) Tricyclic antidepressants most commonly amitriptyline, desipramine, doxepin, and nortriptyline are used for the man-agement of chronic TMD pain 81 . Benzodiazepines are also used for two to four weeks in the initial phase of treatment. (78,82) Ibuprofen is effective inskeletomuscular pains (dosage: 600 -800 mg three times daily). (36) Opioids should be used cautiously because of the potential for dependence. 80 Injections of tender muscles, trigger areas, and/or joint spaces with local anesthetic solution is used fordiagnosis and relief of symptoms. Corticosteroidinjection can be effective in reducing capsulitis. 83 It appears to be an effective method for treating severe bruxism and masseterichypertrophy whentraditional methods fail. (84)(85)(86)(87) Muscle relaxants (baclofen, tizanidin, cyclobenzaprine),opiates (morphine), anticonvulsants (e.g., gabapentin),ketamine, and TCA (e.g., amitriptyline) are also used clinically for TMJ management, but there isno strong evidence for their efficacy. 88,89 Surgical Management: Surgery is seldom needed for TMD patients. A study over 2,000 TMD patients from many practices found that only 2.5% needed TMJ surgery (1.4% arthrocentesis, 1.0% arthroscopy, and 0.1% open joint procedures). (90) The common TMJ surgeries are:-36 


## Conclusion:

TMD should be treated with multidisciplinary approach as other musculoskeletal complaint.It is important to note that treating TMD onlyfrom the dental perspective may fail, as many of theseanomalies are caused by somatic diseases. If TMD is left untreated, symptoms can worsen and extend far beyond the jaw and mouth area. Conservative therapy is best as a first-line approach for treating the patient.Treatment goals in patients with TMD are pain relief and return of function. These goals willbe achieved only if diagnosed properly and the treatment plan is taken with consideration of mental and physicalproblems with predisposing factors. 


. Behavioral factors: grinding, clenching and abnormal head posture b. Social factors: could effect perception and influence of learned response to pain c. Emotional factors: depression and anxiety d. Cognitive factors: negative thoughts and attitudes.


22. de Barbosa TS, Miyakoda LS, de Pocztaruk RL, Rocha CP, Gaviao MB. Temporomandibular disorders and bruxism in childhood and adolescence: review of the literature.Int J PediatrOtorhinolaryngol 2008;72:299-314 23. Dworkin SF, Huggins KH, LeResche L, Von Korff M, Howard J, Truelove E, et al. Epidemiology of signs and symptoms in temporomandibular disorders: Clinical signs in cases and controls. J Am Dent Assoc.1990;120:273-81. 24. McNamara JA, Jr, Seligman DA, Okeson JP. Occlusion, Orthodontic treatment, and temporomandibular disorders: A review. J Orofac Pain. 1995;9:73-90. 25. Okeson JP. Orofacial Pain: Guidelines for assessment, diagnosis, and management. Chicago, Ill: Quintessence Pub. for the American Academy of Orofacial Pain Diffrential diagnosis and management considerations of temporomandibular disorders; 1996, 120-2. 26. DowlatAbadiMMotamedi MHK, Taheri KT. Textbook of Temporomandibular Disorders. ShayanNemodar Publications, Tehran, 2009, 5-100. 27. Motamedi, M. H. Treatment of condylar hyperplasia of the mandible using unilateral ramus osteotomies. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1996;54(10):1161-9. 28. Kirveskari P, Alanen P, Jämsä T. Association between craniomandibular disorders and occlusal interferences in children. JProsthet Dent. 1992;67:692-6. 29. Oral K, BalKüçük B, Ebeoglu B, Dinçer S. Etiology of temporomandibular disorder pain. Agri. 2009;21:89-94. 30. Furquim BD, Flamengui LM, Conti PC. TMD and chronic pain: A current view. Dental Press J Orthod. 2015;20: 127-33. 31. Kolbinson DA, Epstein JB, Burgess JA, Senthilselvan A. Temporomandibular disorders, headaches, and neck pain after motor vehicle accidents: A pilot investigation of persistence and litigation effects. JProsthet Dent. 1997;77:46-53. 32. Grzesiak RC. Psychologic considerations in temporomandibular dysfunction. A biopsychosocial view of symptom formation. Dent Clin North Am. 1991;35:209-26.
Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction SyndromeSMA Sadat et al.
Journal of Bangladesh College of Physicians and SurgeonsVol. 35, No. 3, July 2017

Temporomandibular joint disorders in patients with skeletal discrepancies. 2. Management of temporomandibular disorders. National institutes of health technology assessment conference statement. S Al-Riyami, J Am Dent Assoc. 127PhD ThesisLondon: UCL Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health SciencesAl-Riyami S. PhD Thesis. London: UCL Eastman Dental Institute for Oral Health Sciences; 2010. Temporomandibular joint disorders in patients with skeletal discrepancies. 2. Management of temporomandibular disorders. National institutes of health technology assessment conference statement. J Am Dent Assoc. 1996;127:1595-606.

Chronicity factors of temporomandibular disorders: A critical review of the literature. G Maísasoares, C M Rizzatti-Barbosa, Braz Oral Res. 29MaísaSoares G, Rizzatti-Barbosa CM. Chronicity factors of temporomandibular disorders: A critical review of the literature. Braz Oral Res. 2015;29.

Oral parafunctions and positive clinical examination findings. G Kobs, O Bernhardt, T Kocher, G Meyer, Baltic Dent Maxillofac J. 7Kobs G, Bernhardt O, Kocher T, Meyer G. Oral parafunctions and positive clinical examination findings. Baltic Dent Maxillofac J 2005;7:81-83

Muscle activity in the course of rehabilitation of masticatory motor system functional disorders. E Kijak, E Lietz-Kijak, Z Šliwinski, B Fraczak, PostepyHig Med Dosw. 67Kijak E, Lietz-Kijak E, Šliwinski Z, Fraczak B. Muscle activity in the course of rehabilitation of masticatory motor system functional disorders. PostepyHig Med Dosw 2013;67:507-516

Epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment of temporomandibular disorders. F Liu, A Steinkeler, Dent Clin North Am. 57Liu F, Steinkeler A. Epidemiology, diagnosis, and treatment of temporomandibular disorders. Dent Clin North Am 2013;57:465-479

Psychosocial aspects of temporomandibular disorders and oral health-related qualityof-life. O Miettinen, S Lahti, K Sipilä, ActaOdontolScand. 70Miettinen O, Lahti S, Sipilä K. Psychosocial aspects of temporomandibular disorders and oral health-related quality- of-life. ActaOdontolScand 2012;70:331-336

Chronic pain severity and depression/somatization levels in TMD patients. D Manfredini, L Borella, L Favero, G Ferronato, L Guarda-Nardini, Int J Prosthodont. 23Manfredini D, Borella L, Favero L, Ferronato G, Guarda- Nardini L. Chronic pain severity and depression/somatization levels in TMD patients. Int J Prosthodont 2010;23:529-534

Stomatognathic system involvement in rheumatoid arthritis patients. A E Bono, J A Learreta, G Rodriguez, J C Marcos, CRANIO. 32Bono AE, Learreta JA, Rodriguez G, Marcos JC. Stomatognathic system involvement in rheumatoid arthritis patients. CRANIO 2014;32:31-37

Painful temporomandibular disorders, self reported tinnitus, and depression are highly associated. G Fernandes, D A Gonçalves, J T De Siqueira, C M Camparis, ArqNeuropsiquiatr. 71Fernandes G, Gonçalves DA, de Siqueira JT, Camparis CM. Painful temporomandibular disorders, self reported tinnitus, and depression are highly associated. ArqNeuropsiquiatr 2013;71:943-947

Is there an association between anxiety/depression and temporomandibular disorders in college students?. L B Calixtre, B L Grüninger, T C Chaves, A B Oliveira, J Appl Oral Sci. 22Calixtre LB, Grüninger BL, Chaves TC, Oliveira AB. Is there an association between anxiety/depression and temporomandibular disorders in college students? J Appl Oral Sci 2014;22:15-21

American Academy Of Orofacialpain, Orofacial Pain: Guidelines for Assessment, Diagnosis and Management. de Leeuw RQuintessence4th edAmerican Academy of OrofacialPain . In: Orofacial Pain: Guidelines for Assessment, Diagnosis and Management, 4th ed. de Leeuw R, editor. Chicago: Quintessence; 2008.

Manual of Temporomandibular Disorders. E F Wright, Ames, IA: BlackwellWright EF. Manual of Temporomandibular Disorders. Ames, IA: Blackwell; 2005.

Functional analysis-examination of temporomandibular joint and condylar movement. Rakosi Graber, Petrovic, Dentofacial Orthopedics with Functional Appliances. St. Louis: Mosby2nd ed.Graber, Rakosi, Petrovic . In: Dentofacial Orthopedics with Functional Appliances. 2nd ed. St. Louis: Mosby; 2009. Functional analysis-examination of temporomandibular joint and condylar movement; pp. 135-40.

Temporomandibular disorders are differentially associated with headache diagnoses: a con-trolled study. D A Gonçalves, C M Camparis, J G Speciali, Clin J Pain. 277Gonçalves DA, Camparis CM, Speciali JG, et al. Temporomandibular disorders are differentially associated with headache diagnoses: a con-trolled study. Clin J Pain. 2011; 27(7): 611-615.

Development of temporomandibular disorders is associated with greater bodily pain experience. P F Lim, S Smith, K Bhalang, Clin J Pain. 262Lim PF, Smith S, Bhalang K, et al. Development of temporomandibular disorders is associated with greater bodily pain experience. Clin J Pain. 2010; 26(2): 116-120.

Management and treatment of temporomandibular disorders: A clinical perspective. E F Wright, S L North, J Man ManipTher. 17Wright EF, North SL. Management and treatment of temporomandibular disorders: A clinical perspective. J Man ManipTher. 2009;17:247-54.

Oral health status in the United states: temporomandibular disorders. J D Rugh, W K Solberg, J Dent Educ. 49Rugh JD, Solberg WK. Oral health status in the United states: temporomandibular disorders. J Dent Educ. 1985;49: 398-405.

Estimated prevalence and distribution of reported orofacial pain in the United States. J A Lipton, J A Ship, D Larach-Robinson, J Am Dent Assoc. 124Lipton JA, Ship JA, Larach-Robinson D. Estimated prevalence and distribution of reported orofacial pain in the United States. J Am Dent Assoc. 1993;124:115-21.

J P Okeson, Management of Temporomandibular Disorders and Occlusion. St. Louis, MO: CV Mosby6th edOkeson JP. Management of Temporomandibular Disorders and Occlusion, 6th ed. St. Louis, MO: CV Mosby; 2008.

Oral habits of temporomandibular disorder patients with malocclusion. Y Fujita, E Motegi, M Nomura, S Kawamura, D Yamaguchi, H Yamaguchi, Bull Tokyo Dent Coll. 44Fujita Y, Motegi E, Nomura M, Kawamura S, Yamaguchi D, Yamaguchi H. Oral habits of temporomandibular disorder patients with malocclusion. Bull Tokyo Dent Coll 2003;44:201-207

Pain and temporomandibular disorders: A pharmaco-gender dilemma. J R Shaefer, N Holland, J S Whelan, A M Velly, Dent Clin North Am. 57Shaefer JR, Holland N, Whelan JS, Velly AM. Pain and temporomandibular disorders: A pharmaco-gender dilemma. Dent Clin North Am. 2013;57:233-62.

Adults seeking orthodontic treatment: Expectations, periodontal and TMD issues. L Christensen, F Luther, Br Dent J. 218Christensen L, Luther F. Adults seeking orthodontic treatment: Expectations, periodontal and TMD issues. Br Dent J. 2015;218:111-7.

Etiological factors of temporomandibular disorders. S Sharma, D S Gupta, U S Pal, S K Jurel, Natl J Maxillofac Surg. 22Sharma S, Gupta DS, Pal US, Jurel SK. "Etiological factors of temporomandibular disorders". Natl J Maxillofac Surg. 2011; 2(2): 116-119.

A Textbook of Advanced Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. F Navi, Mhk Motamedi, K T Talesh, E Lasemi, Z Nematollahi, TehranIntech publicationsNavi F, Motamedi MHK, Talesh KT, Lasemi E, Nematollahi Z. A Textbook of Advanced Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery.Intech publications, Tehran, 2013; 831-858

Outcomes of management of early temporomandibular joint disorders: How effective is nonsurgical therapy in the long-term?. S H Mortazavi, Mhk Motamedi, F Navi, M Pourshahab, S M Bayanzadeh, Hajmiraghah, M Isapour, National J MaxillofacSurg. Mortazavi, S. H. Motamedi MHK, Navi F, Pourshahab M, Bayanzadeh SM, HajmiraghaH, Isapour M: Outcomes of management of early temporomandibular joint disorders: How effective is nonsurgical therapy in the long-term? National J MaxillofacSurg, (2010).

R De Leeuw, G D Klasser, Diagnosis, and Management. Chicago, IllQuintessence Publ5th ed.De Leeuw R, Klasser GD; American Academy of Orofacial Pain.Oro-facial Pain: Guidelines for Assessment, Diagnosis, and Management. 5th ed. Chicago, Ill.: Quintessence Publ.; 2013.

Diagnostic criteria for tem-poromandibular disorders (DC/TMD) for clinical and research applica-tions: recommendations of the International RDC/TMD Consortium Network and Orofacial Pain Special Interest Group. E Schiffman, R Ohrbach, E Truelove, J Oral Facial Pain Headache. 281Schiffman E, Ohrbach R, Truelove E, et al. Diagnostic criteria for tem-poromandibular disorders (DC/TMD) for clinical and research applica-tions: recommendations of the International RDC/TMD Consortium Network and Orofacial Pain Special Interest Group. J Oral Facial Pain Headache. 2014;28(1): 6-27.

Myogenoustemporomandibular disorders: Diagnostic and management considerations. J Fricton, DentClin North Am. 51Fricton J. Myogenoustemporomandibular disorders: Diagnostic and management considerations. DentClin North Am. 2007;51:61-83.

Intra-articular disc displacement Part II: Its significant role in temporomandibular joint pathology. H D Hall, J Oral MaxillofacSurg. 531073Hall HD: Intra-articular disc displacement Part II: Its significant role in temporomandibular joint pathology. J Oral MaxillofacSurg 1995;53:1073.

G Boering, Temporomandibular joint osteoarthrosis. Gronigen, the Netherlands, Drukkerij, van Denderen BV; Englishlanguage versionUniversity of GroniganDoctoral thesisBoering G: Temporomandibular joint osteoarthrosis (1966 Doctoral thesis, University of Gronigan). Gronigen, the Netherlands, Drukkerij, van Denderen BV, 1994 (English- language version)

TMJ internal derangements in an orthognathicsurgery population. J J Link, J W NickersonJr, Int J Adult Orthodon OrthognathSurg. 7161Link JJ, Nickerson JW Jr: TMJ internal derangements in an orthognathicsurgery population. Int J Adult Orthodon OrthognathSurg 1992;7:161.

Pediatric internal derangements of the temporomandibular joint: Effect on facial development. K P Schellhas, S R Pollei, C H Wilkes, Am J OrthodDentofacOrthop. 10451Schellhas KP, Pollei SR, Wilkes CH: Pediatric internal derangements of the temporomandibular joint: Effect on facial development. Am J OrthodDentofacOrthop 1993;104:51.

Temporomandibular disorders. S J Scrivani, D A Keith, L B Kaban, N Engl J Med. 35925Scrivani SJ, Keith DA, Kaban LB. Temporomandibular disorders. N Engl J Med. 2008;359(25): 2693-2705.

Managing Orofacial Pain in Practice. E Murphy, Chicago: QuintessenceMurphy E. Managing Orofacial Pain in Practice. Chicago: Quintessence; 2008.

Management of masticatory myalgia and arthralgia. J R Fricton, E L Schiffman, B J Sessle, G J Lavigne, J P Lund, R Dubner, Orofacial Pain: From Basic Science to Clinical Management. Chicago: QuintessenceFricton JR, Schiffman EL. Management of masticatory myalgia and arthralgia. In: Sessle BJ, Lavigne GJ, Lund JP, Dubner R, editors. Orofacial Pain: From Basic Science to Clinical Management. Chicago: Quintessence; 2008.

Differential diagnosis of temporomandibular disorders and other orofacial pain disorders. J P Okeson, R De Leeuw, Dent Clin North Am. 551Okeson JP, de Leeuw R. Differential diagnosis of temporomandibular disorders and other orofacial pain disorders. Dent Clin North Am. 2011; 55(1): 105-120.

Differential diagnosis of facial pain and guidelines for management. J M Zakrzewska, Br J Anaesth. 1111Zakrzewska JM. Differential diagnosis of facial pain and guidelines for management.Br J Anaesth. 2013; 111(1): 95-104.

Diagnosis and treatment of temporomandibular disorders.Americian Family Physician. L Robert, M D Gauer, J Michael, Dmd Semidey, 91Robert L, Gauer MD, Michael J, Semidey DMD. Diagnosis and treatment of temporomandibular disorders.Americian Family Physician. March 15, 2015; 91(6): 378-388

Diagnostic imaging for temporomandibular disorders and orofacial pain. A Hunter, S Kalathingal, Dent Clin North Am. 573Hunter A, Kalathingal S. Diagnostic imaging for temporomandibular disorders and orofacial pain. Dent Clin North Am. 2013; 57(3): 405-418.

The effects of temporomandibular joint internal derangement and degenerative joint disease on tomographic. J Brand, Journal of Bangladesh College of Physicians and Surgeons. 353Oral Surg Oral Med Oral PathBrand J, et al: The effects of temporomandibular joint internal derangement and degenerative joint disease on tomographic Journal of Bangladesh College of Physicians and Surgeons Vol. 35, No. 3, July 2017 and arthrotomographicimages. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path 67: 220, 1989

The temporomandibular Joint: magnetic resonance imaging using surface coils. S E Harms, R M Wilk, L M Wolford, Radiology. 157133Harms SE, Wilk RM, Wolford LM, et al: The temporomandibular Joint: magnetic resonance imaging using surface coils. Radiology 157: 133, 1985

Normal and abnormal temporomandibular joint: MR imaging with surface coil. R W Katzberg, R W Bessette, R H Tallents, Radiology. 158Katzberg RW, Bessette RW, Tallents RH et al: Normal and abnormal temporomandibular joint: MR imaging with surface coil. Radiology 158: 183, 1986

Arthrography of the temporomandibular joint in patients with the TMJ pain-dysfunction syndrome. C H Wilkes, Minn Med. 61Wilkes CH: Arthrography of the temporomandibular joint in patients with the TMJ pain-dysfunction syndrome. Minn Med 61:645, 1978

Arthrotomography of the temporomandibular joint. R W Katzberg, M F Dolwick, C A Helms, AJR. 134995Katzberg RW, Dolwick MF, Helms CA et al: Arthrotomography of the temporomandibular joint. AJR 1980;134: 995,

Temporomandibular joint imaging. R W Katzberg, Radiology. 170297Katzberg RW: Temporomandibular joint imaging. Radiology 1989;170: 297.

Bilateral internal derangements of the temporomandibular joint: evaluation by magnetic resonance imaging. R E Sanchez-Woodworth, R H Tallents, R W Katzberg, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path. 65281Sanchez-Woodworth RE, Tallents RH, Katzberg RW et al: Bilateral internal derangements of the temporomandibular joint: evaluation by magnetic resonance imaging. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path 1988;65: 281,

Internal derangement of the temporomandibular joint: radiologic staging with clinical and pathologic correlation. K Schellhas, Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 75495Schellhas K: Internal derangement of the temporomandibular joint: radiologic staging with clinical and pathologic correlation. Magnetic Resonance Imaging 1989;7(5):495.

Temporomandibular joint: magnetic resonance evidence of joint effusion relative to joint pain and internal derangement. P-L Westesson, S L Brooks, AJR. 159559Westesson P-L, Brooks SL: Temporomandibular joint: magnetic resonance evidence of joint effusion relative to joint pain and internal derangement, AJR 1992;159:559.

Diagnostic value of ultrasonography in temporomandibulardisorders. B Bas, N Y1lmaz, E Gökce, J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 695Bas B, Y1lmaz N, Gökce E, et al. Diagnostic value of ultrasonography in temporomandibulardisorders. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2011; 69(5):1304-1310.

Bone scanning with technetium phosphate to assess condylar hyperplasia. S R Matteson, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path. 60356Matteson SR et al: Bone scanning with technetium phosphate to assess condylar hyperplasia. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Path 1985;60:356.

Physical therapy and anesthetic blockage for treating temporomandibular disorders: a clini-cal trial. M M Nascimento, B C Vasconcelos, G G Porto, Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 181Nascimento MM, Vasconcelos BC, Porto GG, et al. Physical therapy and anesthetic blockage for treating temporomandibular disorders: a clini-cal trial. Med Oral Patol Oral Cir Bucal. 2013; 18(1): e81 e85.

Effectiveness of conservative treatment for craniomandibulardisorders: a 2-year longitudinal study. P Garefis, E Grigoriadou, A Zarifi, J Orofac Pain. 83Garefis P, Grigoriadou E, Zarifi A, et al. Effectiveness of conservative treatment for craniomandibulardisorders: a 2- year longitudinal study. J Orofac Pain. 1994; 8(3): 309-314.

Nonsurgical management of temporomandibular joint disorders. A Indresano, C Alpha, Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. Fonseca RJ, Marciani RD, Turvey TASt. Louis, MoElsevier2nd ed.Indresano A, Alpha C. Nonsurgical management of temporomandibular joint disorders. In: Fonseca RJ, Marciani RD, Turvey TA, eds. Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. 2nd ed. St. Louis, Mo.: Saunders/Elsevier; 2009: 881-897.

Temporomandibular disorders: a clinical update. G Dimitroulis, BMJ. 3177152Dimitroulis G. Temporomandibular disorders: a clinical update. BMJ. 1998; 317(7152): 190-194.

Peterson's Principles of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. M Miloro, L J Peterson, Shelton, ConnPeople's Medical Pub HouseMiloro M, Peterson LJ. Peterson's Principles of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery. 3rd ed. Shelton, Conn.: People's Medical Pub House; 2012.

Evaluation of the effectiveness of biobehavioral therapy in the treatment of temporomandibular disorders: a literature review. B Orlando, D Manfredini, G Salvetti, M Bosco, Behav Med. 333Orlando B, Manfredini D, Salvetti G, Bosco M. Evaluation of the effectiveness of biobehavioral therapy in the treatment of temporomandibular disorders: a literature review. Behav Med 2007;33(3): 101-18

A systematic review of the effectiveness of physical therapy interventions for temporomandibular disorders. M L Mcneely, Armijo Olivo, S Magee, D J , PhysTher. 86McNeely ML, Armijo Olivo S, Magee DJ. A systematic review of the effectiveness of physical therapy interventions for temporomandibular disorders.PhysTher. 2006;86:710-725.

Low level laser therapy for the treat-ment of temporomandibular disorders: a systematic review of the litera-ture. M Melis, Di Giosia, M Zawawi, K H , Cranio. 304Melis M, Di Giosia M, Zawawi KH. Low level laser therapy for the treat-ment of temporomandibular disorders: a systematic review of the litera-ture. Cranio. 2012; 30(4): 304-312.

Oral appliances in the management of tem-poromandibular disorders. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral RadiolEndod. G D Klasser, C S Greene, 107Klasser GD, Greene CS. Oral appliances in the management of tem-poromandibular disorders. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral RadiolEndod. 2009;107(2): 212-223.

Influence of group function and canine guidance on electromyographic activity of elevator muscles. A Manns, C Chan, R Miralles, J Prosthet Dent. 57Manns A, Chan C, Miralles R. Influence of group function and canine guidance on electromyographic activity of elevator muscles. J Prosthet Dent. 1987;57:494-501.

Differentiation of temporomandibular joint dysfunction to simplify treatment. W B Farrar, J Prosthet Dent. 28Farrar WB. Differentiation of temporomandibular joint dysfunction to simplify treatment.J Prosthet Dent. 1972;28:629-36.

The role of bioelectronic instrumentation in the documentation and management of temporomandibular disorders.Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral RadiolEndod. B C Cooper, 83Cooper BC. The role of bioelectronic instrumentation in the documentation and management of temporomandibular disorders.Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral RadiolEndod. 1997;83:91-100.

Acupuncture in the treatment of pain in temporomandibular disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. La Touche, R Goddard, G De-La-Hoz, J , Clin J Pain. 266La Touche R, Goddard G, De-La-Hoz J et al. Acupuncture in the treatment of pain in temporomandibular disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Clin J Pain 2010;26(6): 541-50

Practical recommendations for the use of acupuncture in the treatment of temporomandibular disorders based on the outcome of published controlled studies. P Rosted, Oral Dis. 72Rosted P. Practical recommendations for the use of acupuncture in the treatment of temporomandibular disorders based on the outcome of published controlled studies. Oral Dis. 2001; 7(2): 109-115.

Diagnostic and therapeutic-restorative procedures for masticatory dysfunctions. W B Freesmeyer, M R Fussnegger, M O Ahlers, GMS CurrTop Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 4Freesmeyer WB, Fussnegger MR, Ahlers MO. Diagnostic and therapeutic-restorative procedures for masticatory dysfunctions. GMS CurrTop Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck Surg 2005;4:1-29

Pharmacologic management of temporomandibular disorders. E V Hersh, R Balasubramaniam, A Pinto, Oral MaxillofacSurgClin North Am. 202Hersh EV, Balasubramaniam R, Pinto A. Pharmacologic management of temporomandibular disorders. Oral MaxillofacSurgClin North Am. 2008; 20(2): 197-210.

Treatment of painful temporomandibular joints with a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: a randomized placebo-controlled com-parison of celecoxib to naproxen. L E Ta, R A Dionne, Pain. 1111-2Ta LE, Dionne RA. Treatment of painful temporomandibular joints with a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor: a randomized placebo-controlled com-parison of celecoxib to naproxen. Pain. 2004; 111(1-2): 13-21.

Pharmacologic interventions in the treat-ment of temporomandibular disorders, atypical facial pain, and burning mouth syndrome. A qualitative systematic review. T List, S Axelsson, G Leijon, J Orofac Pain. 174List T, Axelsson S, Leijon G. Pharmacologic interventions in the treat-ment of temporomandibular disorders, atypical facial pain, and burning mouth syndrome. A qualitative systematic review.J Orofac Pain. 2003; 17(4): 301-310.

The effectiveness of add-ing pharmacologic treatment with clonazepam or cyclobenzaprine to patient education and self-care for the treatment of jaw pain upon awakening: a randomized clinical trial. C R Herman, E L Schiffman, J O Look, J Orofac Pain. 161Herman CR, Schiffman EL, Look JO, et al. The effectiveness of add-ing pharmacologic treatment with clonazepam or cyclobenzaprine to patient education and self-care for the treatment of jaw pain upon awakening: a randomized clinical trial. J Orofac Pain. 2002; 16(1): 64-70.

A controlled evaluation of ibuprofen and diazepam for chronic orofacial muscle pain. E Singer, R Dionne, J Orofac Pain. 112Singer E, Dionne R. A controlled evaluation of ibuprofen and diazepam for chronic orofacial muscle pain.J Orofac Pain. 1997; 11(2): 139-146.

Long-term effect of intraarticularinjection of a glucocorticosteroid into the TMJ: Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome SMA Sadat et al. B Wenneberg, S Kopp, H G Grondahl, Wenneberg B, Kopp S, Grondahl HG: Long-term effect of intraarticularinjection of a glucocorticosteroid into the TMJ: Management of Temporomandibular Joint Dysfunction Syndrome SMA Sadat et al.

a clinical and radiographic 8-year follow-up. J Craniomandib Disorders Oral Facial Pain. 511a clinical and radiographic 8-year follow-up. J Craniomandib Disorders Oral Facial Pain 1991;5:11.

The use of botulinum toxin for treatment of temporomandibular disorders: preliminary findings. B Freund, M Schwartz, J M Symington, J Oral MaxillofacSurg. 57916Freund B, Schwartz M, Symington JM: The use of botulinum toxin for treatment of temporomandibular disorders: preliminary findings. J Oral MaxillofacSurg 1999;57:916.

Treating severe bruxism with botulinum toxin. E-K Tan, J Jankovic, JADA. 131211Tan E-K, Jankovic J: Treating severe bruxism with botulinum toxin. JADA 2000;131:211.

The medical management of masseterichypertrophy with botulinum toxin type A. A P Moore, G D Wood, Br J Oral MaxillofacSurg. 3226Moore AP, Wood GD: The medical management of masseterichypertrophy with botulinum toxin type A. Br J Oral MaxillofacSurg 1994;32:26.

Botulinum toxin treatment of bilateral masseteric hypertrophy. A G Smyth, Br J Oral MaxillofacSurg. 3229Smyth AG: Botulinum toxin treatment of bilateral masseteric hypertrophy. Br J Oral MaxillofacSurg 1994;32:29.

Pathophysiology of TMD pain -basic mechanisms and their implications for pharmacotherapy. B E Cairns, J Oral Rehabil. 37Cairns BE. Pathophysiology of TMD pain -basic mechanisms and their implications for pharmacotherapy. J Oral Rehabil 2010;37:391-410

The short-term effects of acupuncture on myofascial pain patients after clenching. Y F Shen, G Goddard, Pain Pract. 7Shen YF, Goddard G. The short-term effects of acupuncture on myofascial pain patients after clenching. Pain Pract 2007;7:256-264

JrTemporomandibular disorder treatment outcomes: Second report of a large-scale prospective clinical study. D T Brown, E L Gaudet, Cranio. 20Brown DT, Gaudet EL., JrTemporomandibular disorder treatment outcomes: Second report of a large-scale prospective clinical study. Cranio. 2002;20:244-253.

Bilateral developmental hyperplasia of the mandibular coronoid process. N L Rowe, Br J Oral Surg. 190Rowe NL: Bilateral developmental hyperplasia of the mandibular coronoid process. Br J Oral Surg 1:90, 1963

Mandibular limitation due to coronoid enlargement: management by surgery and physical therapy. S L Bronstein, J J Osborne, JCraniomandPract. 358Bronstein SL, Osborne JJ: Mandibular limitation due to coronoid enlargement: management by surgery and physical therapy. JCraniomandPract 1985;3:58.

Mandibular coronoid process locking: a prospective study of frequency and association with internal derangement of the temporomandibular joint. A Isberg, G Isacsson, K S Nak, J Oral Surg. 63275Isberg A, Isacsson G, Nak KS: Mandibular coronoid process locking: a prospective study of frequency and association with internal derangement of the temporomandibular joint. J Oral Surg 1987;63:275.

Report of two cases and review of the literature. Y Totsuka, H Fukuda, J CranioMaxillofacSurg. 19172Bilateral coronoid hyperplasiaTotsuka Y, Fukuda H: Bilateral coronoid hyperplasia. Report of two cases and review of the literature. J CranioMaxillofacSurg 1991;19: 172.

Elongated styloid process: symptoms and treatment. W W Eagle, Arch Otolaryngol. 67172Eagle WW: Elongated styloid process: symptoms and treatment. Arch Otolaryngol 1958;67:172.

Eagle's syndrome: a comparison of intraoral versus extraoral surgical approaches. D C Chase, A Zarmen, W C Bigelow, J M Mccoy, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol. 62625Chase DC, Zarmen A, Bigelow WC, McCoy JM: Eagle's syndrome: a comparison of intraoral versus extraoral surgical approaches. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 1986;62:625.

Elongated styloid process, an overview. P S Murthy, P Bazarika, M Mathat, A Kumar, M P Kamath, Int J Oral MaxillofacSurg. 19230Murthy PS, Bazarika P, Mathat M, Kumar A, Kamath MP: Elongated styloid process, an overview. Int J Oral MaxillofacSurg 1990;19 : 230.

. Journal of Bangladesh College of Physicians and Surgeons. 353Journal of Bangladesh College of Physicians and Surgeons Vol. 35, No. 3, July 2017