# Optimizing therapeutics in the management of patients with multiple sclerosis: a review of drug efficacy, dosing, and mechanisms of action

CorpusID: 5883881
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/147d2387b0981f3b0f5f36bdb32377cbf70da338](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/147d2387b0981f3b0f5f36bdb32377cbf70da338)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Optimizing therapeutics in the management of patients with multiple sclerosis: a review of drug efficacy, dosing, and mechanisms of action


Kavitha Damal 
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Research Group Research Group
370 East 9th Avenue -Suite 10684103Salt Lake City, Salt Lake CityUT, UTUSA, USA

Emily Stoker 
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Research Group Research Group
370 East 9th Avenue -Suite 10684103Salt Lake City, Salt Lake CityUT, UTUSA, USA

John F Foley 
Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosis Research Group Research Group
370 East 9th Avenue -Suite 10684103Salt Lake City, Salt Lake CityUT, UTUSA, USA

Optimizing therapeutics in the management of patients with multiple sclerosis: a review of drug efficacy, dosing, and mechanisms of action
10.2147/BTT.S53007Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 247-258 Biologics: Targets and Therapy Dovepress submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dovepress 247 R e v i e w open access to scientific and medical research Correspondence: John F Foley Rocky Mountain Multiple Sclerosismultiple sclerosisimmunomodulationinterferonsglatiramer acetatemonoclonal antibodiesdimethyl fumarate
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating neurological disorder that affects nearly 2 million adults, mostly in the prime of their youth. An environmental trigger, such as a viral infection, is hypothesized to initiate the abnormal behavior of host immune cells: to attack and damage the myelin sheath surrounding the neurons of the central nervous system. While several other pathways and disease triggers are still being investigated, it is nonetheless clear that MS is a heterogeneous disease with multifactorial etiologies that works independently or synergistically to initiate the aberrant immune responses to myelin. Although there are still no definitive markers to diagnose the disease or to cure the disease per se, research on management of MS has improved many fold over the past decade. New disease-modifying therapeutics are poised to decrease immune inflammatory responses and consequently decelerate the progression of MS disease activity, reduce the exacerbations of MS symptoms, and stabilize the physical and mental status of individuals. In this review, we describe the mechanism of action, optimal dosing, drug administration, safety, and efficacy of the disease-modifying therapeutics that are currently approved for MS therapy. We also briefly touch upon the new drugs currently under investigation, and discuss the future of MS therapeutics.

## Introduction

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex and chronic demyelinating autoimmune neurological disorder that manifests through an interaction of environmental and genetic factors. [1][2][3][4][5] The onset of MS occurs at an individual's most productive years (20-40 years), 6,7 and affects considerably more women than men. [8][9][10] A long-term follow-up study of MS reports a steady rise in the incidence of MS, while the age at onset of disease symptoms has been continuously decreasing. 6 Nearly 2.5 million individuals worldwide (nearly one in every 400 individuals) are afflicted with MS, although experts consider this number to be an underestimation of true prevalence. MS is unquestionably a disabling disease that impairs both the physical function and cognitive ability of patients. 11 While their longevity is not severely compromised (reduction in life span by 6-7 years), 12 quality of life is significantly impacted, as individuals are plagued by MS-associated comorbidities, such as chronic pain, fatigue, depression, sleep disorders, spasticity, gait and coordination imbalances, migraines, sensory organ dysfunctions, and overall cognitive impairment. Since the description of MS by French neurologist Jean-Martin Charcot as a triad of symptoms (nystagmus, intention tremor, and slurred speech) 13 in 1868, research on the etiology, Presently, a combination of paraclinical diagnostic investigations, including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) assessment of brain-lesion dissemination in space and time, presence of oligoclonal bands in cerebrospinal fluid, delayed latencies in visual evoked potentials, and changes in retinal nerve fiber-layer thickness evaluated using optical coherence tomography alongside clinical symptoms, as recommended by the 2010 McDonald criteria, are used to guide MS diagnosis. [14][15][16] While several potential biomarkers are being studied to ascertain their utility in diagnosing MS, 17,18 none has yet been determined as clinically useful. Furthermore, discovery of markers to establish prognosis based on disease symptoms and treatment trajectories is also wanting. 19 A majority of MS patients (∼85%) experience symptomatic attacks between dormant states ("remission"), commonly referred to as the relapsing-remitting type (RRMS), which may initially present as a clinically isolated syndrome. This may segue, after a number of years, into secondary progressive MS, marked by fewer or no relapses and gradual neurological worsening with brain atrophy. Primary progressive MS presents with a continuous neurological worsening from the first onset of symptoms. Despite their similarity, studies have identified distinct pathological differences 20 that could be translated to determine treatment decisions and predict the prognosis for patients based on the subtype presentation. 21,22 Of note, primary and secondary progressive forms have generally been more resistant to anti-inflammatory therapies when compared to RRMS subtype.


## Management of MS

MS therapeutics divides into primary disease treatment using immunomodulating agents, which will be discussed in detail, as well as specific symptom management (eg, spasticity, fatigue, depression, pain, etc), which will not be further addressed in this review.


## Primary immunomodulatory therapeutics

The goal of mainstay therapies of MS is to reduce relapses and postpone progression of disability in patients. 23,24 To this end, strategies adopted to treat MS are twofold: a short-term treatment to help reduce the accumulation of disease burden after an acute relapse, and a long-term, sustained treatment aimed at stabilizing the disease process. 25 


## Short-term treatment for acute relapse

In the initial stages of an MS relapse, individuals are generally treated with high doses (500-1,000 mg) of intravenous corticosteroids (eg, methylprednisolone) for a short period of 3-5 days. In rare cases, subcutaneous or intramuscular injections of adrenocorticotropic hormone (eg, HP Acthar ® gel) are used, specifically for individuals who cannot tolerate or have poor response to intravenous prednisolone. [26][27][28] These anti-inflammatory agents accelerate the process of recovery, and reduce duration of the relapse; however, they do not have any bearing on the occurrence of new relapses or on long-term disease progression. [27][28][29][30] Long-term disease management

The fundamental pathogenesis of MS is characterized by two stages of disease development. 31 The inception of MS symptoms (clinical and paraclinical) and focal demyelination of neurons occur during the early inflammatory phase. The late neurodegenerative phase is characterized by further demyelination of neurons perpetrated by infiltrating macrophages, microglial cells, and lymphocytes that attack the endogenous myelin sheath proteins as antigens, leading to irreversible axonal loss. 32 Given the role played by lymphocytes in advancing MS, long-term disease management is largely directed towards suppressing the immune-inflammatory responses that promote demyelination and neuronal degradation in an effort to prevent any saltatory changes in the status quo of patients. 23,24,27,33 Outcomes of MS treatments are evaluated based on a reduction in MS annualized relapse rate (ARR), stabilization, or regression in Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score, and unchanged brain and spinal cord MRI lesion burden. 34 Over the past decade, the disease-fighting armamentarium for MS has rapidly expanded with the discovery of new disease-modifying therapeutics (DMTs), which employ different mechanisms to slow or reverse inflammatory lesion formation. To date, regulatory agencies, such as the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency, have approved nine different DMTs (Table 1) to aid with modifying the disease course in MS patients (http:// www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/drugsatfda/index.cfm). Emerging evidence suggests some DMTs may be able to stabilize and perhaps even improve neurological status; however, they are not capable of completely relieving all symptoms of MS. 23 Here, we briefly discuss the mechanism of action, optimal dosing, and efficacy of each of these DMTs. interferons Interferons (IFNs) are proteins that belong to the cytokine network and are involved with the regulation of immune response against microbial and viral antigens. 35 Their immunomodulatory properties were leveraged to develop the first DMTs for MS, namely, IFN-β1b (Betaseron ® , Bayer HealthCare, Leverkusen, Germany; Extavia, Novartis, Basel, Switzerland), a fermented and purified recombinant protein produced in the bacterium Escherichia coli, 36 and two preparations of IFN-β1a (Avonex ® , Biogen Idec Inc., Weston, MA, USA; Rebif ® , Merck Serono, Geneva, Switzerland), which are recombinant human IFN proteins produced in mammalian cells in a glycosylated form. 27,37 In vitro studies using human isogenic T cell lines and murine experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE; a disease very similar to MS) models and in vivo studies on humans (clinical trials) have elucidated the mechanism of action of IFN-β to be as follows: [37][38][39] IFN-β suppresses the proliferation of myelin-basic protein-specific T cells, reduces the production of proinflammatory cytokines (eg, IFN-γ), and induces anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin (IL)-10. 37,39,40 This results in a cytokine balance that protects neurons from demyelination by preventing the proliferation of T cells that are required for advancing the autoimmune process and inhibiting T cells from crossing the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and entering the central nervous system (CNS). 39,40 Both IFN-β1b and IFN-β1a are equivalent with respect to their ability to reduce MS disease activity (Tables 1 and 2), and they reduce ARR by up to 30%, decrease formation of new or enlarging gadolinium-enhancing MRI lesions by 50%, and significantly lower the progression of EDSS scores. 27,[41][42][43][44] Glatiramer acetate Demyelination of neurons in MS is mediated by activation of helper T cells in response to a specific myelin-basic protein (MBP), which is one of the autoantigens in MS. 45,46 Peptides of MBP bind to class II major histocompatibility complex (MHC II) molecules, which are then recognized by T cells as antigens and consequently destroyed. 47,48 In 1995, Copolymer 1 (glatiramer acetate [GA]/Copaxone ® ; Teva Pharmaceuticals, Petach Tikva, Israel) was introduced as an alternate therapy to IFN-β. GA is a synthetic polymer of four amino acids (l-glutamate, l-lysine, l-alanine, and l-tyrosine) that mimics MBP, and hence competes with MBP antigens to bind with MHC II. 27 


## 251

Optimal therapies for multiple sclerosis with high efficiency as well as at a fast rate. Thus, when the MHC-II molecules are blocked from binding to MBP, T cell responses are automatically diverted away from the myelin, resulting in neuronal protection. 49,50 The proliferation of T cells is thus controlled by GA in a dose-dependent manner. 51 MHC-II molecules interact with CD4 + molecules that are present on the surface of helper T cells (Th1 and Th2) that produce proinflammatory cytokine (Th1-type cytokines: INF-γ) and anti-inflammatory cytokine (Th2-type cytokines: IL-10) molecules. 52 GA preferentially inhibits production of INF-γ, induces regulatory Th2-like T cell populations that cross-react with MBP, and produce anti-inflammatory cytokines, which in turn protects the myelin through a "bystander-suppression" mechanism. 51 GA is generally well tolerated and reduces ARR by 29%; however, it was unable to reduce disability progression significantly when compared to placebo (Tables 1 and 2). [53][54][55] Given their safety profile, low toxicity, reasonable efficacy, and relative tolerability, IFN and GA are often prescribed as first-line MS therapies. 23,27 While a meta-analysis study in 2004 indicated that GA was not useful in treating MS, 55 a more recent study substantiated its utility in treating relapses related to RRMS, but reiterated its limited impact on disability progression. 56 


## Natalizumab

In the early 1990s, Yednock et al 57 identified that monocytic cells selectively bound to inflamed blood vessels in the brain; the inflammation was caused by EAE. Using an EAE mouse model, they demonstrated that the selective adhesion of leukocytes to vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), a protein expressed on the surface of vascular endothelial cells in the brain and spinal cord, 58 is a critical step to gain entry into the CNS across the BBB. Over 95% of this adhesion was significantly inhibited by antibodies against the integrin molecule α 4 β 1 (very late-activation antigen 4 [VLA-4]), a glycoprotein surface molecule found on all leukocytes except neutrophils. 57 Administration of the antibodies reduced the progression of inflammatory disease severity in MS patients (MRI lesions), 59,60 and prevented the development of paralysis in animal studies. 61 Hence, it was hypothesized that monoclonal antibodies against VLA-4 could help with treating autoimmune inflammatory diseases such as MS by blocking the VCAM-1/VLA-4 interaction, and preventing infiltration of leukocytes across the BBB. 57,58 In early 2000, natalizumab (Antegren; Elan, Dublin, Ireland, and Biogen Idec Inc.), an α 4 -integrin humanized monoclonal antibody to VLA-4, was developed. 62 Natalizumab specifically targets the T cells 63 and inhibits the α 4 -integrin-mediated firm adhesion of T cells to the inflamed BBB by 70%, but does not interfere with the initial contact of T cells with the BBB, suggesting that the central mechanism of natalizumab action is prevention of T cell entry into the CNS. 64 After establishment of the relative safety profile in a Phase I clinical trial, 65 Phase II and Phase III doubleblind placebo-controlled trials demonstrated its efficacy in reducing ARR, especially in patients with higher disease activity. 60,66 The FDA subsequently approved natalizumab (Tysabri; Biogen Idec Inc.) as an MS monotherapy in 2004 (http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/appletter/2004/125104_0000_ltr.pdf). However, the emergence of three cases of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) led to its withdrawal from the market for a brief period between February 2005 and June 2006. 67,68 In 2006, the results of the Natalizumab Safety and Efficacy in Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (AFFIRM) trial, 1 with a follow-up of over 2 years, elucidated the superiority of natalizumab in controlling progression of MS (Table 2), resulting in reinstatement of natalizumab as an MS therapeutic. 1,69 Natalizumab therapy also significantly improves the overall quality of life of RRMS patients ( Table 2). [70][71][72][73][74] The Safety and Efficacy of Natalizumab in Combination with Interferon Beta-1a in Patients with Relapsing Remitting Multiple Sclerosis (SENTINEL) study further reiterated the efficacy of natalizumab as a combination therapy with IFN-β1a ( Table 2) than administration of IFN alone (Table 2). 75 The principal limitation to natalizumab utilization has been PML, related to the mutation of the John Cunningham (JC) polyoma virus to a neurotrophic form. Postmarketing surveillance of natalizumab reported 377 incidences of PML 76 across the world, and three principal factors have been identified to increase the risk of developing PML (therapy $24 months, history of immunosuppressant treatment, and JC-antibody positivity) in patients undergoing natalizumab therapy. 71,76,77 Further, recent studies show that higher-titer levels of JC virus antibody predispose to development of PML. 78 Less well defined is the possible contribution of excessively low CD62L (L-selectin) expression on CD4 + cell populations 79 and the possible association between low body weight and increased PML risk, which are presently being studied extensively. 80 Although its superior efficacy in modulating disease activity and progression has made natalizumab a reliable therapy for MS, the risk-to-benefit ratio of the drug varies dramatically among patients, and hence demands a more personalized approach to utilization.  81 Macrophages, upon localization in the glial cells, release proinflammatory cytokines and free radicals to aid with host immune protection. [82][83][84] The antimicrobial properties of Nitric Oxide (NO) are well established, 85 but as a cytotoxic agent NO also leads to extensive host cellular damage. In inflamed regions, NO is released equivalently to the extent of inflammation: the more the inflammation, the more the NO released. 86,87 NO reacts with other free radicals like superoxide to produce RNS, 82,88 which in turn induces oxidative damage to the mitochondrial deoxyribonucleic acid, ultimately resulting in decreased adenosine triphosphate production. 89 Thus axonal transport, a process that requires adenosine triphosphate, and cellular respiration are impaired, leading to axonal degeneration and irreversible cell apoptosis. 89 Initial in vitro studies highlighted the detoxification and anti-inflammatory capabilities of DMF, which reduces with the production and release of inflammatory molecules, such as cytokines and NO, and elevates the production of detoxification enzymes such as reduced-form nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate quinone reductase 1 and/or glutathione. 83,88,90 Additional studies in EAE mouse models showed a DMF dose-dependent decrease in inflammatory cell infiltrates (composed of macrophages, microglial cells, and proinflammatory cytokines). 91 DMF also inhibits the expression of VCAM-1 92 and activates nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor (Nrf2), a transcription factor with antioxidant properties. Nrf2-mediated antioxidative stress response reduces the free radicals, prevents synthesis of RNS, and thus protects the CNS from degeneration and axonal loss. 93 Thus, DMF preserves myelin integrity via two pathways: by downregulating oxidative stress and corresponding cellular injury, as well as by inhibiting proinflammatory cytokines. 82,[93][94][95] The first exploratory study of oral fumaric acid esters was performed in ten patients with RRMS in 2006. 96 Promising results from this study led to the expansion of clinical research to apply BG-12, a second-generation fumarate derivative as a potential oral therapeutic for RRMS. 97 Kappos et al 98 99 and CONFIRM (Comparator and an Oral Fumarate in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis) 100 further elucidated the efficacy of DMF in reducing ARR by 53% and 44% compared to placebo or GA, respectively (Table 2), a decrease in Gd-MRI activity by 70%, and a decrease in disability progression of 38% (Table 2). In addition, the side effects of DMF were relatively benign, including gastrointestinal discomfort, flushing, decreased lymphocyte count, and elevated liver aminotransferase levels ( Table 1). [99][100][101] Although some formulations and metabolites of fumaric acid esters are known to cause PML, 102,103 DMF by itself has been suggested as a safe drug with relatively low side effects. 104 Teriflunomide Teriflunomide is the active metabolite of leflunomide, a chemical with known anti-inflammatory, anti-proliferative and immunosuppressive properties. 105 The utility of oral teriflunomide in treating MS was realized in 2006 through a Phase II clinical study reported by O'Connor et al, 106 which elucidated its immunomodulatory effects in decreasing MRI lesions and ARR in RRMS patients. Triggering of an immune response involves the proliferation of T cells and B cells to provide antigen-specific cell-mediated or humoral immunity, respectively. In order to activate the lymphocytes to undergo clonal expansion, adhesion of T cells to the antigen-presenting cells is a crucial step. 107 Teriflunomide primarily acts by interfering with the lymphocyte cell cycle and inhibiting proliferation. Lymphocyte mitosis requires an eightfold increase in the level of pyrimidine ribonucleotides (eg, ribonucleotide uridine monophosphate) during the interphase of the cell cycle. A key enzyme, dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), is necessary for the de novo synthesis of these pyrimidine ribonucleotides, which in turn fulfills the metabolic needs that are necessary for clonal expansion of lymphocytes. 108,109 By preventing the synthesis of DHODH, teriflunomide actively reduces the pyrimidine ribonucleotide levels, stalls mitosis and further lymphocyte proliferation, and thus protects neurons from autoimmune damage. Teriflunomide also acts by inhibiting protein tyrosine kinases, leading to decreased T cell proliferation, and by shifting the cytokine profile to prevent inflammation (ie, inhibiting synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and promoting anti-inflammatory cytokines). 110 EAE animal models treated with teriflunomide showed a significant reduction in axonal damage by up to 96%, nonlatency or delay of motor-evoked potentials, and preservation of the anatomical integrity in  both the ascending and descending tracts of the spinal cord, thus underscoring its direct effect on neuroprotection. 111,112 The TEMSO (Teriflunomide Multiple Sclerosis Oral) trial 68 illustrated the efficacy of Aubagio ® (Genzyme, Boston, MA, USA) as an MS DMT (Table 2), demonstrating nearly 31% reduction in ARR, a longer time to first relapse, approximately 20% decrease in disability progression, and a decrease in Gd-MRI lesion activity when compared to placebo. Recent animal studies have shown that teriflunomide can significantly improve motor function and decrease the probability of debilitating paralysis, suggesting that it might become one of the early treatment drugs for MS. 111 


## Fingolimod

Levels of T cells and B cells are regulated through a circulatory mechanism between the blood and appropriate secondary lymphoid organs (SLOs), and the homing of T cells from the blood to sites of inflammation in the CNS is crucial for MS pathogenesis. The MBP-activated T cells breach the BBB, reach the site of inflammation, become encephalitogenic effector cells, and initiate demyelination within the CNS. 114 An extracellular signaling molecule, sphingosine-1phosphate (S1P), regulates the process of trafficking T cells and B cells from the lymph to the blood. 115 The S1P receptors, when activated, induce egress of T cells (naïve) from peripheral blood and sequester them within the SLOs, thus decreasing T cell levels in the blood. 106,[116][117][118] FTY720 (2-amino-[2-{4-octylphenyl}ethyl]-1, 3-propanediol hydrochloride), a synthetic S1P analogue, immunomodulates the S1P receptors and revises the T cells' migratory pathway (ie, prevents emigration of activated T cells from lymph nodes and sequesters them within SLOs). 118 This sequestration dramatically reduces the availability of T cells in the blood that can infiltrate the BBB and home in to the inflamed cells in the CNS. Thus, FTY720 (Fingolimod, Gilenya ® ; Novartis) effectively confers neuroprotection against demyelination. [119][120][121] In murine models, FTY720 dramatically reduced the expression of the proinflammatory Th1-type cytokines due to the absence of T cell migrants to promote further inflammation. 122 In addition, FTY720 is also suggested to promote remyelination of neurons in the CNS via direct interaction with oligodendrocytes. 123 Biologics: Targets 124 tested two doses (0.5 mg or 1.25 mg) of fingolimod or placebo taken once daily for 24 months. Results showed that patients treated with fingolimod had an approximately 70% decrease in MS disease activity and a stable EDSS score (Table 2), and about 50% of patients had no change in T2-weighted MRI lesions. 124 In a head-to-head comparison with IFN-β1a (TRANSFORMS [Trial Assessing Injectable Interferon Versus FTY720 Oral in Relapsing-Remitting Multiple Sclerosis]), RRMS patients on fingolimod on average had lower ARRs, significantly fewer new or enlarged T2-weighted MRI lesions, and a stable EDSS score ( Table 2). 125 Despite its promising efficacy, fingolimod's safety profile has been challenging, with occurrence of bradyarrhythmias that have caused deaths and elicited prolonged cardiac monitoring for first dosings. 126 Death of MS patients who were administered fingolimod in the presence of varicella zoster viral infection has also been reported. 127 A first case of PML in the absence of prior natalizumab therapy has also been identified. 128 Research reports on the safety and efficacy of fingolimod are still emerging, and additional data will further inform the risks versus benefits of this drug for MS therapy.


## MS therapy: past, present, and future

Great strides have been made in the last 20 years in MS therapeutics, beginning with the initial INF-β-positive trials up through the recent approval of DMF. A number of newer agents are poised potentially to gain approval over the next few years, which we have briefly touched upon (Table 3). Incremental improvements in efficacy have been seen together with improved odds of disease stability with therapy and the potential for disease improvement with some agents.

As discussed earlier, most agents modify the disease course primarily through anti-inflammatory pathways, although the newest entrant (DMF) may well be efficacious in utilizing a novel antioxidant pathway. However, all these agents carry adverse side effects of varying degrees, and hence a thorough evaluation of the risk-benefit ratio for the individual patient is imperative prior to drug administration (Figure 1). In MS, T cells are known to attack three different antigens: MBP, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and proteolipid protein. The heterogeneity of MS disease is vast, and each patient's antibody signature varies: the antigen epitopes that elicit antibody response differ among people, and so does the mechanism of "epitope spreading," wherein autoreactive T cell activation is elicited by new epitopes secondary to the dominant epitope, either due to their physical proximity or molecular similarity to the dominant epitope, resulting in sequential self-damage. Currently, ways to personalize MS treatment by recognizing these individual epitopes and formulating corresponding antibodies are being explored. Remyelinating agents are actively under investigation, and may yield novel strategies to increase neuronal functionality and survival in the coming Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com


## Dovepress


## Dovepress


## 255

Optimal therapies for multiple sclerosis years. With preclinical animal trials showing superior efficacy in alleviating MS symptoms, ongoing human clinical trials are investigating the use of hematopoietic and mesenchymal stem cells for effective management of MS. While the goal of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is refurbishing the aberrant T cell population with nonautoreactive T cells, mesenchymal stem cell transplantation can potentially promote neural restoration. MS therapeutics is now an area of rapid evolution, with broadening biological targets and ongoing improvement in efficacy.


## Disclosure

Dr Foley has received personal compensation for consulting, speaking and scientific advisory boards from Genzyme, Biogen Idec Inc. and Teva. Dr Foley has also received research support from Biogen Idec Inc., Genzyme, Teva and Avanir. The other authors report no conflicts of interest in this work.


Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.comTable 1Dosing and side-effects of currently approved multiple sclerosis disease-modifying therapeutics Abbreviations: DMT, disease-modifying therapy; PML, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy.Dovepress 

Dovepress 

249 

Optimal therapies for multiple sclerosis 

DMT 

Year of 
approval 

Route of 
administration 

Frequency 

of dosing 

Dosage 
Common adverse effects 

Severe adverse effects 

interferon beta-1b 
(Betaseron ® 

) 

1993 
Subcutaneous injection 

every other day 

250 mcg 
Influenza-like symptoms, urticaria, depression, injection-site 
reactions, leukopenia, headache 

Hepatic injury, congestive heart failure, 
seizures 

interferon beta-1a 
(Avonex ® 

) 

1996 
intramuscular injection 

Once a week 

30 mcg 
Influenza-like symptoms, depression, anemia, urticaria, fever, 

myalgia, asthenia 

Hepatic injury, congestive heart failure, 
anaphylactic shock 

Glatiramer acetate 
(Copaxone ® 

) 

1996 
Subcutaneous injection 

Daily 

20 mg 
Injection-site reactions, palpitations, urticaria, dyspnea, 

chest pain, vasodilation 

injection site lipoatrophy and necrosis 

interferon beta-1a 

(Rebif ® 

) 

2002 
Subcutaneous injection 

Three times 

a week 

22 mcg 
44 mcg 
Influenza-like symptoms, depression, injection-site reactions, 

urticaria, myalgia, fever, abdominal pain, elevated liver enzymes 

Hepatic injury, anaphylactic shock 

Natalizumab 

(Tysabri ® 

) 

2006 

intravenous infusion 

every 4 weeks 

300 mg 
Headache, urinary tract infections, lung infections, abdominal pain, 
fatigue, joint pain, depression, gastroenteritis, urticaria, arthralgia 

PML, anaphylactic shock, hepatotoxicity 

Fingolimod 
(Gilenya ® 

) 

2010 

Oral capsule 

Daily 

0.5 mg 
Headache, influenza, gastrointestinal discomfort, back pain, 
abnormal liver-function tests, angina 

Macular edema, bradyarrhythmia, PML, 
hypotension, herpes infection 

Teriflunomide 

(Aubagio ® 

) 

2012 

Oral capsule 

Daily 
Dyspnea, hypertension, gastrointestinal discomfort, leukopenia, 
urticaria, alopecia, paresthesia 

Hepatotoxicity, peripheral neuropathy, 
hyperkalemia, acute renal failure 

Dimethyl fumarate 
(Tecfidera ® 

) 

2013 

Oral capsule 

Twice daily 

120 mg 
240 mg 
Gastrointestinal disorders (abdominal pain, diarrhea, etc), 

flushing, pruritus, rash, erythema 

Lymphopenia 

Note: Mitoxantrone ® 
not covered in this review. 




,49 Using human Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cell lines, Fridkis-Hareli et al 50 demonstrated in vitro that GA binds to MHC-II molecules Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.comDovepress 

Dovepress 

250 

Damal et al 



## Table 2
2Efficacy of approved multiple sclerosis therapeutics: Phase III clinical trial results Abbreviations: ARR, annualized relapse rate; EDSS, Expanded Disability Status Scale; Gd-MRI, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging; PRISMS, Prevention of Relapses and Disability by Interferon beta-1a Subcutaneously in Multiple Sclerosis; R, randomized; DB, double-blind; PC, placebo-controlled; NA, not available; DMF, dimethyl fumarate; 2× , twice daily; 3× , thrice daily; IFN-β, interferon-β1b (Betaseron); IM-IFN, intramuscular interferon-β1a (Avonex);SC-IFN, subcutaneous interferon-β1a (Rebif); GA, glatiramer acetate; Nat, natalizumab; Ter, teriflunomide; Fing, fingolimod.submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.comDisease-modifying 

therapy 

Study 

Study design 

Treatment 

Patients, n 

Study 
duration 

ARR 
(% decrease compared 
to placebo) 

EDSS 

(% decrease compared 
to placebo) 

Gd-MRI 

(% decrease in T2 
weighted lesions) 

interferon-β1b 
(Betaseron) 
IFNB study group, 42 
Paty et al 41 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

123 

36 months 

0.92 

46 

iFN-β 0.05 mcg 

125 

0.8 (13) 

47 

66 

iFN-β 0.25 mcg 

124 

0.66 (28) 

35 

63 

interferon-β1a 

(Avonex) 

Jacobs et al 129 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

143 

104 weeks 

0.9 

34.9 

iM-iFN 

158 

0.61 (32) 

21.9 (37) 

35 

interferon-β1a 

(Rebif) 

PRiSMS study group 130 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

187 

12 months 

2.56 

37 

SC-IFN 22 mcg 

189 

1.82 (29) 

29 (22) 

67 

SC-IFN 44 mcg 

184 

1.73 (32) 

26 (30) 

78 

Glatiramer acetate 
(Copaxone) 

Johnson et al 53 
Polman et al 1 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

126 

24 months 

0.84 

28.8 

GA 

125 

0.59 (29) 

20.8 (28) 

NA 

Natalizumab 
(Tysabri) 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

627 

116 weeks 

0.73 

29 

Nat 

942 

0.23 (68) 

17 (41) 

83 

Dimethyl fumarate 
(Tecfidera) 

Gold et al 99 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

408 

96 weeks 

0.36 

27 

2 
× DMF 

410 

0.17 (53) 

16 (38) 

85 

3 
× DMF 

416 

0.19 (48) 

18 (34) 

74 

Fox et al 100 

R, DB, PC, GA 

Placebo 

333 

96 weeks 

0.4 

17 

2 
× DMF 

338 

0.22 (44) 

13 (21) 

57 

3 
× DMF 

316 

0.2 (50.5) 

13 (24) 

65 

GA 

304 

0.29 (28.6) 

16 (7) 

41 

Teriflunomide 

(Aubagio) 

O'Connor et al 131 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

363 

108 weeks 

0.54 

27.3 

Ter 7 mg 

365 

0.37 (31.2) 

21.7 (23.7) 

16.7 

Ter 14 mg 

368 

0.37 (31.5) 

20.2 (29.8) 

31.3 

Fingolimod 
(Gilenya) 

Kappos et al 124 

R, DB, PC 

Placebo 

418 

24 months 

0.4 

24.1 

Fing 0.5 mg 

425 

0.18 (52) 

12.5 (37) 

74 

Fing 1.25 mg 

429 

0.16 (62) 

11.5 (40) 

74 

Cohen et al 125 

R, DB, IM-IFN 

iM-iFN 

431 

12 months 

0.33 

7.9 

Fing 0.5 mg 

429 

0.16 (52) 

5.9 (25) 

35 

Fing 1.25 mg 

420 

0.2 (40) 

6.7 (15) 

42 




Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Dimethyl fumarate (DMF; BG-12, Tecfidera ® ; Biogen Idec Inc.) is a methyl ester of fumaric acid approved by the FDA as an oral MS therapy on March 27, 2013 (www.fda.gov/ NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm345528. htm). A well-known pathway to MS is oxidative stress brought about by the effector molecule peroxynitrite (reactive nitrogen species [RNS]).Dovepress 

Dovepress 

252 

Damal et al 

Dimethyl fumarate 




demonstrated the safety and efficacy of DMF, showing a 69% reduction in gadolinium-enhanced MRI (Gd-MRI) lesions and a 32% reduction in ARR when compared to placebo (Table 1). The Phase III trials DEFINE (Determination of the Efficacy and Safety of Oral Fumarate in Relapsing-Remitting MS)

## Table 3
3Disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) currently under review for use as multiple sclerosis therapiesDMT 
(target) 

Study 
phase 
Study design 

Treatment 

Patients, 

n 

Study 
duration 
ARR reduction 
(% decrease) 
% disability progression 
(% decrease from placebo) 

% reduction in T2-weighted 
Gd-MRI from placebo 

Alemtuzumab 

(CD52 -lymphocyte 
depletion) 

Phase iii 132 

Randomized, 
double-blind, 
comparator arm 

SC-IFN 44 mg 

187 

24 months 

0.39 

11 

-

Ale 12 mg 

376 

0.18 (54) 

8 (30) 

NS 

Laquinimod 

(Th1 and Th2 -inhibits 
leukocyte migration into CNS) 

Phase iii 133 

Randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 

Placebo 

556 

24 months 

0.39 

16 

-

Laq 0.6 mg 

550 

0.30 (23) 

11 (29) 

30 

Daclizumab 

(IL-2 signal modulator -
inhibits innate lymphoid cells) 

Phase iii 134 

Randomized, 
double-blind, 
placebo-controlled 

Placebo 

204 

52 weeks 

0.46 

13 

-

Dac 150 mg 

208 

0.21 (54) 

6 (57) 

70 

Dac 300 mg 

209 

0.23 (50) 

8 (43) 

79 

Ocrelizumab 

(CD20 -B cell depletion) 

Phase ii 135 

Randomized, 
double-blind, 

placebo-and 
iFN-β1a-controlled 

Placebo 

54 
24-48 weeks 0.16 

NA 

NS 

iFN-β1a 

55 

0.14 

Ocr 600 mg 

56 

0.09 

Ocr 2,000 mg 

55 

0.28 

Abbreviations: DMT, disease-modifying therapy; ARR, annualized relapse rate; NA, not available; NS, not significant; CNS, central nervous system; IFN-β1a, interferon-β1a; SC-IFN, subcutaneous interferon-β1a; IL, interkeukin; Ale, 
alemtuzumab; Laq, laquinimod; Dac, daclizumab; Ocr, ocrelizumab; CD, cluster of differentiation; Gd-MRI, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging; Th, helper T cell. 




To this end, a Phase III clinical trial (TOPIC [Phase III Study with Teriflunomide Versus Placebo in Patients with First Clinical Symptom of Multiple Sclerosis]; ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00622700)113 is ongoing, with an expected study completion date of August 2015, that will inform the utility of teriflunomide in early clinical treatment.


and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com Optimizing the risk/efficacy balance Figure 1 Optimizing the risk/efficacy balance of approved MS therapeutics: a physician perspective Abbreviations: DMF, dimethyl fumarate; GA, glatiramer acetate; MS, Multiple Sclerosis; EDSS, Expanded Disability Status Scale; MR, magnetic resonance; CNS, central nervous system.The FREEDOMS (FTY720 Research Evaluating Effects of Daily Oral Therapy in Multiple Sclerosis) studyDovepress 

Dovepress 

254 

Damal et al 

Natalizumab 

DMF 
Fingolimod 

Interferons 
GA 
Teriflunomide 

Mild infrequent relapse 
in non eloquent parts of 
CNS quiescent MR 

More frequent relapses 
Incomplete recovery 
Progressive lesion formation 
Brainstem, spinal cord 

Fulminant or tumefactive MS 
Multiple GD++ lesions 
High relapse rate 
Rapid EDSS worsening 

Natalizumab 

Fingolimod 
Teriflunomide 

DMF 
Interferons 
GA 

Drug efficacy 
Drug risk 

Disease risks 



A randomized, placebocontrolled trial of natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. C H Polman, P W O&apos;connor, E Havrdova, N Engl J Med. 3549Polman CH, O'Connor PW, Havrdova E, et al. A randomized, placebo- controlled trial of natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(9):899-910.

Multiple sclerosis: its epidemiological, genetic, and health care impact. R Williams, A S Rigby, M Airey, M Robinson, H Ford, J Epidemiol Community Health. 496Williams R, Rigby AS, Airey M, Robinson M, Ford H. Multiple sclerosis: its epidemiological, genetic, and health care impact. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1995;49(6):563-569.

Multiple sclerosis. A Compston, A Coles, Lancet. 3599313Compston A, Coles A. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2002;359(9313): 1221-1231.

Multiple sclerosis. A Compston, A Coles, Lancet. 3729648Compston A, Coles A. Multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 2008;372(9648): 1502-1517.

Multiple sclerosis. B M Keegan, J H Noseworthy, Ann Rev Medic. 53Keegan BM, Noseworthy JH. Multiple sclerosis. Ann Rev Medic. 2002;53:285-302.

The Danish Multiple Sclerosis Registry: a 50-year follow-up. N Koch-Henriksen, Mult Scler. 54Koch-Henriksen N. The Danish Multiple Sclerosis Registry: a 50-year follow-up. Mult Scler. 1999;5(4):293-296.

Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Olmsted County. W T Mayr, S J Pittock, R L Mcclelland, N W Jorgensen, J H Noseworthy, M Rodriguez, Neurology. 6110Mayr WT, Pittock SJ, McClelland RL, Jorgensen NW, Noseworthy JH, Rodriguez M. Incidence and prevalence of multiple sclerosis in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1985-2000. Neurology. 2003;61(10):1373-1377.

Benign multiple sclerosis? Clinical course, long term follow up, and assessment of prognostic factors. S A Hawkins, G V Mcdonnell, J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 672Hawkins SA, McDonnell GV. Benign multiple sclerosis? Clinical course, long term follow up, and assessment of prognostic factors. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1999;67(2):148-152.

A gender gap in autoimmunity: Task Force on Gender, Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmunity. C C Whitacre, S C Reingold, P A O&apos;looney, Science. 2835406Whitacre CC, Reingold SC, O'Looney PA, et al. A gender gap in autoimmunity: Task Force on Gender, Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmunity. Science. 1999;283(5406):1277-1278.

Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study. S M Orton, B M Herrera, I M Yee, Lancet Neurol. 511Orton SM, Herrera BM, Yee IM, et al. Sex ratio of multiple sclerosis in Canada: a longitudinal study. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5(11):932-936.

Disability in multiple sclerosis: a reference for patients and clinicians. I Kister, E Chamot, A R Salter, G R Cutter, T E Bacon, J Herbert, Neurology. 8011Kister I, Chamot E, Salter AR, Cutter GR, Bacon TE, Herbert J. Disability in multiple sclerosis: a reference for patients and clinicians. Neurology. 2013;80(11):1018-1024.

Life expectancy in patients attending multiple sclerosis clinics. A D Sadovnick, G C Ebers, R W Wilson, D W Paty, Neurology. 425Sadovnick AD, Ebers GC, Wilson RW, Paty DW. Life expectancy in patients attending multiple sclerosis clinics. Neurology. 1992;42(5): 991-994.

Histologie de la sclerose en plaques. J M Charcot, Gaz Hop Civ Mil Empire Ottoman. 41Charcot JM. Histologie de la sclerose en plaques. Gaz Hop Civ Mil Empire Ottoman. 1868;41:554-555.

Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDonald criteria. C H Polman, S C Reingold, B Banwell, Ann Neurol. 692Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B, et al. Diagnostic criteria for multiple sclerosis: 2010 revisions to the McDonald criteria. Ann Neurol. 2011;69(2):292-302.

The utility of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in patients with multiple sclerosis. M Stangel, S Fredrikson, E Meinl, A Petzold, O Stuve, H Tumani, Nat Rev Neurol. 95Stangel M, Fredrikson S, Meinl E, Petzold A, Stuve O, Tumani H. The utility of cerebrospinal fluid analysis in patients with multiple sclerosis. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013;9(5):267-276.

Diagnostic biomarkers in multiple sclerosis. Expert Opinion Medical Diagn. B Kuenz, F Deisenhammer, T Berger, M Reindl, 1Kuenz B, Deisenhammer F, Berger T, Reindl M. Diagnostic biomarkers in multiple sclerosis. Expert Opinion Medical Diagn. 2007;1(2): 225-233.

Biomarkers in multiple sclerosis: an up-to-date overview. S Katsavos, M Anagnostouli, Mult Scler Int. 340508Katsavos S, Anagnostouli M. Biomarkers in multiple sclerosis: an up-to-date overview. Mult Scler Int. 2013;2013:340508.

Association of genetic markers with CSF oligoclonal bands in multiple sclerosis patients. M A Leone, N Barizzone, F Esposito, PloS One. 8664408Leone MA, Barizzone N, Esposito F, et al. Association of genetic markers with CSF oligoclonal bands in multiple sclerosis patients. PloS One. 2013;8(6):e64408.

The elusive biomarker for personalized medicine in multiple sclerosis: the search continues. R A Rudick, Neurology. 796Rudick RA. The elusive biomarker for personalized medicine in multiple sclerosis: the search continues. Neurology. 2012;79(6):498-499.

Retinal damage in multiple sclerosis disease subtypes measured by high-resolution optical coherence tomography. T Oberwahrenbrock, S Schippling, M Ringelstein, Mult Scler Int. 530305Oberwahrenbrock T, Schippling S, Ringelstein M, et al. Retinal dam- age in multiple sclerosis disease subtypes measured by high-resolution optical coherence tomography. Mult Scler Int. 2012;2012:530305.

Primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. S Vukusic, C Confavreux, J Neurol Sci. 2062Vukusic S, Confavreux C. Primary and secondary progressive multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2003;206(2):153-155.

Diseaseassociated inflammatory biomarker profiles in blood in different subtypes of multiple sclerosis: prospective clinical and MRI follow-up study. S Hagman, M Raunio, M Rossi, P Dastidar, I Elovaara, J Neuroimmunol. 2341-2Hagman S, Raunio M, Rossi M, Dastidar P, Elovaara I. Disease- associated inflammatory biomarker profiles in blood in different subtypes of multiple sclerosis: prospective clinical and MRI follow-up study. J Neuroimmunol. 2011;234(1-2):141-147.

Treatment optimization in MS: Canadian MS Working Group updated recommendations. M S Freedman, D Selchen, D L Arnold, Can J Neurol Sci. 403Freedman MS, Selchen D, Arnold DL, et al. Treatment optimization in MS: Canadian MS Working Group updated recommendations. Can J Neurol Sci. 2013;40(3):307-323.

Treatment and treatment trials in multiple sclerosis. B C Kieseier, H Wiendl, B Hemmer, H P Hartung, Curr Opin Neurol. 203Kieseier BC, Wiendl H, Hemmer B, Hartung HP. Treatment and treatment trials in multiple sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol. 2007;20(3): 286-293.

Recent developments in multiple sclerosis therapeutics. R I Spain, M H Cameron, D Bourdette, BMC Med. 774Spain RI, Cameron MH, Bourdette D. Recent developments in multiple sclerosis therapeutics. BMC Med. 2009;7:74.

Corticosteroids or ACTH for acute exacerbations in multiple sclerosis. G Filippini, F Brusaferri, W A Sibley, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 41331Filippini G, Brusaferri F, Sibley WA, et al. Corticosteroids or ACTH for acute exacerbations in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(4):CD001331.

Management of multiple sclerosis. R A Rudick, J A Cohen, B Weinstock-Guttman, R P Kinkel, R M Ransohoff, N Engl J Med. 33722Rudick RA, Cohen JA, Weinstock-Guttman B, Kinkel RP, Ransohoff RM. Management of multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 1997;337(22):1604-1611.

Treatment of acute relapses in multiple sclerosis. R Berkovich, Neurotherapeutics. 101Berkovich R. Treatment of acute relapses in multiple sclerosis. Neurotherapeutics. 2013;10(1):97-105.

Oral versus intravenous steroids for treatment of relapses in multiple sclerosis. J M Burton, P W O&apos;connor, M Hohol, J Beyene, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 126921Burton JM, O'Connor PW, Hohol M, Beyene J. Oral versus intrave- nous steroids for treatment of relapses in multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2012;12:CD006921.

Corticosteroids in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. K M Myhr, S I Mellgren, Acta Neurologica Scand Suppl. 189Myhr KM, Mellgren SI. Corticosteroids in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Acta Neurologica Scand Suppl. 2009;(189):73-80.

Pathology and disease mechanisms in different stages of multiple sclerosis. H Lassmann, J Neurol Sci. Lassmann H. Pathology and disease mechanisms in different stages of multiple sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. Epub June 2, 2013.

Demyelination and remyelination in multiple sclerosis. L Bø, M Esiri, N Evangelou, T Kuhlmann, Myelin Repair and Neuroprotection in Multiple Sclerosis. Duncan ID, Franklin RJMNew YorkSpringer2013Bø L, Esiri M, Evangelou N, Kuhlmann T. Demyelination and remyelination in multiple sclerosis. In: Duncan ID, Franklin RJM, editors. Myelin Repair and Neuroprotection in Multiple Sclerosis. New York: Springer; 2013:23-45.

A multimodal approach to managing the symptoms of multiple sclerosis. H Crayton, R A Heyman, H S Rossman, Neurology. 6311SupplCrayton H, Heyman RA, Rossman HS. A multimodal approach to managing the symptoms of multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 2004; 63(11 Suppl 5):S12-S18.

Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: an expanded disability status scale (EDSS). J F Kurtzke, Neurology. 3311Kurtzke JF. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: an expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology. 1983;33(11): 1444-1452.

The interferons: biological effects, mechanisms of action, and use in multiple sclerosis. B Weinstock-Guttman, R M Ransohoff, R P Kinkel, R A Rudick, Ann Neurol. 371Weinstock-Guttman B, Ransohoff RM, Kinkel RP, Rudick RA. The interferons: biological effects, mechanisms of action, and use in multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 1995;37(1):7-15.

. Lin L Betaseron, Dev Biol Stand. 96Lin L. Betaseron. Dev Biol Stand. 1998;96:97-104.

Effect of interferon beta on human myelin basic protein-specific T-cell lines: comparison of IFNbeta-1a and IFNbeta-1b. F Weber, J Janovskaja, T Polak, S Poser, P Rieckmann, Neurology. 525Weber F, Janovskaja J, Polak T, Poser S, Rieckmann P. Effect of interferon beta on human myelin basic protein-specific T-cell lines: comparison of IFNbeta-1a and IFNbeta-1b. Neurology. 1999;52(5): 1069-1071.

In vivo effects of interferon beta-1a on immunosuppressive cytokines in multiple sclerosis. R A Rudick, R M Ransohoff, J C Lee, Neurology. 505Rudick RA, Ransohoff RM, Lee JC, et al. In vivo effects of inter- feron beta-1a on immunosuppressive cytokines in multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 1998;50(5):1294-1300.

Interferon beta in the treatment of multiple sclerosis: mechanisms of action. V W Yong, S Chabot, O Stuve, G Williams, Neurology. 513Yong VW, Chabot S, Stuve O, Williams G. Interferon beta in the treat- ment of multiple sclerosis: mechanisms of action. Neurology. 1998; 51(3):682-689.

The mechanism of action of interferon-beta in relapsing multiple sclerosis. B C Kieseier, CNS Drugs. 256Kieseier BC. The mechanism of action of interferon-beta in relapsing multiple sclerosis. CNS Drugs. 2011;25(6):491-502.

. Damal, Damal et al

Interferon beta-1b is effective in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. II. MRI analysis results of a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. UBC MS/MRI Study Group and the IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. D W Paty, D K Li, Neurology. 434Paty DW, Li DK. Interferon beta-1b is effective in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. II. MRI analysis results of a multicenter, random- ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. UBC MS/MRI Study Group and the IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. Neurology. 1993;43(4):662-667.

Interferon beta-1b is effective in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. I. Clinical results of a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. The IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. Neurology. 434No authors listed[No authors listed]. Interferon beta-1b is effective in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. I. Clinical results of a multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. The IFNB Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. Neurology. 1993;43(4):655-661.

Intramuscular interferon beta-1a for disease progression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. L D Jacobs, D L Cookfair, R A Rudick, Ann Neurol. 393Jacobs LD, Cookfair DL, Rudick RA, et al. Intramuscular interferon beta-1a for disease progression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 1996;39(3):285-294.

Treatment of relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis with natural interferon beta: a multicenter, randomized clinical trial. O Fernandez, A Antiquedad, T Arbizu, Mult Scler. 1Suppl 1Fernandez O, Antiquedad A, Arbizu T, et al. Treatment of relapsing- remitting multiple sclerosis with natural interferon beta: a multicenter, randomized clinical trial. Mult Scler. 1995;1 Suppl 1:S67-S69.

Autoantibodies to myelin basic protein catalyze site-specific degradation of their antigen. N A Ponomarenko, O M Durova, I I Vorobiev, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1032Ponomarenko NA, Durova OM, Vorobiev II, et al. Autoantibodies to myelin basic protein catalyze site-specific degradation of their antigen. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006;103(2):281-286.

Catalytic activity of autoantibodies toward myelin basic protein correlates with the scores on the multiple sclerosis expanded disability status scale. N A Ponomarenko, O M Durova, I I Vorobiev, Immunol Lett. 1031Ponomarenko NA, Durova OM, Vorobiev II, et al. Catalytic activity of autoantibodies toward myelin basic protein correlates with the scores on the multiple sclerosis expanded disability status scale. Immunol Lett. 2006;103(1):45-50.

Binding of myelin basic protein peptides to human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen class II molecules and their recognition by T cells from multiple sclerosis patients. A Valli, A Sette, L Kappos, J Clin Invest. 912Valli A, Sette A, Kappos L, et al. Binding of myelin basic protein pep- tides to human histocompatibility leukocyte antigen class II molecules and their recognition by T cells from multiple sclerosis patients. J Clin Invest. 1993;91(2):616-628.

T-cell recognition of an immunodominant myelin basic protein epitope in multiple sclerosis. K Ota, M Matsui, E L Milford, G A Mackin, H L Weiner, D A Hafler, Nature. 3466280Ota K, Matsui M, Milford EL, Mackin GA, Weiner HL, Hafler DA. T-cell recognition of an immunodominant myelin basic protein epitope in multiple sclerosis. Nature. 1990;346(6280):183-187.

Copolymer 1: a most reasonable alternative therapy for early relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis with mild disability. J S Wolinsky, Neurology. 457Wolinsky JS. Copolymer 1: a most reasonable alternative therapy for early relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis with mild disability. Neurology. 1995;45(7):1245-1247.

Direct binding of myelin basic protein and synthetic copolymer 1 to class II major histocompatibility complex molecules on living antigen-presenting cellsspecificity and promiscuity. M Fridkis-Hareli, D Teitelbaum, E Gurevich, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 9111Fridkis-Hareli M, Teitelbaum D, Gurevich E, et al. Direct binding of myelin basic protein and synthetic copolymer 1 to class II major histo- compatibility complex molecules on living antigen-presenting cells - specificity and promiscuity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994;91(11): 4872-4876.

Mechanisms of immunomodulation by glatiramer acetate. B Gran, L R Tranquill, M Chen, Neurology. 5511Gran B, Tranquill LR, Chen M, et al. Mechanisms of immunomodula- tion by glatiramer acetate. Neurology. 2000;55(11):1704-1714.

Th1 and Th2 responses: what are they?. A Berger, BMJ. 3217258424Berger A. Th1 and Th2 responses: what are they? BMJ. 2000; 321(7258):424.

Copolymer 1 reduces relapse rate and improves disability in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: results of a phase III multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. The Copolymer 1 Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. K P Johnson, B R Brooks, J A Cohen, Neurology. 457Johnson KP, Brooks BR, Cohen JA, et al. Copolymer 1 reduces relapse rate and improves disability in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: results of a phase III multicenter, double-blind placebo-controlled trial. The Copolymer 1 Multiple Sclerosis Study Group. Neurology. 1995;45(7):1268-1276.

Safety profile of copolymer 1: analysis of cumulative experience in the United States and Israel. A D Korczyn, P Nisipeanu, J Neurol. 2434Suppl 1Korczyn AD, Nisipeanu P. Safety profile of copolymer 1: analysis of cumulative experience in the United States and Israel. J Neurol. 1996;243(4 Suppl 1):S23-S26.

Therapy with glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis. L Munari, R Lovati, A Boiko, Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 14678Munari L, Lovati R, Boiko A. Therapy with glatiramer acetate for mul- tiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;(1):CD004678.

Glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis. La Mantia, L Munari, L M Lovati, R , Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 54678La Mantia L, Munari LM, Lovati R. Glatiramer acetate for multiple sclerosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;(5):CD004678.

Prevention of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis by antibodies against alpha 4 beta 1 integrin. T A Yednock, C Cannon, L C Fritz, F Sanchez-Madrid, L Steinman, N Karin, Nature. 3566364Yednock TA, Cannon C, Fritz LC, Sanchez-Madrid F, Steinman L, Karin N. Prevention of experimental autoimmune encephalomy- elitis by antibodies against alpha 4 beta 1 integrin. Nature. 1992; 356(6364):63-66.

Humanization of a mouse antibody against human alpha-4 integrin: a potential therapeutic for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. O J Leger, T A Yednock, L Tanner, Hum Antibodies. 81Leger OJ, Yednock TA, Tanner L, et al. Humanization of a mouse antibody against human alpha-4 integrin: a potential therapeutic for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Hum Antibodies. 1997;8(1):3-16.

A monoclonal antibody to alpha 4-integrin reverses the MR-detectable signs of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in the guinea pig. S J Kent, S J Karlik, G P Rice, H C Horner, J Magn Reson Imaging. 55Kent SJ, Karlik SJ, Rice GP, Horner HC. A monoclonal antibody to alpha 4-integrin reverses the MR-detectable signs of experimental allergic encephalomyelitis in the guinea pig. J Magn Reson Imaging. 1995;5(5):535-540.

A controlled trial of natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. D H Miller, O A Khan, W A Sheremata, N Engl J Med. 3481Miller DH, Khan OA, Sheremata WA, et al. A controlled trial of natalizumab for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2003; 348(1):15-23.

A monoclonal antibody to alpha 4 integrin suppresses and reverses active experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. S J Kent, S J Karlik, C Cannon, J Neuroimmunol. 581Kent SJ, Karlik SJ, Cannon C, et al. A monoclonal antibody to alpha 4 integrin suppresses and reverses active experimental allergic encephalomyelitis. J Neuroimmunol. 1995;58(1):1-10.

. M J Elices, Natalizumab, Elan, Biogen, Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 411Elices MJ. Natalizumab. Elan/Biogen. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2003;4(11):1354-1362.

Beta1 integrins differentially control extravasation of inflammatory cell subsets into the CNS during autoimmunity. M Bauer, C Brakebusch, C Coisne, Proc Natl Acad Sci. 1066Bauer M, Brakebusch C, Coisne C, et al. Beta1 integrins differen- tially control extravasation of inflammatory cell subsets into the CNS during autoimmunity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009;106(6): 1920-1925.

Cutting edge: natalizumab blocks adhesion but not initial contact of human T cells to the blood-brain barrier in vivo in an animal model of multiple sclerosis. C Coisne, W Mao, B Engelhardt, J Immunol. 18210Coisne C, Mao W, Engelhardt B. Cutting edge: natalizumab blocks adhesion but not initial contact of human T cells to the blood-brain barrier in vivo in an animal model of multiple sclerosis. J Immunol. 2009;182(10):5909-5913.

A safety and pharmacokinetic study of intravenous natalizumab in patients with MS. W A Sheremata, T L Vollmer, L A Stone, A J Willmer-Hulme, M Koller, Neurology. 525Sheremata WA, Vollmer TL, Stone LA, Willmer-Hulme AJ, Koller M. A safety and pharmacokinetic study of intravenous natali- zumab in patients with MS. Neurology. 1999;52(5):1072-1074.

Relapse rates and enhancing lesions in a phase II trial of natalizumab in multiple sclerosis. P O&apos;connor, D Miller, K Riester, Mult Scler. 115O'Connor P, Miller D, Riester K, et al. Relapse rates and enhancing lesions in a phase II trial of natalizumab in multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2005;11(5):568-572.

The role of alpha-4 integrin in the aetiology of multiple sclerosis: current knowledge and therapeutic implications. W A Sheremata, A Minagar, J S Alexander, T Vollmer, CNS Drugs. 1911Sheremata WA, Minagar A, Alexander JS, Vollmer T. The role of alpha-4 integrin in the aetiology of multiple sclerosis: current knowledge and therapeutic implications. CNS Drugs. 2005;19(11):909-922.

Natalizumab and the role of alpha 4-integrin antagonism in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. P O&apos;connor, Expert Opin Biol Ther. 71O'Connor P. Natalizumab and the role of alpha 4-integrin antago- nism in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2007;7(1):123-136.

MRI outcomes in a placebocontrolled trial of natalizumab in relapsing MS. D H Miller, D Soon, K T Fernando, Neurology. 6817Miller DH, Soon D, Fernando KT, et al. MRI outcomes in a placebo- controlled trial of natalizumab in relapsing MS. Neurology. 2007; 68(17):1390-1401.

Health-related quality of life in multiple sclerosis: effects of natalizumab. R A Rudick, D Miller, S Hass, Ann Neurol. 624Rudick RA, Miller D, Hass S, et al. Health-related quality of life in multiple sclerosis: effects of natalizumab. Ann Neurol. 2007; 62(4):335-346.

Natalizumab reduces visual loss in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis. L J Balcer, S L Galetta, P A Calabresi, Neurology. 6816Balcer LJ, Galetta SL, Calabresi PA, et al. Natalizumab reduces visual loss in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis. Neurology. 2007; 68(16):1299-1304.

Sustained improvement in Expanded Disability Status Scale as a new efficacy measure of neurological change in multiple sclerosis: treatment effects with natalizumab in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis. J T Phillips, G Giovannoni, F D Lublin, Mult Scler. 178Phillips JT, Giovannoni G, Lublin FD, et al. Sustained improvement in Expanded Disability Status Scale as a new efficacy measure of neurological change in multiple sclerosis: treatment effects with natalizumab in patients with relapsing multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2011;17(8):970-979.

Additional efficacy endpoints from pivotal natalizumab trials in relapsing-remitting MS. B Weinstock-Guttman, S L Galetta, G Giovannoni, J Neurol. 2595Weinstock-Guttman B, Galetta SL, Giovannoni G, et al. Additional efficacy endpoints from pivotal natalizumab trials in relapsing-remitting MS. J Neurol. 2012;259(5):898-905.

Impact of natalizumab on ambulatory improvement in secondary progressive and disabled relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. D Cadavid, S Jurgensen, S Lee, PloS One. 8153297Cadavid D, Jurgensen S, Lee S. Impact of natalizumab on ambulatory improvement in secondary progressive and disabled relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. PloS One. 2013;8(1):e53297.

Natalizumab plus interferon beta-1a for relapsing multiple sclerosis. R A Rudick, W H Stuart, P A Calabresi, N Engl J Med. 3549Rudick RA, Stuart WH, Calabresi PA, et al. Natalizumab plus inter- feron beta-1a for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. March 2, 2006;354(9):911-923.

Tysabri (natalizumab): benefit/risk update and PML risk stratification. Biogen Idec, Biogen Idec. Tysabri (natalizumab): benefit/risk update and PML risk stratification. 2013. Available from: http://www.slideshare.net/ gavingiovannoni/natalizuman. Accessed September 17, 2013.

Risk of natalizumabassociated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. G Bloomgren, S Richman, C Hotermans, N Engl J Med. 36620Bloomgren G, Richman S, Hotermans C, et al. Risk of natalizumab- associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(20):1870-1880.

Use of JC virus antibody index to stratify risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in natalizumab-treated patients with multiple sclerosis. T Plavina, M Subramanyam, G Bloomgren, Poster presented at: 27th Annual Meeting of the CMSC and the Fifth Cooperative Meeting of the CMSC-ACTRIMS. Orlando, FLPlavina T, Subramanyam M, Bloomgren G, et al. Use of JC virus antibody index to stratify risk of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy in natalizumab-treated patients with multiple sclerosis. Poster presented at: 27th Annual Meeting of the CMSC and the Fifth Cooperative Meeting of the CMSC-ACTRIMS; May 29-June 1, 2013; Orlando, FL.

L-selectin is a possible biomarker for individual PML risk in natalizumab-treated MS patients. N Schwab, T Schneider-Hohendorf, V Posevitz, Neurology. 8110Schwab N, Schneider-Hohendorf T, Posevitz V, et al. L-selectin is a possible biomarker for individual PML risk in natalizumab-treated MS patients. Neurology. 2013;81(10):865-871.

Natalizumab related PML: an evolving risk stratification paradigm. J F Foley, Poster presented at: American Academy of Neurology 2013 Annual Meeting. San Diego, CAFoley JF. Natalizumab related PML: an evolving risk stratification paradigm. Poster presented at: American Academy of Neurology 2013 Annual Meeting; March 16-23, 2013; San Diego, CA.

Neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis: the role of oxidative stress and excitotoxicity. R E Gonsette, Biologics: Targets and Therapy. 2741-2J Neurol Sci.. submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.comGonsette RE. Neurodegeneration in multiple sclerosis: the role of oxida- tive stress and excitotoxicity. J Neurol Sci. 2008;274(1-2):48-53. Biologics: Targets and Therapy 2013:7 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com

Cytokine localization in multiple sclerosis lesions: correlation with adhesion molecule expression and reactive nitrogen species. C F Brosnan, B Cannella, L Battistini, C S Raine, Neurology. 456Suppl 6Brosnan CF, Cannella B, Battistini L, Raine CS. Cytokine localization in multiple sclerosis lesions: correlation with adhe- sion molecule expression and reactive nitrogen species. Neurology. 1995;45(6 Suppl 6):S16-S21.

Van Dam AM. Detoxication enzyme inducers modify cytokine production in rat mixed glial cells. A Wierinckx, J Brevé, D Mercier, M Schultzberg, B Drukarch, J Neuroimmunol. 1661-2Wierinckx A, Brevé J, Mercier D, Schultzberg M, Drukarch B, Van Dam AM. Detoxication enzyme inducers modify cytokine pro- duction in rat mixed glial cells. J Neuroimmunol. 2005;166(1-2): 132-143.

Advances in antioxidative therapy of multiple sclerosis. Current medicinal chemistry. E Miller, B Wachowicz, I Majsterek, Miller E, Wachowicz B, Majsterek I. Advances in antioxidative therapy of multiple sclerosis. Current medicinal chemistry. Epub June 25, 2013.

Nitric oxide and the immune response. C Bogdan, Nat Immunol. 210Bogdan C. Nitric oxide and the immune response. Nat Immunol. 2001;2(10):907-916.

Reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in the relationship between mammalian hosts and microbial pathogens. C Nathan, M U Shiloh, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 9716Nathan C, Shiloh MU. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen intermediates in the relationship between mammalian hosts and microbial pathogens. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000;97(16):8841-8848.

Nitric oxide: a cytotoxic activated macrophage effector molecule. J B HibbsJr, R R Taintor, Z Vavrin, E M Rachlin, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1571Hibbs JB Jr, Taintor RR, Vavrin Z, Rachlin EM. Nitric oxide: a cyto- toxic activated macrophage effector molecule. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1988;157(1):87-94.

Demyelination: the role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. K J Smith, R Kapoor, P A Felts, Brain Pathol. 91Smith KJ, Kapoor R, Felts PA. Demyelination: the role of reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. Brain Pathol. 1999;9(1):69-92.

Axonal degeneration in multiple sclerosis: the mitochondrial hypothesis. K G Su, G Banker, D Bourdette, M Forte, Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 95Su KG, Banker G, Bourdette D, Forte M. Axonal degeneration in multiple sclerosis: the mitochondrial hypothesis. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2009;9(5):411-417.

Effects of dimethyl fumarate on neuroprotection and immunomodulation. P Albrecht, I Bouchachia, N Goebels, J Neuroinflammation. 9163Albrecht P, Bouchachia I, Goebels N, et al. Effects of dim- ethyl fumarate on neuroprotection and immunomodulation. J Neuroinflammation. 2012;9:163.

Fumaric acid esters are effective in chronic experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and suppress macrophage infiltration. S Schilling, S Goelz, R Linker, F Luehder, R Gold, Clin Exp Immunol. 1451Schilling S, Goelz S, Linker R, Luehder F, Gold R. Fumaric acid esters are effective in chronic experimental autoimmune encepha- lomyelitis and suppress macrophage infiltration. Clin Exp Immunol. 2006;145(1):101-107.

Dimethylfumarate is an inhibitor of cytokine-induced E-selectin, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 expression in human endothelial cells. M Vandermeeren, S Janssens, M Borgers, J Geysen, Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2341Vandermeeren M, Janssens S, Borgers M, Geysen J. Dimethylfumarate is an inhibitor of cytokine-induced E-selectin, VCAM-1, and ICAM-1 expression in human endothelial cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997;234(1):19-23.

Fumaric acid esters exert neuroprotective effects in neuroinflammation via activation of the Nrf2 antioxidant pathway. R A Linker, D H Lee, S Ryan, Brain. 1343Linker RA, Lee DH, Ryan S, et al. Fumaric acid esters exert neuro- protective effects in neuroinflammation via activation of the Nrf2 antioxidant pathway. Brain. 2011;134(3):678-692.

Oxidation of biological systems: oxidative stress phenomena, antioxidants, redox reactions, and methods for their quantification. R Kohen, A Nyska, Toxicol Pathol. 306Kohen R, Nyska A. Oxidation of biological systems: oxidative stress phenomena, antioxidants, redox reactions, and methods for their quantification. Toxicol Pathol. 2002;30(6):620-650.

Fumarates promote cytoprotection of central nervous system cells against oxidative stress via the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 pathway. R H Scannevin, S Chollate, M Y Jung, J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 3411Scannevin RH, Chollate S, Jung MY, et al. Fumarates promote cyto- protection of central nervous system cells against oxidative stress via the nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2 pathway. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012;341(1):274-284.

Oral fumaric acid esters for the treatment of active multiple sclerosis: an open-label, baselinecontrolled pilot study. S Schimrigk, N Brune, K Hellwig, Eur J Neurol. 136Schimrigk S, Brune N, Hellwig K, et al. Oral fumaric acid esters for the treatment of active multiple sclerosis: an open-label, baseline- controlled pilot study. Eur J Neurol. 2006;13(6):604-610.

Drug evaluation: BG-12, an immunomodulatory dimethylfumarate. Curr Opinion Investig Drugs. M Wakkee, H B Thio, 8Wakkee M, Thio HB. Drug evaluation: BG-12, an immuno- modulatory dimethylfumarate. Curr Opinion Investig Drugs. 2007; 8(11):955-962.

Efficacy and safety of oral fumarate in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase IIb study. L Kappos, R Gold, D H Miller, Lancet. 3729648Kappos L, Gold R, Miller DH, et al. Efficacy and safety of oral fumarate in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase IIb study. Lancet. 2008;372(9648):1463-1472.

Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing multiple sclerosis. R Gold, L Kappos, D L Arnold, N Engl J Med. 36712Gold R, Kappos L, Arnold DL, et al. Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2012; 367(12):1098-1107.

Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 or glatiramer in multiple sclerosis. R J Fox, D H Miller, J T Phillips, N Engl J Med. 36712Fox RJ, Miller DH, Phillips JT, et al. Placebo-controlled phase 3 study of oral BG-12 or glatiramer in multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(12):1087-1097.

Clinical efficacy of BG-12 (dimethyl fumarate) in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: subgroup analyses of the CONFIRM study. M Hutchinson, R J Fox, D H Miller, Journal of Neurology. 2609Hutchinson M, Fox RJ, Miller DH, et al. Clinical efficacy of BG-12 (dimethyl fumarate) in patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: subgroup analyses of the CONFIRM study. Journal of Neurology. 2013;260(9):2286-2296.

PML in a patient treated with fumaric acid. U Ermis, J Weis, J B Schulz, N Engl J Med. 36817Ermis U, Weis J, Schulz JB. PML in a patient treated with fumaric acid. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(17):1657-1658.

PML in a patient treated with dimethyl fumarate from a compounding pharmacy. B W Van Oosten, J Killestein, F Barkhof, C H Polman, M P Wattjes, N Engl J Med. 36817van Oosten BW, Killestein J, Barkhof F, Polman CH, Wattjes MP. PML in a patient treated with dimethyl fumarate from a compounding pharmacy. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(17):1658-1659.

Manufacturer's response to case reports of PML. M T Sweetser, K T Dawson, C Bozic, N Engl J Med. 36817Sweetser MT, Dawson KT, Bozic C. Manufacturer's response to case reports of PML. N Engl J Med. 2013;368(17):1659-1661.

Disruption of the interaction of T cells with antigen-presenting cells by the active leflunomide metabolite teriflunomide: involvement of impaired integrin activation and immunologic synapse formation. M Zeyda, M Poglitsch, R Geyeregger, Arthritis Rheum. 529Zeyda M, Poglitsch M, Geyeregger R, et al. Disruption of the interaction of T cells with antigen-presenting cells by the active leflunomide metabo- lite teriflunomide: involvement of impaired integrin activation and immu- nologic synapse formation. Arthritis Rheum. 2005;52(9):2730-2739.

A Phase II study of the safety and efficacy of teriflunomide in multiple sclerosis with relapses. P W O&apos;connor, D Li, M S Freedman, Neurology. 666O'Connor PW, Li D, Freedman MS, et al. A Phase II study of the safety and efficacy of teriflunomide in multiple sclerosis with relapses. Neurology. 2006;66(6):894-900.

Review of teriflunomide and its potential in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. C Warnke, G Meyer Zu Hörste, H P Hartung, O Stüve, B C Kieseier, Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 5Warnke C, Meyer zu Hörste G, Hartung HP, Stüve O, Kieseier BC. Review of teriflunomide and its potential in the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2009;5:333-340.

Mechanism of action for leflunomide in rheumatoid arthritis. R I Fox, M L Herrmann, C G Frangou, Clin Immunol. 933Fox RI, Herrmann ML, Frangou CG, et al. Mechanism of action for leflunomide in rheumatoid arthritis. Clin Immunol. 1999;93(3): 198-208.

Leflunomide: an immunomodulatory drug for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. M L Herrmann, R Schleyerbach, B J Kirschbaum, Immunopharmacology. 472-3Herrmann ML, Schleyerbach R, Kirschbaum BJ. Leflunomide: an immu- nomodulatory drug for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. Immunopharmacology. 2000;47(2-3): 273-289.

Teriflunomide for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. J Oh, O&apos; Connor, P W , Semin Neurol. 331Oh J, O'Connor PW. Teriflunomide for the treatment of multiple sclerosis. Semin Neurol. 2013;33(1):45-55.

Effects of prophylactic and therapeutic teriflunomide in transcranial magnetic stimulation-induced motor-evoked potentials in the Dark Agouti rat model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. D Iglesias-Bregna, S Hanak, Z Ji, J Pharmacol Exp Ther. Iglesias-Bregna D, Hanak S, Ji Z, et al. Effects of prophylactic and therapeutic teriflunomide in transcranial magnetic stimulation-induced motor-evoked potentials in the Dark Agouti rat model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. Epub Jul 26.

Teriflunomide reduces behavioral, electrophysiological, and histopathological deficits in the Dark Agouti rat model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J E Merrill, S Hanak, S F Pu, J Neurol. 2561Merrill JE, Hanak S, Pu SF, et al. Teriflunomide reduces behavioral, electrophysiological, and histopathological deficits in the Dark Agouti rat model of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. J Neurol. 2009;256(1):89-103.

Phase III Study With Teriflunomide Versus Placebo in Patients With First Clinical Symptom of Multiple Sclerosis (TOPIC). Sanofi, Identifier: NCT00622700. Accessed. Available fromSanofi. Phase III Study With Teriflunomide Versus Placebo in Patients With First Clinical Symptom of Multiple Sclerosis (TOPIC). Avail- able from: http://clinicaltrials.gov/show/NCT00622700. Identifier: NCT00622700. Accessed September 27, 2013.

Autoreactive T lymphocytes in multiple sclerosis determined by antigen-induced secretion of interferon-gamma. T Olsson, W W Zhi, B Höjeberg, J Clin Invest. 863Olsson T, Zhi WW, Höjeberg B, et al. Autoreactive T lymphocytes in multiple sclerosis determined by antigen-induced secretion of interferon-gamma. J Clin Invest. 1990;86(3):981-985.

Alteration of lymphocyte trafficking by sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonists. S Mandala, R Hajdu, J Bergstrom, Science. 2965566Mandala S, Hajdu R, Bergstrom J, et al. Alteration of lymphocyte trafficking by sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonists. Science. 2002;296(5566):346-349.

Leukotrienes, sphingolipids, and leukocyte trafficking. A C Yopp, G J Randolph, J S Bromberg, J Immunol. 1711Yopp AC, Randolph GJ, Bromberg JS. Leukotrienes, sphingolipids, and leukocyte trafficking. J Immunol. 2003;171(1):5-10.

The structure and function of the S1P1 receptor. C O&apos;sullivan, K K Dev, Trends Pharmacol Sci. 347O'Sullivan C, Dev KK. The structure and function of the S1P1 receptor. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2013;34(7):401-412.

Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonism impairs the efficiency of the local immune response by altering trafficking of naive and antigenactivated CD4+ T cells. J H Xie, N Nomura, S L Koprak, E J Quackenbush, M J Forrest, H Rosen, J Immunol. 1707Xie JH, Nomura N, Koprak SL, Quackenbush EJ, Forrest MJ, Rosen H. Sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor agonism impairs the efficiency of the local immune response by altering trafficking of naive and antigen- activated CD4+ T cells. J Immunol. 2003;170(7):3662-3670.

FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats, III. Increase in frequency of CD62L-positive T cells in Peyer's patches by FTY720-induced lymphocyte homing. Y Yanagawa, Y Masubuchi, K Chiba, Immunology. 954Yanagawa Y, Masubuchi Y, Chiba K. FTY720, a novel immunosup- pressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats, III. Increase in frequency of CD62L-positive T cells in Peyer's patches by FTY720-induced lymphocyte homing. Immunology. 1998;95(4):591-594.

FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats. II. FTY720 prolongs skin allograft survival by decreasing T cell infiltration into grafts but not cytokine production in vivo. Y Yanagawa, K Sugahara, H Kataoka, T Kawaguchi, Y Masubuchi, K Chiba, J Immunol. 16011Yanagawa Y, Sugahara K, Kataoka H, Kawaguchi T, Masubuchi Y, Chiba K. FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte hom- ing in rats. II. FTY720 prolongs skin allograft survival by decreasing T cell infiltration into grafts but not cytokine production in vivo. J Immunol. 1998;160(11):5493-5499.

FTY720, a novel immunosuppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats. I. FTY720 selectively decreases the number of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing. K Chiba, Y Yanagawa, Y Masubuchi, J Immunol. 16010Chiba K, Yanagawa Y, Masubuchi Y, et al. FTY720, a novel immuno- suppressant, induces sequestration of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing in rats. I. FTY720 selec- tively decreases the number of circulating mature lymphocytes by acceleration of lymphocyte homing. J Immunol. 1998;160(10):

Amelioration of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis in Lewis rats by FTY720 treatment. M Fujino, N Funeshima, Y Kitazawa, J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 3051Fujino M, Funeshima N, Kitazawa Y, et al. Amelioration of experimen- tal autoimmune encephalomyelitis in Lewis rats by FTY720 treatment. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003;305(1):70-77.

Fingolimod (FTY720) enhances remyelination following demyelination of organotypic cerebellar slices. V E Miron, S K Ludwin, P J Darlington, Am J Pathol. 1766Miron VE, Ludwin SK, Darlington PJ, et al. Fingolimod (FTY720) enhances remyelination following demyelination of organotypic cer- ebellar slices. Am J Pathol. 2010;176(6):2682-2694.

A placebo-controlled trial of oral fingolimod in relapsing multiple sclerosis. L Kappos, E W Radue, O&apos; Connor, P , N Engl J Med. 3625Kappos L, Radue EW, O'Connor P, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of oral fingolimod in relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(5):387-401.

Oral fingolimod or intramuscular interferon for relapsing multiple sclerosis. J A Cohen, F Barkhof, G Comi, N Engl J Med. 3625Cohen JA, Barkhof F, Comi G, et al. Oral fingolimod or intramus- cular interferon for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(5):402-415.

Sudden unexpected death on fingolimod. J W Lindsey, K Haden-Pinneri, N B Memon, L M Buja, Mult Scler. 1810Lindsey JW, Haden-Pinneri K, Memon NB, Buja LM. Sudden unex- pected death on fingolimod. Mult Scler. 2012;18(10):1507-1508.

Varicella-zoster virus encephalitis and vasculopathy in a patient treated with fingolimod. J N Ratchford, K Costello, D S Reich, P A Calabresi, Neurology. 79Ratchford JN, Costello K, Reich DS, Calabresi PA. Varicella-zoster virus encephalitis and vasculopathy in a patient treated with fingolimod. Neurology. 2012;79(19):2002-2004.

FDA investigates PML in patient taking Gilenya. O Rukovets, ?PostID=240. Accessed. Rukovets O. FDA investigates PML in patient taking Gilenya. 2013. Available from: http://journals.lww.com/neurotodayonline/blog/ breakingnews/pages/post.aspx?PostID=240. Accessed September 17, 2013.

Intramuscular interferon beta-1a for disease progression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. The Multiple Sclerosis Collaborative Research Group (MSCRG). L D Jacobs, D L Cookfair, R A Rudick, Ann Neurol. 393Jacobs LD, Cookfair DL, Rudick RA, et al. Intramuscular interferon beta-1a for disease progression in relapsing multiple sclerosis. The Multiple Sclerosis Collaborative Research Group (MSCRG). Ann Neurol. 1996;39(3):285-294.

Randomised double-blind placebo-controlled study of interferon beta-1a in relapsing/remitting multiple sclerosis. PRISMS (Prevention of Relapses and Disability by Interferon beta-1a Subcutaneously in Multiple Sclerosis) Study Group. Lancet. 3529139No authors listed130. [No authors listed]. Randomised double-blind placebo-controlled study of interferon beta-1a in relapsing/remitting multiple sclerosis. PRISMS (Prevention of Relapses and Disability by Interferon beta- 1a Subcutaneously in Multiple Sclerosis) Study Group. Lancet. 1998;352(9139):1498-1504.

Randomized trial of oral teriflunomide for relapsing multiple sclerosis. P O&apos;connor, J S Wolinsky, C Confavreux, N Engl J Med. 36514O'Connor P, Wolinsky JS, Confavreux C, et al. Randomized trial of oral teriflunomide for relapsing multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2011;365(14):1293-1303.

Alemtuzumab versus interferon beta 1a as first-line treatment for patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a randomised controlled phase 3 trial. J A Cohen, A J Coles, D L Arnold, Lancet. 3809856Cohen JA, Coles AJ, Arnold DL, et al. Alemtuzumab versus interferon beta 1a as first-line treatment for patients with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: a randomised controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2012;380(9856):1819-1828.

Placebo-controlled trial of oral laquinimod for multiple sclerosis. G Comi, D Jeffery, L Kappos, N Engl J Med. 36611Comi G, Jeffery D, Kappos L, et al. Placebo-controlled trial of oral laquinimod for multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(11): 1000-1009.

Daclizumab high-yield process in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (SELECT): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. R Gold, G Giovannoni, K Selmaj, Lancet. 3819884Gold R, Giovannoni G, Selmaj K, et al. Daclizumab high-yield process in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (SELECT): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2013; 381(9884):2167-2175.

Ocrelizumab in relapsingremitting multiple sclerosis: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial. L Kappos, D Li, P A Calabresi, Lancet. 3789805Kappos L, Li D, Calabresi PA, et al. Ocrelizumab in relapsing- remitting multiple sclerosis: a phase 2, randomised, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2011;378(9805):1779-1787.