# A survey of in-patient and out-patient antipsychotic prescriptions in Hong Kong Antipsychotic prescriptions were analysed for a large sample of psy- chiatric in-patients and out-patients in Hong

CorpusID: 74619273
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/368902a7a2838f140e0a1afe934d6a63548b3b8b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/368902a7a2838f140e0a1afe934d6a63548b3b8b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A survey of in-patient and out-patient antipsychotic prescriptions in Hong Kong Antipsychotic prescriptions were analysed for a large sample of psy- chiatric in-patients and out-patients in Hong
2008

A survey of in-patient and out-patient antipsychotic prescriptions in Hong Kong Antipsychotic prescriptions were analysed for a large sample of psy- chiatric in-patients and out-patients in Hong

Psychiatric Bulletin
32200810.1192/pb.bp.107.016899G A B R I E L B. K . H U N G A N D H . K . C H E U N G AIMS AND METHOD


Low levels of adherence to established guidelines for high-dose antipsychotic prescription were found in this study, with clinical and medicolegal implications. The results of this study highlight the need for staff education and regular audit of antipsychotic doses in the in-patient and out-patient setting.

High-dose antipsychotic prescribing is a common practice worldwide (Diaz & de Leon, 2002;Harrington et al, 2002;Bitter et al, 2003;Chong et al, 2004). In a recent study of 3132 in-patients in 47 UK adult mental health services, 20% were prescribed a total dose of antipsychotic medication above the British National Formulary (BNF) recommendations (Harrington et al, 2002).

Recent reviews have failed to show any clinical benefit in prescribing high doses of antipsychotic medications (Freudenreich & Goff, 2002;Davis & Chen, 2004). However, there is clear evidence to show the harmful effects of high-dose antipsychotic therapy. There is evidence to link mortality with antipsychotic dosage and polypharmacy (Waddington et al, 1998;Joukamaa et al, 2006).

The Royal College of Psychiatrists (2006) currently recommends the use of high doses only after evidencebased strategies have failed, and as a carefully monitored limited therapeutic trial.


## Method


## Study population

All in-patients and out-patients receiving psychiatric services in the New Territories West Cluster (NTWC) in Hong Kong who received antipsychotic medications on 15 November 2006 were included in this study. The NTWC covers a catchment area of 223.17 km 2 with a population of 1.1 million inhabitants. Out-patients followed up prior to 15 November 2006 were included if antipsychotic medications were to be self-administered on that day.

A full range of psychiatric services are provided, including general adult, community, liaison, old age, child and adolescent, learning disability, forensic, early psychosis, substance misuse and perinatal psychiatry. This psychiatric service is an accredited training centre of the Royal College of Psychiatrists.


## High-dose prescriptions

A high dose was defined as a total daily dose of a single antipsychotic exceeding the upper limit in the BNF. Where two or more antipsychotics are used, the prescribed dose is converted to a percentage of the maximum dose for each drug. If the sum of the percentages exceeds 100% the patient is receiving a high dose (Yorston & Pinney, 2000;Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2006). For trifluoperazine, a maximum daily dose was set at 50 mg. The maximum dosage for thiothixene and ziprasidone, which are not available in the UK, were obtained from the US prescribing information published by the manufacturer.


## Adherence to established guidelines

Where a high dose is prescribed, the Royal College of Psychiatrists (2006) recommends that:

(1) the clinical indications should be stated;

(2) the decision should be made by a fully trained psychiatrist;

(3) the patient should be consulted; (4) electrocardiogram (ECG) should be performed at baseline, a few days after prescription, and every 1-3 months in the early stages of treatment; and (5) the outcome should be reviewed after a 3-month trial, and the dose should be reduced back to conventional levels unless the clinical benefits outweigh the risks.

The case notes of all patients receiving a high dose were obtained to identify the extent to which these recommendations are followed in clinical practice.


## Data collection

In-patient data were collected using a pro forma to collect information on all antipsychotic medications prescribed between 00.00 and 23.59 on 15 November 2006. Depot medications that were given prior to this date were included if this date fell within the period between successive injections. The prescribed dosage of 'as required' medications was obtained, in addition to the dosage dispensed by nursing staff. Out-patient prescription data were collected using the Clinical Management System database of the hospital authority, which processes and stores information on all out-patient prescriptions. A checklist was used to collect information from case notes to obtain further data and this is listed in Table 1.


## Results


## Demographic and prescription data

Demographic and prescription data were obtained from 1254 in-patients and 19 986 out-patients. Antipsychotic medications were prescribed to 1129 in-patients and 7520 out-patients. Of those receiving antipsychotic medications, high doses were prescribed to 9.2% of inpatients and 1.8% of out-patients. The findings are summarised in Tables 2 and 3.


## Case notes

Where available, case notes were reviewed to determine the date of the high-dose prescription and whether the recommendations in the Royal College of Psychiatrists (2006) were followed. The results are summarised in Table 1.


## Discussion


## Antipsychotic dosages

One antipsychotic was prescribed in 78.8% of in-patients and 83.1% of out-patients. This is in line with recommendations against the routine use of antipsychotic polypharmacy (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2006). High doses were prescribed for 9.2% of all in-patients and 1.8% of all out-patients. A similar study conducted in the UK revealed 20% of in-patients receiving a high dose (Harrington et al, 2002). Antipsychotic polypharmacy was original papers

Hung & Cheung A survey of antipsychotic prescriptions in Hong Kong  (37) 1. High-dose prescription commenced in other psychiatric centres prior to transfer into the current out-patient clinic in 22 cases. Case notes not available for review.

2. Doses were decreased to normal levels before the end of 1 week in 2 cases.

3. Doses were decreased to normal levels before the end of 3 months in a further 8 cases.

4. Doses were decreased to normal levels before the end of 3 months in 17 cases.  also more common in patients prescribed a high dose. High doses had been prescribed for an average of 571 days for in-patients and 1098 days for out-patients.


## Documentation, precautions and review

The case notes showed a general lack of documentation in patients receiving a high dose. Documentation of the indications for high-dose prescription was found in only six cases. Only three case notes recorded that the patient was informed, and very few patients received an ECG at baseline, 1 month, and 3 months after a high dose was prescribed. Due to a low index of suspicion or unawareness, the psychiatrist may have failed to realise that a patient was receiving a high dose. In addition, poor record-keeping and a lack of knowledge of the current recommendations regarding documentation, monitoring and review may have contributed to these findings. Further studies are required to identify and target factors leading to low adherence to guideline recommendations.


## Limitations

This study was based on a large, representative population in Hong Kong, including both in-patients and outpatients. Although there were no private psychiatric hospitals or clinics in the catchment area, patients residing in the area may be receiving private psychiatric services elsewhere. These cases could not be identified for the purposes of this study. The cross-sectional design of this study does not provide any information on longitudinal patterns of prescription. This study did not investigate the reasons for high-dose antipsychotic prescription. 


## Medico-legal implications

A prescription exceeding the maximum recommended dose results in an unlicensed use of the medicine. A doctor who prescribes high-dose antipsychotic medications is likely to be held liable for damage caused to a patient, unless it can be shown that the damage was unrelated to the dosage prescribed. The existence of clear guidelines advising against the use of high-dose antipsychotic medications, together with poor documentation, a lack of patient consent and a lack of ECG monitoring will render many claims indefensible. The results of this study highlight the need for staff education and regular audit of antipsychotic doses in both the inpatient and out-patient setting.

## Table 1 .
1Adherence to guideline recommendations for cases receiving high-dose antipsychotic medicationsIn-patients n (%) 
Out-patients n (%) 



## Table 2 .
2Demographic and prescription data: all patients 
prescribed antipsychotics 

Patient 
characteristics 

In-patients 
(n=1129) 

Out-patients 
(n=7520) 

Age, years: mean (s.d.) 
45.8 (14.2) 
43.3 (11.7) 
Gender, n (%) 
Male 
738 (65.4) 3671 (48.8) 
Female 
391 (34.6) 3849 (51.2) 
Dose, %: mean (s.d.) 
53.8 (37.8) 
25.3 (26.8) 
High-dose prescriptions, n (%) 
104 (9.2) 
137 (1.8) 
Antipsychotics prescribed, n (%) 
One 
889 (78.7) 6246 (83.1) 
Two 
215 (19.0) 
1165 (15.5) 
Three 
25 (2.2) 
107 (1.4) 
Four 
0 (0) 
2 (0) 



## Table 3 .
3Demographic and prescription data: patients receiving 
high-dose antipsychotic medications 

Patient characteristics 

In-patients 
(n=104) 

Out-patients 
(n=137) 

Age, years: mean (s.d.) 
43.3 (11.7) 
44.1 (12.6) 
Gender, n (%) 
Male 
75 (72.1) 
80 (58.4) 
Female 
29 (27.9) 
57 (41.6) 
Antipsychotic prescriptions 
Dose, %: mean (s.d.) 
128.8 (25.0) 130.1 (25.1) 
Duration of high dose, 
days: mean (s.d.) 
571 (776.4) 1098 (1351.1) 
Antipsychotics prescribed, n (%) 
One 
37 (35.6) 
44 (32.1) 
Two 
56 (53.9) 
72 (52.6) 
Three 
11 (10.9) 
20 (14.6) 
Four 
0 (0.0) 
1 (0.7) 



The degree of awareness of the Royal College of Psychiatrists' consensus statement (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 2006) was not assessed.
Declaration of interestNone.
Prescribing for inpatients with schizophrenia: an international multi-center comparative study. I Bitter, J C Chou, G S Ungvari, Pharmacopsychiatry. 36BITTER, I., CHOU, J. C., UNGVARI, G. S., et al (2003) Prescribing for inpatients with schizophrenia: an international multi-center comparative study. Pharmacopsychiatry, 36,143-149.

British, Association &amp; Royal, Pharmaceutical, Of, Britain, British National Formulary. BMJ Books & Pharmaceutical PressBRITISH MEDICAL ASSOCIATION & ROYAL PHARMACEUTICAL SOCIETY OF GREAT BRITAIN (2006) British National Formulary (March). BMJ Books & Pharmaceutical Press.

Antipsychotic drug prescription for schizophrenia in East Asia: rationale for change. M Y Chong, C H Tan, S Fujii, Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences. 58CHONG, M.Y.,TAN, C. H., FUJII, S., et al (2004) Antipsychotic drug prescription for schizophrenia in East Asia: rationale for change. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, 58, 61-67.

Dose response and dose equivalence of antipsychotics. J M Davis, N Chen, Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology. 24DAVIS, J. M., CHEN, N. (2004) Dose response and dose equivalence of antipsychotics. Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology, 24,192-208.

Excessive antipsychotic dosing in two US state hospitals. F J Diaz, J De Leon, Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. 63DIAZ, F. J. & DE LEON, J. (2002) Excessive antipsychotic dosing in two US state hospitals. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 63, 998-1003.

Antipsychotic combination therapy in schizophrenia: a review of efficacy and risks of current combinations. O Freudenreich, D C Goff, Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 106FREUDENREICH, O. & GOFF, D. C. (2002) Antipsychotic combination therapy in schizophrenia: a review of efficacy and risks of current combinations. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 106, 323- 330.

The results of a multicentre audit of the prescribing of antipsychotic drugs for in-patients in the UK. M Harrington, P Lelliott, C Paton, Psychiatric Bulletin. 26HARRINGTON, M., LELLIOTT, P., PATON, C., et al (2002) The results of a multi- centre audit of the prescribing of antipsychotic drugs for in-patients in the UK. Psychiatric Bulletin, 26, 414- 418.

) Schizophrenia, neuroleptic medication and mortality. M Joukamaa, M Heliúvaara, P Knekt, British Journal of Psychiatry. 188JOUKAMAA, M., HELIÚVAARA, M., KNEKT, P., et al (2006) Schizophrenia, neuroleptic medication and mortality. British Journal of Psychiatry, 188,122- 127.

Consensus Statement on the Use of High Dose Antipsychotic Medication. Royal College, Psychiatrists, CR138Royal College of PsychiatristsCouncil ReportROYAL COLLEGE OF PSYCHIATRISTS (2006) Consensus Statement on the Use of High Dose Antipsychotic Medication. Council Report CR138. Royal College of Psychiatrists.

Antipsychotic polypharmacy and absence of adjunctive anticholinergics over the course of a10-year prospective study. J L Waddington, H A Youssef, A Kinsella, British Journal of Psychiatry. 173Mortality in schizophreniaWADDINGTON, J. L.,YOUSSEF, H. A. & KINSELLA, A. (1998) Mortality in schizophrenia. Antipsychotic polypharmacy and absence of adjunctive anticholinergics over the course of a10-year prospective study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 173, 325- 329.

Chlorpromazine equivalents and percentage of British National Formulary maximum recommended dose in patients receiving high-dose antipsychotics. G Yorston, A Pinney, Psychiatric Bulletin. 24YORSTON, G. & PINNEY, A. (2000) Chlorpromazine equivalents and percentage of British National Formulary maximum recommended dose in patients receiving high-dose antipsychotics. Psychiatric Bulletin, 24, 130-132.

Hung Resident in Rehabilitation Psychiatry, Castle Peak Hospital, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong, email: gabrielhung@hotmail.com, H. K. Cheung Chief of Science, Castle Peak Hospital. * Gabriel, B K , Tuen MunHong Kong*Gabriel B. K. Hung Resident in Rehabilitation Psychiatry, Castle Peak Hospital, Tuen Mun, Hong Kong, email: gabrielhung@hotmail.com, H. K. Cheung Chief of Science, Castle Peak Hospital,Tuen Mun, Hong Kong