# Percutaneous Angioplasty of Severe Concomitant Carotid, Coronary, and Peripheral Arteriosclerosis: A Case Report and Literature Review

CorpusID: 80139768
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8c091fa3781d683562044f75976123840940983](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8c091fa3781d683562044f75976123840940983)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Percutaneous Angioplasty of Severe Concomitant Carotid, Coronary, and Peripheral Arteriosclerosis: A Case Report and Literature Review
2017 June 12

Behzad Farahani 
Interventional Cardiologist
Firoozgar General Hospital
Iran

University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Hossein Fouladi Vanda 
Cardiovascular Intervention Research Center
Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center
Iran

University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Mohammad Ghorbani 
Interventional Cardiologist
Firoozgar General Hospital
Iran

University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Ahmad Shakeri 
Cardiovascular Intervention Research Center
Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center
Iran

University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Hossein Fouladi 

Cardiovascular Intervention Research Center
Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center
Iran


University of Medical Sciences
TehranIran

Percutaneous Angioplasty of Severe Concomitant Carotid, Coronary, and Peripheral Arteriosclerosis: A Case Report and Literature Review
2017 June 12BC27AF6EEC1BE4C780B21E6172125C6E10.5812/ircmj.14590Received 2017 January 30; Revised 2017 March 14; Accepted 2017 April 29.Cardiovascular DiseaseVascular DiseasesArterial Occlusive DiseasesArteriosclerosisPeripheral Arterial DiseaseAngioplastyPercutaneous Transluminal AngioplastyConcomitant Severe ArteriosclerosisConcomitant Arterial StenosisPolyvascular DiseasePVDCVD
Introduction:Severe presentation of concomitant carotid, coronary, and peripheral arteriosclerosis is not a common finding.However, some studies have reported surgical and noninvasive interventions for this condition.Case Presentation: Herein, we present a patient with concomitant carotid, coronary, and peripheral arteriosclerosis, who underwent angioplasty in Tehran, Iran in November 2015.Some studies have been carried out on surgical and percutaneous coronary, carotid and peripheral intervention for concomitant lesions; however, reports about percutaneous coronary, carotid and peripheral intervention, similar to the present case, are not available.Conclusions: Due to lack of evidence on the prevalence and management of concomitant multifocal coronary, carotid, and limb arteriosclerosis, it is necessary to perform well-designed studies on such groups of patients to define proper management (surgical versus endovascular interventions), periprocedural complications, as well as short-and long-term outcomes.

## Introduction

According to the Lancet's global burden of disease study in 2015, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the leading cause of all-cause mortality (1).Reasonably, prevention (2) and treatment of cardiovascular disease (CVD) should be of the highest priority for the development of health policies.The European Society of Cardiology (ESC) defines polyvascular disease (PVD) as "the simultaneous presence of clinically relevant atherosclerotic lesions in at least 2 major vascular territories" (3).

Mortality is significantly higher in PVD patients, compared to those with only 1 stenotic lesion (4,5), while definite management of such groups (surgical versus nonsurgical interventions) is one of the challenging clinical decisions (4,6,7).Herein, we present a patient with symptomatic PVD, who was a candidate for non-surgical approach and angioplasty of carotid, coronary, and lower extremities with major arterial lesions.


## Case Presentation

In November 2015, a 58-year-old man was admitted to the emergency ward of Firoozgar general hospital, Tehran, Iran, with sudden onset of paraparesia and falling on the same day.The patient with primary impression of transient ischemic attack was admitted to receive neurology services.He had no history of cerebrovascular accidents, diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease (CAD), hypertension, or dyslipidemia; also, he had no family history of these disorders and was a nonsmoker.The patient's only complaint was limping while walking, which was compatible with vascular involvement.Neurologic physical examination and brain imaging (CT scan and MRI) were normal, based on the radiologist's report.Diminished dorsalis pedis pulses in the lower extremities were the only abnormal finding.

According to the laboratory findings at admission (Table 1), it was revealed that diabetes mellitus had not been diagnosed in the patient.Due to primary impression, the patient underwent color Doppler sonography of carotid arteries and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) for cardiac examination.After establishment of left common carotid artery stenosis on color Doppler sonography and reduced left ventricular ejection fraction on TTE (LVEF=40% with segmental wall motion abnormalities), angioplasty of the left common carotid (Figure 1) and coronary arteries (Figure 2) was carried out in 2 separate sessions.Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 0.9 microIU/mL 0.5 -5.5 was carried out, which showed that both left and right common femoral arteries were cut (Figure 2).Accordingly, 2 Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2017; 19(6):e14590.percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) of the lower extremities was planned.Due to common femoral artery occlusion, access to femoral artery was impossible; therefore, popliteal artery access was considered in the prone position via fluoroscopy and Doppler sonography guidance.Finally, angioplasty was performed on the left femoral, common, and internal iliac arteries.In the fourth session, PTA was performed on the right lower extremity (Figure 2).Intensive hydration and close monitoring of renal function were the main considerations during and after the procedures.Both lower limbs showed a relatively acceptable distal flow after angioplasty.


## Considering the patient's complaint of vascular limping, color Doppler sonography of both lower extremities


## Discussion

According to early registries, patients with concomitant peripheral artery disease (PAD) and coronary artery disease (CAD) have higher mortalities, compared to those with only CAD (5); these reports are compatible with recent studies (3,4).Overall, no prevalence estimation has been performed on severe presentation of concomitant carotid, coronary, and peripheral arteriosclerosis (3,(8)(9)(10)(11), whereas carotid artery stenosis, concurrent with coronary or peripheral artery arteriosclerosis, is not a rare finding (with or without symptoms) (3,4,10,12).

It is reasonable to consider early revascularization for the prevention of mortality and further morbidities in such patients.However, there is a gap of information about proper management of patients with PVD (3,13).Some studies have discussed surgical, percutaneous, and noninvasive interventions (4,6,11,13,14).Surgical revascularization may lead to more perioperative complications (e.g., stroke, hemorrhage, and vascular complications) (13), while percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) is one of the options for preventing such adverse events, reducing Iran Red Crescent Med J. 2017; 19(6):e14590.the length of admission, and facilitating early return to work.

On the other hand, contrast-induced nephropathy is a major concern and may lead to permanent hemodialysis in some patients, especially diabetics.Therefore, intensive hydration and close monitoring of renal function are mandatory.Although Surgical interventions and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) have been performed in concomitant lesions (11,15), reports about percutaneous intervention, as a single revascularization technique, are not available in similar cases.

Due to lack of evidence on the prevalence and management of PVD, it is necessary to perform well-designed studies on this group of patients to define proper management (including surgical, endovascular, and noninvasive strategies), periprocedural complications, as well as short-and long-term outcomes.Although the number of patients in such groups is not favorable, decision-making for proper management and long-term positive outcomes is essential.

## Figure 1 . 1
11
Figure 1.Figure 1


## Figure 2 . 2 A
22
Figure 2.Figure 2


## Table 1 .
1
Laboratory Test Results Upon Admission (Diabetes Mellitus Presented by High FBS and HbA1C Levels)
Tests

Causes of Death C. Global, regional, and national life expectancy, all-cause mortality, and cause-specific mortality for 249 causes of death, 1980-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study. G B D Mortality, 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31012-1Lancet. 3882015. 2016. 10053PubMed: 27733281

AHA Guidelines for Primary Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease and Stroke: 2002 Update: Consensus Panel Guide to Comprehensive Risk Reduction for Adult Patients Without Coronary or Other Atherosclerotic Vascular Diseases. T A Pearson, S N Blair, S R Daniels, R H Eckel, J M Fair, S P Fortmann, American Heart Association Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee. Circulation. 10632002PubMed: 12119259

. V Aboyans, Panvascular Medicine, 2015second edition. Polyvascular disease: Definition, epidemiology, relevance

The management of combined coronary artery disease and peripheral vascular disease. A Cassar, D Poldermans, C S Rihal, B J Gersh, 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq186Eur Heart J. 31132010PubMed: 20525983

Long-term survival in patients with coronary artery disease: importance of peripheral vascular disease. The Coronary Artery Surgery Study (CASS) Investigators. K A Eagle, C S Rihal, E D Foster, M C Mickel, B J Gersh, 10.1016/0735-1097(94)90596-7J Am Coll Cardiol. 2351994PubMed: 8144774

E R Charchian, A B Stepanenko, Belov Iu, V Gens, A P Kabanova, M N Turaev, M M , One-stage carotid and coronary artery surgeries in the treatment of multifocal atherosclerosis. 

. Kardiologiia. 549257024022014

A Systematic Review of Early Results Following Synchronous or Staged Carotid Artery Stenting and Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting. J Zhang, R W Xu, X Fan, Z Ye, P Liu, 10.1055/s-0035-1566262Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 6542017PubMed: 26536085

Concomitant occlusive disease of the coronary arteries and great vessels. T J Takach, G J Reul, D A Cooley, J J Livesay, J M Duncan, D A Ott, 10.1016/S0003-4975(97)00863-1Ann Thorac Surg. 6511998PubMed: 9456099

A rare case of lack of correlation of carotid atherosclerosis and coronary atherosclerosis. G Dattilo, G Morabito, M Cerrito, A Lamari, D Tulino, F Marte, 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.03.052Int J Cardiol. 15212011PubMed: 19345427

Prevalence of concomitant atherosclerotic arterial diseases in patients with significant cervical carotid artery stenosis in Taiwan. Y W Wu, M S Lin, Y H Lin, C L Chao, H L Kao, 10.1007/s10554-006-9180-xInt J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2342007PubMed: 17120098

Simultaneous carotid and coronary arteries disease: staged or combined surgical approach?. B Chiappini, A Dell' Amore, Di Marco, L , Di Bartolomeo, R Marinelli, G , 10.1111/j.1540-8191.2005.200420.xJ Card Surg. 2032005PubMed: 15854084

Prevalence of Carotid Artery Disease among Ambulatory Patients with Coronary Artery Disease. S Kazum, A Eisen, E I Lev, Z Iakobishvili, A Solodky, D Hasdai, Isr Med Assoc J. 1822016PubMed: 26979002

Current concepts on the management of concomitant carotid and coronary disease. M Roffi, A Cremonesi, J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino). 5412013PubMed: 23296415

The clinical instrumental evaluation of treatment efficacy in patients with concomitant atherosclerosis of the coronary. R S Karpov, V A Dudko, V M Shipulin, N V Kanskaia, Koshel'skaia, Oa, N A Stepanian, cerebral and peripheral arteries

. Ter Arkh. 63420686871991

Simultaneous hybrid revascularization by carotid stenting and coronary artery bypass grafting: the SHARP study. F Versaci, B Reimers, Del Giudice, C Schofer, J Giacomin, A Sacca, S , 10.1016/j.jcin.2009.02.010JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 252009PubMed: 19463460

. Iran Red Crescent Med J. 196e145902017