# Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences Obesity perception survey among youth in Turkey: instrument development and test- retest reliability

CorpusID: 87315372
 
tags: #Medicine, #Sociology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/74c5b986fbb21eb38a4a7c5fa2699caf794680ec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/74c5b986fbb21eb38a4a7c5fa2699caf794680ec)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences Obesity perception survey among youth in Turkey: instrument development and test- retest reliability


J Med Turk 
Sci 
Wasantha Jayawardene 
School of Public Health -Bloomington
Indiana University
BloomingtonIndianaUSA

Salih Pinar 
Faculty of Sports Science
Marmara University
İstanbulTurkey

 
Mohammad Torabi 
School of Public Health -Bloomington
Indiana University
BloomingtonIndianaUSA

 
Pengcheng Xun 
School of Public Health -Bloomington
Indiana University
BloomingtonIndianaUSA

 
Mustafa Özer 
Faculty of Sports Science
İstanbul Gedik University
İstanbulTurkey

Turkish Journal of Medical Sciences Obesity perception survey among youth in Turkey: instrument development and test- retest reliability
10.3906/sag-1811-561228 http://journals.tubitak.gov.tr/medical/ * Correspondence: wajayawa@indiana.edu 1 http://www.hurriyetdailynews.com/


developed and developing countries [11][12][13][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22]. For example, the Obesity Perception Survey of the U.S. (OPSUS), a nationally representative survey of U.S. adults (n = 1011) [23], assessed public perceptions and opinions regarding the causes and consequences of obesity, including links to other chronic conditions. OPSUS also explored the roles of individuals, families, communities, and respective governments in addressing obesity. Similarly, the Obesity Perception Survey of the European Union (OPSEU), conducted in seven countries (n = 14,000), assessed obesity awareness, including its causes, implications, and treatments, plus self-reported weight status. Additionally, a multinational survey assessed obesity perceptions and policy preferences among policymakers in Europe and the Americas [21]. However, no study has evaluated perceptions and beliefs about obesity among youth (i.e. adolescents and young adults) and adults in Turkey, including their preferred solutions.

The variations of obesity-related social norms, perceptions, and preferred solutions across countries, and even across geographical regions, age groups, and social classes within a country, make it challenging to utilize a standard survey for investigating these constructs. This study is part of a research collaboration to assess obesityrelated perceptions and preferences in Turkey. This study aimed to develop a survey for adolescents and young adults by translating and revising questions from existing surveys [22,23] to accommodate the Turkish cultural context and subsequently to evaluate the construct validity and test-retest reliability of survey questions administered to İstanbul youth.


## Materials and methods

The Obesity Perception Survey among Youth in Turkey (OPSYT) was designed for self-administered, standardized data collection from adolescents and young adults in the region. It was pilot-tested in İstanbul, considering its central location in the target region. In 2016, the high school (ages [14][15][16][17] net enrollment rate in Turkey was 79% for males and 78% for females [24]. In 2017, about 31% of men and 32% of women in the 25-34 age group had completed some tertiary education [25]. Considering that the target age group is 15-25, the survey was intended to accommodate the expected average literacy level of high school students. The survey structure and a majority of OPSYT questions were based on the OPSUS and OPSEU surveys [22,23], validated with permission, and were subsequently revised as necessary. All the questions were closed-ended and designed as either multiple-choice (single or multiple answers) or Likert-scale questions. The draft OPSYT survey aimed to evaluate the perceptions of obesity-related problems and solutions in both the public sphere (societal level) and the private sphere (the participants and persons known to the participants). Hereafter, 'problem' denotes obesity-related problems either in the public or private sphere while 'solution' stands for existing or potential answers to such problems in either sphere.

Problem Perception -Public Sphere ('Problem-Public'), 15 questions: How participants understand and perceive the magnitude of obesity problem compared to other health issues in Turkey, potential causes and consequences of obesity, the relationship between overweight and overall health status, and obesity-related societal discrimination.

Solution Perception -Public Sphere ('Solution-Public'), 6 questions: Participants' opinions regarding potential treatments for obesity, including morbid obesity, and the responsibility of individuals, families, communities, healthcare providers, various institutions, and government for solving the obesity problem of the country along with the participants' support for existing or hypothetical policies targeting obesity.

Problem Perception -Private Sphere ('Problem-Private'), 6 questions: Participants' overall health status, including height, weight, and perceived body image, plus knowing a person with obesity.

Solution Perception -Private Sphere ('Solution-Private'), 5 questions: Instructions received from participants' healthcare providers about obesity prevention or treatment and participants' behavioral strategies for weight management plus awareness of physical and social environments that promote or impede healthy behaviors.

Sociodemographic, 4 questions: Basic information about participants' sex, age, income, and area of residence.

Some questions were presented in tabular format to reduce the target response time to 15 min. The questions were listed continuously with no topical dividers or skip patterns. As this study evaluated perceptions, not attitudes, a 'don't know' option was included where relevant (27 of 36 questions) to allow the respondents to indicate no previous consideration of a particular issue. All response choices facilitated coding and data analysis.


### Assessment of construct validity

The survey was originally composed in English and translated into Turkish. To establish face validity, two U.S. experts individually reviewed each question, with response options, to ensure the operationalization of each construct against a detailed description of the relevant content domain [26,27]. Subsequently, two Turkish experts individually reviewed the questions, with response options, to ensure that each met the average literacy level of Turkish high school students and Turkish contextual social acceptability (i.e. cross-cultural validity). The survey was revised accordingly and reassessed by all the experts. Prior to utilization, it was also back-translated to English by a professional translator to ensure fidelity with original concepts.


### Assessment of test-retest reliability


#### Study population, setting, and design

In İstanbul, there are over 400 schools with approximately 50 high schools and 44 higher education institutions, including eight public universities. The study population consisted of high school students, typically 15-18 years old, with an approximately 1:1 sex-ratio, plus university undergraduates, typically 19-25 years of age, with a slightly higher percentage of males (Table 1). While the main project study will involve a random sample of İstanbul high school and college undergraduate students, this instrument development study was conducted with a convenience sample of public high school and university students during spring 2016. For both study samples, the project aimed for representative sex and age-group distributions.


#### Procedure

The survey was administered to each student twice, 2 weeks apart, an interval that was long enough to prevent them from recalling previous answers but short enough to prevent changes in perceptions over time [28,29]. The self-administered survey was distributed at each site by two researchers. Participation was strictly voluntary and the respondents were not incentivized. The data entry template consisted of validation rules for each question and the entry was supervised by a coauthor. The Ethics Review Committee of Marmara University (İstanbul) approved the study.


#### Statistical analysis

The data were analyzed using STATA-14.0 [30]. Only the results of those respondents who completed both surveys (test and retest) were retained for analysis. For variables with more than 5% missing values, missing value analysis revealed no systematic patterns based on the available sociodemographic variables [31]. Missing values for each variable were replaced with the mean of sex-based variables. Univariate and multivariate outliers were deleted. The survey primarily collected categorical data, so frequencies and percentages were calculated for each categorical variable. Means and standard deviations were calculated for continuous variables.

The aim was to assess consistency between test and retest scores of individuals (test-retest reliability), but not relative consistency, which compares individuals in the group relative to the others. Therefore, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) with a two-factor mixed-effects model was utilized [32]. In line with the prior literature, ICC < 0.50 was considered 'poor reliability' , 0.5 ≤ ICC < 0.75 'moderate reliability' , 0.75 ≤ ICC < 0.90 'good reliability' , and >0.90 'excellent reliability' [29]. The reliability of each item was determined based on the 95% confident interval (95% CI) of the ICC estimate, rather than the ICC estimate itself, considering that the ICC approximation in a test-retest reliability study is not the true ICC but only an expected value of the true ICC. Hence, the lower limit of 95% CI being greater than 0.5 was considered to be the criterion for ensuring test-retest reliability in this study. 


## Results

The questionnaire validation study involved 122 students with repeated measures; 46 of them were high school students (47.8% males) and 76 were university students (62.5% males). In the school sample, 83% of students were 17-18 years old, and in the university sample, 85% were between 19 and 24 years of age (Table 1). According to self-reported weight and height, the mean body mass index (BMI) values for high school and university samples were 20.91 (standard deviation = 3.04) and 22.47 (standard deviation = 2.63), respectively. Fewer than half (48%) of high school students and two-thirds (66%) of university students rated their overall health as excellent or very good.


### Practicality

The range of response time for high school and university students to complete the questionnaire was 6-17 and 5-15 min, respectively.


### Construct validity

To ensure clarity, the final draft of the original English version was subjected to five minor revisions as suggested by two expert reviewers. After these revisions, age and income categories were revised. Two Turkish experts reviewed the Turkish translation and suggested two major and seven minor revisions to ensure that the questionnaire met the average literacy level of Turkish high school students and Turkish contextual social acceptability (i.e. cross-cultural validity). The Turkish version was back-translated into English and it was not different from the original English version in terms of content and meaning. To establish face validity, three carefully selected experts individually reviewed each question to ensure the operationalization of each construct against a detailed description of the relevant content domain. Subsequently, three carefully selected Turkish experts individually reviewed the questions, with response options, to ensure that each met the average literacy level of Turkish high school students and Turkish contextual social acceptability (i.e. cross-cultural validity). The survey was revised accordingly and reassessed by all the experts. Prior to utilization, it was also back-translated to English by a professional translator to ensure fidelity with the original concepts.


### Reliability

The distribution of ICC estimates between pre-and posttests for questionnaire items was skewed to the left (i.e. towards lower correlations), but the range of ICC estimates was wider for high school students than for university students. The number of items with an ICC value below 0.5 was considerably higher for high school students than for university students, whereas the mean and median ICC values for high school students (0.63 and 0.67, respectively) were lower than those for university students (0.70 and 0.71, respectively). For high school and university, the ICC distribution for each of the five categories is summarized below.


#### High school students

The items for the 'Problem-Public' category (56 from 15 questions) had a wide range of ICC (0-0.99), with a mean of 0.62 (95% CI = 0.57-0.67), which was significantly greater than the cutoff of 0.5. The items for the 'Solution-Public' category (24 from 6 questions) also had a wide range (0-0.95), but the mean ICC, 0.56 (95% CI = 0.46-0.65), was lower compared to the previous category and was not significantly greater than the cutoff. Lastly, compared to high school students, the items for the 'Sociodemographic' category had a wider ICC range (0.37-0.97) and a much lower mean of 0.60 (95% CI = 0.34-0.87). While not significantly greater than the cutoff, it was the lowest mean of all the categories as well.


## Discussion

To our knowledge, this is the first study that assessed the test-retest reliability of obesity perception items among adolescents and young adults [14]. Overall, the test-retest reliability of items was higher for university students than for school students [29]. In the questionnaire for school students, 26 items that had ICC values of less than 0.5 as well as 36 items with ICC values of 95% CI crossing the 0.5 cutoff (although ICC > 0.5) were disqualified due to poor reliability. However, the number of disqualified questions was markedly lower for university students: only 13 items had ICC values of less than 0.5, whereas 25 items had ICC values of 95% CI crossing the 0.5 cutoff (although ICC > 0.5). The aforementioned items (62 in the high school questionnaire and 38 in the university questionnaire) were deleted. Furthermore, 3 items in the high school questionnaire and 11 items in the university questionnaire were deleted because their retention appeared to be meaningless after the deletion of the aforementioned items [29]. The final questions and items (by category), recommended for high school students (19 questions, 36 items) and university students (26 questions, 52 items), can be found in Table 2 and Table 3, respectively, along with the 95% CI for each item. Compared to high school students, the test-retest reliability of university students was considerably higher for both public sphere question categories (i.e. problem and solution perception). This is consistent with the fact that the original survey questions were obtained from OPSUS and OPSEU, which were designed for data collection from adults in their respective countries [22,23]. Furthermore, the general understanding is that most adolescents find it difficult to perceive the magnitude of problems at the population level and recommend public policy solutions for consideration. Regardless of the importance of the problem to the general well-being of the country, most adolescents may also not be interested in discussing Table 2. High school survey's 19 questions (36 items), selected using test-retest reliability. 


## How serious a problem is each of these health issues for people in this country


## ) Employers

Morbid obesity increases the risk for illnesses like diabetes, high blood pressure, sleep apnea, heart disease, and cancer. Which of the following is the most effective way to treat morbid obesity? 1) Exercise, 2) Diet control, 3


## ) Medication, 4) Surgery, 5) Other

In general, how would you rate your overall health? Excellent, Very good, Good, Fair


## Do you personally know anybody who you would consider to be obese? Yes, No

Which of the following best describes your current weight? Underweight, Normal/healthy weight, Overweight, Obese

How do you feel about your current weight? Very happy, Happy, Neither happy nor unhappy, Unhappy, Very unhappy

These questions are about where you live. Is it very easy, somewhat easy, neither easy nor hard, somewhat hard, very hard to… 1) Get to fast food restaurants, 2) Find safe places to be physically active outdoors?

When was your last visit with a doctor for check-up? <6 months ago, 6-12 months ago, 1-2 years ago, >2 years ago


## Has your health care provider ever talked with you about the health risks of being or becoming overweight or obese? Yes, No

What is your age? 15-16, 17-18, 19-20 Which one of the following best describes where you live? Urban, Suburban, Rural

Are you male or female? Male, Female Table 3. University survey's 26 questions (52 items), selected using test-retest reliability.

How serious a problem is each of these health issues for people in this country: not a problem, only a little serious, moderately serious, very serious, or extremely serious? 1) Cancer, 2) Overweight and obesity, 3) Heart disease, 4) Alcohol and drug abuse, 5) Smoking and tobacco use, 6) HIV/AIDS, 7) Mental illness More people are becoming obese these days. These might be causes. For each, please tell if you think it is a major reason, a minor reason, or not a reason for this problem. 1) People don't want to change, 2) People don't know how to control their weight, 3) There is too much unhealthy food, snacks, and drinks for sale in schools, 4) Healthy foods are expensive, 5) People don't have enough information about what's in their food, 6) There are not enough safe places for people to be physically active outdoors  the problem at all. However, high school students were consistent in perceiving some problems and solutions at the population level, demonstrating their potential to contribute by providing inputs on shaping prevention strategies based on perceived problems, responsibilities, needs, and solutions [14,20]. Their inputs through such surveys would be particularly important in designing health education campaigns and mass media messages for dispelling myths regarding obesity, and also for predicting future trends in public perception of obesity-related problems and solutions [33].

Compared to the public sphere, the private sphere questions had a greater test-retest reliability for high school students, whereas they were more consistent in solution perception in the private sphere compared to university students. These results supported the prior studies which found that children perceive problems and potential solutions in relation to themselves and persons known to them [14]. It is highly likely that their social networks, environments, and experiences affect their perceptions [19,34]. Furthermore, the responses of adolescents to sociodemographic questions were more consistent than the responses of their older counterparts. Higher consistency in these question categories indicated that obesity perception surveys for adolescents could consider collecting more information regarding individual environment, personal experiences, and adolescents themselves [20]. On the other hand, the inconsistency in reporting height and weight by adolescents was in agreement with numerous studies that challenged the reliability of self-reported anthropometric data.

University students were more consistent in responding to problem perception questions and public policy questions, demonstrating their higher knowledge level and ability to express an opinion by processing information received from multiple sources [16]. Furthermore, in contrast to adolescents, young adults were highly reliable in reporting factual details such as height and weight [35]. These findings were somewhat anticipated because the original survey questions addressed persons who were older than 18 years [22,23]. However, university students were relatively inconsistent in solution perception in the private sphere, which may be due to having multiple opinions regarding a given topic. They were also surprisingly inconsistent in reporting sociodemographic information, which may be due to a lack of willingness to disclose actual information. Considering the small sample size, this instrument development study did not intend to compare obesity perceptions among Turkish youth and analogous populations elsewhere, because that will be accomplished in the main study.

This instrument development study had several limitations. First, the sample size was small; although it was sufficient for the test-reliability analysis [29], it was insufficient for exploratory factor analysis [31]. Second, a common questionnaire was used for both settings (high school and university) intentionally, assuming this approach will be useful in comparing age groups in future surveys; however, the mentioned approach is still open to question [22].

In conclusion, the OPSYT developed for high school students consists of 19 questions (36 items), whereas the survey for university students consists of 26 questions (52 items). The OPSYT was the first study that assessed the test-retest reliability of obesity perception items among adolescents and young adults, while the developed instrument has moderate to excellent reliability, with a higher average reliability for young adults. This instrument can be administered longitudinally to suggest changes to policies and interventions, and it can also be utilized after cross-cultural validation to compare obesity perceptions across different populations in the region [29].


: not a problem, only a little serious, moderately serious, very serious, or extremely serious? 1) Cancer, 2) Overweight and obesity, 3) Diabetes, 4) Alcohol/drug abuse, 5) HIV/AIDS More people are becoming obese these days. These might be causes. For each, please tell if you think it is a major reason, a minor reason, or not a reason for this problem. 1) People spend too much time in front of TV, video games, and computer screens, 2) People do not know how to control their weight, 3) Healthy foods are expensive, 4) People don't have enough information about what's in their food, 5) There are not enough safe places for people to be physically active outdoors Do you think it's possible for one to be a little overweight and still be healthy? Yes, No Do you think it's possible for one to be a lot overweight and still be healthy? Yes, No How much discrimination do obese people face because of their weight? A lot, a little, some, not very much, or none at all How many years does obesity shorten an individual's life expectancy by? <5 years, 5-10 years, 11-15 years, 16-20 years, >21 years Do you favor the following government policies: Strongly favor, Somewhat favor, Neither favor nor oppose, Somewhat oppose, Strongly oppose? 1) Requiring more physical activity in schools, 2) Requiring restaurants to post calorie information on menus, 3) Limiting the types or amounts of foods and drinks people can buyHow much responsibility does each of the following groups have for solving the country's obesity problems? A very large amount of responsibility, a large amount, a moderate amount, a small amount of responsibility, or no responsibility at all? 1) Parents and other family members, 2) Food industry, 3) Schools, 4) Health insurance companies, 5) The government, 6) State and local governments, 7


Do you think it's possible for one to be a little overweight and still be healthy? Yes, No Do you think it's possible for one to be a lot overweight and still be healthy? Yes, No How much discrimination do obese people face because of their weight? A lot, a little, some, not very much, or none at all What is the most serious consequence of being overweight or obese? Heart disease, Diabetes, High blood pressure, Joint problems, High cholesterol, Mental issues, Stroke, Dying young, Cancer, Mobility issues, Respiratory problems, Kidney problems, Other Which of the following do you think is the greater danger to health? Obesity, Smoking Which of these do you consider to be the biggest threat to one's wellbeing, lifestyle, and health, arising from obesity? Tiredness, High blood pressure, Heart disease, Diabetes, Cancer, Sleep apnea, Stroke, Asthma, Low self-esteem and confidence, Depression, Joint and back pain, Limited opportunities for work and career advancement, Other How many years does obesity shorten an individual's life expectancy by? <5 years, 5-10 years, 11-15 years, 16-20 years, >21 years?What should be the government's involvement in finding solutions to obesity problem? Not involved, slightly involved, moderately involved, very involved, extremely involved Do you favor the following government policies: Strongly favor, Somewhat favor, Neither favor nor oppose, Somewhat oppose, Strongly oppose? 1) Providing nutritional guidelines and information to people about how to make healthy choices about diet and exercise, 2) Providing incentives to the food industry to produce healthier foods, 3) Requiring restaurants to post calorie information on menus, 4) Banning advertisements for unhealthy foods aimed at children, 5) Placing a tax on the sale of unhealthy foods and drinks, 6) Limiting the types or amounts of foods and drinks people can buy Which is closer to your opinion? Maintaining a healthy weight is something individuals and families should deal with on their own, It's something governments, whole communities, schools, healthcare, food industry, etc. need to deal with, or Both How much responsibility does each of the following groups have for solving the country's obesity problems? A very large amount of responsibility, a large amount, a moderate amount, a small amount of responsibility, or no responsibility at all? 1) Individual people, 2) Parents and other family members, 3) Food industry, 4) Schools, 5) Health insurance companies, 6) The government, 7) State and local governments,8) EmployersIs each of these an appropriate treatment for obesity: Never, Almost never, Sometimes, Almost every time, Every time? 1) Exercise, 2) Diet control, 3) Medication, 4) Surgery

## Table 1 .
1Demographic characteristics self-reported by students* (N = 122).Variable 
Category 
High school (N = 46) 
University (N = 76) 

Sex 
Male 
47.8% 
62.5% 

Age 
Largest group (%) 
17-18 years (82.6%) 
21-22 years (36.2%) 

Second largest group (%) 
15-16 years (15.2%) 
23-24 years (27.6%) 

Area 
Urban 
92.4% 
89.5% 

Suburban 
5.4% 
9.9% 

Income 

Below the middle 
25.0% 
15.9% 

Above the middle 
44.6% 
61.6% 

Don't know 
30.4% 
22.5% 

Overall health 

Excellent 
15.2% 
21.0% 

Very good 
32.6% 
44.7% 

Good 
40.2% 
31.6% 

Fair 
12.0% 
1.3% 

Poor 
0.0% 
1.3% 

BMI 
Mean (standard deviation) 
20.9 (3.0) 
22.5 (2.6) 

* Each cell is the average of two assessments taken 2 weeks apart. 
BMI: Body mass index. 



Morbid obesity increases the risk of several illnesses. Whichof these is the most effective way to treat morbid obesity? Exercise, Diet control, Medication, Surgery, Other In general, how would you rate your overall health? Excellent, Very good, Good, Fair About how much do you weigh without shoes? (in kilograms or pounds) About how tall are you without shoes? (in meters/centimeters or inches/feet) Do you personally know anybody who you would consider to be obese? Yes, No Which of these best describes your weight? Underweight, healthy, Overweight, Obese How do you feel about your current weight? Very happy, Happy, Neither happy nor unhappy, Unhappy, Very unhappy These questions are about where you live. Is it very easy, somewhat easy, neither easy nor hard, somewhat hard, very hard to ... 1) Find safe places to be physically active outdoors, 2) Buy junk food or fast food when kids are on their way to or from school When was your last visit with a doctor for check-up? <6 months ago, 6-12 months ago, 1-2 years ago, >2 years ago Has your health care provider ever talked with you about the health risks of being or becoming overweight or obese? Yes, No Which of these do you apply first to control your weight? Regular dieting, Counting calories, Regular exercise, Diet pills or supplements, Smoking, Monitoring water intake, Monitoring alcohol intake, Getting enough sleep, Other, None of the above Are you male or female? Male, Female
AcknowledgmentsWe thank the European Association for the Study of Obesity, U.K., and the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research, U.S.A., for providing us with their questionnaires.
Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 countries over 25 years. A Afshin, M H Forouzanfar, M B Reitsma, P Sur, K Estep, New England Journal of Medicine. 3771Afshin A, Forouzanfar MH, Reitsma MB, Sur P, Estep K et al. Health effects of overweight and obesity in 195 countries over 25 years. New England Journal of Medicine 2017; 377 (1): 13- 27.

National, regional, and global trends in body-mass index since 1980: systematic analysis of health examination surveys and epidemiological studies with 960 country-years and 9.1 million participants. M M Finucane, G A Stevens, M J Cowan, G Danaei, J K Lin, Lancet. 3779765Finucane MM, Stevens GA, Cowan MJ, Danaei G, Lin JK et al. National, regional, and global trends in body-mass index since 1980: systematic analysis of health examination surveys and epidemiological studies with 960 country-years and 9.1 million participants. Lancet 2011; 377 (9765): 557-567.

Global burden of obesity in 2005 and projections to 2030. T Kelly, W Yang, C S Chen, K Reynolds, J He, International Journal of Obesity. 329Kelly T, Yang W, Chen CS, Reynolds K, He J. Global burden of obesity in 2005 and projections to 2030. International Journal of Obesity 2008; 32 (9): 1431-1437.

Overview: Bellagio conference on program and policy options for preventing obesity in the low-and middle-income countries. B Popkin, C Monteiro, B Swinburn, Obesity Reviews. 14Popkin B, Monteiro C, Swinburn B. Overview: Bellagio conference on program and policy options for preventing obesity in the low-and middle-income countries. Obesity Reviews 2013; 14: 1-8.

Overweight and obesity: Prevalence, consequences, and causes of a growing public health problem. S B Wyatt, K P Winters, P M Dubbert, American Journal of the Medical Sciences. 3314Wyatt SB, Winters KP, Dubbert PM. Overweight and obesity: Prevalence, consequences, and causes of a growing public health problem. American Journal of the Medical Sciences 2006; 331 (4): 166-174.

Putative contributors to the secular increase in obesity: exploring the roads less traveled. S W Keith, D T Redden, P T Katzmarzyk, M M Boggiano, E C Hanlon, International Journal of Obesity. 3011Keith SW, Redden DT, Katzmarzyk PT, Boggiano MM, Hanlon EC et al. Putative contributors to the secular increase in obesity: exploring the roads less traveled. International Journal of Obesity 2006; 30 (11): 1585-1594.

Economic causes and consequences of obesity. E A Finkelstein, C J Ruhm, K M Kosa, Annual Review of Public Health. 261Finkelstein EA, Ruhm CJ, Kosa KM. Economic causes and consequences of obesity. Annual Review of Public Health 2005; 26 (1): 239-257.

. Physical Activity and Obesity: Turkey. WHO Regional Office for Europe. NutritionWHO Regional Office for Europe. Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity: Turkey. Geneva, Switzerland: WHO; 2013.

Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Turkey. C Erem, IJC Metabolic & Endocrine. 8Erem C. Prevalence of overweight and obesity in Turkey. IJC Metabolic & Endocrine 2015; 8: 38-41.

Obesity profile in Turkey. N Bagriacik, H Onat, B Ilhan, T Tarakci, Z Oşar, International Journal of Diabetes and Metabolism. 17Bagriacik N, Onat H, Ilhan B, Tarakci T, Oşar Z et al. Obesity profile in Turkey. International Journal of Diabetes and Metabolism 2009; 17: 5-8.

Changing perceptions of the childhood obesity epidemic. W D Evans, J M Renaud, E Finkelstein, D B Kamerow, D S Brown, American Journal of Health Behavior. 302Evans WD, Renaud JM, Finkelstein E, Kamerow DB, Brown DS. Changing perceptions of the childhood obesity epidemic. American Journal of Health Behavior 2006; 30 (2): 167-176.

Public perceptions of childhood obesity. W D Evans, E A Finkelstein, D B Kamerow, J M Renaud, American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 281Evans WD, Finkelstein EA, Kamerow DB, Renaud JM. Public perceptions of childhood obesity. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 2005; 28 (1): 26-32.

Family food providers' perceptions of the causes of obesity and effectiveness of weight control strategies in five countries in the Asia Pacific region: a cross-sectional survey. A Worsley, W Wang, R Sarmugam, Q Pham, J Februhartanty, Nutrients. 9113Worsley A, Wang W, Sarmugam R, Pham Q, Februhartanty J et al. Family food providers' perceptions of the causes of obesity and effectiveness of weight control strategies in five countries in the Asia Pacific region: a cross-sectional survey. Nutrients 2017; 9 (1): 13.

Children's perception on obesity and quality of life: a Mexican survey. M E Rendon-Macias, H Rosas-Vargas, M A Villasis-Keever, C Perez-Garcia, BMC Pediatrics. 148Rendon-Macias ME, Rosas-Vargas H, Villasis-Keever MA, Perez-Garcia C. Children's perception on obesity and quality of life: a Mexican survey. BMC Pediatrics 2014; 14: 8.

Australian GPs' perceptions about child and adolescent overweight and obesity -the Weight of Opinion study. L A King, Jhm Loss, R L Wilkenfeld, D L Pagnini, M L Booth, British Journal of General Practice. 57535King LA, Loss JHM, Wilkenfeld RL, Pagnini DL, Booth ML et al. Australian GPs' perceptions about child and adolescent overweight and obesity -the Weight of Opinion study. British Journal of General Practice 2007; 57 (535): 124-129.

Community beliefs about childhood obesity: its causes, consequences and potential solutions. T Covic, L Roufeil, S Dziurawiec, Journal of Public Health. 292Covic T, Roufeil L, Dziurawiec S. Community beliefs about childhood obesity: its causes, consequences and potential solutions. Journal of Public Health 2007; 29 (2): 123-131.

Elementary school personnel's perceptions on childhood obesity: pervasiveness and facilitating factors. M Odum, Elj Mckyer, C A Tisone, C W Outley, Journal of School Health. 833Odum M, McKyer ELJ, Tisone CA, Outley CW. Elementary school personnel's perceptions on childhood obesity: pervasiveness and facilitating factors. Journal of School Health 2013; 83 (3): 206-212.

Parental weight perceptions: a cause for concern in the prevention and management of childhood obesity in the United Arab Emirates. A Aljunaibi, A Abdulle, N Nagelkerke, PLoS One. 8359923Aljunaibi A, Abdulle A, Nagelkerke N. Parental weight perceptions: a cause for concern in the prevention and management of childhood obesity in the United Arab Emirates. PLoS One 2013; 8 (3): e59923.

Perceptions of local neighbourhood environments and their relationship to childhood overweight and obesity. A Timperio, J Salmon, A Telford, D Crawford, International Journal of Obesity. 292Timperio A, Salmon J, Telford A, Crawford D. Perceptions of local neighbourhood environments and their relationship to childhood overweight and obesity. International Journal of Obesity 2005; 29 (2): 170-175.

Childhood obesity among Puerto Rican children: discrepancies between child's and parent's perception of weight status. W T Rivera-Soto, L Rodriguez-Figueroa, International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health. 94Rivera-Soto WT, Rodriguez-Figueroa L. Childhood obesity among Puerto Rican children: discrepancies between child's and parent's perception of weight status. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 2012; 9 (4): 1427-1437.

Obesity: Perception and Policy -Multi-Country Review and Survey of Policymakers. Teddington, UK: European Association for the Study of Obesity. Easo, The European Association for the Study of ObesityEASO. The European Association for the Study of Obesity. 2015. Obesity: Perception and Policy -Multi-Country Review and Survey of Policymakers. Teddington, UK: European Association for the Study of Obesity; 2015.

Obesity: An Underestimated Threat. Teddington, UK: European Association for the Study of Obesity. Easo, The European Association for the Study of ObesityEASO. The European Association for the Study of Obesity. 2016. Obesity: An Underestimated Threat. Teddington, UK: European Association for the Study of Obesity; 2016.

Obesity in the United States: Public Perceptions. J Agiesta, J Benz, K H Brewer, L L Bye, D D Junius, University of Chicago PressChicago, IL, USAAgiesta J, Benz J, Brewer KH, Bye LL, Junius DD et al. Obesity in the United States: Public Perceptions. The Associated Press- NORC Center for Public Affairs Research. Chicago, IL, USA: University of Chicago Press; 2013.

United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization. Education and Literacy -Turkey. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization. Education and Literacy -Turkey. Montreal, Canada: UNESCO Institute for Statistics; 2018.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Education at a Glance -Population with Tertiary Education. Online Library of OECD. OECDParis, FranceOrganisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Education at a Glance -Population with Tertiary Education. Online Library of OECD. Paris, France: OECD; 2019.

Construct validity in psychological tests. L J Cronbach, P E Meehl, Psychological Bulletin. 524Cronbach LJ, Meehl PE. Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychological Bulletin 1955; 52 (4): 281-302.

Validating the interpretations and uses of test scores. M T Kane, Journal of Educational Measurement. 501Kane MT. Validating the interpretations and uses of test scores. Journal of Educational Measurement 2013; 50 (1): 1-73.

Development and validation of a questionnaire for the assessment of physical activity in epidemiological studies in Sub-Saharan Africa. E Sobngwi, Jcn Mbanya, N C Unwin, T J Aspray, K Alberti, International Journal of Epidemiology. 306Sobngwi E, Mbanya JCN, Unwin NC, Aspray TJ, Alberti K. Development and validation of a questionnaire for the assessment of physical activity in epidemiological studies in Sub-Saharan Africa. International Journal of Epidemiology 2001; 30 (6): 1361-1368.

A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation coefficients for reliability research. T K Koo, M Y Li, Journal of Chiropractic Medicine. 152Koo TK, Li MY. A guideline of selecting and reporting intraclass correlation coefficients for reliability research. Journal of Chiropractic Medicine 2016; 15 (2): 155-163.

StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 14. College Station, TX, USAStataCorp LPStataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 14. College Station, TX, USA: StataCorp LP; 2015.

Using Multivariate Statistics. B G Tabachnick, L S Fidell, Allyn and BaconBoston, MA, USA6th edTabachnick BG, Fidell LS. Using Multivariate Statistics. 6th ed. Boston, MA, USA: Allyn and Bacon; 2013.

Quantifying test-retest reliability using the intraclass correlation coefficient and the SEM. J P Weir, Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research. 191Weir JP. Quantifying test-retest reliability using the intraclass correlation coefficient and the SEM. Journal of Strength and Conditioning Research 2005; 19 (1): 231-240.

The myth of innocent obesity. M Bluher, Nature Reviews Endocrinology. 1312Bluher M. The myth of innocent obesity. Nature Reviews Endocrinology 2017; 13 (12): 691-692.

Accuracy of adults' perception of childhood obesity in a military environment. G F West, M R Hayden, C R Benjamin, Public Health Nursing. 304West GF, Hayden MR, Benjamin CR. Accuracy of adults' perception of childhood obesity in a military environment. Public Health Nursing 2013; 30 (4): 343-350.

Discrepant body mass index: behaviors associated with height and weight misreporting among US adolescents from the National Youth Physical Activity and Nutrition Study. W Jayawardene, D Lohrmann, Youssef Agha, A , Childhood Obesity. 103Jayawardene W, Lohrmann D, Youssef Agha A. Discrepant body mass index: behaviors associated with height and weight misreporting among US adolescents from the National Youth Physical Activity and Nutrition Study. Childhood Obesity 2014; 10 (3): 225-233.