# A Review on Ethnomedicinal Plants of Nimar Area in Madhya Pradesh

CorpusID: 90191357
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Biology

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/149731b45f2973acd2c2b80a3452c135cfa2a4ca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/149731b45f2973acd2c2b80a3452c135cfa2a4ca)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A Review on Ethnomedicinal Plants of Nimar Area in Madhya Pradesh
July, 2017

Pragati Jaiswal 
Sarojini Naidu Govt. Girls P.G. Autonomous College
Bhopal (M.PIndia

Bharti Jain 
Sarojini Naidu Govt. Girls P.G. Autonomous College
Bhopal (M.PIndia

A Review on Ethnomedicinal Plants of Nimar Area in Madhya Pradesh
0975-4873July, 20177D2F63FE78434E83927C6290B23F162D10.25258/phyto.v9i07.11174Received 6 th June, 17; Revised 10 th June, 17, Accepted 14 th July, 17;Ethno medicinal plantBioactive constituentNimar areaAilmentsTraditional medicine
Medicinal plants are a boon for disease.Nature has provided a rich botanical wealth with diverse plantation in different parts of India.Medicinal plants are useful for human ailments because of the presence of bioactive constituents or phytochemicals which are secondary metabolites such as alkaloids, saponin, glycosides, lactones, steroids etc. Due to the rapid extension of side effects of allopathic medicines, Herbal medicines are becoming popular day by day as Herbal drugs are safe, cheaper and easily available with therapeutic properties.In Nimar region of Madhya Pradesh, lots of common medicinal plants are available that are used by Nimari people and tribes as remedy to cure diseases.Nimar is the south western region of Madhya Pradesh state in west central India.The present paper provides information on 52 medicinal plants of Nimar area.

## INTRODUCTION

India has treasure of traditional medicines.Herbal medicines have therapeutic value.An Indian traditional medicinal system are based on various therapies including Ayurveda, Homeopathy, Unani.The Herbal drugs are initially evaluated on the basis of phytochemical and pharmacological approach.WHO has prepared list of medicinal plants that used globally 1 .Medicinal plants are foundations of pharmaceutical companies because parts of plants are good generator of medicine.In India medicinal plants have been used since ancient time.Indian citizens are using spices in their food daily for better health [2][3] .S ince last four decades considerable growth has been observed in the study of ethno medicinal plants 4 .Medicinal herbs are considered to be a chemical factory, which contain different kinds of chemical compounds like steroids, alkaloids, saponins, lactones, glycosides, sesquiterpene & oils 5 .Under indigenous systems of medicine, medicated herbs have been used in different form.Phytochemical isolation and identification from medicinal plants should be carried out 6 , because this phytochemical or secondary metabolites are essential for plants and also commercially important 7 .Extract of medicinal plants or phytochemicals has been exhibiting antibacterial activity against bacterial disease 8 and also showing antiinflammatory, antioxidant, anti diabetic etc. 9 Medicinal herbs have been used for different ailments and also for wound healing by Nimari people and tribes in the Nimar region of Madhya Pradesh.Nimar is the south western region of Madhya Pradesh state in west central India.Nimar region falls under tropical dry deciduous forest.The main vegetation of this is Wheat, Cotton, Soyabean, Chilly and thorny trees like Babul etc.The most common tribes are Bhil, Bhilala, Banjara, and Korku.Tribal communities depend on their surrounding vegetation for their livelihood.Nimar consists of two region -East Nimar and West Nimar.The Khargone district region was normally known as west Nimar region.Topographically west Nimar region is situated in Northern part covered with Vindhyan scabs and southern part with Satpura hill ranges, the whole area covered by black cotton soil. 10Khandwa district region was also known as East Nimar region.East Nimar situated on southern part of Madhya Pradesh.Nimar area has plentiful diversity of vegetation.


## Survey Method

The ethnomedicinal survey was conducted and information was gathered through interview with the tribal medicine man (commonly called as Badwa, Bhopa) and with local experience people, as they posses inherited knowledge regarding medicinal uses of plants.The information and data has been collected from authentic sources and different literature and publications have been referred for verification.From the collected data a list prepared on medicinal plants in alphabetically order with their family, vernacular names, and their uses.Enumeration A list of plants that are used by Nimari people for treatment of diseases is given in alphabetical order in Table 1 [11][12][13] .


## DISCUSSION

The study revealed that 52 plants species belonging to 31 families are used for treatment of various disease by Nimari people.These herbs are easily available at low cost and very commonly seen.Their mode of administration is quite easy.During survey it was observed that the tribals are dependent on medicinal plants for their livelihood and treatment of various diseases like Diarrhea, Dysentery, Asthama, Tuberculosis, Jaundice, Arthritis, Tonic, Dull memory etc. Presence of secondary metabolites such as alkaloid, steroid, saponin, etc in these plants are responsible for their therapeutic value.

## Table 1 :
1
Ethanomedicinal Plants used by Nimari People.
S.no.Botanical name with familyVernacular name Traditional uses1.Abelmoschus moschatus MalvaceaeJangali bhindiRoot paste helps to cure undesirabledischarge of semen.2.Abelmoschus ficulneus MalvaceaeRam bhindiRoot juice helps to cure diabetes.3.Abrus precatorius Linn. FabaceaeSafed gomchiSeeds help in the treatment of intestinalworms.4.Acacia nilotica Linn. FabaceaeKeekarLeaves are used in the treatment of diarrhea, dysentery, diabetes .5.Achyranthes aspera Linn. AmaranthaceaeHathijharaRoot is used as a toothbrush. Root juicehelps in the treatment of snake bite,scorpion bite etc.6.Actinopteris australislinn.BhuitarExtract of plant exhibits cooling effect inpolypodiacaeabody.7.AdhatodvasicaNeesAdusaLeaf juice helps to cure TuberculosisAcanthaceae8.Ageratum conizoides LinnAsteraceaeOsariIt is used in Leucoderma.9.Aristolochia bracteataAristolochiaceae GirdhanSeed powder treats intestinal worm.10.Aristolochia indica Linn Aristolochiaceae,IshwariRoot paste is used as an antidote tosnakebite.11.Anogeissus pendula Edgw CombretaceaeKala DhawdaFruitsare given in dysentery and,Liliaceaediarrhoea.12.Asparagus racemosus LiliacaeaeNimariDry powder of root acts as tonic.Harachara13.Barleria prionitis Linn. AcanthaceaeDeo KataslaIn powder form given in dental carries.14.Boerhaavia diffusa Linn. NyctaginaceaeVishkhapraLeaves help to cure jaundice and kidney.15.Butea monospermaFabaceaePalasFlowers are taken in urinary problem andcolic pains.16.Cassia tora Linn.FabaceaePawarHas been used for treating skin diseasessuch as leprosy, ringworm, itching, &psoriasis and also for treatment of snakebiteand arthritis.17.Cheilanthes argenteaAdiantaceaeBalPlant produces cooling effect in the body.18Chlorophytum tuberosum LiliaceaeSafed musliRoot powder is taken as tonic.19.Cuscuta reflexaCuscutaceaeAmarbelIt helps in recovery from jaundice.20.Curculigo orchioides HypoxidaceaeKali MusliIt helps in recovery of wounds.21.Cynodon dactylonPoaceaeDurbaPlant extract used to cure epilepsy,dysentery, chronic diarrhea.22.Datura metel Linn. SolenaceaeDhaturaFresh leaves soaked in coconut oil areapplied externally on burnt skin.23.Desmodium gangeticum FabaceaeSarivanRoot powder used as tonic andSpermatorrhoea.24.Diospyros melanoxylon EbenaceaeTemruExtract of root is given with black pepperorally to patient as an antidote in snakebite.25.Dioscorea bulbifera L. DioscoreaceaeMorus belFor curing cough and asthama, root pastewith cow milk is taken orally.26.Echinops echninatus AsteraceaeOmkataRoot extract is helpful to cure cough andcold.27.Eclipta alba Linn. AsteraceaeBhangraSeed oil is used for hair growth.28.Enicostema axillare GentianaceaeNaiLeaf extract is given orally for reduce fever,also as antidote.29.Euphorbia clarkeana EuphorbiaceaeChhoti dudhiIt is used to cure mouth blisters.30.Euphorbia hirta Linn. EuphorbiaceaeBari dudhiExtract of plant is helpful to cureurinogenital disease, dysentery, colicproblem.

Achyranthes aspera -An important medicinal plant :A review. S Srivastav, P Singh, G Mishra, K K Jha, R L Khosa, j. Nat. Prod. Plant Resour. 112011

Folklore claims on some medicinal plant used by Bheel tribal of Guna district Madhya Pradesh. A K Jain, G M Vairale, R Singh, Indian J.Traditional knowledge. 912010

A note on medicoethnobotany Survey India. P Patel, S K Mahajan, 200446

Some Ethno medicinal plants species of Jhabua district Madhya Pradesh. C Kadel, V V Wagh, A K Jain, Indian J. Traditional Knowledge. 1032011

. Amrit Singh, Pal, Promising Phytochemical Ethnobotanicals Leaflets. 12005VolArticle 18

Qualitative analysis of selected medicinal plants. C Chitravadivu, S Manjan, K Kalaichelvi, Tamilnadu, India. Middle -East J Sci Res. 42009

P P Joy, J Thomas, S Mathew, Skaria, Plants, Tropical Horticulture.Naya Prokash. T K Bose, J Kabir, P Das, P P Joy, Calcutta, India20012

Inhibitory properties of aqueous extract of selected indigenous medicinal plants against dental caries causing Streptococcus mutans and Streptococcus mitis. M D Dinesh, M S Uma, V M Anjali, N S Meenatchisundaram, V Shanmugam, Afr J Basic Appl Sci. 52013

Ethno-dentistry: popular medicinal plants used for dental diseases in India. A Bhardwaj, S V Bhardwaj, J Intercult Ethnopharmacol. 12012

Diversity of Grasses in Nimar region. Ray Sudip, Sainkhediya Jeetendra, Madhya Pradesh, Indian Journal of Plant Science. 12-32012

Traditional herbal remedies among the tribes of Bijagarh of West Nimar district. S K Mahajan, Indan Journal of Tradutional Knowledge. 622007

Ethnomedicinal plants used by tribals of East Nimar region. Ray Sudip, M Sheikh, S Mishra, Indian Journal of Traditional. 102Knowledge2011

Folk medicinal uses of plants against Malignant Tumor in Khargone district of M. S K Mahajan, Khare Bharti, D D Mahajan, Gupta Vrinda, S L Muwel, Gupta Madhu, Mahajan Pooja, Journal of Environmental Research and Development. 342010