# A Survey on Hardware-based Security Mecha-nisms for Internet of Things

CorpusID: 198967727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/25a3a164acfefaef93a476e6882b3939c35da619)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Review of Recent Relevant Survey Papers and the Contributions of this Paper
(p1.0) This survey aims to focus on the applicability of PUFs-based hardware security for key generation and authentication of IoT devices. The paper offers a unique and timely survey compared to existing survey papers in the literature by investigating the role of PUFs in IoT security, in particular providing an additional level of security to common key-based cryptographic methods to generate the keys from the devices. In 2018, authors of [28] discuss the standards of wireless communication in Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) and IoT and focus on security of these systems. The paper does not study the physical side channel attacks in implementation of security mechanisms for these systems. The paper explains in detail, the various wireless communication standards and protocols. Later, it briefly reviews the security threats in IoT and CPS domains and concludes the paper with recommendations on careful selection of devices from sensors to routers, and auditing the systems using dedicated third party surveillance technologies. The paper does not address the problems in identifying malicious nodes and authenticating known users in the network. In [178], several recent challenges are identified as a result of the introduction of IoT and CPS systems are discussed. This work focuses on different attacks and threats for these systems as well as challenges related to implementation of CPS and IoT in the wireless network.

(p1.1) In [97], the security and privacy challenges of IoT in general and possible attacks in different layers of IoT devices were discussed. In particular, this paper discusses the security challenges of fog/edge computing-based IoT. In [11], the use of information-centric networking (ICN) as a possible protocol for addressing IoT devices was introduced.

(p1.2) This paper stresses on the need for larger and permanent naming scheme and addressing space for IoT contents and devices. ICN-based solutions for IoTs were discussed along with classification of ICN-IoT architecture into naming, caching, security and mobility fields for applicability of ICN for IoTs. The authors also provided a detailed survey on ICN based caching, naming, security, and mobility approaches for IoTs. In [59], the authors identify different protocols and mechanisms to secure communications in IoT and the security weaknesses of IoT at different layers of communication.

LLM judge: YES

## (s4) Communication. Communication in IoT network is defined based on exchanging or sharing of information
(p4.0) and data between the users, devices or even exchanging information between different IoT layers. Noting the wide applications of IoT devices in different domains, several communication protocols have been used in IoT networks leading these networks being vulnerable to various communication attacks [66]. As a result, the communication medium is a bottleneck for many attacks such as Man-in-the-Middle (MitM) [64] and eavesdropping attacks [121].

LLM judge: NO

Violated criteria:
- The paragraph is too vague and lacks specificity, making it difficult to understand without the context of the entire paper. 
Other issues:
- The paragraph jumps from discussing communication protocols to various attacks without providing a clear transition or explanation of how they are connected.

## (s5) Architecture.
(p5.0) There is no global and specific architectures for IoT networks to validate the security concepts for authorization and authentication. However, various architectures such as Software-Defined Network (SDN) [168], secure and efficient architecture (SEA) [109], smart city [57], service-oriented architecture (SOA), object security architecture (OSCAR) [174], and black SDN [35] are proposed to examine both authentication and authorization.

LLM judge: YES

## (s7) I) Authentication:
(p7.0) The authentication refers to the process of verifying the identity of devices to grant them with information access. Data integrity and unauthorized access to the IoT networks such as impersonating attacks are critical issues in these systems. The objective of the authentication process is to assure that the nodes only carry validated information from the legitimated sources. In order to manage numerous IoT networks offered by different vendors, the IoT devices need to be authenticated to validate their identities before routing any information. The authentication mechanisms usually rely on a certification authority (CA) that involves a fairly heavy load of message exchange between the CA and the low power IoT nodes. The authors of [62] proposed an authentication scheme based on hashing and element extraction used for application layer in IoT nodes. An access control method is implemented in [116] that adopts an ECC-based key establishment. For access control policy, the authors utilized a role-based access control (RBAC) authentication method employing the nodes' particular role(s) and applications in the corresponding IoT network. One drawback of this work is that it incurs a large number of overhead messages during the access control and authentication mechanisms. In [182], a new authentication method is developed which considers the IoT perception layer. This method enhances mutual authentication between the user and the sensor nodes, and intermediate processes.

LLM judge: YES

## (s8) II) Authorization:
(p8.0) Authorization is defined as how IoT nodes (e.g., sensors or actuators) can access the resource of information. Let us consider an example of IoT application in health care. In this case, the sensitive information such as the critical health profile of the patients are momentous and only authorized nodes or users should be able to access this data. Therefore, the IoT devices should not be able to reveal the data to other unauthorized users or nearby users [1].

LLM judge: NO

Violations of criteria:
- The content is a single paragraph, but the first sentence is cut off, making the beginning unclear.
Other issues:
- The content could benefit from providing more specific examples or details to clarify the concept of authorization in IoT applications.

## (s10) Sybil attack.
(p10.0) Networks with a large number of users are more prone to Sybil attacks. In this attack, a single node is identified with different IDs. This means that the unification of entities will be eliminated from the network [160]. Based on [187], in 2012, 76 million users on Facebook and 20 million users on Twitter were fake. Online Social Networks (OSNs) such as Facebook, Instagram, or Tweeter are prone to this kind of attack as they have lots of users.

(p10.1) One of the purposes of the Sybil attack is to hijack the information from the OSNs and websites. Since the number of IoT devices is growing rapidly, they are also vulnerable to Sybil attacks. A Sybil attack can cause users to produce fake and false reports. Users might also receive spam messages from fake profiles and fail to keep their privacy. Sybil attacks can be categorized into three different types: SA-1, SA-2, and SA-3 [187]. Different mechanisms including Friend

LLM judge: YES

## (s11) Spoofed, Alter, or Replay Routing Information.
(p11.0) In these types of attacks, an attacker changes the routing information or tried to manipulate the routing packets by listening to the legitimate transmitter and impersonate the identity of the real transmitter. Then, it sends fake data to the receiver and introduce loops into the network [160,184].

LLM judge: YES

## (s17) Host-Based Attacks.
(p17.0) In this attack, the intruder targets the host resources such as the Operating System (OS) or the hardware. The assumption in this attack is that the intruder has managed to access to the host. Host-based attacks are categorized into three groups: hardware-, software-and user-based attacks. The IoT nodes are usually tiny devices with some applications or software embedded in the OS. The attackers target these three resources of IoT devices and compromise each group with different impact on the overall network [48].

(p17.1) Targeting the hardware: In hardware-based attacks, the attackers manipulate the hardware or try to compromise the driver applications of the targeted hardware. Sometimes they insert malicious code on the micro-controller to attack the driver. In other cases, the attackers replace the hardware and place the destructive one instead of the legitimate hardware [20].

(p17.2) Targeting the software: In this attack, the intruders exploit the resources (such as power, battery or even buffer and queues of the different applications or protocols) of the users in an IoT network. Hence, battery depletion, buffer overflow, or a full queue (stack) might be the results of this attack [189].

LLM judge: YES

## (s19) Network layer.
(p19.0) This layer includes interfaces, communication channels, network management, addressing, and so on. It is also responsible for all communications and connectivity for all devices in the network using multiple communication protocols [180]. Unlike the Internet, there is no standard protocol for the network layer for IoT devices.

LLM judge: YES

## (s20) Application layer.
(p20.0) This layer makes sure that different entities in the network communicate using the same type of service. This layer is also called the service-oriented layer [80] and it handles data for different applications based on Manuscript submitted to ACM user requirements and demands. For instance, for applications such as smart transportation, smart home, and eHealth, it can store data into an appropriate database [80].

LLM judge: YES

## (s22) HARDWARE-BASED SECURITY
(p22.0) In the previous section, we reviewed software-based security challenges and attacks. However, based on the production line for Integrated Circuits (ICs), there are several vulnerabilities based on hardware designs. Figure 7 shows this semiconductor manufacturing process chain which consists of different tasks. As a result of the fast and growing trends in IC manufacturing and production, this global supply chain can be targeted and attacked at different vulnerable points. Some common threats faced by the manufacturing process include fake copy, side-channel attack, reverse engineering, Intellectual Property (IP) hijacking, and hardware Trojans. Next, we review hardware-based attacks and threats disuccesed in [128,129].

LLM judge: YES

## (s23) Fake Replica
(p23.0) In this attack, the intruder counterfeits the original IP illegally. Fake replica and piracy are totally different. Piracy means overbuilding the entire IC. This might happen because the attacker gets access to the design information at different points such as the design or the fabrication. However, a fake replica might happen at different stages such as recycling, packaging, or the new vendor [86]. Fake replica or counterfeiting can be very harmful to the industry. Since the attacker uses the reputation of the original designer, instead he/she uses expired or old designs to rebuild the ICs or IPs. In most cases, the attacker wants to earn more money by selling fake products. However, he/she can also put malicious circuits such as Trojans into those ICs and compromise different critical products and applications such as airplanes, vehicles, drones and UAVs, elevators, and so on. 

LLM judge: YES

## (s26) Intellectual Property (IP) Hijacking
(p26.0) When the IC is designed, the designers of the IP company or people involved in the fabrication process might hijack the design information without respecting the copy-right terms. Moreover, an attacker at the fabrication stage may reproduce additional chips to sell them on the black market. In these cases, unreliable people can steal the design information and claim the ownership of the IP or the IC [130]. For instance, they are three IP piracy methods. In one case, the attacker can steal the third-party's IP. In another case, the intruder can steal the layout design. Finally, the intruder may take the IC design in the fabrication process and try to rebuild many others.

LLM judge: YES

## (s27) Trojans in Hardware
(p27.0) Malicious modifications to an IC can be defined as a hardware Trojan. This Trojan can mislead the communication or cause a failure in control and processing units. In this kind of attack, the intruder can modify and alter the circuit or add a malicous circuit to it. Since the testing procedures are usually slow and expensive, it is hard to detect the hardware Trojans after wafer fabrications. Moreover, the technology is merging with Nano-and Pico-meter fabrication design and because of the large space inside of ICs, there are many locations for implanting Trojans. Such locations include different design points such as logic, circuit, and physical and the fabrication process [79,163,175].

(p27.1) After introducing hardware-based attacks, Figure 8 summarizes these attacks and indicates which entities are vulnerable to specific attacks in the semiconductor manufacturing chain. Section 4 introduces the concept of PUFs and their roles to prevent the aforementioned attacks.

LLM judge: YES

## (s32) SRAM cells consists of cross-coupled inverters connected by access transistors and because of intrinsic manufacturing
(p32.0) variations, SRAM cells will typically settle into a "0" or "1" state consistently [22,173]. SRAM PUFs were introduced in [71] where the initial values of the cells, on powering on the SRAM were used to generate a unique fingerprint. The mismatch between the transistors in a SRAM cell determines the value ("0" or "1") to be assigned to it. The output of an SRAM PUF is a combination of a various SRAM cells in the memory. The implementation of memory-based PUF is easy and inexpensive becasue every micro-controller includes a memory which can be used to generate cryptographic keys.

(p32.1) SRAMs tend to emit energy when they switch states which can be detected by checking the wavelength of the laser by using a signal analyzer. This side channel information leaked will give the attacker enough information about the Manuscript submitted to ACM device in order to clone it [32]. These PUFs are most common memory-based PUFs but, they are considered as weak PUFs due their size limitations.

LLM judge: YES

## (s33) RESISTIVE RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY (RE-RAM) TERNARY PUF
(p33.0) Emerging systems use advanced state-of-the-art technology for its memory, which include Re-RAM, memristive devices and Magnetic Random Access Memory (MRAM). Memristor and Re-RAM rely on resistive technology to store information. The manufacturing of Re-RAM is very similar to CMOS technology and hence it can be easily integrated into the IC. Voltage is used to program Re-RAM and erase cells while current is used to read the resistance values of the cells [120]. These devices have high randomness which occurs not only in separate dies but also in the same die.

(p33.1) Only specific parameters such as low and high state resistance which are used to represent "0"s and "1"s in making the challenge and response pairsin the device can be measured consistently.

(p33.2) In a conductive Re-RAM, two dissimilar metals with different conductance values are used. When voltage is applied, the filament inside Re-RAM forms a bridge and a hole is left in its place when the voltage is reversed. A metal-oxide

(p33.3) Re-RAM works in a similar way but it uses two metal plates separated by an oxide. The oxygen vacancies formed while programming the device will create a high resistance state and the erased cell will have a low resistance because the oxides will be evenly distributed.

(p33.4) Re-RAM PUFs will play a vital role in hardware security in the future due to their high randomness which occurs during the manufacturing process. This high randomness requires for good error correction codes. This device is sensitive to temperature and noise but offers the benefit of being at or below noise level which makes them more secure. The memory cells are affected by aging, operating temperature and operating voltage. Some cells may tend to die faster which can cause a change in the PUF output that may hinder the implementation of the system because it causes problems in the reliability of bits.

(p33.5) Re-RAM based PUFs use the value of V set after programming or the resistance of each cell, to differentiate between "0" and "1" states. The cells close to the threshold can flip one way or the other during response generation when they are subjected to voltage changes, temperature, aging or electromagnetic interference. This could result in 5-20% CRP matching error rate if the number of marginal cells is high. [32] offers a solution to this behavior by identifying three types of cells "0","1" and "X ". The cells that are too close to the threshold and are not reliable are blanked by an "X". Figure 9 shows the number of cells whose resistance value are close to the threshold, and therefore can be blanked by an "X".

(p33.6) A solution to store the three elementary states described was provided in [32]. The memories were segmented by pairs of rows or columns and the first column of each pair was named active column and the other companion column. The physical parameter was measured on the active area and the cells that are below the first threshold were characterized as "0"s, cells above second threshold were "1"s and the cells in between were labeled "X"(ternary state).

(p33.7) When the active cell of a row is characterized as a solid "0", "0" is programmed in this cell and a "1" is programmed in its companion cell. Similarly, when a cell is characterized as a solid "1", "1" and "0" are programmed in the active cell and companion cell, respectively. Cells without solid bits were programmed with identical bits in active and companion cells, "0,0" and "1,1" [32].

(p33.8) Around 68% of the ReRAM cells were blanked, "X" as their V set was close to the threshold and the rest was used for CRP generation to generate a 128 bit PUF in a memory array of 1000 bit range, where 50% of the cells were used as companion cells. The results =showed a CRP error rate of 8 per million. This was expected to improve reliability with low False Negative Authentications and low False Positive Authentications. The ternary representation of a PUF can be used with other memory/ delay based PUFs to improve their reliability.

LLM judge: YES

## (s34) Challenges with PUF Technologies
(p34.0) Analog physical parameters of the fabricated circuit are used to derive the fingerprint of the hardware. These parameters are prone to noise and may change due to temperature, supply voltage and other parameters. The digital fingerprint of the PUF may vary due to changes in any of the parameters mentioned before. Differential design techniques are applied in order to mitigate some of the environmental dependencies in a PUF to make it more stable [70].

(p34.1) Although differential design techniques may improve reliability, the change in environmental conditions will introduce noise in the PUF output. Noise may cause one or more PUF output bits to be flipped resulting in a false negative.

(p34.2) Different error correction coding techniques are being employed in order to improve the reliability of the PUF using "Fuzzy Extractor" schemes elaborated in section 7. Various error correcting codes have been utilized to reduce the intra PUF variation factor and improve the similarity of PUF responses for the same query [70]. Adding redundant information (parity bit or helper data) will increase the probability of error detection and correction during the challenge response authentication. Linear block codes and 2-D Hamming codes were used earlier in several PUFs.

(p34.3) Taking into account the number of challenges that hinder the perfect reproducibility of the PUF response, we need mechanisms which will reduce the Intra hamming distance of the PUF responses.

LLM judge: YES

## (s35) FUZZY EXTRACTORS
(p35.0) A Fuzzy Extractor (FE) extracts a uniformly random string R and non-secret string P (helper data) from its initial input w. This mechanism allows the string R to be used as a key and reproduced exactly with the help of P, even though the input changes to some w ′ but remains close to w. Fuzzy extractors are said to be information-theoretically secure,

(p35.1) i.e., a crypto-system whose security is derived only from information theory, where a hacker does not have enough information to break the encryption, thereby allowing them to be used in cryptography. FEs are constructed using Secure Sketch (SS), which is a pair of randomized procedures "sketch" and "recover" that allow precise reconstruction of the initial input from noisy input by making use of some helper data P.

(p35.2) In the "sketch" phase, Helper Data P is extracted from initial input w, which can be made publicly available. This output P will be used in the "recover" phase along with noisy input w ′ to recover w. This method is secure because the publicly available Helper Data reveals little to no information about w. Figure 10 describes a secure sketch. FE is defined by a pair of randomized procedures "generate" and "reproduce". In the "generate" phase, the fuzzy extractor uses the "sketch" phase of the SS where Helper data, P and Key, R are extracted from the given input w. The Shamsoshoara and Korenda, et al.

(p35.3) "reproduce" phase uses the "recover" phase of the secure sketch which makes use of the Helper data to recover the original input w from a noisy input w ′ along with the random extractor used in the "sketch" phase, to extract the randomness from the recovered w. The ability to recover w from w ′ is highly dependent on the technique, usually an error correction scheme, used in the "sketch" phase of the FE. If the distance between the noisy input w ′ and input w is too large, it may not be possible to recover w from w ′ . Figure 12 shows the construction of a FE using a secure sketch.

(p35.4) Due to the error tolerance capability of Secure Sketches, their construction is based on error correcting codes. The error Fig. 12. Construction of a fuzzy extractor using secure sketch extractor correcting code C is used to correct errors in w ′ by shifting the codeword, although w ′ may not be in C. Two different constructions are used for secure sketch are presented [46]:

(p35.5) • Code-Offset Construction: For input w, a uniformly random codeword c is selected from C, and SS(w) to be the shift needed to get from c to w: SS(w) = w − c. To compute Rec(w ′ , s), the shift s is subtacted from w ′ to get c ′ = w ′ − s: c ′ is decoded to retrieve c and w is computed by shifting back to get w = c + s. When code C is linear, the information in s is essentially the syndrome of w.

LLM judge: YES

