# Current Status of Guava (Psidium Guajava L.) Production, Utilization, Processing and Preservation in Kenya: A Review Article History

CorpusID: 209431063 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0332acd702d1638e93c575cc4761c9c1b9c9c0be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0332acd702d1638e93c575cc4761c9c1b9c9c0be)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Biology

## (s7) Guava Value Addition
(p7.0) The guava has great potential for extensive commercial use because of its ease of cultivation, high nutrient content and ease of processing into various industrial products. 69 There are many products which can be obtained from processing guavas including guava pulp, jam, juice, jelly chocolates, wine and guava powder (which is mostly used in preparation of yogurt) 3 and spray dried soluble guava extracts containing high concentration of antioxidants. 3,70 

LLM judge: YES

## (s9) Dehydrated Guava Products
(p9.0) Drying preserves fruits through reduction of the moisture content which inhibits growth of microorganisms and prevents enzymatic reactions. 79 There are various drying methods including sun and solar drying which result to contaminated and poor quality products as compared to products obtained through osmotic dehydration, vacuum, freeze and spray drying techniques. 80

LLM judge: YES

## (s10) Guava Jams and Jellies
(p10.0) Guava jam is produced by cooking of pulp after addition of sugar, jellifying substances and other suitable additives to achieve desired consistency 86 . The jam should correspond to 65-68 o Brix after which it is hot filled into cleaned and sterilized glass jars. 87 Guava jellies are processed from fruits that are slightly ripe. The fruits are cut into small pieces and boiled for about 45 minutes using equal amount of water at low temperatures and the juice extracted by filtration using strainers or clean muslin clothes. 88 Further processing involves addition of sugars to the extracted juice after which the mixture is boiled to 105°C or formation of a sheet when a small portion is cooled off in a spoon. 87 The amount of sugar used depends on the pectin levels of the extracted juices and it ranges from 0.5 kg sugar/kg juice to 0.75 kg sugar/kg juice for pectin-rich juice and low-pectin juices respectively. 87 This is followed by hot filling into clean and sterilized jars.

LLM judge: YES

