# Indoor positioning and wayfinding systems: a survey

CorpusID: 218081822 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/805c23c160235d2696afd83b75125f6084965e74](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/805c23c160235d2696afd83b75125f6084965e74)

Fields: Computer Science, Engineering

## (s0) Computer vision-based positioning and localization systems
(p0.0) The tasks of indoor localization, positioning, scene recognition and detection of specific objects, such as doors, were also considered in the context of indoor navigation since they can be extended for wayfinding in indoor areas.

(p0.1) Tian et al. [59] developed a method to detect doors for assisting people with VI to access unfamiliar indoor areas. The proposed prototype consists of a miniature camera mounted on the head for capturing the image and a computer to provide the speech output following the object detection algorithm. A "generic geometric door model" built on stable edge and corner features facilitates door detection. Objects with similar shapes and sizes, such as bookshelves and cabinets, were separated from the door using additional geographic information. The presented results indicate a true positive rate of 91.9%.

(p0.2) The Blavigator project included a computer vision module [60] for assisting blind people in both indoor and outdoor areas. The proposed object collision detection algorithm uses a "2D Ensemble Empirical Mode Decomposition image optimization algorithm" and a "two-layer disparity image segmentation algorithm" to identify adjacent objects. Two area of interests are defined near the user to guarantee their safety. Here, depth information at 1 m and 2 m are analyzed for retrieving information about the obstacles in the path from two distances. An omnidirectional wearable system [61] for locating and guiding the individual in an indoor environment combined GIST and SURF for feature extraction. Two-levels of topological classification are defined in this system, namely, global and local. The global classification will consider all images as references, whereas the local classification will be based on prior knowledge. A visual odometry module was developed by integrating extended Kalman filter monocular SLAM and omnidirectional sensors. The system was trained using 20,950 omnidirectional images and tested on 7027 images. Localization errors were present due to misclassified clusters. Huang et al. [62] developed an indoor positioning system called 3DLoc, which is a 3D feature-based indoor positioning system that can operate on handheld smart devices to locate the user in real time. This system solves the limitation that exists in previous indoor navigation systems based on sensors and feature matching (e.g., SIFT and SURF), and it considers the 3D signature of pictures of places to recognize them with high accuracy. An algorithm to obtain the signatures from pictures has been proposed. The algorithm is capable of robustly decoding those signatures to identify the location. At the first stage, 3D features are extracted from the captured pictures. Therefore, a 3D model is constructed using the obtained features using the indoor geometry reasoning [63]. Pattern recognition is then performed to identify the 3D model. The authors proposed a K-locations algorithm to identify the accurate location. An augmented particle filter method is used if the captured images are insufficient for recognizing the location due to information loss. Inertial sensors of the mobile device are used to provide real-time navigation of users under motion. Based on the conducted experiments, 90% of the exposed errors are within 25 cm and 2° for location and orientation, respectively.

(p0.3) iNavigation [64] combines SIFT feature extraction and an approximately nearest neighbor algorithm called 'K-d tree based on the best bin' first for positioning from the ordinary sequential images. Inverse perspective matching was used for finding the distance when an image was queried by the user. Dijkstra's algorithm was implemented for routing through the shortest path. In this method, locations of landmark images were manually assigned. Therefore, further expansion of landmark image datasets requires a considerable amount of manual work.

LLM judge: YES

## (s1) Communication technology based indoor positioning and wayfinding systems
(p1.0) Communication technology-based positioning systems make use of various approaches to measure the signals from respective signal transmitting devices (Wi-Fi access point, BLE beacon etc.) installed in the indoor environments. The commonly used methods are time-based methods, angle-based methods, and RSS-based methods [84]. The timebased measurements include TOA and TDOA. The TOA approach utilizes the time taken for the signal propagation between the transmitter and receiver to find the range of the user, while the TDOA approach uses the difference of transmission time for two signals that have a different velocity. The angle-based method ' AOA' makes use of the angle of arrival at the target node to estimate target direction. The AOA measurement technique is rarely used in an indoor environment due to non-line of sight issues [85]. AOA and TOA based indoor localization approach are shown in Figs. 4 and 5 respectively. TDOA method computes the difference between the TOA of the signals from two distinct RF transmitters to the mobile device. A TDOA value geometrically represents a hyperbola as shown in the figure. When there is more than one TDOA value, the intersection point of hyperbolas is estimated as the position of the mobile device. Figure 6 illustrate the TDOA based indoor localization approach.

(p1.1) Lateration, angulation, proximity, and radio fingerprinting are the main techniques used in communication technology-based systems for position estimation. The lateration technique calculates the distance between the receiver device and cluster of  transmitting devices (access points, tags or beacons) that are attached in predefined locations. The angulation technique is similar to the lateration technique but considers the angle or phase difference between the sender and receiver instead of distance for position estimation [86].

(p1.2) The proximity technique is based on the proximity of the receiver to recently known locations. Compared with lateration and angulation, the proximity technique can provide a rough location or set of possible locations. The radio fingerprinting approach is an entirely different approach compared to the other techniques and does not consider the distance, angle or nearness between sender and receiver. Instead, a pattern matching procedure is applied, where the RSS or other signal properties at a location will be compared with the RSS for different locations stored in the database [87]. General steps involved in RSS fingerprint-based localization system are explained in Fig. 7. For pattern  FreeNavi [88] is a mapless indoor navigation system that relies on the Wi-Fi fingerprints of each landmark's entrance in the indoor environment. Along with Wi-Fi fingerprints, walking traces of the users between two landmarks was utilized for creating virtual maps of the indoor environment. A lowest common subsequence (LCS) algorithm [89] that finds similarities between Wi-Fi fingerprints was adopted for virtual map creation as well as indoor localization. The LCS algorithm was developed to tolerate access point (AP) changes in regions where the concentration of the APs are high. To provide reliable navigation of users, two route planning algorithms were introduced in this system. One was for finding the shortest path between two landmarks while the other was for finding the most frequently traveled route. Both of the abovementioned algorithms were implemented using Floyd's shortest path algorithms. FreeNavi was evaluated in a shopping center environment in Beijing by collecting the fingerprints of 23 landmarks and a total of 1200 m of traces. The virtual maps have a maximum accuracy of 91%, although an 11.9% error step rate was found in navigation because the user have to guess the travelling direction in junctions.

(p1.3) A Wi-Fi fingerprinting-based navigation system was proposed in [90]. The proposed system makes use of Wi-Fi fingerprinting combined with a radio path loss model for the estimation of locations. The position estimation algorithm was based on particle filter and K nearest neighbor (K-NN) algorithms. Dijkstra's algorithm was implemented for the shortest path calculation between the source and destination. These authors also examined the performance of three fingerprint matching algorithms, namely, Kalman filter, unscented Kalman filter and K-NN. The results showed the average error while using each algorithm and the values were similar at approximately 1.6 m. However, K-NN had the greatest maximum error.

(p1.4) In a Wi-Fi-based indoor navigation system, the fluctuations in RSS can result in unfair positioning accuracy. To overcome these issues, a fingerprint spatial gradient (FSG) was introduced in [91]. The proposed method makes use of the spatial relationship of RSS fingerprints between nearby numerous locations. For profiling the FSG, these authors introduced an algorithm that picks a group of nearby fingerprints that advance the spatial stability as well as fingerprint likeness. A pattern matching approach is used for comparing the stored FSG and queried FSG using similarity measures, such as the cumulative angle function, cosine similarity or discrete Fréchet distance. The average accuracy of the position estimation was between 3 and 4 m.

(p1.5) In Wi-Fi-based indoor positioning and navigation systems, the radio fingerprinting approach has been used widely for estimating the position of the RF signal receiver. The fingerprinting approach follows a pattern matching technique where the property of the currently received signals is compared with the properties of the signal stored during the offline or training phase. In the last 10 years, various machine learning algorithms such as SVM [92], KNN [93], neural networks [92] have been utilized for pattern matching in radio fingerprint-based indoor localization methods. Compared to traditional machine learning algorithms, deep learning algorithms such as CNN, RNN, etc have demonstrated their effectiveness in various tasks such as image classification, text recognition, intrusion detection, etc. In this context, in recent years deep neural network-based approaches [94,95] have been used in fingerprint-based indoor localization systems.

(p1.6) Jin-Woo et al. [96] proposed an indoor localization system that utilizes CNN for the Wi-Fi fingerprinting task. Since the fluctuations in RSS and multipath issues can cause errors in location estimation, training with few data can lead to the development of ineffective models. The proposed method utilized 2-D radio maps as inputs to train the CNN model. The 2-D virtual map for the input has been created from the 1-D signals. The developed deep CNN architecture consists of four convolutional layers, two maxpooling layers, and two fully connected layers. Even though It is a lite deep CNN model it has outperformed all other deep neural network-based methods proposed before that and achieved a mean accuracy of 95.41%. Since 2-D radio maps are used for training the deep CNN, it can learn signal strength and topology of radio maps. This approach makes the proposed system robust to the small RSS fluctuations.

(p1.7) Mittal et al. [97] have adapted CNN for Wi-Fi based indoor localization system for mobile devices. The proposed work presents a novel technique for Wi-Fi signature to image transformation and a CNN framework namely CNN-LOC. Instead of training with the available dataset, they have constructed their database by collecting RSSI data from a test environment. One of the novelties of the proposed work is the conversion of RSSI data to image data. For each location, the collected RSSI data are converted to the grayscale image using the Hadamard product method. Similar to [14], this work has used a lite deep CNN model which comprises of five CNN layers. To improve the scalability of the system, CNN-LOC is integrated with a hierarchical classifier. Hierarchical classifiers are used to scale up the lite or small CNN architecture for larger problems. The proposed hierarchical classifier consists of three layers where the first layer is used to find the floor number, the second layer for detecting the corridor and the third layer for estimating the location of the mobile device. The system has been tested in 3 indoor paths extended over 90 m. The obtained results show that the average localization error was less than 2 m.

(p1.8) Ibrahim et al. [98] proposed an advanced approach to improve the localization accuracy by reducing randomness and noise found in RSS values. The time series of RSS values are applied to CNN as input. The hierarchical architecture of CNN was employed for predicting the fine-grained location of the user. The first layer is responsible for detecting the building, second and third layers will predict floor number and location of the user respectively. The proposed CNN model was evaluated in the UJIIndoorLoc dataset. The dataset consists of the Wi-Fi RSS fingerprints collected from multiple-multi storied buildings. Demonstrated results show that the proposed hierarchical CNN predicts the building and floor with an accuracy of 100%. The average error in localization is 2.77 m which acceptable in the case of Wi-Fi-based systems.

(p1.9) Li et al. [99] proposed a multi-modal framework for indoor localization tasks in the mobile edge computing environment. Presented work focuses on the multiple models' based localization approaches, its drawback and finally proposes theoretical solutions to overcome its shortcomings. There exist many machine learning models for RSS based indoor localization tasks. Even though they displayed their effectiveness in the test environment, but failed to repeat the same performance in practical situations. There are many factors like refrigerators, temperature, doors in indoor areas which can affect the localization performance. Theoretically, building distinct models for distinct surroundings is an effective method for indoor localization. But multiple models based approaches will also have drawbacks. Too many models have to be built, the presence of unstable factors which affect RSS are the major drawbacks. To solve these issues, two combinatorial optimization problems are formulated: external feature selection problem and model selection for location estimation problem. NP-hardness of the problems is analyzed in this work.

(p1.10) Wireless technology based indoor localization systems are prone to errors because of non-line of sight issues, inconsistency in received signals, fluctuation in RSS, etc. In large scale wireless-based localization systems, while comparing with the number of sensors, information is sparse. The main challenge in these systems is recovering the sparse signals for further processing to localize the user. Compressive sensing is a popular signal processing technique to efficiently acquire and reconstruct signals. This technique is used in wireless-based indoor positioning systems [100,101] to recover sparse signals efficiently. Many of the existing compressive sensing techniques are intended to solve the issues for a single application and it lacks dynamic adaptability. Zhang et al. [102] proposed a learning-based joint compressive technique to solve the challenges in compressive sensing techniques. They introduced a learning technique that can learn the basis of sparse transformation from compressive sensing measurement output instead of historical data. Acquiring a big amount of historical data is costly and learning from specific historical data can affect the dynamic adaptability. A hybrid navigation system that combines magnetic matching (MM), PDR and Wi-Fi fingerprinting was proposed in [103]. Since such systems combine different approaches, the user can even navigate through the regions were Wi-Fi signals are poor or environments have indistinctive magnetic feature. The location of the user was resolved by calculating the least value of the mean absolute difference between the estimated fingerprint or magnetic profile and the predetermined value of the respective candidate in the database. An attitude determination technique [104] and PDR [105] method were integrated for implementing the proposed navigation algorithm. To improve the Wi-Fi and MM results, three separate levels of quality control method using PDR-based Kalman filter were introduced. The results demonstrated that the proposed method has an accuracy of 3.2 m in regions with sufficient number of APs and 3.8 m in regions with poor numbers of APs.

LLM judge: YES

## (s7) Performance/findings
(p7.0) Kim et al. [118] Indoor navigation for people with VI BLE beacons based proximity detection and IMUs (+) Proposed system was tested in a complex, highly crowded environment and observed results showed its potential for large scale deployment

LLM judge: YES

## (s14) Future work and discussion
(p14.0) Computer vision-based navigation and positioning systems can provide better mindfulness about encompassing environments compared with systems that utilize communication technologies or PDR approaches. Thus, computer vision-based frameworks are more appropriate for navigation by individuals with VI. In computer vision-based systems, deep learning methodologies are observed to be more precise than pure conventional methodologies. The hybrid technique that utilizes deep learning methodologies for scene recognition or image retrieval tasks and SIFT or ORB features for position estimation achieved better accuracy compared with pure deep learning methodology-based systems. Three-dimensional feature-based localization methods solved the limitations associated with SIFT-or SURF-based matching methods. The impact of human occlusions adversely affects visual feature-based positioning [81]. The elimination of human objects from visual scene recognition process can be further explored to solve these issues for both static and dynamic camera setups.

(p14.1) Compared to 2-dimensional image feature based approaches 3-dimensional features and RGB-D image-based methods are more reliable for indoor navigation. Visual positioning systems which are considered as the future of indoor navigation technology utilize RGB-D images to train and learn the models for localizing the user in indoor areas. Most of the RGB-D based methods have not extended to a fully working indoor navigation system. Instead many articles have proposed the methods and done offline testing in the publicly available dataset. Only a few works had extended RGB-D indoor positioning techniques to fully working indoor navigation systems, but still, it is implemented in a client-server manner. Because every mobile device is not able to bear the high computation required for position estimation tasks. Optimization of visual indoor positioning models to deploy in mobile devices like smartphones is one of the least explored topic in this research domain. There exists some systems that utilized Google tango VPS for the development of indoor navigation. But Google tango is supported in only a few devices and currently, Google has stopped the support on Google tango. But Google's new tool ARCore provides similar features like Google tango. It can be extended for the development of visual positioning based indoor navigation systems.

(p14.2) Communication technology-based approaches that integrate PDR methodologies or magnetic fingerprinting methods improved the coverage and precision of the system. The drift errors and initial position estimation problems of PDR-based systems are alleviated by introducing communication technologies, such as BLE and Wi-Fi, or magnetic fingerprinting approaches along with PDR. Fingerprint spatial gradients (spatial relation between RSS fingerprints of nearby locations) reduced the issues associated with RSS fluctuations. PDR systems integrated with Bluetooth technology seem to be more precise, and such systems can be further extended to correct radio maps of Wi-Fi.

(p14.3) Other than seven indoor positioning technologies discussed in this article, there exist many other technologies like audio signal based localization [151], magnetic field-based localization [152], etc. Audio signal based localization or acoustic localization is more accurate and cheaper compared to other RF technologies [153]. Because acoustic localization requires microphones and speakers which are available in every smart mobile device. Moreover, RF signal speed is very much higher compared to the sound and it implies acoustic localization can provide higher accuracy. In this context, acoustic localization technology can be combined with BLE or Wi-Fi-based approaches, where BLE or Wi-Fi can be utilized for rough location estimation and acoustic signals for computing the precise location.

LLM judge: YES

