# MINI REVIEW Recent advanced techniques in cysteine determination: a review

CorpusID: 226975130 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6000d30c845a89b8b806f829c0f5876321fe8164](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6000d30c845a89b8b806f829c0f5876321fe8164)

Fields: Chemistry

## (s1) Cysteine amino acids and its religious issue
(p1.0) Amino acids (AA) are important for growth and development. It acts as precursors for building up proteins and other biologically important substances such as peptides, hormones and enzyme (Baker, 2009;Kimura, 2014;Poinsot et al., 2016;Kodera et al., 2017). It is categorized as essential AA that can be obtained from the diet and non-essential AA that is synthesized directly in the human body. Accordingly, cysteine is a non-essential AA as it can be directly synthesized in the body. However, the classification of essential AA should comprise the ability of the organism to synthesize carbon skeleton or just nitrogen compounds (Wu, 2009). Since cysteine carbon skeleton cannot be synthesized directly, thus it is under nutritionally essential AA (Wu, 2009).

LLM judge: YES

## (s4) Molecular imprinted polymers (MIPs)
(p4.0) Molecular imprinted polymers have been recognized due to their advantages involve in predetermined recognition ability, chemical stability, simple preparation and relative ease. Initially, this approach has received much attention in the fields of polymer science and chemical analysis. Theoretically, MIPs are synthetic polymers belong to specific cavities designed for a target molecule and are synthesized by the polymerization of different components (Lin et al., 2012). The stability of MIPs is based on adsorption capacity, active site accessibility and fixed shape (Hashemi et al., 2017). Hence, due to low-cost and easy preparation, MIP has gained wide acceptance as molecular recognition materials in developing sensor. Hashemi et al. (2017) had used a combination of spectrophotometric detection (UV-Vis) based on MIP grafted with multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) for separation and detection of cysteine in water samples. This method is based on the functionalization of MWCNTs by methacrylic acid (MAA) and subsequent polymerization for the preparation of a selective MIP/ MWCNTs composite for separation and enrichment of cysteine prior to its spectrophotometric determination. Tremendously, MIPs able to identified cysteine with a LOD as low as 2.3ng mL -1 . In fact, cysteine in human serum and water samples was successfully determined with recoveries ranging from 96.6% to 102.4%.

(p4.1) Similarly, Cai et al. (2014), performed fluorescence determination of cysteine by using MIPs as an adsorbent with newly synthesis fluorescent detector chemodosimeter of rhodamine B derivative (RB1). The precipitation polymerization of cysteine MIP was prepared by mixing MAA, ethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA), acetonitrile and methanol. A novel chemodosimeter, RB1 has LOD up to 12.5 nM to enhance the extraction of MIPs. This method successfully separated cysteine with other amino acids in aqueous solution.

LLM judge: YES

## (s5) Raman spectroscopy
(p5.0) Raman spectroscopy is a method to determine the chemical structures of molecules and interactions of molecules by representing the frequencies of molecular vibrations (Nemecek et al., 2013). The molecular vibrational will represent the peptide backbone and its side chains in protein analysis. The spectral positions, intensities, and polarization of the Raman bands are sensitive to protein secondary, tertiary, and quaternary structures and to side-chain orientations and local environments. The Raman band resulting from the cysteine sulfhydryl bond (S-H) stretching vibration is a unique marker of sulfhydryl (SH) structure (Nemecek et al., 2013).

(p5.1) The sulfhydryl will be used as Raman marker which occurs in a region of the spectrum between 2500 cm -1 to 2600 cm -1 (Nemecek et al., 2013). The interaction between sulfhydryl hydrogen bonding and the S-H stretching frequency yield a distinct wavenumber value for cysteinyl SH group identification. Meanwhile, a study done by Fu et al. (2018) recorded the wavenumber of SH group of crystal cysteine occurred at 2552 cm -1 and 2546 cm -1 (SH stretching) and 1070 cm -1 , 1000 cm -1 and 944 cm -1 (SH bonding). This difference of recorded wavenumber because of additional weak hydrogen bonds are by the SH group either with oxygen or sulfur atom (Minkov et al., 2009).

(p5.2) A study done by Baranski and Baranska (2008), showed that cysteine compound in the tobacco and carrot plant can be detected by using Raman spectroscopy. The spectroscopy of cysteine compound was further validated with hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) in order to differentiate between genetically modified (GM) crops and non-genetically modified (Non-GM) crop. In addition, the wavenumber of 500-600 cm -1 was used in the experiment as a set of a cluster which based on the amide and S-S stretching band. Therefore, the presence of additional S-S bonds in the GM samples could explain the differences observed between the GM and non-GM spectra in a low wavenumber range. Thus, other than the sulfhydryl group used as a marker, peptide S-S group of cysteine can also provide helpful information for a reliable interpretation.

(p5.3) On the other hand, Cebi et al. (2017) used a combination of Raman microscopy with chemometric analysis of PCA and HCA, to differentiate ten types of eISSN: 2550-2166 © 2020 The Authors. Published by Rynnye Lyan Resources wheat flour into the adulterated group and the nonadulterated group. The analytical technique was able to detect cysteine compound with LOD of 0.125% (w/w). Raman spectral range was set between 500 -2000 cm -1 prior to performing PCA and HCA analysis. The perfect combination of Raman spectroscopy and chemometric analysis was successfully discriminated and classified between non-adulterated and adulterated wheat flour.

LLM judge: YES

## (s6) Attenuated Total Reflection-Fourier Transform Infrared (ATR-FTIR)
(p6.0) Attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy is an internal reflection light incidence from a denser medium to lower index medium (air or sample) with an incident angle greater than critical angle θc (Vongsvivut et al., 2014). The condition cause the electromagnetic field (evanescent wave) decays exponentially in limited depth into the adjacent lower index sample. Any infrared (IR) absorbing material locating in contact to the interface interacts with the evanescent field causing a reduced IR intensity. The reduction of IR intensity is measured reflect to incident IR radiation and transformed into an ATR-FTIR spectrum (Vongsvivut et al., 2014). For example, polar functional groups (e.g. carbonyl compound) could easily be detected because of IR depends on the change of the permanent dipole moment of a chemical bond (Käppler et al., 2016).

(p6.1) Determination of cysteine compound residue by ATR-FTIR is widely introduced in wheat flour. This is because cysteine residue is one of the subfractions in wheat flour (Li et al., 2006). Many studies, found that valuable structural characteristics related to the interaction between protein components and amino acids sample that could be obtained from amide I and amide II band (Manley et al., 2002;Reinbold et al., 2008;Amir et al., 2013;Hell et al., 2016;Cebi et al., 2017;Chagas et al., 2018;Chen et al., 2018). The detection relied on the organization of the chemical structure in a sample. The protein organization structure can be identified in ATR-FTIR through specific wavelength changes (de la . For example, the difference of amide I band which is assigned around 1600 -1700cm -1 can detect stretching vibration of C=O and C-N groups. Meanwhile, the amide II around is located around 510-1580 cm -1 in terms of in-plane N-H bending (40-60%), C -N (18-40%) and C-C (10%) stretching (Amir et al., 2013). Thus, it could give us valuable information on the possible interactions that occurred at the molecular level that produce a significant impact on cysteine identification.

(p6.2) In a study done by Li et al. (2006), glutenin subfraction which consists of cysteine residue had been successfully differentiated between hydrated flour, gluten protein and flour. The result showed that hydrated flour had the highest peak in the amide I region at 1633 cm -1 and 1612cm -1 (Li et al., 2006). This can be supported by data from Chávez-Murillo et al. (2018) where different proportions amide I band ratio at 1625 and 1616 cm -1 were recorded in different heat starch conditions. The study proved that heat treatment could rearrange the β-helix structure of protein in the flour. Moreover, ATR-FTIR analysis also proved that difference between a-helix and b-sheet secondary structures of the amide II group in different flour extracts (de la . Hence, it proved that, the capability of ATR-FTIR spectral measurement to determine the chemical composition of protein content qualitatively.

(p6.3) Apart from that, the major advantages of using ATR-FTIR are a rapid, nondestructive, time-saving method that can detect a range of functional groups and is sensitive to changes in molecular structure. ATR-FTIR could provide information on the basis of chemical composition 20 and the physical state of the whole sample (Amir et al., 2013). Thus, makes it a valuable tool in compound identification.

LLM judge: YES

## (s9) Gold nanoparticles based colourimetric assay
(p9.0) The interaction of gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) with cysteine and its derivatives is the basis of a number of bio nanotechnologies, and for these, the most important process is aggregation (or ant aggregation), which enables an array of colourimetric detection methods (Acres et al., 2014). The mechanism of aggregation will be observed when AuNPs were functionalized with cysteine and its dimer cystine, or the cysteine-derived tripeptide. The aggregation is can be seen when cysteine forms a two-layer boundary around the gold nanoparticles. The cysteine induced aggregation of AuNPs without further pH modification: the first by interparticle zwitterionic interaction and the second by interparticle hydrogen bonding (Abraham et al., 2010).

(p9.1) In order to improve the detection of cysteine using gold nanoparticles, Shang et al. (2007) had modified the method by prepared fluorescent conjugated polymerstabilized gold. The addition of cysteine, a thiolcontaining amino acid, the fluorescence of the colloidal solution increases significantly, indicating that cysteine can modulate the energy transfer between fluorophore and gold. This phenomenon then allows for sensitive detection of cysteine with a limit of detection (LOD) of 25 nM. The linear range of determination of cysteine is from 5 x 10 -8 to 4 x 10 -6 M. Another study showed that cysteine compound was successfully detected in tablet capsule with a limit of detection to 2.7 µmmolL -1 through the combination of gold nanoparticles and UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Rastegarzadeh and Hashemi, 2015). Hence, a precise yet sensitive gold nanoparticle probe is a good analytical measure for cysteine compound detection.

LLM judge: YES

