# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Phototoxic or Photoprotective?-Advances and Limitations of Titanium (IV) Oxide in Dermal Formulations-A Review

CorpusID: 258500099 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d2df96389e242c5ce906c51b77a1d5180100e36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0d2df96389e242c5ce906c51b77a1d5180100e36)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science, Environmental Science

## (s5) General Information
(p5.0) Crystalline TiO2 may exist in three phases, namely rutile, anatase, and brookite (  Variations between these polymorphs involve octahedral units arranged in a threedimensional space. Importantly, each of the crystal structures exhibits different properties-they can differ in shape, structure, refractive index, and photocatalytic activity [30]. Furthermore, only rutile is stable, while anatase and brookite are metastable and convert Variations between these polymorphs involve octahedral units arranged in a threedimensional space. Importantly, each of the crystal structures exhibits different propertiesthey can differ in shape, structure, refractive index, and photocatalytic activity [30]. Furthermore, only rutile is stable, while anatase and brookite are metastable and convert to rutile upon heating. The differences between the polymorphs are particularly apparent when comparing their photocatalytic activity. The higher energy gap of anatase and brookite and their superior electron mobility make these polymorphs more reactive than rutile. Moreover, there is a significant difference in the refractive index of rutile and anatase (2.7 and 2.5, respectively). While there are many arguments in favor of the safety of TiO 2 , potential risk factors also need to be considered. On the one hand, excellent photoprotective properties are reported, and on the other hand, the risk of inducing photochemical reactions, as shown in the following sections.

LLM judge: YES

## (s10) Material Size, Surface, and Morphology
(p10.0) In physics-scale matters. The size of the material determines its properties, especially when nanomaterials are considered. The reason that properties of nanomaterials are quite different from bulk concerns both the surface effects and quantum size effects.

(p10.1) The atoms in the surface of the material have fewer neighbors than atoms in bulk, and thus generate a lower coordination and dangling bonds. This makes those atoms less stable compared to bulk atoms. The smaller the particle, the greater the number of surface atoms; therefore, the surface-to-volume ratio scales with the inverse of size. Moreover, in semiconductors (e.g., TiO 2 ), the electronic wave functions of conductive electrons are delocalized over the entire particle. Electrons are described as "particles in the box" and the density of state and the energy of particles depend crucially on the size of the box, which leads to a smooth-size dependence. Absorption wavelengths, ionization potentials, and electron affinities are tuned between the atomic values and the work function of the bulk material by varying the size of the NPs. These properties are connected to the availability of electrons for redox reactions. Therefore, the photoreactivity depends on the NPs size [55].

(p10.2) Considering the influence of the size on the cytotoxic effect, tests using the Sinorhizobium meliloti bacteria exposed to aqueous dispersions of micrometer-sized TiO 2 (44 µm) and TiO 2 -NPs (21 nm) under various concentrations were conducted. A hundred percent mortality of the bacteria was reached using TiO 2 -NPs at a concentration of 100 mg/L (under UVA irradiation) and 900 mg/L (under dark conditions). However, the exposure to micrometer-sized TiO 2 showed that there is no effect on the bacteria in a concentration of less than 300 mg/L (under dark or UVA light irradiation). One hundred percent mortality was only achieved with a nominal concentration of 600 mg/L or more (UVA light irradiated) [56]. This result clearly shows that there is a direct correlation between the effect of material size and the toxic effect.

(p10.3) Sanders et al., tested the uptake and accumulation of TiO 2 -NPs in ARPE-19 cells and showed that after a short-term or long-term exposure, the NPs were observed inside the cells and remained there for an extended period. Moreover, the amount of NPs inside the cells was dose-dependent. However, no clear effects on viability or morphology were observed. The cells that were treated with any of the TiO 2 -NPs and remained in the dark were 100% viable up to the concentration of 30 µg/mL, except for the sample treated with 31 nm-sized anatase/rutile, which showed a dose-related decrease in viability beginning at 10 µg/mL. Moreover, the tests conducted under visible light illumination showed no difference in viability compared to the dark conditions, which is not surprising as TiO 2 cannot be photo-activated under these irradiation conditions. The differences between samples were observed when cells were exposed to UVA radiation. The outcomes showed clearly that the LC 50 decreased with the particles size [57]. However, the outcomes of Wyrwoll et al., suggested that these results are only valid on a limited number of particle sizes. The authors showed that NPs of 25 nm were more toxic than those of 10 nm. Although the smaller NPs are able to generate a higher amount of • OH radicals, the sum of all measured ROS (free and surface attached • OH and O 2

(p10.4) •− radicals) was the highest for 25 nm-sized NPs [58]. These phenomena may be explained by the different mechanisms that remain behind the photoactivity. For the particles smaller than 25 nm, the mechanism depends more on optical and electronic properties, including light absorption, scattering efficiencies, and charge-carrier dynamics. In contrast, for particles larger than 25 nm, the photoactivity depends more on the surface area available for redox reactions [59]. Moreover, Wyrwoll et al., confirm that the ionic strength (IS) of the medium highly influences the material toxicity as a high IS promotes material agglomeration and thus sedimentation; therefore, lowering its phototoxicity [58].

LLM judge: YES

## (s13) Might Modifications of TiO 2 -NPs Surface Decrease Phototoxicity?
(p13.0) The widespread potential use of TiO 2 in medicine and cosmetics has led researchers to try to reduce phototoxicity by modifying the particles surface. Most of the modifications involve the introduction of an inert shell on the surface of the NPs. Among the materials used for coating, the most common are silica (SiO 2 ), alumina (Al 2 O 3 ), zirconium dioxide (ZrO 2 ), or siloxanes [36]. However, the main challenge in synthesizing these types of particles with decreased phototoxicity is to suppress the photoactivity with preserved UV-shielding ability. Moreover, due to the potential application of these particles, the shell must be built of inert materials, the role of which is to inhibit the formation of ROS or to scavenge ROS. However, to date, there is no evidence that this method leads to a complete deactivation of the catalytic activity of TiO 2 -NPs [36,73].

LLM judge: YES

## (s14) Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles as Photostabilizing Agents in Topical Drug Formulations
(p14.0) The use of TiO 2 as a photoprotector for photolabile active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) in dermal drug formulations is very limited, and to date, was tested only for retinoic acid and ketoprofen. However, all the papers confirm the increased photostability due to the use of this inorganic sunscreen, compared to formulations without TiO 2 [13,82,83]. Asfour et al., combined all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and TiO 2 for the alleviation of photoinduced sensitivity. The authors confirmed the positive impact of the prepared formulation on product safety in vitro and in vivo studies. They have proven that the addition of 6% (w/w) TiO 2 resulted in the enhanced photostability of ATRA by about 2 times, compared to its methanolic solution. Moreover, in vivo studies on mice exposed to direct sunlight for 4 days, confirmed that the prepared formulation alleviated the photosensitization in comparison to the marketed product [82]. The positive effect of TiO 2 on ketoprofen (KP) photostability has been proven for transdermal patches [13] and gels [83]. By incorporating TiO 2 into the fabric backing of the patch, the UV transmission through the product was effectively decreased in the UVA region, exhibiting the same increased photostability of KP. Moreover, in vivo studies demonstrated lower photosensitization of the patch with TiO 2 , compared to the KP patch without TiO 2 . In the latter study, the lowered decomposition of KP in the gel was confirmed. The three materials (crystalline TiO 2 , pharmaceutical grade TiO 2 , and TiO 2 coated with alumina and silica) were tested and the latter-one showed the best effect. The 2 h exposure of the gels with and without coated TiO 2 to ordinary sunlight caused a decrease in KP concentration from 2.5% to 0.05% (gel without TiO 2 ) and from 2.5% to 0.71% (gel with TiO 2 ).

(p14.1) Both presented studies conclude the high potential of TiO 2 in the protection of photolabile API applied to the skin. However, given the scarcity of work on the subject, more in-depth studies and a comprehensive evaluation of the effect of TiO 2 addition on the formulation stability are required.

LLM judge: YES

