# Readout IC Architectures and Strategies for Uncooled Micro-Bolometers Infrared Focal Plane Arrays: A Review

CorpusID: 257328059 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3fc2a944632981568b0bff63d4ee087dca6d5dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3fc2a944632981568b0bff63d4ee087dca6d5dc)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Physics, Engineering

## (s1) Micro-Bolometers: Device Structure and Operation Principle
(p1.0) The considered thermal-imaging sensors consist of a matrix of pixels, each of which is composed of a micro-bolometer, interconnections and part of the readout structure such as multiplexing switches. The micro-bolometer absorbs InfraRed (IR) radiation and this changes its electrical resistance; this variation is then detected by an interface circuit to create a thermal image of the scene in front of the camera. The pixel matrix is typically fabricated using a MEMS process on a Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor (CMOS) substrate that houses the interconnections and the required Integrated Circuits (ICs); over the years, various techniques have been developed to obtain micro-bolometers with an increasing Temperature Coefficient of Resistance (TCR) (this parameter will be addressed in detail in Section 3), with a reduced thermal conductivity and with the goal of a noise minimization.

(p1.1) The pixel structure can be divided into three parts: the bolometer membrane, the support structures and the cavity. The bolometer membrane is the sensing element, and its material determines its capabilities. Amorphous Silicon (a-Si) and Vanadium Oxide (VO x ) are the most commonly used materials due to their high TCR and compatibility with standard CMOS and MEMS integration processes. However, research has been conducted in recent years to find new materials, such as graphene and Carbon NanoTube (CNT) composites, or different types of metal-oxides, such as Titanium Oxide (TiO x ), that can improve the micro-bolometer's performance. Metal-based membranes, which typically exhibit a lower TCR, instead offer the advantage of an easier fabrication process, which results in a lower manufacturing cost. Figure 1 summarizes the TCR values for these different categories of materials according to [12]. A 3D layout of the described micro-bolometer structure is shown in Figure 2, while Figure 3 reports its cross-section.  In order to reduce heat flow, the sensing membrane needs to be suspended; this is achieved through the use of various types of supporting structures known as legs. In earlier micro-bolometers, the sensing layer was directly deposited on the substrate, and a cavity was then etched beneath it: this meant that all the necessary interconnections and devices to bias and read the pixel had to be integrated beside the micro-bolometer, leading to a poor filling factor. With the advancement of MEMS fabrication processes, a two-level structure, in which the micro-bolometer is separated from the substrate, has become possible, as depicted in Figures 2 and 3; with this arrangement, all the required interconnection circuitry can be integrated into the empty space under the pixel, and heat flow is only possible through the supporting legs, which also serve as an electrical connection between the sensing element and the rest of the system. Another consequence of the MEMS technological development is the possibility to create compact, robust and low thermal conductance supporting structures; in addition, it is now possible to completely separate the IR absorber from the sensing membrane by creating an umbrella structure (not shown) above it, which maximizes the filling factor [23]. The cavity between the sensing membrane and the substrate is used to reduce heat flow; for this reason, the entire detector is enclosed in a rigid metal package under vacuum. The cavity can also be used to enhance the absorbance of the micro-bolometer by controlling its height; if the distance between the sensing membrane and the substrate is chosen to be equal to λ IR/4, where λ IR is the infrared wavelength of interest, the void acts as a Fabry-Perot optical cavity and this increases the performance of the micro-bolometer. To maximize this effect, the substrate under the sensing plate is coated with a reflective layer, typically aluminum, and the top of the membrane is covered with an anti-reflective material.

LLM judge: YES

## (s11) Biasing Circuit
(p11.0) A micro-bolometer can be seen as a temperature-sensing resistor; its resistance change, caused by an incident IR wave, can be extracted in two ways: with a voltage mode approach, fixing the current flowing in the resistor and reading the voltage at its terminals, or with a current mode approach, fixing the voltage at its terminals and reading the current through it. In both cases, the bias is typically applied for a short time (t int ) to each micro-bolometer of the detector's matrix in accordance with the multiplexing operation that is needed to perform the reading of all pixels (discussed in Section 4.3); this allows each micro-bolometer to cool down after being heated by the biasing process.

(p11.1) In both reading modes, blind micro-bolometers [17,30,34], heat shunt microbolometers [3,21,28] or a combination of the two are used as a reference in the majority of the compensation strategies implemented to minimize the self-heating and the substrate temperature (T sub ) variation effects. The blind micro-bolometer has the same structure as the sensing ones, but after its fabrication, it is coated with a reflective film that blocks all the IR radiation; in this way, its resistance change depends only on the other sources of heat. Heat shunt micro-bolometers, instead, are constructed to have a high thermal conductance with the substrate (exactly the opposite with respect to the sensing micro-bolometer); in this way, their temperature is not affected by the bias and can be employed as a reference.

(p11.2) As previously mentioned, the main signal generated by the incident IR radiation, whether it is a voltage or a current, can be affected by undesired effects, such as bias self-heating, substrate temperature or fabrication non-uniformity. All these non-idealities result in a Fixed Pattern Noise (FPN) [35] that degrades the performance of the detector.

LLM judge: YES

## (s16) Analog-to-Digital Converter (ADC)
(p16.0) The ADC is the block that receives the sampled output of the AFE as input and generates IR-dependent digital words as output. There are many ADC types and architectures to be used in the micro-bolometer framework. One of the simplest ways, for instance, is to use the integrator already present in the system (both with a voltage or a current mode approach) to implement a single-slope A/D conversion [3,14,17,50]. The output ramp of the integrator is compared with a reference voltage; a change in the input signal impacts the slope of the output ramp, which results in a different time needed for the signal to cross a comparator's threshold. Since a digital counter starts counting at the beginning of the integration process, at the triggering of the comparator, the counter content will be a digital representation of the input signal. Another commonly used ADC type is the Successive Approximation Register (SAR) converter [7,18,34,51], in which the subsequent decisions of a comparator about the polarity of the AFEs output with respect to a reference are processed to obtain IR-dependent digital codes. This approach features, particularly fast conversions, but its resolution is typically limited by the presence of thermal noise (10). To overcome this issue, an oversampling approach can be considered by employing Σ∆ converters operating in incremental mode [52] in accordance with the multiplexing requirements discussed before.

LLM judge: YES

