# Controls on Pt/Pd ratios in Bushveld magmas and cumulates: a review complemented by new W isotope data

CorpusID: 253059929 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2ec7ebd90776ba447506647a9bd5b508bdf05da](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b2ec7ebd90776ba447506647a9bd5b508bdf05da)

Fields: Geology

## (s1) Pt/Pd and Au/Pt ratios in Bushveld magmas
(p1.0) Global komatiites and basalts that crystallised while remaining undersaturated in sulfide melt typically have up to ~20 ppb Pd and Pt (Fig. 1). Pt/Pd ratios cluster around or just below unity, except for relatively evolved lavas many of which tend to have somewhat lower Pt/Pd. The magmas show a subtle trend of increasing Pd and Pt with falling MgO resulting from incompatibility of Pd and Pt into silicate and oxide minerals (Barnes and Ripley 2016). The observed scatter may be due to a combination of mobility of PGE in hydrothermal and low-T fluids, and equilibration with immiscible sulfide melt (notably in some of the relatively evolved samples having < 10 wt.% MgO). In addition, there is a temporal control, in that Archean komatiites tend to have lower PGE than post-Archean lavas (Maier et al. 2009;Puchtel et al. 2020).

LLM judge: YES

## (s9) Melting of PGE-rich mantle domains
(p9.0) The PGE contents of the Earth's modern mantle are largely the result of processes occurring during the Hadean and Archean eras: (1) The vast bulk of the Earth accreted ~ 4.5 Ga ago from impactors that remain incompletely known and appear not to be represented in our meteorite collections (Fischer Goedde et al. 2020).

(p9.1) (2) Next, the Earth's core formed via segregation of Fe-Ni alloy (and some sulfide) ~ 30 m.y. after Earth's initial accretion (Kleine et al. 2002). The segregation of the core resulted in efficient scavenging of the highly siderophile and chalcophile PGE and Au from the Earth's mantle (Stevenson 1981). (3) Puchtel et al. (2020) suggested that portions of the mantle remained poorly equilibrated with LV until ~ 2 Ga, based on W and Pt isotopes as well as PGE systematics in komatiites of the Lapland Greenstone belt. Heterogeneous inmixing of late veneer is consistent with models of modern mantle dynamics; for example, Barry et al. (2017) showed that whole-mantle convection may preserve long-term global patterns of upper-mantle geochemistry. Based on these data, one could hypothesise that the Pt-rich Bushveld magmas formed from a mantle that was relatively enriched in late veneer.

LLM judge: YES

