# Prevalence, incidence and carrier frequency of 5q-linked spinal muscular atrophy - a literature review

CorpusID: 10787051 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/453972bc9b360226ceb8a5b90414333353943d6b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/453972bc9b360226ceb8a5b90414333353943d6b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is characterised by degeneration of the alpha motor neurons of the spinal cord anterior horn cells, leading to progressive proximal muscle weakness and atrophy and, in the most severe types, paralysis.

(p0.1) The clinical phenotype of SMA is heterogeneous, ranging from a severe to a mild phenotype. It is generally divided into three main subtypes: type I (also called Werdnig Hoffmann disease), type II and, type III (also called Kugelberg Welander disease). However, these phenotypes are seen more as a continuum rather than as distinct subtypes and sometimes further subtypes at both ends of the spectrum are observed. SMA type 0 is a very severe form with onset in utero, reduced or absent movements, contractures, and requirement for mechanical ventilation support at birth and death before six months of age, while SMA type IV is a mild late (adult) onset form that has a normal life expectancy [1,2]. An overview of the different subtypes is given in Table 1. SMA is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. In most cases it is caused by mutations in the survival motor neuron 1 (SMN1, SMN T , telomeric) gene, located on chromosome 5q13.2 [3]. In rare cases (~4%) SMA is caused by mutation in another gene (non-5q SMA). The majority of the patients (92%) have a homozygous deletion of SMN1. In the remaining patients small mutations that abolish the production of the SMN protein are found, mostly in a combination with an SMN1 deletion (~4%) [4,5]. A centromeric homologue of the gene, SMN2, (previously also called SMN C or C BCD541) is present in humans. SMN2 differs from SMN1 by five nucleotides of which only one (an 840C➔T transition at exon 6-7) lies in the coding sequence and is transitionally silent. This change and a change in intron 7 cause exon 7 of the SMN2 transcript to be poorly recognized by the splicing machinery, resulting in the skipping of this exon in the majority of transcripts. This results in a frame-shift and production of a protein with a different C-terminal end, which is unstable and non-functional [3,6]. Since exon 7 is sometimes included in SMN2 transcripts, some full-length SMN protein can be produced, albeit as very low levels (~10-20%) that are insufficient to prevent disease. The number of SMN2 copies varies within the general population, and is inversely associated with disease severity as having more SMN2 copies ensures that the absolute amount of SMN protein that is produced is higher. Notably, SMN2 defects in isolation do not seem to cause the disease [7][8][9]. Other modifiers that might play a role are NAIP, H4F5, GTF2H2 and PLS3 [10][11][12][13][14][15]. NAIP, H4F5 and GTF2H2 are thought to be a modifiers due to their proximity to the SMN1 gene and NAIP also shows homology to apoptosis inhibitory proteins [12,14,16]. PLS3 restores the function of the neuromuscular junction, by stabilizing F-actin-dependent endocytosis [17].
## (s2) Prevalence and incidence of SMA
(p2.0) To date, only a few studies have been performed to assess the prevalence and incidence of SMA. Most of these have been conducted before 1995, when the disease causing gene was identified, therefore using clinical rather than genetic diagnosis as an inclusion criterion. Generally, an estimation of the incidence of all types of SMA of around 10 in 100,000 (1 in 10,000) live births is cited [20,21].
## (s4) Prevalence by SMA subtype
(p4.0) Although SMA type I is expected to account for more than half of all new SMA cases [30], the studies that examined a SMA type I only showed a prevalence of 0.04 to 0.28 per 100,000 [24,25,[31][32][33][34], which is much lower than the 1-2 per 100,000 persons noted for all SMA. Due to its severity, patients with SMA type I have a short life expectancy. Therefore often no or only few patients are alive on the date of the study, which could account for this lower prevalence. Nowadays, a median life expectancy of around one year of age is estimated for type I patients [35][36][37], whereas in type II 75-93% of patients survive beyond 20 years of age [37][38][39][40] and life expectancy for type III is thought to be close to the normal population [20,39]. The prevalence of both SMA type II and III together has been estimated around 1.5 per 100,000 [31,32,[41][42][43]. Of three studies that investigated type II and type III separately, two found a higher prevalence of type III compared to type II [24,32]. This may be explained by the longer life expectancy of type III patients compared to type II SMA patients.
## (s7) Considerations for comparing studies
(p7.0) To date, there are few studies of the prevalence and/or incidence of SMA, with a small number of these being recent. Most of the studies have been carried out in Europe. Furthermore, four of the ten studies done outside of Europe were performed in the countries with high consanguinity or small communities, thereby they are not considered to be representative of the overall SMA prevalence and incidence. No worldwide studies have been published to date.

(p7.1) A number of limitations should be taken into account when estimating prevalence/ incidence of SMA and comparing the presented studies. Most studies have been performed before 1995 when the genetic cause for SMA, deletion of the SMN1 gene, was identified [3], where after genetic diagnosis was implemented. Therefore, most studies rely on the less accurate clinical diagnosis of SMA. This increases the chance of misdiagnosis of diseases with clinical features similar to SMA. Another difficulty comparing studies is that the classification of SMA has slightly changed over the years and it is not always clear which classification system has been used. For example, in the studies of John Pearn in Northeast England patients were defined as SMA type I if they had an onset of symptoms before the age of 12 months, so this might also include some early diagnosed SMA type II patients [41,52]. Chronic SMA was classified as patients living beyond 18 months old. However, in the study in West-Thüringen, Germany patients had to survive till at least four years of age to be classified as chronic SMA [43]. This is further exemplified by the study of Spiegler et al. in Warsaw, Poland. In this study type Ib patients are mentioned, and are defined as patients diagnosed at birth or in the first months of life and living up to 30 years, whereas type II SMA was described as having an onset at the age of one year onwards [42]. In the study of Zellweger et al. in Switzerland it is not clearly specified which definitions were used, but it is conceivable that some type II patients are included in the numbers of type I patients [55]. Currently, the classification of the main subtypes: I, II and III (and sometimes IV) as described in Table 1 is used.

(p7.2) Another factor that should be taken into account is that the studies have been performed in different time periods. The natural history of SMA has changed over the years as the standards of care and associated outcomes have largely improved in the recent years. For example for type I comparison of studies showed the mean age of death increased from 8.8-10 months in studies performed before 1995 to 10.4 months up to 4 years in studies performed after 2000 [35,36]. This is partly due to the availability of assisted ventilation (non-invasive or through tracheostomy) and of tube feeding through a gastrostomy [36].

(p7.3) Lastly, most of the studies have been performed in small geographical areas, thereby including a relatively small study population. One or two patients more or less in a small patient population will have a strong effect on the calculated prevalence or incidence. All these factors make a comparison between the studies and the interpretation of the findings difficult.

(p7.4) In conclusion, few prevalence and incidence studies have been performed for SMA, of which most are based on clinical diagnosis and are performed in European countries or regions, using small study populations. In addition to prevalence and incidence studies, carrier frequencies can provided useful additional information about, for example, ethnic subpopulations.
## (s8) Carrier frequency in SMA
(p8.0) Since SMA is a recessive disease, there are also unaffected, heterozygous carriers of the disease. Carriers fall into four main groups of genotypes (Fig. 1). The most common one is the '1 + 0' genotype (one normal, functional allele and a SMN1 deleted, disease allele). A much less common category is the '2 + 0' genotype with two functional genes on one chromosome and none on the other. Furthermore, there are also '1 + 1 D ' and '2 + 1 D ' genotypes, which have one or two functional genes on one chromosome and a non-functional gene due to either a point mutation or a microdeletion on the other. These last two genotypes are very rare [56,57]. Four or even more copies of the SMN1 gene have also been found, indicating a '2 + 2' or possibly a '3 + 1' genotype. This suggests '3 + 0' or '3 + 1 D ' carrier genotypes might also be possible, however these will be even rarer.
## (s10) SMN1 copy number differences between populations
(p10.0) In 2014, MacDonald et al. have performed a metaanalysis comparing the SMA carrier frequency among different ethnicities. In their analysis they included 14 studies where ethnicities were described and results were broken down by SMA copy number [47]. They took the different carrier genotypes described above into account and determined the carrier rates in the ethnic groups. Furthermore, they calculated the reduced risk of being a carrier if a 2-or 3-copy result was found. This again showed a substantially higher carrier risk with a 2-copy test result for Black people. In addition a very high carrier risk and 2-copy risk in Iranians was found. However, this is based on one study only [91].

(p10.1) The Additional file 3 shows all studies that examined at the SMN1 copy number status. None of the studies among Arabian populations performed this analysis, therefore this group has not been included in the table. SMN1 allele frequencies were determined for each group (Table 5) using copy numbers (for methods and calculations see Additional file 1).

(p10.2) The copy number 0 (carriers) is lower in Blacks and Hispanics. Whilst there is not a great difference in the two copy number frequencies between other ethnicities, this is much higher in the Black population. As is seen in Table 6, this indicates a higher number of hidden carriers ('2 + 0' genotype), thereby decreasing the sensitivity of most carrier tests used, which only measure the copy numbers. Therefore, it is important to take the ethnicity into account when performing population screening or genetic counselling and consider a different method to reduce the chance of false negative results. In Table 6 also disease frequencies are estimated by combining the copy number results with an estimated small mutation (1 D ) frequency of 4% [4,5] and an estimated de novo mutation frequency of 2% [100]. Thereafter, the incidences rates were estimated using these frequencies ( Table 7).

(p10.3) The incorporation of estimated carrier risks for people with a 2 copy number result, generates only a slightly lower incidence (~1 in 54) for the Black populations compared to most other populations (~1 in 45), due to presence of a much higher number of multiple SMN1 copy number alleles in this population. The estimation of the combined carrier frequency in Hispanics is lower than in other populations (1 in 65), as was also seen in the  Table 4), which can also contribute to differences in estimations.

(p10.4) The combined results lead to the highest incidence estimations of around 1 in 8000 in Asians and Caucasians, whilst lower incidence of around 1 in 20,000 are estimated in the Black and Hispanic populations.

(p10.5) In Caucasians, the incidence rate estimated from carrier frequencies is higher than the observed incidence rates in studies (Table 3,~1 in 11,000). Carrier frequency estimates are solely based on genetic studies, whilst most incidence studies were based on clinical diagnosis and are mostly much older. However, carrier frequency incidence estimates could be an overestimation of the true incidence due to reduced penetrance. Here a penetrance of 100% is assumed. If the penetrance is decreased by 10% (i.e. penetrance of 90%) the incidence would also decrease by 10%. It might be that some cases of SMA are so severe that they lead to premature death in utero. SMN2 is absent in 10-15% of the general population [101], and deletions of both SMN1 and SMN2 are embryonically lethal. Furthermore increased awareness could lead to more genetic counselling of couples at risk, certainly in couples who have previous children or family members with SMA. In addition, sporadic cases of unaffected individuals without functional SMN1 cases have been described [96,[102][103][104][105][106][107][108][109]. This might be due to high copy numbers of SMN2, since, as mentioned before, SMN2 copy number influences the severity of the disease [7][8][9]. Therefore, it is important to take SMN2 copy number into account when performing newborn screening.
