# A Review of Localization and Tracking Algorithms in Wireless Sensor Networks

CorpusID: 10003728 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f02fc32f7e13d6c587769588567187277ff8977](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f02fc32f7e13d6c587769588567187277ff8977)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) II. BROAD CLASSIFICATION OF LOCALIZATION METHODS
(p1.0) Localization methods can be broadly classified as rangefree and range based methods in literature [124]. The class tree is illustrated in Figure 1. Range based localization methods utilize the distance between the anchor and unknown node. On the other hand, range-free methods utilize only connectivity information. Range-based methods are fine-grained localization methods, whereas, range-free methods are coarsegrained. A particular method can be chosen based on whether course grained resolution (± 5 m) or fine grained resolution (± 10 cm) is required.
## (s3) a) Time-of-Arrival (TOA)-based Localization
(p3.0) The TOA-based localization method [24] is formulated as Where, X = x y τ T is the unknown parameter vector. v and N denote the speed of signal and the set of unknown nodes. The Least-Square estimate of location is expressed as where k is the confidence parameter between 0 and 1. The location of unknown sensor node can be estimated as TOA-based method require synchronization between the node and the anchor and it utilizes distance information between node and anchor

(p3.1) TDOA-based localization method [25] can be formulated as follows: The received signals at two different nodes are given by where αi represents the attenuation factor for the anchor and i th node, and wi is zero-mean Gaussian noise. τi denotes the delay associated with the i th node. Estimated cross-correlation is expressed as where, T is the observation period. The TDOA can be estimated by maximizing the correlation function as Difference between TOAs of pair of nodes that is TDOA is utilized herein for obtaining the location of unknown sensor node. It requires highly precise synchronization between nodes, however, it does not require synchronization between node and source. It may be noted that TDOA is an efficient estimator compared to the TOA-based method.
## (s4) c) Angle-of-Arrival (AOA)-based Localization
(p4.0) The angle and location relationship between the unknown sensor and anchor can be expressed as [10] where, X = [x y] T is an unknown node, and Xi = [xi yi] T , i th is the anchor. The location of an unknown sensor node using Least-Square approach can be estimated as where,
## (s5) d) Received Signal Strength (RSS) based Localization
(p5.0) The RSS measurements at the unknown sensor node can be expressed as [26] where d0 denotes the reference distance from the transmitter and η represents the path loss exponent. Xσ is zero mean Gaussian random variable with standard deviation σ. Unbiased estimate of true distance using Maximum likelihood estimate is given by RSS a low cost measurement and it depends upon the wireless channel. It may yield large error because of the requirement of an accurate propagation model.

(p5.1) Semidefinite Programming Based Localization. RSS based method called semi-definite programming (SDP) is described in [27,28], for noisy distance measurements as an approach to localization. The time measurement is expressed as

(p5.2) where v and t0 denote the speed of signal and unknown reference time. wi is Gaussian distributed with zero mean and σ 2 variance. SDP formulation of TDOA-based localization problem can be succinctly recast as . The approach is less precise in estimating the location of static sensor nodes.
## (s6) MDS Based Localization.
(p6.0) In [29,30], an attempt to reduce the error in estimated location for static nodes is discussed. The algorithm based on the multidimensional scaling (MDS) [31,32], also computes the location of unknown nodes, given the set of distances between each pair of nodes. Finding the squared distance matrix.

(p6.1) Apply double centering matrix to D where, where, 1 is the vector of all ones. Apply Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) on Ddc where A is the diagonal matrix having each element as eigen value and Q a matrix corresponding to the eigen vector. Choosing the first 2 (For 2D) eigen value and corresponding eigen vector Transform the relative coordinates system to absolute coordinates system using anchor nodes.

(p6.2) The MDS-based localization method is energy efficient, as it only requires initial distance information. It also provides good initial coordinates for other optimization method. This method requires the set of anchors for converting the node location to actual coordinate system.
## (s9) b) Centroid-based Localization
(p9.0) The centroid-based localization method [44] for sufficiently large number of anchor nodes is given by Where is an unknown sensor node. [xi yi] T denotes the i th anchor and αi represents the confidence of i th anchor communication. It is the most basic localization technique.
## (s10) c) Monte-Carlo Localization
(p10.0) The Monte-Carlo localization [38,39,129,133] improves the localization accuracy by efficiently drawing the samples from the constrained area. The overlapped region of communication ranges of all neighboring anchors is called the anchor box. On the other hand, intersection of anchor box and range of node movement (based on the mobility of the sensor node) is called the sample box. The sample box further confines the area and it reduces the computational complexity, while filtering out the bad samples as shown in Figure 5. 
## (s11) d) DV-Hop based Localization
(p11.0) The DV-HOP localization method is based on the average hop distance between two sensor nodes. It does not utilize the absolute distance between two neighboring sensor node and consequently gives coarser location of node than range-based methods. The DV-HOP based localization method [36] is given by where, (xi, yi) = Coordinates of the i th anchor, and hi,j = Hop count from i th node to j th node.
## (s12) e) Closest Point based Localization
(p12.0) The closest point localization [40] provides a low cost solution, easily implementable, low energy consumption and low resolution of location estimate. The closest point localization method is employed for obtaining the cardinal location information. The coarse location of the unknown sensor node is decided based on the following conditions: • Node receiving maximum power closest to which anchor? • Whether node is in communication range of i th anchor? • Direction in which nth node receives maximum energy? • Near-far information between pair of nodes.
## (s14) III. OVERVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION METHODS
(p14.0) In this section, a brief overview of various implementation methods for node localization relevant to this localization and tracking is provided. Various machine learning method used in the implementation of localization are first listed. Subsequently, implementation of localization algorithm based on computational architecture is discussed. A brief review of fingerprinting and multi-sensor data fusion based localization method is also provided [125].
## (s18) D. Fingerprinting Based Methods [57]
(p18.0) Standard fingerprinting based localization methods available in the literature are Radar [65], PlaceLab [66], and Horus [67]. These methods comprise primarily two phases: training and testing [126]. During training phase, radio map is generated at each of the fingerprint location. Subsequently, a location is chosen corresponding to the minimum error between test RSS data and fingerprint RSS. [68,69]. This method is able to cope with heterogeneous devices during training and testing phases. A method described in [68] utilizes ratio of RSS, whereas, [69] uses relative RSS data for coarse-grained localization due to which performance deteriorates [70]. Notably, these fingerprinting based localization methods provide good location accuracy at the expense of heavy training during radio map construction. Classification of tracking algorithms is described in the ensuing section.
## (s19) IV. BROAD CLASSIfiCATION OF TRACKING METHODS
(p19.0) Tracking of mobile node [2] is carried out generally using a Kalman filter [71], an extended Kalman filter [72] or a particle filter [73,74] in current state of-art methods. The mobile sensor node accounts for all possible motion scenarios unlike a static node [127]. Mobile nodes can be localized using range free techniques. Applications in this context include vehicular tracking in a city [75]. Networks which consist of mobile nodes also employ Monte Carlo localization techniques [38,39].
## (s20) A. Cluster-based Tracking Methods
(p20.0) There are three types of clustered-based approaches, namely static, dynamic and spatio-temporal. In [92], three cluster based approaches, adaptive head, static head, and selective static head are proposed. The adaptive head [92] is the most energy efficient approach while static and selective static heads algorithms are chosen for rapidly moving target. Cluster management strategies, such as the proactive and the reactive cluster management are presented to handle energy and the longevity constraints of the sensor nodes [93]. A dynamic clustering method that optimizes the information utility of data for a given cost of communication and computation is explored in [94]. However, this energy efficient approach is applicable to single target only. An energy aware target detection and localization strategy for cluster-based wireless sensor network is presented in [95]. This probabilistic localization method is not scalable and limited to a single target. A decentralized, lightweight, dynamic clustering algorithm for target tracking is proposed in [88]. A cluster head is chosen for the received acoustic signal above a set threshold. The cluster head collaborates with the neighboring sensors for the exchange of information. In [96], a tracking approach that uses dynamic mechanism to deal with different ways of missing targets is presented. DELTA [97] tracks a constant moving target dynamically by building groups and electing group leaders using flashlight. An attempt to reduce the number of the number of nodes involved in communication for tracking and consequently decreasing energy consumption is presented in [98]. In [84], a classification algorithm for target tracking is developed. It estimates the velocity to reduce uncertainty in the movement of the target and thus tracking error. However, this method is applicable only for single target. A hybrid static/dynamic clustering method called continuous object detection and tracking algorithm (CODA) is described in [99]. It utilizes cluster head to estimate the boundary profile and communicates this to base-station.
## (s21) a) Prediction-based Tracking Methods
(p21.0) The prediction based tracking is one of the subclass of clustered-based tracking. In this context, an energy efficient prediction based mobile node tracking method is discussed in [78,100,87]. This method is energy efficient since sensors are in sleep mode most of the time and avoid long range transmission to the base-station. The architecture of this prediction-based energy saving scheme (PES) comprises of three blocks, namely, prediction, wake up and recovery. Only the sensor node that tracks a mobile target is active, while remaining sensor nodes stay in a low-power mode. Hence the sensing and micro-control unit are deactivated. Sensor nodes monitor and send the information of mobile target to the basestation. The prediction from base-station is sent back to the sensor node, when the target enters its range. The sensor node continues to monitor and track the object, if the prediction is consistent. Otherwise, the target is declared missing and a recovery mechanism is activated. However, the work is limited for the case of moving patterns of the mobile target.

(p21.1) In [101], dual prediction based reporting (DPR) for mobile target tracking is discussed. Both sensor node and base-station predict the future location of target. Multi-hop communication does not take place in case of consistent prediction. The DPR comprises of two subsystem; location and prediction. The location model determines the granularity of the target location state and prediction model estimate targets' future movement. In [91], distributed processing for multiple target tracking is presented. Distributed architecture is preferred over centralized architecture for energy efficiency in a wireless sensor network. A linear predictor (DPT) that utilizes previous two locations to predict the next location is proposed in [89]. The method is distributed and is scalable while minimizing the energy consumption of the network. However, reduction of miss rate, relationship between energy consumption and location accuracy, and extension for mobile sensors are the open problems here. An optimal tracking interval for a given predictive tracking of the target is proposed in [102]. The energy aware tracking system with error handling ability is discussed in [103]. This method considers the case of error avoidance and error correction besides tracking. The method also handles sudden direction change of moving target and transmission failure. However, varying speed of mobile target is not taken into the account.
## (s22) B. Tree-based Tracking Methods
(p22.0) A scalable tracking using networked sensors (STUN) [104] tracks a large number of targets using hierarchical organization. In [105], a DCTC method to detect and track a target by pruning and expanding a convoy tree. An initial convoy tree is created, when target is detected. The neighboring sensor nodes send the data to the root node and the tree is reconfigured once the target moves out. In [106,107], an approach for target tracking that ensures reasonable localization accuracy, low energy dissipation, and low complexity is proposed. However, this work is not suitable for multiple intruding objects. Innetwork data processing for object tracking is carried out using update cost and query cost efficiently in [108,109]. A query based efficient target tracking that continuously reports the tracking information to a mobile user is presented in [110]. A voronoi-based target tracking is explored in [83], which establishes non-uniform coverage to detect the target using non-redundant sensor nodes
