# Breast cancer in pregnancy: a literature review

CorpusID: 10882261 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67719dda6c9509aee6b651c2cf67c5ca01002d0f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67719dda6c9509aee6b651c2cf67c5ca01002d0f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Radiotherapy
(p5.0) There exists some controversy regarding the safety of radiation therapy during pregnancy. In general, fetal exposure depends on several factors including the target dose, size of radiation field, and the distance from the edges of the field to the fetus. According to the 'International recommendations from an expert meeting', external beam radiation necessary for the completion of breast conservation or postmastectomy radiation is contraindicated during  (Webb et al., 2005).
## (s6) Iodinated agents Gadolinium agents
(p6.0) Pregnancy may be administered in exceptional circumstances, may be administered when mRI examination is required when radiographic examination is essential neonatal care thyroid function should be checked in no neonatal tests are necessary the neonate during the 1 st week postpartum pregnancy because of the risks associated with fetal exposure to radiation (Loibl et al., 2006). However, successful radiotherapy of breast cancer during pregnancy and birth of healthy children have been reported (Van der Giessen, 1997;ngu et al., 1992;Antypas et al., 1998). According to these and other findings, kal et al. concluded that radiotherapy of pregnant patients with breast cancer is possible with fetal doses below the deterministic threshold (kal and Struikmans, 2005).
## (s10) Prenatal care
(p10.0) Prenatal care in women diagnosed with breast cancer during pregnancy should be performed like in other pregnant women (Lenhard et al., 2008). It is important to estimate correctly the fetal risk caused by the mother's cancer treatment. Therefore, before starting treatment, an ultrasound of the fetus should be performed to ensure that the fetus is normal and to clearly define the gestational age and date of delivery (Loibl et al., 2006). Before every cycle of chemotherapy, an evaluation of fetal growth must be carried out.

(p10.1) The time of delivery should be balanced according to the need of breast cancer treatment and the maturation of the fetus (Lenhard et al., 2008). Premature delivery should best be avoided and delivery after 35 weeks should be aimed for . The mode of delivery is determined by obstetrical indications. If further chemotherapy is necessary, vaginal delivery is recommended because of lower risk of therapy delay due to lower maternal morbidity (Lydon-Rochelle et al., 2000). Delivery should occur 3 weeks after the last dose of anthracyclin-based chemotherapy to allow the bone marrow to recover and to minimize the risk of maternal and fetal neutropenia (Loibl et al., 2006). Furthermore, neonates, especially preterm babies, have limited capacity to metabolize and eliminate drugs due to liver and renal immaturity. The delay of delivery after chemotherapy will allow fetal drug excretion via the placenta (Sorosky et al., 1997). Therefore, chemotherapy should not be given after 35 weeks of gestation. The first dose of chemotherapy should be given once the mother is recovered from delivery. Although placental metastases in breast cancer are rare, the placenta should be analysed histopathologically after delivery (Alexander et al., 2003;Dunn et al., 1999).
