# -NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/). Selection and peer-review under responsibility of the ScienceDirect Simplified design and fabrication of water sprinkler system: a survey based analysis

CorpusID: 108763338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97b1b83bc87b106741c329e7283f3a32e9aec267](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97b1b83bc87b106741c329e7283f3a32e9aec267)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s6) Design and Fabrication
(p6.0) The proposed design of water sprinkler is the multi-streamed rotary sprinkler type. The rotary motion is achieved solely through the pressure of the flowing fluid. The base remains fixed and the water flows in through it via water piping system. The bolt is screwed with the base by means of screw thread system which allows the rotary cylindrical stem (lower), passing through it, and the rotary cylindrical stem (upper) to rotate with respect to the base. Three nozzles bent into three different angles vertically (approximately 10°, 12° and 14°) to achieve uniform coverage. The spray head converts the incoming water into sprays. The use of spray head is justified due to the fact that some investigators have found that raindrops of sprinklers break down aggregates and compact thin surface layers and lead to seal or crust formation and hard setting [15][16][17]. Larger sprinkler intensity produced greater changes and influenced deeper soil layers on properties of soil structure [18,19]. However, soil structure is damaged very slightly when drops are very fine and so is the spray heads used at the tip of nozzle. The design is shown below: A timer circuit mechanism, which is basically a time-responsive releasing mechanism for watering areas following a fixed pattern and time interval, has been connected to automate the watering to a certain degree. A schematic diagram is shown in figure 3. All the dimension of the sprinkler system has been shown in figure 2(c).

(p6.1) For the fabrication of the water Sprinkler standard engineering methods involving Material Selection, Manufacturing Process Selection and Black Box Diagram were followed. Material used being Mild Steel for the Lower Body (Base) and the rest from Brass. The manufacturing process involved is as shown in Table 1. Various standard guidelines such as DFM (Design for Manufacturing), DFA (Design for Assembly) etc. has been followed to ensure the product is up to the market standard. The designed Sprinkler has been tested in terms of its coverage, longevity, quality of spray produced, dispersing pattern of water etc. and compared with those available on market. The results obtained from the testing process were satisfactory.
