# Automorphism groups of circulant graphs -a survey

CorpusID: 10657891 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4633b6e23f8b5d325229149d756e58a534fbcb2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4633b6e23f8b5d325229149d756e58a534fbcb2e)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s8) The square-free case
(p8.0) There is no known characterisation for the automorphism groups of circulant graphs in the general square-free case that is as straightforward as the results we have described above, when the number of vertices is p or pq and p, q are distinct primes. However, Dobson and Morris [14] did prove the following structural theorem about the automorphism groups of circulant graphs of arbitrary square-free order. The definition of a group being 2-closed is quite technical, but the important thing to know about 2-closed groups is that the automorphism group of a vertextransitive graph or digraph is always 2-closed. The terms used in the second point of this theorem are defined later in this paper, in the section "A Strategy," for readers who are interested.
## (s13) Other regular subgroups in Aut(X)
(p13.0) The automorphism group of any circulant graph will have a cyclic subgroup that acts regularly on the vertices of the graph. (A permutation group on a set V is said to act regularly if for any pair of points in V , there is exactly one permutation in the group that maps one to the other.) Sometimes, the automorphism group of a graph may have multiple, nonisomorphic, regular subgroups. This is of interest from a different perspective, because it means that the graph in question can be represented as a Cayley graph on some noncyclic group, besides being a circulant graph. From our perspective, knowing the regular subgroups of the automorphism group may be useful in determining the automorphism group. There are only a few results of note on this topic. The first result was proven by Joseph in the special case n = p 2 [23], and extended by Morris [33] to all prime powers.

(p13.1) Theorem 9.8. If n = p e , X is a circulant graph on n vertices, and Aut(X) contains a regular subgroup that is not cyclic, then X is isomorphic to a wreath product of smaller circulant graphs.

(p13.2) Recently, Marušič and Morris [31] proved the following results. Theorem 9.9. Let X = X(n; S) be a circulant graph, and Z * n (S) be the subgroup of Z * n that fixes S set-wise. Then if gcd(n, |Z * n (S)|) > 1, the automorphism group of X has a noncyclic regular subgroup.

(p13.3) In fact, if p is any prime divisor of gcd(n, |Z * n (S)|), then the automorphism group of X contains a regular subgroup that is isomorphic to Z p ⋉ Z n/p . They also show that the converse is not true in general; that is, there may be noncyclic regular subgroups in the automorphism group even if this greatest common divisor is 1.

(p13.4) In the same paper, they prove the following result. The condition that we must have a normal circulant means that the regular cyclic group must be normal in the automorphism group of the graph. Theorem 9.10. Let X be a normal circulant graph of order n, n not divisible by 4. Then if the automorphism group of X has a noncyclic regular subgroup, that group must be metacyclic, generated by two cyclic subgroups whose orders are relatively prime.
