# A SURVEY ON THE CONVERGENCE OF MANIFOLDS WITH BOUNDARY

CorpusID: 119613422 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e408dd057edd9260a58c2909d6be0f5515f8731e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e408dd057edd9260a58c2909d6be0f5515f8731e)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s4) Gromov-Hausdorff
(p4.0) Convergence. More about Gromov-Hausdorff convergence can be find in [10] and [3]. Gromov's embedding theorem appears in [9]. Examples and pictures about Hausdorff converging sequences can be found in [15].
## (s7) Precompactness Theorems for
(p7.0) The following two definitions are needed to explain the proof of Theorem 3.1 and state Theorem 3.5.  Wong proves later [20] that II does not have to be nonnegative and the volume condition can be replaced by a diameter condition. See Subsection 3.3.
## (s9) Anderson-Katsuda-Kurylev-Lassas-Taylor's Precompactness Theorem.
(p9.0) This subsection reviews the precompactness theorem that appear in [1] which extend Theorem 1.1 [2] of Anderson to manifolds with boundary. Theorem 3.5 is proved by showing that a larger class of manifolds is precompact in the C 1,α ′ topology for each 0 < α ′ < 1. The second step is to show that M(m, R, i, H 0 , D) is contained in the larger class. This part relies completely on the use of harmonic coordinates and harmonic radii for manifolds with boundary.
## (s10) Wong's Precompactness Theorem.
(p10.0) This theorem, which appears in [20], is an improvement of Theorem 3.1. Unlike Theorem 3.5, the hypotheses do not assume any type of injectivity radius, do not require any bound on the Ricci curvature of the boundary, and the condition on the mean curvature vector is replaced by a condition on the second fundamental form. 
