# Coupling phenomena and collective effects in resonant meta-molecules supporting plasmonic and magnetic functionalities: a review

CorpusID: 119506324 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d325585d88281996e5269e79ff45a223697053d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d325585d88281996e5269e79ff45a223697053d9)

Fields: Materials Science, Physics

## (s4) Artificial optical-magnetism in coupled plasmonic metamaterials
(p4.0) We mentioned at the beginning of this article that there is an alternative approach to artificially achieve magnetic effects by using nanostructured meta-molecules. The simplest structure to generate magnetic modes is the metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structure [173][174][175], where the excitation of gap plasmons induce strong magnetic resonances [176].  [191]. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Left, experimental extinction efficiency spectra associated with the respective arrays of disk trimer (red curve) and MTR (black curve), for normal incidence condition (see the left side insets for the polarization direction). The insets respectively show the SEM images of a single disk trimer (upper inset) and a single moon trimer resonator (MTR) (lower inset) (scalebar: 1 μm). Right, respective simulated extinction efficiency spectra (solid lines) and magnetic field enhancement spectra (dotted lines) of the disk trimer array (red curves) and the MTR array (black curves). The insets show the 2D plots of the magnetic field enhancement distribution in the Fano resonance condition (λ=8 μm). Adapted from ref. [190]. (c) Scattering properties of a single vertical MIM dimer (top), plasmonic oligomer (centre) and MIM oligomer (bottom). The properties of the first two architectures are combined in the latter system that supports multiple subradiant modes, thus generating a quasi-broadband magnetic response at visible frequencies. (d) Tilted SEM image of an MIM pentamer (scale bar 200 nm). (e) A sketch of the simulated system with the nomenclature used in the text. Each dimer is constructed from two cylindrical gold nanodisks with similar aspect ratio (d/h). The incident plane wave enters from above and is polarized along x. (f) Representative experimental dark-field spectra (dashed lines) and simulated scattering spectra (continuous lines) of individual MIM pentamers for different in-plane gap distances g and for the two investigated spacer thicknesses, s=20 and 10 nm, together with single dimer spectra for comparison. The colorcoding links the spectra to the SEM images shown in the left column. Adapted from ref. [185]. (g) Left: SEM image of a plasmonic naphthalene sample fabricated by electron-beam lithography. The periodicities in both directions are 2200 nm. The interparticle gap distance is 30 nm and the thickness of the gold particles is 80 nm. The diameter of the gold particles is 260 nm. Inset: enlarged view of the sample. Right: experimental and simulated extinction spectra of the plasmonic naphthalene sample. The light polarization is along the direction of the two shared gold particles. Bottom: charge density and magnetic field plots at resonances I and II. Resonance I corresponds to a double Fano resonance mode. Resonance II corresponds to a magnetic ring mode, in which antiphase magnetic plasmons are excited. (h) Simulated absorption spectra of the cyclic aromatic structures in dependence on heptamer unit number n. For simplicity, the simulations were performed for the case of air ambient. Spectra are shifted upward for clarity. The red-dashed line highlights the Fano resonances of different structures. A clear resonance blue shift is visible with increasing n. The charge density plot of the Fano resonance for n = 6 is presented. The magnetic ring modes (highlighted using the blue bars) only occur when n is even. The charge density plots of the magnetic ring modes are displayed for n = 2, 4, and 6. The charge density plot of the complex Fano resonance mode at 1200 nm for n = 3 is also presented. Adapted from ref. [186].
