# Overview of the parametric representation of renormalizable non-commutative field theory

CorpusID: 118701577 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/15cb4dd48b918c22274efe743f0a5eeaf3451748](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/15cb4dd48b918c22274efe743f0a5eeaf3451748)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s6) IV. Parametric representation
(p6.0) In the case of commutative QFT, one has translation invariance in position space. As a consequence of this invariance, the first polynomial U (see section II) vanishes when integrating over all internal positions. Therefore, one has to integrate over all internal positions (which correspond to vertices) save one, which is thus singularized. However, the polynomial is a still a canonical object, i. e. it does not depend of the choice of this particular vertex. As noticed in [15], in the non-commutative case the translation invariance is lost. Therefore, one can integrate over all internal positions and hypermomenta, without vanishing of the first polynomial. However, in order to be able to recover the commutative limit, we also singularize a particular vertexV ; we do not integrate on its associate hypermomenta pV . We call this particular vertex the root. Because there is no translation invariance, the polynomial does depend on the choice of the root; however the leading ultraviolet terms do not.

(p6.1) We now define the (L × 4)-dimensional incidence matrix e V for each of the vertices V . Since the graph is orientable (in the sense defined in the previous section) we can choose We now generalize the short and long variables introduced in the previous section at the level of the whole Feynman graph:
