# Part Functionality Alterations Induced by Changes of Surface Integrity in Metal Milling Process: A Review

CorpusID: 116022842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49cc5500dab07d6f583a605f675b8d50790c4eba](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/49cc5500dab07d6f583a605f675b8d50790c4eba)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In today's competitive manufacturing industry, the ultimate goal of manufacturers is to produce higher-performance products at lower cost and in less time. At the end of the machining process chain, thermomechanical coupling load has significant impact on workpiece surface property with a direct link to functionality. To get a reliable machined component with high fatigue strength, high wear resistance, and high dimensional accuracy are the goals of the machining process. It is necessary to evaluate the effects of machining parameters, tool parameters, etc. on machined surface performance capabilities.

(p0.1) The specified term surface integrity can be used to evaluate the machined surface properties after manufacturing operations. There are mainly some aspects to describe surface integrity: topography, metallurgy characteristics and residual stress. The topography is made up of surface roughness, waviness and flaws. The metallurgy characteristics include grain size, plastic deformation, microhardness, phase transformation, recrystallization, etc. [1].
## (s2) Machined Surface Topography Characteristic
(p2.0) The surface topography of any manufacturing process is a critical index. It is mainly affected by geometric properties of the machining system for milling process. Choosing suitable cutting parameters for given tools, workpiece materials, and machine tools is an important step to get The definition of surface function differs depending on the operating performance of the surface. For example, when translational surfaces are used as surfaces for the bearing inner and outer rings, tribological functionality will become dominant. However, for the applications of dynamic loading and cyclical stresses, fatigue characteristics may be a prime consideration in determining component failure [11]. Therefore, in order to get the influence mechanism of cutting parameters on parts performance, it is important to study the intrinsic relationship between the factors of surface integrity and parts performance [6].

(p2.1) Milling has the advantages of high production efficiency and wide processing range, and it is widely used in key fields such as aerospace, mold, automobile, and parts manufacturing [12]. To reveal the topic more clearly, the surface integrity and functionality of the part after the milling process are focused on in this paper. The effects of the manufacture process on surface integrity are discussed. Through the analysis research and the finite element modeling method, the surface integrity can be better understood. Then, a review of the state-of-art research on finished component functionality affected by surface integrity, such as surface topography, surface metallography, and residual stress, is presented. In this review, the component functionality mainly includes fatigue strength and wear resistance.
## (s4) Machined Surface Topography Characteristic
(p4.0) The surface topography of any manufacturing process is a critical index. It is mainly affected by geometric properties of the machining system for milling process. Choosing suitable cutting parameters for given tools, workpiece materials, and machine tools is an important step to get reasonable surface topography. Because the two-dimensional parameters cannot properly represent the surface features of milling, more and more attention is being paid to three-dimensional parameters today.

(p4.1) Considerable research has been performed to get suitable surface topography. Zhang et al. [13] provided in-depth characterization and analysis of the three-dimensional topography of feed direction and cross-feed direction in the hard milling process of AISI H13 steel (AISI is an abbreviation of American Iron and Steel Institute), as shown in the Figure 2. The results show that better surface morphology can be obtained by using higher cutting speed, lower feed speed, and lower cutting depth. Wang et al. [14] studied the surface morphology and surface roughness in the milling process of AlMn1Cu. Due to the high ductility of the AlMn1Cu material, the material flows plastically along the side-cutting edge and meanwhile is extruded by the side-cutting edge to cause the material to accumulate on the machined surface. With the increase of cutting depth and feed per tooth, the plastic flow of the material along the cutting edge is strengthened, resulting in increased surface roughness. However, with the increase of cutting speed, the plastic flow of the material is weakened along the secondary cutting edge, resulting in that the surface roughness value decreases. Ghani et al. [15] found that high cutting speed, low feed rate, and low cutting depth can be used to obtain ideal surface quality in the semifinishing and finishing process of AISI H13 steel. reasonable surface topography. Because the two-dimensional parameters cannot properly represent the surface features of milling, more and more attention is being paid to three-dimensional parameters today. Considerable research has been performed to get suitable surface topography. Zhang et al. [13] provided in-depth characterization and analysis of the three-dimensional topography of feed direction and cross-feed direction in the hard milling process of AISI H13 steel (AISI is an abbreviation of American Iron and Steel Institute), as shown in the Figure 2. The results show that better surface morphology can be obtained by using higher cutting speed, lower feed speed, and lower cutting depth. Wang et al. [14] studied the surface morphology and surface roughness in the milling process of AlMn1Cu. Due to the high ductility of the AlMn1Cu material, the material flows plastically along the side-cutting edge and meanwhile is extruded by the side-cutting edge to cause the material to accumulate on the machined surface. With the increase of cutting depth and feed per tooth, the plastic flow of the material along the cutting edge is strengthened, resulting in increased surface roughness. However, with the increase of cutting speed, the plastic flow of the material is weakened along the secondary cutting edge, resulting in that the surface roughness value decreases. Ghani et al. [15] found that high cutting speed, low feed rate, and low cutting depth can be used to obtain ideal surface quality in the semifinishing and finishing process of AISI H13 steel. Some scholars carried out the research of prediction of surface topography for milling process. As established by experimental tests, the actual roughness values obtained usually deviates from theoretical ones. There are several reasons accounting for this, such as runout of the milling cutter tooth tips, rounding of the cutting edge, and irregularities of cutting edge [16].
## (s5) Fatigue Strength and Wear Resistance as Effected by Surface Topography
(p5.0) Milling process is generally applied to conduct finishing machining of sculptured surfaces, therefore the machined component have very demanding specifications in surface topography for its performance. The smoothest surfaces are desired in most milling processes, especially when the fatigue life of the part being machined is high [38]. However, in some biomedical fields, it is desirable to have rough surface morphology [39]. The surface structure is responsible for the mechanical functionality of the component. Sometimes, even if the surface dimension and surface finish of a component are well within the tolerance, there remains the possibility of lack of surface quality for a milled surface. The reason is surface topography influences not only the mechanical and physical properties of contacting parts, but also optical and coating properties of some no contacting components.
## (s6) Fatigue Strength and Wear Resistance as Effected by Surface Topography
(p6.0) Milling process is generally applied to conduct finishing machining of sculptured surfaces, therefore the machined component have very demanding specifications in surface topography for its performance. The smoothest surfaces are desired in most milling processes, especially when the fatigue life of the part being machined is high [38]. However, in some biomedical fields, it is desirable to have rough surface morphology [39]. The surface structure is responsible for the mechanical functionality of the component. Sometimes, even if the surface dimension and surface finish of a component are well within the tolerance, there remains the possibility of lack of surface quality for a milled surface. The reason is surface topography influences not only the mechanical and physical properties of contacting parts, but also optical and coating properties of some no contacting components.
## (s8) Machined Surface Metallurgy Characteristic
(p8.0) In milling of high hardness material or difficult-to-machine metal material, high stress, strain rate, and temperature will have a severe impact on the machined surface. The microscale and nanometer scale existing on the machined surface will change under the interaction of large strain, high strain rate and high temperature [58,59]. The property changes include microstructure change, plastic deformation. Many research works have been done on process mechanics and surface integrity due to the complex coupling between phase transformations and loading in milling process [60]. Generally, the depth of microstructural alteration has been observed to increase when the cutting speed, feed rate and tool wear are increased.

(p8.1) For milling process, Elbestawi et al. investigated the microstructural alterations in high speed milling of hardened AISI H13 using PCBN (Polycrystalline Cubic Boron Nitride) ball-nose end tools. They found that the formation of phase transformation layer was dependent on tool edge preparation and tool wear [61].

(p8.2) Both thermal and mechanical effects attribute to the plastic deformations significantly. Mechanical effects play a major role in the hardening of materials, while thermal effects play a major role in the softening of materials. Moreover, the rubbing effect of flank face on machined surface play an important role in its generation. That is why the tool wear increases from initial condition to its life value, the changed microstructure turns to be deeper. The effects of cutting speed and tool wear on the surface microstructure were investigated when milling titanium alloy Ti-1023 [34]. When VB = 0 (Tool wear value), the cutting speed has no effect on the phase transition or deformation of the machined surface, as shown in Figure 6a. Tool Wear has a significant effect on the plastic deformation and the depth of microstructure of the machined surface, as shown in Figure 6b.

(p8.3) The reasonable selection of cutting parameters in the finishing process does not cause the change of the structure type of the machined surface. The reason is the contact area between the cutting tool and the machined surface is so smaller that the maximal temperature of the machined surface would be lower than the austenitizing temperature of workpiece material [62]. The similar results were found by Li and Zhao [63] and Devillez et al. [64].

(p8.4) Extensive experimental work has been conducted to get an ideal surface metallurgical for machining process. However, indispensable hardware is needed for this method. So the modeling for machined surface microstructure has attracted wide attention [65][66][67][68][69]. Unfortunately, few research works focused on the milling process are found.
## (s9) Wear Resistance and Corrosion Resistance as Effected by Surface Metallurgy
(p9.0) The microstructural alterations in the material cause the surface layer to exhibit different material behavior, and these alterations include phase transformations and plastic deformations. After the workpiece is machined, the behavior and property of surface is different with the interior of the bulk material. So, the subsurface microstructure has a crucial impact on the performance of the final part. There are controversial standpoints about whether the formation of phase transformations is beneficial to the application. It is more brittle than bulk material, so the appearance of the white layer usually worsens the product's service life [74]; therefore it is important to prevent its occurrence or at least predict how it would affect the final product.
## (s12) Fatigue Resistance as Effected by Surface Residual Stress
(p12.0) The residual stress has an important effect on the mechanical properties of the workpiece. Residual stresses directly influence the deformation of workpiece, such as static and dynamic strength and chimerical and electrical properties, as shown in Figure 8. It is well known that surface finish and residual stress can significantly affect the antidestructive ability of the component under high cyclic fatigue load.

(p12.1) The residual stress has an important effect on the mechanical properties of the workpiece. Residual stresses directly influence the deformation of workpiece, such as static and dynamic strength and chimerical and electrical properties, as shown in Figure 8. It is well known that surface finish and residual stress can significantly affect the antidestructive ability of the component under high cyclic fatigue load. Compressive residual stress is usually advantageous to the fatigue life of machined parts, while residual tensile stress is the opposite. The tensile residual stress will enlarge or contribute the extension of microcrack. When the crack increases to a certain extent, it will cause workpiece failure. So, it is necessary to remove tensile residual stresses occurring during machining process. In view of the high speed milling process of Ti-10V-2Fe-3Al, Yao et al. [101] found that the fatigue life of the workpiece is more sensitive to residual stress than surface roughness. Similar results were found by Moussaoui et al. [41].
