# A review of the D1/D5 system and five dimensional black hole from supergravity and brane viewpoints

CorpusID: 119524369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d37989fb16424caa28de1d7bb0bfc55ebb41a515)

Fields: Physics

## (s5) The extremal 5D black hole solution
(p5.0) Let us now compactify x 5 along a circle of radius R 5 and wrap the above solution along x 5 to get a 0-brane in five dimensions. Let us also "add" gravitational waves (denoted W ) moving to the left along x 5 . This gives us the BPS version [12,13] of the five-dimensional black hole. Adding such a wave can be achieved by augmenting the M2 ⊥ M2 solution by a third, transverse, set of M2-branes along x 5,10 and passing through the same sequence of transformations as above. Alternatively, one can apply the Garfinkle-Vachaspati transformation [37] to the above solution, with the same final result. In the first method, one should start from the M2 ⊥ M2 ⊥ M2 solution and use a transformation table like the above which has an additional line M2 ( 5,10) → NS1 ( 5 ) → W ( 5)
## (s6) Non-extremal five-dimensional black hole
(p6.0) We have explained above how to construct from first principles the BPS (hence extremal) version of the 5D black hole solution. We will now present an algorithm (without proof and specialized to intersections of M2) of how to generalize these constructions to their non-extremal (nonsupersymmetric) versions [39]: Rule 1: In the transverse part of the metric (including time) make the following substitution:
## (s17) Thus, for S(3) the distinct conjugacy classes can be represented as (1)(2)(3), (12)(3), (123).
(p17.0) The fields x i A , ψ aα A in a sector (n i , l i ) appear as a collection of n 1 strings of length l 1 plus n 2 strings of length l 2 , etc. [62] For example, in the maximally twisted sector, corresponding to the maximal cycle of length m, the boundary condition on the bosonic coordinate is
## (s22) Non-BPS entropy
(p22.0) For the non-extremal black hole (47) with no "anti"-branes (i.e., α 1,5 → ∞, N1 ,5 = 0, α n < ∞), we have both left and right moving gravitational waves in the classical solution. This in the CFT should correspond to exciting both L 0 andL 0 (in the near-extremal case L 0 ≡ N ≫L 0 ≡N ). If we assume that the left and right moving oscillators do not interact, the total degeneracy would be given by

(p22.1) which is indeed the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy of the non-extremal black hole as well! This is a surprise, since there is no obvious non-renormalization theorem for these systems which could protect the density of states as the coupling constant is varied from the D-brane regime to the supergravity regime (see below the corresponding discussion for BPS states).
## (s32) Fixed scalar
(p32.0) The above example describes the emission/absorption of any scalar that couples only to the five-dimensional Einstein metric. It is clear from the type II Lagrangian in five dimensions (95) that not all scalars are that way. For example, consider scalar fluctuations described by (ds 2 10 ) T 5 = e 2ν 5 dx 2 5 + e 2ν (dx 2 6 + dx 2 7 + dx 2 8 + dx 2 9 ) (139)
