# Magnetic Catalysis: A Review

CorpusID: 118087122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2665d6fa7df5c5e4d1784c29810c0698159cd618)

Fields: Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The magnetic catalysis is broadly defined as an enhancement of dynamical symmetry breaking by an external magnetic field. In this review, we discuss the underlying physics behind magnetic catalysis and some of its most prominent applications. Considering that the ideas of symmetry breaking take the center stage position in many branches of modern physics, we hope that this review will be of interest to a rather wide audience. In particle and nuclear physics, spontaneous symmetry breaking is commonly used in order to explain the dynamical origin of the mass of elementary particles. In this context, the idea was realized for the first time over 50 years ago by Nambu and Jona-Lasinio [149,150], who suggested that "the nucleon mass arises largely as a self-energy of some primary fermion field through the same mechanism as the appearance of energy gap in the theory of superconductivity." As we now know, the analogy with superconductivity is not very close and the description of chiral symmetry breaking in terms of quarks may be more natural than in terms of nucleons. However, the essence of the dynamical mass generation was captured correctly in Refs. [149,150]. In fact, with the current state of knowledge, we attribute most of the mass of visible matter in the Universe to precisely this mechanism of mass generation, which is associated with breaking of the (approximate) chiral symmetry.

(p0.1) The conceptual knowledge that the mass can have a dynamical origin opens myriads of theoretical possibilities that would appear meaningless in classical physics. For example, keeping in view the above mentioned mechanism of mass generation through chiral symmetry breaking, it is reasonable to suggest that the masses of certain particles can be modified or even tuned by proper adjustments of physical parameters and/or external conditions.

(p0.2) One of the obvious knobs to control the value of the dynamical mass is an external magnetic field. In addition to be a good theoretical tool, magnetic fields are also relevant to many applications. For example, they are commonly present and play an important role in such physical systems as the Early Universe [181,44,30,18,95], heavy ion collisions [122,177], neutron stars [180,38], and quasi-relativistic condensed matter systems like graphene [153,188].

(p0.3) As we discuss in detail in this review, the magnetic field has a strong tendency to enhance (or "catalyze") spin-zero fermion-antifermion condensates. Such condensates are commonly associated with breaking of global symmetries (e.g., such as the chiral symmetry in particle physics and the spin-valley symmetry in graphene) and lead to a dynamical generation of masses (energy gaps) in the (quasi-)particle spectra. The corresponding mechanism is called magnetic catalysis [99].

(p0.4) It should be emphasized that, in a striking contrast to its role in superconductivity, the magnetic field helps to strengthen the chiral condensate. There are many underlying reasons for its different role. Unlike the superconductors, the ground state with a nonzero chiral condensate shows no Meissner effect. This is because the chiral condensate can be thought of as a condensate of neutral fermion-antifermion pairs, not charged Cooper pairs that can give rise to supercurrents and perfect diamagnetism. Also, in a usual Cooper pair, the two electrons have opposite spins and, therefore, opposite magnetic moments. When placed in a magnetic field, only one of the magnetic moments can minimize its energy by orienting along the direction of the field. The other magnetic moment will be stuck in a frustrated position pointing in the opposite direction. This produces an energy stress and tends to break the Cooper pair. (Note, however, that the orbital motion plays a much more important role in breaking nonrelativistic Cooper pairs.) In a neutral spin-zero pair, in contrast, the magnetic moments of the fermion (with a fixed charge and spin) and the antifermion (with the opposite charge and spin) point in the same direction. Therefore, both magnetic moments can comfortably align along the direction of the magnetic field without producing any frustration in the pair. (Also, in relativistic systems the fermion-antifermion condensate is not destroyed by the orbital motion.)
## (s5) Magnetic catalysis in 2+1 dimensions
(p5.0) Now, let us consider a Nambu-Jona-Lasinio (NJL) model in 2 + 1 dimensions, in which the magnetic catalysis of symmetry breaking is realized in its simplest possible form [99,102]. When using the reducible representation of Dirac algebra, given by Eq. (6), one finds that the kinetic part of the massless Dirac theory is invariant under a global U(2) flavor symmetry. The generators of the symmetry transformations are given by
## (s7) Large N approximation
(p7.0) It is instructive to generalize the above analysis in the NJL model to the case of strong coupling. While magnetic catalysis occurs even at arbitrarily weak coupling, such a generalization will be useful to understand how magnetic catalysis is lost in the limit of the vanishing magnetic field.

(p7.1) At strong coupling, a reliable solution to the NJL model can be obtained by using the so-called large N approximation, which is rigorously justified when the fermion fields in Eq. (9) carry an additional, "color" index α = 1, 2, . . . , N, and N is large. Using the Hubbard-Stratonovich transformation [178,115], one can show that the NJL theory in Eq. (9) is equivalent to the following one:
## (s8) Zero magnetic field limit in 2 + 1 dimensions
(p8.0) Before concluding the discussion of the (2 + 1)-dimensional NJL model, it is instructive to consider how the above analysis of flavor symmetry breaking modifies in the zero magnetic field case. By taking the limit B → 0 in Eq. (16), we arrive at the following effective potential:
## (s13) Analogy with superconductivity
(p13.0) It is interesting to point that the dynamics described by the gap equation in the case of magnetic catalysis has a lot of conceptual similarities to the mechanism of superconductivity in metals and alloys. This is despite the clear differences between the two phenomena that we discussed in the Introduction. (In order to avoid a possible confusion, let us emphasize that here we compare the nonrelativistic Cooper pairing dynamics in superconductivity in the absence of magnetic fields with the relativistic dynamical generation of a mass in the presence of a constant magnetic field.) The corresponding gap equation in the Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer theory [17] of superconductivity can be written in the following form:

(p13.1) where N(0) is the density of electron states at the Fermi surface, ω D is the Debye frequency, and ∆ is the energy gap associated with superconductivity. The solution for the gap reads

(p13.2) At weak coupling, this solution has the same essential singularity as the dynamical mass parameter in Eq. (35). We can argue that the similarity is not accidental. To see this clearly, let us rewrite the gap equation in the problem of magnetic catalysis in the lowest Landau level approximation, see Eq. (34), as follows:

(p13.3) where the Wick rotation was performed (ω → iω). As we see, the structure of this gap equation is identical to its counterpart in the BCS theory after we identify the density of states N(0) with the density of states in the lowest Landau level, |eB|/(2π), and the Debye frequency ω D with the cutoff parameter Λ . The similarity between the BCS theory of superconductivity and magnetic catalysis goes deeper. In particular, the generation of a nonzero gap in superconductors can be also thought of as the result of a 3 + 1 → 1 + 1 dimensional reduction of the phase space around the Fermi surface. Also, just like in magnetic catalysis, it is essential that the density of states at the Fermi surface is nonzero.
## (s17) Bound states in a three-dimensional potential well
(p17.0) Now, in the three-dimensional case, there are no bound states if the potential well is too shallow in depth. This was first shown by Peierls in 1929 [158]. This can be demonstrated, for example, in a special case of a spherically symmetric potential well of a finite size,
## (s19) Magnetic Catalysis in QED
(p19.0) Using the same conceptual approach as outlined in Sec. 2.4 for the NJL model, one can show that, in Euclidean space, the equation describing a pion-like Nambu-Goldstone boson in QED in a magnetic field has the form of a two-dimensional Schrödinger equation [101]:
## (s22) Concluding Remarks
(p22.0) We hope that this review of magnetic catalysis is sufficient to convey the main idea of the phenomenon in terms of simple and rather general physics concepts. From the outset, this review was never meant to be comprehensive. Here we concentrated only on the bare minimum needed to understand the phenomenon as a consequence of the underlying dimensional reduction of the fermion-antifermion pairing in a magnetic field [99,102,100,101]. For further reading and for deeper insights into various aspects of the magnetic catalysis, it is suggested that the reader refers to the original literature on the topic. Over nearly 20 years of research, there has been a lot of progress made in our understanding of magnetic catalysis. A rather long list of research papers at the end of this review is a pretty objective proof of that. At present, it is evident that the key features of the underlying physics are well established and understood. At the same time, it is also evident that there are still many theoretical questions about the applications of magnetic catalysis under various conditions, where factors other than the magnetic field may also play a substantial role.
