# A Survey on Robotic Coconut Tree Climbers -Existing Methods and Techniques

CorpusID: 117193232 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b564c8f972a47f47ec192dd4eab1ba6973128be4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b564c8f972a47f47ec192dd4eab1ba6973128be4)

Fields: Physics, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s14) Telescopic Ladder Method
(p14.0) We have proposed similar model in our paper earlier [11] in which a telescopic type ladder is raised or lowered using a manual crank attached to it. At the top of the ladder is attached a robotic arm which can be controlled in wireless way using a smart phone or a wireless joystick device. The user can position the arm to which a cutter is attached to the stem of the coconut bunch. This could be one of the cheapest methods as no complex sensor technology or image processing technology is required. It could be easily transported and the user need no special training to attach this system to the tree as it is going to operate independent of the tree. In this method, the stability analysis must be carried out and taken care as the ladder should not fall when it is raised to higher level.

(p14.1) We have proposed similar model in our paper earlier [11] in which a telescopic type ladder is raised or lowered using a manual crank attached to it. At the top of the ladder is attached a robotic arm which can be controlled in wireless way using a smart phone or a wireless joystick device. The user can position the arm to which a cutter is attached to the stem of the coconut bunch. This could be one of the cheapest methods as no complex sensor technology or image processing technology is required. It could be easily transported and the user need no special training to attach this system to the tree as it is going to operate independent of the tree. In this method, the stability analysis must be carried out and taken care as the ladder should not fall when it is raised to higher level.
## (s33) Telescopic Ladder Method
(p33.0) We have proposed similar model in our paper earlier [11] in which a telescopic type ladder is raised or lowered using a manual crank attached to it. At the top of the ladder is attached a robotic arm which can be controlled in wireless way using a smart phone or a wireless joystick device. The user can position the arm to which a cutter is attached to the stem of the coconut bunch. This could be one of the cheapest methods as no complex sensor technology or image processing technology is required. It could be easily transported and the user need no special training to attach this system to the tree as it is going to operate independent of the tree. In this method, the stability analysis must be carried out and taken care as the ladder should not fall when it is raised to higher level.

(p33.1) We have proposed similar model in our paper earlier [11] in which a telescopic type ladder is raised or lowered using a manual crank attached to it. At the top of the ladder is attached a robotic arm which can be controlled in wireless way using a smart phone or a wireless joystick device. The user can position the arm to which a cutter is attached to the stem of the coconut bunch. This could be one of the cheapest methods as no complex sensor technology or image processing technology is required. It could be easily transported and the user need no special training to attach this system to the tree as it is going to operate independent of the tree. In this method, the stability analysis must be carried out and taken care as the ladder should not fall when it is raised to higher level.
