# Indigenous Birth Outcomes in Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States -an Overview

CorpusID: 11852254 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95e1bc9e570a12f36b56a1649105a94cfda56287](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95e1bc9e570a12f36b56a1649105a94cfda56287)

Fields: Sociology, Geography, Medicine

## (s5) Infant and Perinatal Mortality-Between 1981 and 2000, in British
(p5.0) Columbia, infant mortality rates among infants born to parents who were First Nations (Status Indians living on reserve, off-reserve Status Indians or those who self-identified as 'Aboriginal') were 2.3 times higher in rural areas and 2.1 times higher in urban areas than those of the 'non-First Nations' population [30].
## (s9) Birth Weight and Preterm Birth-During 2002-2006
(p9.0) , rates of SGA were 50% higher for Māori compared to European New Zealanders [47]. During 1996-2006, Māori experienced the highest preterm birth rates of any ethnic group in New Zealand.

(p9.1) , rates of SGA were 50% higher for Māori compared to European New Zealanders [47]. During 1996-2006, Māori experienced the highest preterm birth rates of any ethnic group in New Zealand.
## (s11) Infant and Perinatal
(p11.0) Mortality-Infant mortality rates are higher among the Native Hawaiian (9.0 per 1,000 live births) and American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations (8.3 per 1,000 live births) compared to a rate of 5.7 among White Americans [49]. The Native Hawaiian neonatal mortality rate (6.2 per 1,000 live births) is higher than both the AIAN neonatal mortality rate (4.4 per 1,000 live births) and the White neonatal mortality rate (3.8 per 1,000 live births) [49]. The postneonatal mortality rate for AIAN populations was 4.4 per 1,000 live births) and over twice that of Whites (1.9 per 1,000) [49].

(p11.1) Cause of Death-The leading cause of infant death in the United States in 2000 was congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (congenital malformations), accounting for 21% of all infant deaths. Infant mortality rate for congenital malformations among American Indian mothers was 1.5 per 1000, but was not statistically significant from white mothers. Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight, not elsewhere classified was the second leading cause of infant death and accounted for 16% of all infant deaths, followed by SIDS accounting for 9% infant deaths. For American Indian mothers, SIDS was 2.3 times that for white mothers. As most SIDS deaths occur during the postneonatal period, the high SIDS rates for infants of American Indian mothers account for much of their elevated risk of postneonatal mortality. For American Indian mothers, more than one-fourth (26%) of their elevated infant mortality rate, when compared with white mothers, can be accounted for by their higher SIDS rates (1.2 per 1000), and 14% by higher rates for low birth weight (1.1 per 1000) [49]. If American Indian infant mortality for SIDS and low birth weight could be reduced to white levels, the difference in the infant mortality rate between American Indian and white mothers would be reduced by 40% [49].

(p11.2) Comparable national Native Hawaiian cause of infant mortality data is not currently available because all reporting continues to follow the outdated U.S. Office of Management and Budget guidelines. In spite of the federal mandate to disaggregate Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander data from the larger Asian race category, national data are still not publicly available on Native Hawaiians.

(p11.3) Mortality-Infant mortality rates are higher among the Native Hawaiian (9.0 per 1,000 live births) and American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations (8.3 per 1,000 live births) compared to a rate of 5.7 among White Americans [49]. The Native Hawaiian neonatal mortality rate (6.2 per 1,000 live births) is higher than both the AIAN neonatal mortality rate (4.4 per 1,000 live births) and the White neonatal mortality rate (3.8 per 1,000 live births) [49]. The postneonatal mortality rate for AIAN populations was 4.4 per 1,000 live births) and over twice that of Whites (1.9 per 1,000) [49].

(p11.4) Cause of Death-The leading cause of infant death in the United States in 2000 was congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (congenital malformations), accounting for 21% of all infant deaths. Infant mortality rate for congenital malformations among American Indian mothers was 1.5 per 1000, but was not statistically significant from white mothers. Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight, not elsewhere classified was the second leading cause of infant death and accounted for 16% of all infant deaths, followed by SIDS accounting for 9% infant deaths. For American Indian mothers, SIDS was 2.3 times that for white mothers. As most SIDS deaths occur during the postneonatal period, the high SIDS rates for infants of American Indian mothers account for much of their elevated risk of postneonatal mortality. For American Indian mothers, more than one-fourth (26%) of their elevated infant mortality rate, when compared with white mothers, can be accounted for by their higher SIDS rates (1.2 per 1000), and 14% by higher rates for low birth weight (1.1 per 1000) [49]. If American Indian infant mortality for SIDS and low birth weight could be reduced to white levels, the difference in the infant mortality rate between American Indian and white mothers would be reduced by 40% [49].

(p11.5) Comparable national Native Hawaiian cause of infant mortality data is not currently available because all reporting continues to follow the outdated U.S. Office of Management and Budget guidelines. In spite of the federal mandate to disaggregate Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander data from the larger Asian race category, national data are still not publicly available on Native Hawaiians.
## (s12) Birth Weight and Preterm
(p12.0) Birth-Low birth weight or very low birth weight (birth weight less than 1500 g) is approximately 43% higher among AI/AN compared to their White American counterparts, and rates of prematurity among AI/AN are 16.6 per 1000 live births (compared to 11.3 per 1000 live births for White Americans) [49].

(p12.1) Birth-Low birth weight or very low birth weight (birth weight less than 1500 g) is approximately 43% higher among AI/AN compared to their White American counterparts, and rates of prematurity among AI/AN are 16.6 per 1000 live births (compared to 11.3 per 1000 live births for White Americans) [49].
## (s14) Understanding the Findings -A Global Perspective
(p14.0) In Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand, Indigenous peoples represent a sizeable, youthful, and growing population group. Given their younger population age structure and higher fertility rates, Indigenous populations embody a significant potential for future contribution to both Indigenous and non-Indigenous society in all four countries.

(p14.1) Significant and potentially preventable disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcomes are evident in all four countries. Stillbirth rates, where data are available, are uniformly higher for Indigenous people. In all four countries, infant mortality rates are higher among Indigenous children with Indigenous/non-Indigenous infant mortality rate ratios ranging from 1.6 to 4.0. In all four countries, the disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous IMR ratios are most marked in the post-neonatal period. Generally, stillbirth is associated with maternal health and access to maternity care; neonatal death is associated with access to obstetric and neonatal care; and postneonatal death is more likely to reflect social and environmental factors. These findings would suggest that health service, program, and policy responses are required across the spectrum of these domains, with special emphasis on the amelioration of Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in the social and environmental determinants of infant health.

(p14.2) With very few exceptions, mortality rates for the leading causes of death in all four countries are higher among Indigenous infants than non-Indigenous infants. Of particular concern are the consistent and significant Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in infant death from SIDS and respiratory tract infection, as there are existing public health strategies that can reduce both of these causes of death.

(p14.3) Indigenous infants in Australia, Canada, and the United States are more likely than non-Indigenous infants to be born with a low birth weight, except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. This is likely linked to the higher rates of preterm birth for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous populations identified in all four countries. Where data was available, rates of SGA were also elevated for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous infants except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. Interestingly, rates of HBW and LGA are increased for almost all groups of Indigenous peoples in Canada compared to the general and/or non-Indigenous populations. The increased incidence of HBW is marked for First Nations/Status Indians living on and off-reserve. While the underlying causes of this are not clear, links have been made between the relatively high and increasing rates of maternal diabetes in the First Nations/Indian population in Canada, compared to the non-Indigenous population [50]. While HBW/LGA are not routinely identified as major birth outcomes of interest, HBW and LGA are linked to adverse clinical outcomes [51]. It will be important to monitor it closely among Indigenous populations in Canada and perhaps also Australia, New Zealand and the United States, where there are emerging epidemics of chronic disease, including diabetes among Indigenous peoples [15].

(p14.4) The consistency of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities across all four countries, across almost all major birth outcomes provides compelling evidence of Indigenous/non-Indigenous health inequity. Health inequity has been defined as "differences in health that are not only unnecessary and avoidable, but in addition unfair and unjust [52]." The persistence of these birth outcome disparities in affluent countries where the majority populations take for granted the daily expression of their rights to life, health, and livelihood is particularly problematic from a human rights and population health perspective.

(p14.5) Furthering this sense of urgency and alarm is the fact that the challenges in the accurate identification of Indigenous individuals on vital registration records translates into a systematic underestimate of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities as adverse Indigenous events are more likely to be misclassified as non-Indigenous than vice versa.

(p14.6) In Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand, Indigenous peoples represent a sizeable, youthful, and growing population group. Given their younger population age structure and higher fertility rates, Indigenous populations embody a significant potential for future contribution to both Indigenous and non-Indigenous society in all four countries.

(p14.7) Significant and potentially preventable disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcomes are evident in all four countries. Stillbirth rates, where data are available, are uniformly higher for Indigenous people. In all four countries, infant mortality rates are higher among Indigenous children with Indigenous/non-Indigenous infant mortality rate ratios ranging from 1.6 to 4.0. In all four countries, the disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous IMR ratios are most marked in the post-neonatal period. Generally, stillbirth is associated with maternal health and access to maternity care; neonatal death is associated with access to obstetric and neonatal care; and postneonatal death is more likely to reflect social and environmental factors. These findings would suggest that health service, program, and policy responses are required across the spectrum of these domains, with special emphasis on the amelioration of Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in the social and environmental determinants of infant health.

(p14.8) With very few exceptions, mortality rates for the leading causes of death in all four countries are higher among Indigenous infants than non-Indigenous infants. Of particular concern are the consistent and significant Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in infant death from SIDS and respiratory tract infection, as there are existing public health strategies that can reduce both of these causes of death.

(p14.9) Indigenous infants in Australia, Canada, and the United States are more likely than non-Indigenous infants to be born with a low birth weight, except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. This is likely linked to the higher rates of preterm birth for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous populations identified in all four countries. Where data was available, rates of SGA were also elevated for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous infants except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. Interestingly, rates of HBW and LGA are increased for almost all groups of Indigenous peoples in Canada compared to the general and/or non-Indigenous populations. The increased incidence of HBW is marked for First Nations/Status Indians living on and off-reserve. While the underlying causes of this are not clear, links have been made between the relatively high and increasing rates of maternal diabetes in the First Nations/Indian population in Canada, compared to the non-Indigenous population [50]. While HBW/LGA are not routinely identified as major birth outcomes of interest, HBW and LGA are linked to adverse clinical outcomes [51]. It will be important to monitor it closely among Indigenous populations in Canada and perhaps also Australia, New Zealand and the United States, where there are emerging epidemics of chronic disease, including diabetes among Indigenous peoples [15].

(p14.10) The consistency of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities across all four countries, across almost all major birth outcomes provides compelling evidence of Indigenous/non-Indigenous health inequity. Health inequity has been defined as "differences in health that are not only unnecessary and avoidable, but in addition unfair and unjust [52]." The persistence of these birth outcome disparities in affluent countries where the majority populations take for granted the daily expression of their rights to life, health, and livelihood is particularly problematic from a human rights and population health perspective.

(p14.11) Furthering this sense of urgency and alarm is the fact that the challenges in the accurate identification of Indigenous individuals on vital registration records translates into a systematic underestimate of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities as adverse Indigenous events are more likely to be misclassified as non-Indigenous than vice versa.
## (s29) Infant and Perinatal Mortality-Between 1981 and 2000, in British
(p29.0) Columbia, infant mortality rates among infants born to parents who were First Nations (Status Indians living on reserve, off-reserve Status Indians or those who self-identified as 'Aboriginal') were 2.3 times higher in rural areas and 2.1 times higher in urban areas than those of the 'non-First Nations' population [30].
## (s33) Birth Weight and Preterm Birth-During 2002-2006
(p33.0) , rates of SGA were 50% higher for Māori compared to European New Zealanders [47]. During 1996-2006, Māori experienced the highest preterm birth rates of any ethnic group in New Zealand.

(p33.1) , rates of SGA were 50% higher for Māori compared to European New Zealanders [47]. During 1996-2006, Māori experienced the highest preterm birth rates of any ethnic group in New Zealand.
## (s35) Infant and Perinatal
(p35.0) Mortality-Infant mortality rates are higher among the Native Hawaiian (9.0 per 1,000 live births) and American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations (8.3 per 1,000 live births) compared to a rate of 5.7 among White Americans [49]. The Native Hawaiian neonatal mortality rate (6.2 per 1,000 live births) is higher than both the AIAN neonatal mortality rate (4.4 per 1,000 live births) and the White neonatal mortality rate (3.8 per 1,000 live births) [49]. The postneonatal mortality rate for AIAN populations was 4.4 per 1,000 live births) and over twice that of Whites (1.9 per 1,000) [49].

(p35.1) Cause of Death-The leading cause of infant death in the United States in 2000 was congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (congenital malformations), accounting for 21% of all infant deaths. Infant mortality rate for congenital malformations among American Indian mothers was 1.5 per 1000, but was not statistically significant from white mothers. Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight, not elsewhere classified was the second leading cause of infant death and accounted for 16% of all infant deaths, followed by SIDS accounting for 9% infant deaths. For American Indian mothers, SIDS was 2.3 times that for white mothers. As most SIDS deaths occur during the postneonatal period, the high SIDS rates for infants of American Indian mothers account for much of their elevated risk of postneonatal mortality. For American Indian mothers, more than one-fourth (26%) of their elevated infant mortality rate, when compared with white mothers, can be accounted for by their higher SIDS rates (1.2 per 1000), and 14% by higher rates for low birth weight (1.1 per 1000) [49]. If American Indian infant mortality for SIDS and low birth weight could be reduced to white levels, the difference in the infant mortality rate between American Indian and white mothers would be reduced by 40% [49].

(p35.2) Comparable national Native Hawaiian cause of infant mortality data is not currently available because all reporting continues to follow the outdated U.S. Office of Management and Budget guidelines. In spite of the federal mandate to disaggregate Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander data from the larger Asian race category, national data are still not publicly available on Native Hawaiians.

(p35.3) Mortality-Infant mortality rates are higher among the Native Hawaiian (9.0 per 1,000 live births) and American Indian/Alaska Native (AIAN) populations (8.3 per 1,000 live births) compared to a rate of 5.7 among White Americans [49]. The Native Hawaiian neonatal mortality rate (6.2 per 1,000 live births) is higher than both the AIAN neonatal mortality rate (4.4 per 1,000 live births) and the White neonatal mortality rate (3.8 per 1,000 live births) [49]. The postneonatal mortality rate for AIAN populations was 4.4 per 1,000 live births) and over twice that of Whites (1.9 per 1,000) [49].

(p35.4) Cause of Death-The leading cause of infant death in the United States in 2000 was congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities (congenital malformations), accounting for 21% of all infant deaths. Infant mortality rate for congenital malformations among American Indian mothers was 1.5 per 1000, but was not statistically significant from white mothers. Disorders related to short gestation and low birth weight, not elsewhere classified was the second leading cause of infant death and accounted for 16% of all infant deaths, followed by SIDS accounting for 9% infant deaths. For American Indian mothers, SIDS was 2.3 times that for white mothers. As most SIDS deaths occur during the postneonatal period, the high SIDS rates for infants of American Indian mothers account for much of their elevated risk of postneonatal mortality. For American Indian mothers, more than one-fourth (26%) of their elevated infant mortality rate, when compared with white mothers, can be accounted for by their higher SIDS rates (1.2 per 1000), and 14% by higher rates for low birth weight (1.1 per 1000) [49]. If American Indian infant mortality for SIDS and low birth weight could be reduced to white levels, the difference in the infant mortality rate between American Indian and white mothers would be reduced by 40% [49].

(p35.5) Comparable national Native Hawaiian cause of infant mortality data is not currently available because all reporting continues to follow the outdated U.S. Office of Management and Budget guidelines. In spite of the federal mandate to disaggregate Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander data from the larger Asian race category, national data are still not publicly available on Native Hawaiians.
## (s36) Birth Weight and Preterm
(p36.0) Birth-Low birth weight or very low birth weight (birth weight less than 1500 g) is approximately 43% higher among AI/AN compared to their White American counterparts, and rates of prematurity among AI/AN are 16.6 per 1000 live births (compared to 11.3 per 1000 live births for White Americans) [49].

(p36.1) Birth-Low birth weight or very low birth weight (birth weight less than 1500 g) is approximately 43% higher among AI/AN compared to their White American counterparts, and rates of prematurity among AI/AN are 16.6 per 1000 live births (compared to 11.3 per 1000 live births for White Americans) [49].
## (s38) Understanding the Findings -A Global Perspective
(p38.0) In Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand, Indigenous peoples represent a sizeable, youthful, and growing population group. Given their younger population age structure and higher fertility rates, Indigenous populations embody a significant potential for future contribution to both Indigenous and non-Indigenous society in all four countries.

(p38.1) Significant and potentially preventable disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcomes are evident in all four countries. Stillbirth rates, where data are available, are uniformly higher for Indigenous people. In all four countries, infant mortality rates are higher among Indigenous children with Indigenous/non-Indigenous infant mortality rate ratios ranging from 1.6 to 4.0. In all four countries, the disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous IMR ratios are most marked in the post-neonatal period. Generally, stillbirth is associated with maternal health and access to maternity care; neonatal death is associated with access to obstetric and neonatal care; and postneonatal death is more likely to reflect social and environmental factors. These findings would suggest that health service, program, and policy responses are required across the spectrum of these domains, with special emphasis on the amelioration of Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in the social and environmental determinants of infant health.

(p38.2) With very few exceptions, mortality rates for the leading causes of death in all four countries are higher among Indigenous infants than non-Indigenous infants. Of particular concern are the consistent and significant Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in infant death from SIDS and respiratory tract infection, as there are existing public health strategies that can reduce both of these causes of death.

(p38.3) Indigenous infants in Australia, Canada, and the United States are more likely than non-Indigenous infants to be born with a low birth weight, except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. This is likely linked to the higher rates of preterm birth for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous populations identified in all four countries. Where data was available, rates of SGA were also elevated for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous infants except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. Interestingly, rates of HBW and LGA are increased for almost all groups of Indigenous peoples in Canada compared to the general and/or non-Indigenous populations. The increased incidence of HBW is marked for First Nations/Status Indians living on and off-reserve. While the underlying causes of this are not clear, links have been made between the relatively high and increasing rates of maternal diabetes in the First Nations/Indian population in Canada, compared to the non-Indigenous population [50]. While HBW/LGA are not routinely identified as major birth outcomes of interest, HBW and LGA are linked to adverse clinical outcomes [51]. It will be important to monitor it closely among Indigenous populations in Canada and perhaps also Australia, New Zealand and the United States, where there are emerging epidemics of chronic disease, including diabetes among Indigenous peoples [15].

(p38.4) The consistency of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities across all four countries, across almost all major birth outcomes provides compelling evidence of Indigenous/non-Indigenous health inequity. Health inequity has been defined as "differences in health that are not only unnecessary and avoidable, but in addition unfair and unjust [52]." The persistence of these birth outcome disparities in affluent countries where the majority populations take for granted the daily expression of their rights to life, health, and livelihood is particularly problematic from a human rights and population health perspective.

(p38.5) Furthering this sense of urgency and alarm is the fact that the challenges in the accurate identification of Indigenous individuals on vital registration records translates into a systematic underestimate of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities as adverse Indigenous events are more likely to be misclassified as non-Indigenous than vice versa.

(p38.6) In Australia, Canada, the United States and New Zealand, Indigenous peoples represent a sizeable, youthful, and growing population group. Given their younger population age structure and higher fertility rates, Indigenous populations embody a significant potential for future contribution to both Indigenous and non-Indigenous society in all four countries.

(p38.7) Significant and potentially preventable disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcomes are evident in all four countries. Stillbirth rates, where data are available, are uniformly higher for Indigenous people. In all four countries, infant mortality rates are higher among Indigenous children with Indigenous/non-Indigenous infant mortality rate ratios ranging from 1.6 to 4.0. In all four countries, the disparities in Indigenous/non-Indigenous IMR ratios are most marked in the post-neonatal period. Generally, stillbirth is associated with maternal health and access to maternity care; neonatal death is associated with access to obstetric and neonatal care; and postneonatal death is more likely to reflect social and environmental factors. These findings would suggest that health service, program, and policy responses are required across the spectrum of these domains, with special emphasis on the amelioration of Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in the social and environmental determinants of infant health.

(p38.8) With very few exceptions, mortality rates for the leading causes of death in all four countries are higher among Indigenous infants than non-Indigenous infants. Of particular concern are the consistent and significant Indigenous/non-Indigenous disparities in infant death from SIDS and respiratory tract infection, as there are existing public health strategies that can reduce both of these causes of death.

(p38.9) Indigenous infants in Australia, Canada, and the United States are more likely than non-Indigenous infants to be born with a low birth weight, except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. This is likely linked to the higher rates of preterm birth for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous populations identified in all four countries. Where data was available, rates of SGA were also elevated for Indigenous compared to non-Indigenous infants except for First Nations/Indians in Canada. Interestingly, rates of HBW and LGA are increased for almost all groups of Indigenous peoples in Canada compared to the general and/or non-Indigenous populations. The increased incidence of HBW is marked for First Nations/Status Indians living on and off-reserve. While the underlying causes of this are not clear, links have been made between the relatively high and increasing rates of maternal diabetes in the First Nations/Indian population in Canada, compared to the non-Indigenous population [50]. While HBW/LGA are not routinely identified as major birth outcomes of interest, HBW and LGA are linked to adverse clinical outcomes [51]. It will be important to monitor it closely among Indigenous populations in Canada and perhaps also Australia, New Zealand and the United States, where there are emerging epidemics of chronic disease, including diabetes among Indigenous peoples [15].

(p38.10) The consistency of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities across all four countries, across almost all major birth outcomes provides compelling evidence of Indigenous/non-Indigenous health inequity. Health inequity has been defined as "differences in health that are not only unnecessary and avoidable, but in addition unfair and unjust [52]." The persistence of these birth outcome disparities in affluent countries where the majority populations take for granted the daily expression of their rights to life, health, and livelihood is particularly problematic from a human rights and population health perspective.

(p38.11) Furthering this sense of urgency and alarm is the fact that the challenges in the accurate identification of Indigenous individuals on vital registration records translates into a systematic underestimate of Indigenous/non-Indigenous birth outcome disparities as adverse Indigenous events are more likely to be misclassified as non-Indigenous than vice versa.
