# Reducing industrial energy demand in the UK: A review of energy efficiency technologies and energy saving potential in selected sectors

CorpusID: 117159736 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9375f5ff521fc859e34181aadfdd5f50e6856f45](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9375f5ff521fc859e34181aadfdd5f50e6856f45)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s3) Generation
(p3.0) Boiler efficiency is the key index to evaluate the energy efficiency of a whole steam system, which depends on many more parameters apart from combustion and thermal efficiencies. In actual practice, two methods are commonly used to find out boiler efficiency, namely direct method and indirect method of efficiency calculation [18]. Both the methods of calculating boiler efficiency have their own advantages and disadvantages. In reality, indirect efficiency is measured at a particular time whereas direct efficiency is measured over a period of time and hence, losses on account of fluctuating loads, boiler on-off etc. are also taken into consideration.
## (s8) Technology mapping
(p8.0) Heat recovery technologies may be classified as either passive or active (see Fig. 9). The passive heat recovery follows the convection/ diffusion law that heat spontaneously passes from a higher temperature source to a lower temperature stream by using heat exchangers of various types. Due to the spontaneous nature, passive heat recovery technologies do not require significant mechanical or electrical input for their operation, except for auxiliary equipment such as pumps or fans. In contrast, since heat can never pass from a lower temperature source to a higher temperature stream without some other cost, active heat recovery technologies require the input of energy (e.g. waste heat). Some examples of both passive and active heat recovery technologies are shown in Fig. 9. Table 5 lists the available heat recovery technologies for industrial applications, including some of their techno-economic characteristics either from models or experiments. The selection of appropriate heat recovery technology for a particular application, primarily, depends on heat source grades (e.g. temperature), quantity (e.g. flow rate), efficiency and payback period. In general, the passive heat recovery technologies are used for various preheating processes, direct heat to electricity conversion or thermal energy storage applications. For preheating processes, the target (waste heat) temperature is usually greater than 60°C, such as preheating of air and boiler make-up water. Heat distribution is particularly suitable for recovering waste heat of hot streams, like steam (100-140°C) and hot water (50-90°C), to district heating; redundant hot water can also be stored for future use. One of the passive ways of heat recovery technology is thermal energy storage using a Phase Change Materials (PCMs) system which absorbs energy when heating and releases energy when cooling. Although PCMs can be used as both latent and sensible heat storage units, the latent heat storage PCMs offers a more efficient and greater energy storage density than the sensible heat storage PCMs [36]. PCMs are therefore designed to recover energy from different temperature ranges heat sources: from as low as 15°C to above 90°C. The high temperature PCMs are mainly employed to industrial waste heat recovery applications where a heat source temperature could typically higher than 90°C [37]. Unlike other passive heat recovery technologies, the direct energy conversion technologies such as thermoelectric generator and thermophotovoltaic convert heat energy into electricity directly. The thermoelectric generator is a solid-state semiconductor or conductor device, which generates electricity through the Seebeck effect when a temperature difference across the device is imposed. The conversion efficiency of thermoelectric generators is in the range of 1-5% while the operating temperature is within 150-600°C [38,39], and they are therefore suitable to low and medium grade heat recovery applications. In the case of high grade heat sources in industry, typically with temperatures of 1000°C and above, a thermophotovoltaic device, which is a collection of photovoltaic cells that absorb infrared radiation from a high temperature heat source and converts it into electricity, can be used. It has been reported that the thermophotovoltaic has an efficiency potential of up to 20% at a heat source temperature of 1800°C [40,41].

(p8.1) The active heat recovery strategies mainly refer to recovering waste heat for heating, cooling, and mechanical work. Some of the active heat recovery technologies, their operating conditions and techno-economic performances are provided in Table 5. Among them, closed-cycle mechanical heat pumps are suitable for heat recovery from waste heat streams up to about 110°C, depending on the working fluid. Heat pump is particularly suited for moist exhaust stream as it can not only recover the heat associated with the temperature -'sensible heat' but also the heat associated with the humidity -'latent heat'. Absorption refrigerators and adsorption chillers are often used to recover waste heat from turbine and engine exhausts but do not rely on electrical power. In addition to the pumps and valves, they mainly consist of heat exchangers with the features of low noise and little vibration. In recent years, these two technologies have been widely used in central air conditioning to replace traditional compression refrigeration systems.
## (s9) Overall heat recovery solutions
(p9.0) According to spatial distribution and energy conversion form, overall heat recovery solutions can be broadly classified into three strategies, as shown in Fig. 10: (a) recovering waste heat from a process and recycling the recovered energy back into the process through heat exchange of various types; (b) recovering waste heat for other process uses or hot water storage through heat distribution network and heat exchange; (c) using it to pass heat from a lower temperature source to a higher temperature stream (e.g. refrigeration or heat pump) or generate electricity in power systems (e.g. thermodynamic cycle or heat engine).

(p9.1) Industrial processes are sets of procedures that involve thermal, physical, mechanical, chemical and electrical actions to produce a target item, for instance a steam generating process. An industry is comprised of many individual process and sub processes in different operating temperatures. The most efficient way of recovering waste heat from a process is to reuse the heat by feeding back to the main process. A common example of waste heat reuse within a process is boilers. In industrial boilers, the combustion exhaust can be used to preheat combustion air and feed water which eventually saves fuel costs and increases boiler efficiency. A list of industrial processes, temperatures and potential in-process reuse options is listed in Table 6. The second most efficient option for the utilisation of waste heat in industry is to use the heat in other nearby processes. Waste heat from high temperature processes can be transferred to other lower temperature processes via heat exchangers. Some examples where heat exchangers used are space heating, hot water for domestic use, in plant absorption refrigeration system, heating of evaporative systems or over the fence heat sinks such as district heating [63]. In addition, waste heat from different processes can also be stored for future use by various storage technologies with carrier fluids such as water, thermal oil, PCMs, etc. The thermal energy storage could be an effective way of reducing waste heat, especially when the waste heat from any process is intermittent in nature and utilisation of this excess heat in other processes is not viable. The third and final stage of the solution is to recover a waste heat either using heating and cooling systems or via power generation systems. Although, numerous technologies for this purpose are commercially available and ready to use, a process specific waste heat recovery technology should be assessed according to the quantity and quality of heat source. Hammond and Norman [9] conducted such an analysis to show the heat source characteristics required by different technologies to be used for waste heat recovery applications. For instance, heat pumps can be used with a heat source temperature less than 100°C. On the other side, an on-site heat recovery is preferable if the temperature of heat source is higher than 100°C. Heat to chilling is suitable for a heat source temperature in between 100 and 300°C and all heat sources with temperatures greater than 100°C can be used for electricity generation [9].
## (s16) Heat recovery potential from the iron and steel industry
(p16.0) Energy interdependent relationship within modern iron and steel enterprises is a complex system. Fig. 23 illustrates an example of the energy flows in an integrated steelwork. Although the dominant inputs are coal (more than 65% of primary source of energy), heavy oil and coke (if bought from an external supply), most of them are used to produce coke in the coke oven plant and as reducing agents in the blast furnace. The materials that constitute the basis of the energy system are the process gases, including coke oven gas, blast furnace gas, and basic oxygen furnace gas. Heat recovery is an effective way to enable that most of the energy demand can be satisfied by these gases, while minimising the remaining part that must be balanced with purchased energy, normally electrical power and natural gas. Despite the widespread development of heat recovery technologies within process stages (individual process or plant level), larger savings may be obtained by using a wider integrated network of heat exchange across various processes along the supply chain (integrated system level). McBrien et al. [131] investigated the potential for energy savings by heat recovery in an integrated steel supply chain using pinch analysis. Table 8 lists potential heat recovery methods currently available and average energy saving obtained if implemented in the blast furnacebasic oxygen furnace integrated (BF-BOF) route steelmaking process.
## (s17) Bioenergy/waste utilisation in the iron and steel industry
(p17.0) Although energy efficiency measures are able to effectively reduce production energy consumption per tonne of steel for the time being, they are not enough to offset the growth in energy demand resulting from increasing steel production in the long run. Fossil fuels coal and coke represent the main source of energy in the iron and steel industry. Total or partial substitution with a fuel with a lower carbon content, e.g. biomass, can reduce the dependence on fossil fuels. The extent to which coal can be replaced is dependent on the iron-and steelmaking process. The biomass products can be applied in several processes as shown in Fig. 24: (i) coke making for production of bio-coke or  charcoal; (ii) sintering process for production of bio-sinter; (iii) partial replacement of nut coke, coke or PC in blast furnace; (iv) pelletising/ briquetting for production of bio-composites and/or bio-briquettes; (v) replacement of pulverised coal injected as a fuel in the blast furnace; and (vi) bio-recarburisation of steel in ladle furnace [134]. Due to much lower mechanical strength of bio-coke compared to coke, in practice it is impossible to operate large blast furnaces with 100% substitution of bio-coke for coke, with substitution rates up to 20% being considered reasonable [135]. Typical carbon material addition rates of other processes in different steelmaking routes are shown in Table 9.
## (s23) Heat recovery potential in food and drink industry
(p23.0) As stated before, the Food and drink manufacturing industry is one of the largest energy consumers within UK industry. Because of thermodynamic limitation or equipment or process inefficiency, a significant amount of waste heat is released and lost by the sector in every year. It has been estimated that UK industry produces around 11.4 TW h/year of recoverable waste heat of which 2.8 TW h is from the food and drink manufacturing processes [63]. Utilisation of this waste heat can reduce 514.08 ktCO 2 e emissions and save £70 million per year. Unlike the heat source from the Iron and Steel industry, the waste heat from food and drink processes is predominantly low grade energy   whose temperature is typically below 260°C. In the food and drink industry, about 64% of the energy is used for low temperature processes [63]. Heat recovery from the moderate temperature (200-400°C) heat sources is more cost effective today with the increasing energy prices, technological development by equipment manufacturers and decreasing equipment costs. The heat recovery with a temperature less than 60°C is not economical in light of the current technological development stage yet. In order to recover the low grade heat from the industrial processes three criteria should be met: a) the processes must generate a waste heat at a reasonable temperature that a heat sink can use the waste heat, b) the heat transfer from a low grade heat source to a heat sink should be economically sound, c) a heat sink must be available to absorb the waste heat during the main process operation [157]. Since the sector is highly diverse in terms of types of processes and products used to manufacture, there is limited accurate data available on the heat source and sink temperatures, waste heat quantity and potential to heat recovery using a specific heat recovery method. Therefore, an approximate temperature of different processes has been adopted to summarise the opportunities that are available for waste heat recovery from the food and drink manufacturing sector, which is presented in Table 12. A recent study conducted by Hammond and Norman [9] shows that around 0.75 TW h of waste heat at temperatures up to 200°C is available from the UK food and drink sector. The available waste heat is used to derive the potential heat recovery opportunities using different methods as follows: a) on-site heat recovery, b) heat recovery by heat pumps, c) Heat utilisation in chilling process, d) electricity generation from waste heat, e) Heat transportation for over the fence use, and f) combination of different recovery options. Fig. 27 shows an indicative potential for the heat recovery from the food and drink manufacturing sector. It can be seen that onsite heat recovery has the potential to recover a maximum of 0.611 TW h/year, which is highest among the individual waste heat recovery method used in the study. It was also reported that over 85% of the food and drink manufacturing sites have the capability to adopt an on site heat recovery option [9]. Heat pumps on the other hand represent the lowest opportunities with a potential of 0.03 TW h/year. The study could not find any opportunities for the use of the waste heat in electricity generation in the food and drink sectors. This is because of the low temperature heat sources that could not potentially generate a minimum of 0.5 MW e , which is the minimum limit to be considered as the potential waste heat recovery method in the analysis [9]. The heat to chilling was suggested to be the second highest potential method with a contribution of 0.58 TW h/year. Heat transportation to neighbour industries, within 10 km distance, with 50% efficiency has the potential to recover 0.333 TW h/year. In order to maximise the heat recovery potential, a combination of different waste heat recovery methods was applied and the result shows that the combined option has the maximum potential which is 0.67 TW h/year [9].
## (s27) Engineering-Procurement-Construction (E-P-C)
(p27.0) E-P-C is a popular business model in industry. Energy service providers undertake the system planning and design, civil construction, equipment procurement, equipment installation, system commissioning, and are fully responsible for the quality, safety, duration, and cost of a project [169]. The entire system is handed over to the energy users on completion thus turnkey operates. The E-P-C business model has some derivative forms. For the Engineering (E) service model [170], the ESCO provides technical solutions and design, but the energy users arrange their own equipment procurement, construction, and management. In the E model, the ESCO occupies only one value chain position, so some of the large ESCOs are reluctant to provide this model of service, thus the proportion of this business model is declining year by year. For the Engineering-Procurement (E-P) service model, the ESCO not only provides technical solutions and design, but also arrange equipment procurement, construction, and management for the energy users. The E-P service is widely used for energy efficiency projects or non-core business. Other energy users adopt the E-P-C service model in the project phase and then commission the ESCO to operate the energy system in the operation phase, that is, the E-P-C & Commission service model. The application and promotion of the E-P-C & Commission service model has some inevitability as energy efficiency projects often have different technical requirements compared to the energy users' core business. They are often complicated in structure and have a wide range of highly technical content. After project completion, the operation, maintenance and management of the new energy system require personnel with high technical capabilities. Due to the lack of relevant professional and technical personnel as well as other organisation barriers as discussed in Section 4.2, in most cases energy users cannot operate the energy system under optimum conditions. Furthermore, due to technical barriers and other reasons, when determining the general contractor, it is difficult for the energy user to determine the pros and cons of E-P-C project work and the effect this will have on operational efficiency from the written materials. In either case, the E-P-C & Commission service model allows the project risk to be handed over to the operations contractor and the energy user can concentrate on its core business.
## (s34) A new approach to drivers and barriers for energy efficiency
(p34.0) Highlighted from this multi-scale breakdown at process, plant and national level of energy efficiency barriers and drivers it can be seen Table 14 Taxonomy of the drivers to industrial energy efficiency from a disaggregated systems perspective [184,192].
