# A REVIEW ON THE PROGRESS OF POLYMER NANOSTRUCTURES WITH MODULATED MORPHOLOGIES AND PROPERTIES, USING NANOPOROUS AAO TEMPLATES

CorpusID: 119030467 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54bfdc064ba68ac3721790e8a5c5bed292e900cd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54bfdc064ba68ac3721790e8a5c5bed292e900cd)

Fields: Physics, Materials Science

## (s0) Electrospinning
(p0.0) Electrospinning has been shown to be a simple but powerful technique for the preparation of 1D nanostructures (mainly nanofibers; other types of 1D nanostructure, such as nanorods, can be cut from nanofibers by special methods [6,7]). In fact, more than 80% of the total number of papers shown in figure 1 employs this method for the preparation of polymer nanofibers. This is an interesting fabrication process in terms of material diversity, cost, throughput, and the potential for high-volume production.

(p0.1) Polymer nanofibers are produced by using an electrostatically driven jet of polymer solution (or polymer melt) [8]. In an ordinary electrospinning process, the jet is simultaneously pulled, stretched, elongated, and bent by the electric forces. Solvent evaporates rapidly, causing the shell jet to solidify, thus producing nano/micro fibers [9,10].
## (s1) Nanofabrication techniques
(p1.0) Nanofabrication involves processes and methods of constructing engineered nanostructures and devices having minimum dimensions lower than 100 nm. Generally, the nanofabrication methods are divided into two major categories: "bottom-up" and "top-down" methods according to the processes involved in creating nanoscale structures [15]. Bottom up approaches rely on the spontaneous organization or selfassembly of molecules or objects into stable, well defined structures by noncovalent forces including atomic and molecular nanostructures at a surface [16][17][18].
## (s5) Combination of nanofabrication techniques
(p5.0) Combination of "bottom-up" and "top-down" approaches have been efficiently used in producing functionally important nanoscale materials [16]. Specifically, for the case of 1DPN, block copolymer lithography involves a combination of bottom-up selfassembly and top-down lithographic processes that result in domains with high periodicity (10 nm within a template or highly elaborate patterns) [56]. Self-assembly strategies can also be combined with template approaches to achieve polymeric nanotubes. That is the case of the self-assembly of block copolymers BCPs in AAO membranes which give rise to BCP nanorods and nanotubes that, with a weak base or acid, can easily be released from the template [57]. For example, nanorods of polystyrene-b-polybutadiene (PS-b-PB) and polystyrene-b-poly(methylmethacrylate) (PS-b-PMMA) have been successfully prepared within AAO membranes and morphological changes under cylindrical nanoconfinement have been studied [58][59][60]. In addition, nanotubes of polystyrene-b-polyacrylonitrile (PS-b-PAN) and polystyrene-bpoly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP) were prepared within AAO membranes and used to generate nanoporous carbon nanotubes [61,62].

(p5.1) The layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly method can be regarded as a versatile bottomup nanofabrication technique [63]. In the LbL process, different charged speciespolymeric, colloidal, nano-and microscale-are assembled on a substrate in sequences of alternating charges [64] or other complementary interactions such as hydrogen bonding or host-guest interactions [65]. The fabrication of polymer nanotubes via layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly of polyelectrolyte solutions employing AAO membranes gives rise to hierarchical nanostructures previously challenging to obtain via other means (e.g., solution-casting, melt-wetting) [66]. There exists an optimum set of conditions (ionic strength, molecular weight) that ultimately control chain dimension relative to geometric dimension The tube wall thickness was found to be thinner or thicker than those assembled on planer surfaces depending on pore size [67,68]. A broad range of polymer materials have been LbL-assembled within the cylindrical nanopores of AAO membranes to yield polymer nanotubes [69].  The formation of the AAO porous honeycombs have been extensively investigated and reported by various groups along the 20 th century, starting by the pioneering works by Keller [72], Thomson [73,74] and others. Nevertheless, AAO drawn the attention from scientist in the nanotechnology arena in 1995, when Masuda and co-workers reported the reaction conditions leading to self-ordering of pores [47] and the subsequent development of a method for achieving ordered AAO templates, i.e.

(p5.2) the so-called two-step anodization process [75]. This essentially consists of two consecutive anodization reactions (electrochemical oxidations) over the surface of an aluminum foil. Briefly, a high purity aluminum foil is first cleaned, degreased and polished. Then, a first anodization reaction is performed in an acidic electrolyte under dc constant voltage, which provokes the formation of a first porous AAO layer. The pores in this AAO layer are not ordered at the top surface but are hexagonally arranged at the regions close to the oxide-aluminum interface if the anodization is carried out under specific conditions. On their growth during first anodization, the pores sculpt hemispherical concaves on the aluminum substrate, which thus tend to organize together with the pores. Subsequently, the first AAO layer is dissolved and a second anodization reaction is performed. In the second anodization, the concaves sculpted in the aluminium surface act as nucleation points for the growth of the new pores.
## (s8) Ordered AAO templates with different pore architectures
(p8.0) The development of AAO templates with complex pore architectures has meant a step further in template-based nanofabrication, as cavities different from the typically HA pulses are alternated without the necessity of electrolyte change [79]. Lee and coworkers [79,105,106] as well as Sulka and coworkers [107,108] have demonstrated that pulse anodization enable a high control of pore diameter modulations in terms of shape and position. Losic et al. reported the "cyclic anodization", in which current profiles in the form of waves were applied to produce the pore modulations [89,109].

(p8.1) Furthermore, spontaneous current oscillations taking place during HA process in oxalic and sulfuric acid electrolytes induce also pore diameter modulations, as reported by Lee at al. [110] and Schwirn et al. [86] (Figure 4b). Branched pores. Ordered AAO templates with Y shaped pores can be produced by a step reduction of the applied voltage (by a factor of 1/√2), as reported by Li and coworkers [111]. The method was further extended to achieve multitetered AAO templates consisting of pores branching into smaller pores in succeeding tiers [112].

(p8.2) Meng and coworkers managed to produce a number of different multibranched pore structures adjusting the voltage step reduction [113,114]. Moreover, exponential reductions of the applied voltage also yield branched pore structures, as has been showed by Chen et al [115].
## (s9) Three-dimensional porous structures.
(p9.0) Three-dimensional (3D) ordered nanostructures are currently gaining increasing attention as they promise the lowdimensionality effects associated to nanoscopic elements, while being a macroscale-size pieces, hence, easy to be manipulated, analyzed and employed. However, their fabrication turns to be challenging, as the macroscopic extension of 3D nanostructures restricts their fabrication approaches to bottom-up strategies, i.e those based on selforganization. Thus, a promising method for achieving 3D nanostructures are template approaches using self-organized porous templates having 3D porous structures.

(p9.1) Motivated by this idea, a number of groups have ventured into the development of AAO templates with ordered three-dimensionally interconnected nanopores. Lee et al. showed that pore modulations originated from self-induced current oscillations may be an starting point to create a well-defined 3D porous structure at a local scale [110].
## (s10) Template synthesis methods
(p10.0) Steinhart et al [118] were the first to develop a simple method for the fabrication of polymer nanotubes of polystyrene and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) with a monodisperse size distribution, from the polymer melt or solutions, using ordered porous alumina templates. This method was based on the wetting phenomena that occur if a polymer solution or melt is placed in contact with a substrate of high surface energy, like the porous of AAO templates. As a consequence, the polymer will spread to form a thin film. This method is known as precursor film. In this work, authors also reported the conditions to process the polymer melts, i.e. polymers must be placed on the top of the AAO pore array at a temperature well above its glass transition temperature, in the case of amorphous polymers, or its melting point, in the case of partially crystalline polymers ( Figure 6). Owing to the versatility of this technique, this approach has been largely employed in many different laboratories as a route toward the preparation of polymer and polymerbased composites nanotubes from many different chemical structures and compositions.

(p10.1) A particular case of the melt precursor film infiltration method is when the thickness of this precursor film is larger than the pore radius of the AAO template [147,149]. In this case, solid polymer nanofibers are obtained instead of hollow nanotubes as can be observed in Figure 7. This procedure has been largely applied to systematically prepare polymer nanofibers of PEO, PVDF, PI, PVDF-TrFE, P3HT, etc with dimensions ranging from 15 to 65 nm, in studies of correlation between polymer properties and degree of confinement, as it will described in section 4. Based also on wetting phenomena, if the polymer infiltration in AAO templates is carried out under partial wetting regime conditions, the melt infiltrates into the pores by capillarity. Capillary process of polymer liquids into templates is also a spontaneous process that has been studied by Russell et al,. [131][132][133], McCarthy et al,. [157] and previously by Whitesides et al for other patterns [158]. This is the case, when during infiltration polymer chains are in a low mobility regime within the melt (temperature slightly above the glass transition temperature) and are unable to form a melt precursor film. However, the polymer melt is still a low surface energy liquid that tends to wet the pore walls. In this way, the polymer melt infiltrates into the pore, not only by advancing over the alumina pore walls, but also through the whole pore section.

(p10.2) In this case, solid polymer solid nanorods or nanofibers are obtained. Generally, capillary infiltration is orders of magnitude slower than precursor wetting infiltration, and it is characterized by a meniscus in the advance extreme of the melt ( Figure 8).  [131]. In this work they observed that, as the annealing temperature was increased, a transition from partial to complete wetting, resulting in the formation of very different one-dimensional polymeric nanostructures (nanorods and nanotubes). They also found that the wetting transition temperature was dependent on the polymer molecular weight.
## (s13) Introduction
(p13.0) The "in-situ" polymerization of a monomer in the AAO template (nanoreactor) is an alternative to prepare polymer nanostructures, other than by the infiltration of polymers (nanomolding). In fact, is a complementary way to obtain tailored thermoplastic polymer nanostructures when the polymer infiltration process must be carried out at high temperature and/or for a relatively long time, from hours to days, and the only way to obtain nanostructures from thermoset polymers, for which the polymer infiltration by melting is impossible [162,168,169]. It also offers important advantages in the study of the polymerization kinetics and reaction modelling in confinement, in comparison to other nanoconfined systems since i) each AAO nanocavity is a watertight compartment and, therefore, can be considered as a nanoreactor, ii) the dimensions of AAO nanopores are not only well defined but also easily tailored; and iii) the polymer can also be extracted [170][171][172][173][174]. Moreover, one important fact is the feasibility to directly produce polymer nanostructures for applications. nanotubes were prepared with different composite ratios and it was found that the tubular wall strongly depends on the monomer concentration [175,176] (Figure 13).  Recently, a functional monomer was thermally polymerized inside the anodized aluminum oxide (AAO) channel into nanotubes, which were isolated and characterized to be semiconductive and blue fluorescent, and used as nano-containers of Fe3O4 nanoparticles to form magnetic nanocomposites [183]. Previously, polypyrrole (PPy) nanotubes with highly uniform surface and tunable wall thickness were fabricated by one-step vapor deposition polymerization using anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) template membranes and transformed into carbon nanotubes through a carbonization process [184].

(p13.1) Moreover, it was reported a simple method of utilizing anodized aluminum oxide as a reproducible template for fabricating high-aspect-ratio uniformly bent polymeric nanopillars that can be used as a physical adhesive [185]. In this paper, it is shown how to achieve straight high-aspect-ratio nanopillars with concepts of the work of adhesion and lateral collapse between polymer pillars without serious damage to the master template and is demonstrated, with the support of manufacturing polymeric nanopillars from the reusable AAO, a simple route to asymmetric dry adhesive nanopillars bent by residual stresses. However, with a few exceptions described below, in all the above papers the kinetics of the vinyl polymerization or how the kinetics is affected by the confinement have not been studied and neither if the chemical structure of synthesized polymers have been modified compared to bulk polymerization.
## (s14) Effect on polymerization kinetics and chemical structure
(p14.0) In a recent work [168], the polymerization of styrene in the AAO nanotemplates has been carried out as an example of vinyl polymerization by free radicals mechanism.   In the case of free radical polymerization of styrene in AAO nanocavities, the polystyrene nanostructures extracted from the AAO templates have been characterized by SEC and NMR spectroscopy, as a function of the percentage of conversion. Up to 50% conversion, no significant differences in the values of M w or PDI for bulk and confinement polymerization processes were found, which means that the growth radical termination mechanisms is the same in both cases [168]. At high conversion (>65%), it was observed that M w and PDI values are higher for bulk polymerization than nanopolymerization and the difference is more pronounced as the reaction conversion progresses. This behavior was attributed to the better control of the temperature inside of the nanomold, in comparison to the bulk polymerization, where the heat transfer will occur in a very much higher volume. Concerning the steoregularity of the nanostructured polymer, NMR results showed that nanopolymerized PS has a higher degree of syndiotacticity than bulk polymerized. Although the authors cannot attribute this difference to any particular confinement effect, they speculate if the difference in the diffusion of growing chains in confinement with regard to the bulk and/or nanocavities wall obstruction, could favor a kind of regiorigidity of the chain that would allow a rather stereoregular growing. From these results, it is thus evident the influence of nanoconfinement both on the styrene polymerization and the polymer microstructure, therefore, these changes will be accompanied by the variation in the physical properties of the polymer. Nonetheless, considering that confinement and surface effects may not be necessarily identical to all the monomer and polymerization processes, it seems obvious the need of systematic studies of polymerization in confinement, polymer characterization and modelling.
## (s15) Modeling of polymerization in nanoconfinement
(p15.0) Very recently, Begum et al. [173,188] studied the modeling of methyl methacrylate free radical polymerization in borosilicate nanopores finding that the confinement accelerates the reaction rate as a function of the nanopores size. In contrast, a recent study has found that free radical polymerization of perfluorodecyl acrylate (PFA) in AAO nanopores, showed a significant reduction in the rate of polymerization with respect to the reaction carried out in bulk [162]. The authors considered that the situation observed in this case is similar in nature to dispersed phase polymerizations such as miniemulsion and emulsion polymerization, where the concentration of radicals in the dispersed phase varies depending on the volume of monomer droplets/polymer particles dispersed in water [189,190]. From this assumption a kinetics polymerization model was proposed in which the reaction was confined to a cylindrical space defined by the dimensions of the AAO template used, rather than being confined to droplets A good agreement between the experimental data and the compartmentalized model was obtained while the corresponding bulk free radical polymerization would proceed at a much faster rate. Thus, the current model accurately predicts that as the nanocompartment diameter is decreased the probability of termination is increased due to a higher local radical concentration resulting in a slower rate of polymerization. 
## (s19) Structure of amorphous polymers
(p19.0) Disordered polymer chains, like those in the molten state or below T g in amorphous polymers, might be also considered nanosized entities, as typical values of the radius of gyrations, R g , of Gaussian chain conformations range typically from 3 to 30 nm.

(p19.1) Therefore, the conformation of disordered chains can also be affected when they are confined into nanoscopic cavities, such as the nanopores of AAO templates. Moreover, the nature of interaction with the confining surface -attractive, neutral or repulsive-may lead also to anisotropic conformations of chains located at the interfaces. Furthermore, these deviations from the isotropic statistic chain as well as polymer-pore wall contact points are expected to influence the entanglement network [149,195,196], with subsequent consequences in chain diffusion [197,198] and rheological properties [199][200][201][202], as will be shown below.

(p19.2) In this context AAO templates stand as ideal platform for the study of confinement effects on chain conformation and the entanglement network as: (i) The degree of confinement can be easily modulated from values significantly below 2R g up to values much larger than 2R g ; (ii) Well defined cylindrical confinement allows for the study of anisotropies; (iii) the nature of polymer-wall interaction can be tuned by chemical functionalization of the hydroxilated pore walls. Nonetheless, these studies are hitherto scarce in the literature [149,199,203,204].

(p19.3) Noirez et al. reported the more detailed study so far on the chain conformation of an amorphous polymer, PS, confined into nanopores of AAO templates [204]. The analysis of the polymer form factor obtained by small angle neutron scattering revealed that the chain extension was similar along the transverse and longitudinal direction to the AAO pore axes ( Figure 19). Thus, they concluded that the PS chain remains isotropic in both configurations inside the nanopores. Likewise, Martín and coworkers [149] as well as Lagrené et al. [203] did not detect any influence of confinement on molten PEO chains inside AAO templates. The entanglement network of molten high molecular weight polymers is likely to be more affected by the confinement than chain conformation [149,199,205]. Shin et al. reported reduction of the viscosity of PS chains during capillary flow along AAO nanopores with dimensions smaller than that of the chain in bulk [199]. Also, they 
## (s20) Supramolecular structures
(p20.0) It is well known that 2D confinement and the influence of pore walls influence the selfassembly of block copolymers having immiscible blocks and, thus, their microphase structure. The same must be true for liquid crystalline polymers. However, in this review none of these topics will be addressed. In the case of block-copolymers, because

(p20.1) Steinhart has recently reported a very complete review article, which includes the description of a number of theoretical and experimental works, as well as general conclusions on the organization of block copolymers within nanopores [194].

(p20.2) Furthermore, reviews on theory of block copolymer self-assembly in confined geometries have been also reported [206]. On the other hand, self-organization of liquid crystalline polymers confined into AAO templates is not reviewed here due to the few reports on the topic, which prevents drawing general conclusions [207].
## (s21) Confinement effects on dynamical processes
(p21.0) As stated before, finite size effects are considered to originate directly from the hindering of a certain physical process. These effects are due to the fact that the associated length scale of the physical property in question comes into conflict with the dimensions of the material itself. However, the real influence of the size limitation over such processes is often hard to identify and thus has become a matter of controversy among the scientific community [208,209]. One of the main reasons behind that might be the fact that finite size effects are frequently masked by other effects, which are also connected to low dimensionality but cannot be directly ascribed to the hindering of the physical processes due to reduced space. Among such effects are interfacial interactions between polymer molecules and the confining surface, i.e. substrates, pore walls, etc.
## (s22) Tg, segmental dynamics
(p22.0) The typical finite size effects on segmental relaxation of polymers have been proposed to be i) the broadening of relaxation time distribution function, ii) the acceleration or deceleration of dynamics and iii) a different dependence of the relaxation time on the temperature. Nevertheless, dimensions of pores in AAO templates are likely to be far from the length-scales associated with the segmental dynamics [212]. Thus these kinds of pure finite size effects are hard to be observed in the AAO-polymer system. Instead, the adsorption of polymer chains on the hydroxilated pore walls of AAO templates seems to play mayor roll on the segmental dynamics -and thus on the T g -of polymers embedded in AAO templates. The dimensions of the AAO nanopores, however, come into conflict with the length scale of crystalline structures, which hence are altered in these pores. Consequently, indirect effects of pore confinement on segmental dynamics through structural changes might be a general feature of this system.

(p22.1) The first investigation on segmental dynamics of polymers confined in well defined, ordered AAO templates was reported by Duran et al [213]. They synthesized the polypeptide poly (γ-bencil-L-glutamate) (PBLG) in AAOs with pore diameters ranging from 25 to 400 nm and the dynamical process was analyzed by dielectric spectroscopy. The segmental dynamics of PBLG located in 200 and 400 nm in diameter pores corresponded to that of bulk PBLG, which is characterized by a "fragile" temperature dependence of the relaxation times. In contrast, they reported a change from "fragile" to "strong" dynamic behavior in PBLG confined in templates with pore diameters equal or smaller than 65 nm. Moreover, they observed a reduction of the effective glass temperature of 50 K. Both were discussed in terms of newly formed hydrogen bonds between the silanol group used for the synthesis and the peptide backbone ( Figure 20).
## (s27) Confinement effects on rheological properties
(p27.0) The flow behavior of nanoconfined polymers is expected to be sensitive to the entanglement network of the molten polymer as well as to the capability of the polymer chain to diffuse along the nanopores. High surface-energy cylindrical nanopores of AAO templates allows for the assessment of the flow of confined polymer melts during capillary rise. The time required to fill the nanopores a polymer melt by capillary action can be coarsely obtained by [158,226]:

(p27.1) Where t is the time, η is the viscosity, z is the height of the liquid column, R is the hydraulic radius (the cross sectional area of a stream divided by the wetting perimeter, which for well-defined cylindrical pores is equal to the half of the pore radius), γ polymer/air is the surface tension of the polymer, and θ is the contact angle at the polymer-pore wall interface.
## (s29) Surface Properties. Applications as highly adhesive and hydrophobic surfaces
(p29.0) The fabrication of arrays of straight polymeric nanorods with a high aspect ratio constitutes a biomimetic approach for the preparation of highly adhesive surfaces [239][240][241][242][243]. This is based on the fact that these nanostructured surfaces can mimic gecko's foot-hair and provide a similar adhesion [244][245][246]. Gecko toes present arrays of millions of fine hairs with a high aspect ratio (setae), which split into submicron or nanoscale fine termini (spatulae), and these hairs enable geckos to make extensive contact with almost any surface by van der Waals and possibly capillary forces [247,248]. Arrays of branched contact elements have been fabricated by replication of AAO with hierarchical pore morphologies in order to replicate as close as possible the topographic features found in geckos [249,250]. The tip shape in hairy polymer arrays also modulates the adhesion properties of the material. By simple mechanical shaping, flat, foot-like, and pancake-like tip shapes roughly corresponding to three main types of biological contact shapes were accessible. The normal dry adhesion was enhanced in the polymer array with pancake-like tips as can be observed in figure 27. Figure 27. Dependence of F ad on F 1 for PS nanorod arrays with flat tips obtained by cold pressing, foot like tips obtained by shear pressing, and pancake-like tips obtained by hot pressing. Reproduced with permission [243] Copyright 2012: American Chemical Society.

(p29.1) The properties of adhesion can be modulated by different stimuli., i.e. chemical functionality and topography [251], pressure changes [252] or even humidity. As an example, adhesion on arrays of porous fibrillar adhesive pads consisting of the amphiphilic block copolymer PS-b-P2VP can be reversibly switched between lowadhesion states at low humidity and high-adhesion states at high humidity [128].
## (s30) Electrical functionalities for potential applications
(p30.0) Electrical conductivity of conjugated polymers also changes when the material is embedded into nanopores due to structural changes taking place in the nanoconfined material. Thus, chain orientation phenomena induced by interactions with AAO surfaces, or by the space reduction itself, may induce strong enhancement of electrical conductivity. This fact was first demonstrated by Martin et al, who managed to polymerize different conjugated polymers, such as polypyrrole, polyaniline, etc., into the nanopores of disordered AAO membranes [265,266].
