# fibers Multiscale Frictional Properties of Cotton Fibers: A Review

CorpusID: 116247769 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/553b4f22cd938af59edb8255eb91fdf80f271c4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/553b4f22cd938af59edb8255eb91fdf80f271c4a)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s2) Friction as a Key Factor
(p2.0) SLC design and developments have been more based on trial and error methods than science. Researchers have been trying to optimize the effect of the SLC design factors in order to achieve maximum cleaning efficiency and retain fiber qualities. Modification and optimization of design factors alter the magnitude of forces and interactions between fibers and machine parts. Some of the published studies on this subject are summarized here. Baker et al. reported that changes in the batt weight, the combing ratio, and the saw speed did not have any major impact on fiber quality measurements [17,18]. However, they significantly influenced both lint wastage and cleaning efficiency. Baker et al. later studied the effect of the combing ratio on fiber quality measurements and open-end spun yarn properties [19]. Their results showed that increasing the combing ratio from 25 to 50 significantly reduced the 2.5% span length and the upper quartile length; nevertheless, the yarn properties were not affected in a major way. Leonard et al. compared the performance of notched-edge grid bars against regular plain-edged ones [20]. Any modification in grid bars design alters the scrubbing forces applied to fiber tufts. However, they reported that the indentation of the grid bars edge did not affect the level of fiber damage significantly. Columbus studied influences of four saw cylinder speeds and the saw tooth density on fiber quality parameters and the SLC cleaning efficiency [21]. His results showed that, at a constant combing ratio, an increase in the saw cylinder speed did not affect the upper-half mean length. However, increasing the saw tooth density significantly reduced the upper-half mean length. Baker et al. studied effects of the spacing between grid bars, the curvature radius of grid bars front edge, and the clearance distance between grid bars and the saw teeth on cleaning performance and fiber quality measurements [22]. Their results indicated the studied variables had no significant effect on high volume instrument (HVI TM ) parameters. The sharp edge grid bars, however, produced better fiber length distributions as measured by the array method. Mangialardi modified an SLC machine by reversing its feed plate and mounting a round lint-saver bar and a carding brush ahead of the first grid bar [23]. By reversing the feed plate, less frictional shear stresses are placed on fibers since they do not have to travel around the edge of the feed plate once a saw tooth seizes them. His study showed that, although reversing the feed plate improved the fiber quality preservation, it reduced the cleaning performance of the machine. The effects of the round lint-saver bar and the carding brush on fiber quality were not significant. He concluded that the action of fiber and grid bar have a greater impact on the impurity particle removal process than the action of fiber and feed plate. Le studied the effects of saw speed, feed rate, combing ratio, and moisture content on the fiber damage [24]. He concluded that fibers with lower moisture content experienced significantly more breakage throughout the lint cleaning processing. According to his study, the changes in machine settings caused no significant effect on the typical level of fiber damage imparted by the SLC. Gordon et al. used a laboratory scale SLC and investigated the effects of various lint cleaning elements on fiber quality by eliminating them from the machine [25]. They concluded that the majorly of fiber damage in a SLC takes place when fibers are being delivered from the feed plate onto the saw cylinder. This literature review indirectly shows that the modification of fiber and machine parts interactions-mostly in the form of alteration in frictional forces between fibers and the grid bars or Figure 2. Mechanism of the fiber-grid bar interaction: (a) fiber tuft is elevated from the cylinder surface due to centrifugal forces; (b) the middle section of the fiber tuft impacts against the edge of the grid bar; (c) the tuft rapidly slides over the grid bar; (d) the fiber tuft travels past the grid bar while impurity particles rebound from it.
## (s3) Friction as a Key Factor
(p3.0) SLC design and developments have been more based on trial and error methods than science. Researchers have been trying to optimize the effect of the SLC design factors in order to achieve maximum cleaning efficiency and retain fiber qualities. Modification and optimization of design factors alter the magnitude of forces and interactions between fibers and machine parts. Some of the published studies on this subject are summarized here. Baker et al. reported that changes in the batt weight, the combing ratio, and the saw speed did not have any major impact on fiber quality measurements [17,18]. However, they significantly influenced both lint wastage and cleaning efficiency. Baker et al. later studied the effect of the combing ratio on fiber quality measurements and open-end spun yarn properties [19]. Their results showed that increasing the combing ratio from 25 to 50 significantly reduced the 2.5% span length and the upper quartile length; nevertheless, the yarn properties were not affected in a major way. Leonard et al. compared the performance of notched-edge grid bars against regular plain-edged ones [20]. Any modification in grid bars design alters the scrubbing forces applied to fiber tufts. However, they reported that the indentation of the grid bars edge did not affect the level of fiber damage significantly. Columbus studied influences of four saw cylinder speeds and the saw tooth density on fiber quality parameters and the SLC cleaning efficiency [21]. His results showed that, at a constant combing ratio, an increase in the saw cylinder speed did not affect the upper-half mean length. However, increasing the saw tooth density significantly reduced the upper-half mean length. Baker et al. studied effects of the spacing between grid bars, the curvature radius of grid bars front edge, and the clearance distance between grid bars and the saw teeth on cleaning performance and fiber quality measurements [22]. Their results indicated the studied variables had no significant effect on high volume instrument (HVI TM ) parameters. The sharp edge grid bars, however, produced better fiber length distributions as measured by the array method. Mangialardi modified an SLC machine by reversing its feed plate and mounting a round lint-saver bar and a carding brush ahead of the first grid bar [23]. By reversing the feed plate, less frictional shear stresses are placed on fibers since they do not have to travel around the edge of the feed plate once a saw tooth seizes them. His study showed that, although reversing the feed plate improved the fiber quality preservation, it reduced the cleaning performance of the machine. The effects of the round lint-saver bar and the carding brush on fiber quality were not significant. He concluded that the action of fiber and grid bar have a greater impact on the impurity particle removal process than the action of fiber and feed plate. Le studied the effects of saw speed, feed rate, combing ratio, and moisture content on the fiber damage [24]. He concluded that fibers with lower moisture content experienced significantly more breakage throughout the lint cleaning processing. According to his study, the changes in machine settings caused no significant effect on the typical level of fiber damage imparted by the SLC. Gordon et al. used a laboratory scale SLC and investigated the effects of various lint cleaning elements on fiber quality by eliminating them from the machine [25]. They concluded that the majorly of fiber damage in a SLC takes place when fibers are being delivered from the feed plate onto the saw cylinder. This literature review indirectly shows that the modification of fiber and machine parts interactions-mostly in the form of alteration in frictional forces between fibers and the grid bars or fibers and the feed plate-impacts the magnitude of fiber breakage and damage during the lint cleaning operation.

(p3.1) In addition to machine settings, inherent physical properties of fibers also affect the performance of fibers during a lint cleaning operation. Dever et al. studied the effects of fiber properties on the extent of fiber breakage during ginning operations [26]. They reported that the fiber breakage in the saw ginning and the lint cleaning processes was better correlated with fibers strength and fineness, respectively. Their results showed that, throughout the ginning operation, the finer and stronger fibers from the Gossypium barbadense cultivar incurred less damage compared to the coarser and weaker ones from the Gossypium hirsutum type. Their study on relationships between fiber properties and nep formation showed that the final nep count after ginning was significantly correlated with fiber maturity. However, the tendency of fibers to entangle into neps during the ginning operation was reported to be more correlated with the flexural rigidity of fibers-as determined by their length and fineness-and the amount of foreign matter content. Mangialardi et al. reported that both variety and the degree of mechanical lint cleaning significantly impacted the final nep count [27]. Their results showed that the varieties with lower nep counts were also associated with higher micronaire values. Hughs et al. conducted a similar type of experiment on seven varieties and four level of lint cleaning [28]. Their results showed that the nepping potential of cotton fibers varies significantly across different varieties and the lint cleaning treatment. These studies signify the influence of the inherent fiber quality parameters on the level of fiber damage during the lint cleaning process. Since significant frictional forces are applied to fibers during lint cleaning, the surface roughness of individual fibers and fiber assemblies are certainly among those inherent fiber quality parameters that directly influence fiber damage in this unit operation.
## (s8) Howell's Friction Law Conditions
(p8.0) Equation (6) was developed in the 1950s by Howell and gained popularity for the study of fiber friction [32]. Since then, it has been the basis of modern nonlinear friction theories between non-adhesive surfaces at the micro and nanoscale [56]. With developments in Surface Force Apparatuses (SFAs), it is possible to collect both single asperity friction and contact area empirical data between two crossed cylinders coated with materials of interest [57]. With SFAs, data on friction and contact area as a function of applied load can be fit to Equation (10) by adjusting the and indices or by inserting some known values for both and and solving for ̅ . While Equation (10) is easy to execute and interpret, care must be taken in fitting this equation for study of various contact problems. The key conditions that have to be met are as follows:

(p8.1) (i) The sublinear relationship between and holds only in the case of microscale point contacts between smooth fibers under very light normal pressures. Upon the occurrence of surface damage and the formation of wear debris between the surfaces, friction will be dominated by = ̅ . In the study of macroscale friction under relatively high normal force, surface damages and plastic deformation are unavoidable; therefore Amontons' law of friction is found to be a more accurate fit for macroscale friction experiments of bulk materials [31].

(p8.2) (ii) Howell's assumptions of nominally flat surfaces and fibers circular cross-section can be easily violated. For instance, natural fibers, such as desiccated cotton fibers, have nanoscale surface roughness and irregular cross-section shape that can alter the stress distribution inside the contact region and affect the real contact area between the contacting surfaces. According to Archard, and later Greenwood, the validity of Amontons's friction law for a given surface also depends on its surface roughness [55,58]. Although ∝ ⁄ for an elastic single-asperity contact, it has been shown that the value of index tends to reach unity for a rough multiasperity contact.

(p8.3) (iii) One should also consider the effect of environmental conditions on experimental results. Specifically, in the study of biological materials, the outermost layer of the plant cell wall often consists of various amounts of polysaccharides and fatty acids. The polysaccharide constituent of the primary cell wall is a hydrophilic structure, meaning that if contact experiments are not conducted under low humidity, a water meniscus can be formed between the crossed fibers. This water meniscus will affect the overall interfiber friction forces.

(p8.4) (iv) In the case of two parallel fibers in contact or a fiber in contact with a flat surface, the contact area is no longer circular. In these cases, the contact area is a rectangle with length and width 2 . Manmade textile fibers are produced from synthetic polymers with well-defined fiber cross-section shape and dimensions. Frictional forces opposing the relative motion of a fiber with respect to its adjacent fibers or another surface can be explained by two mechanisms: adhesion (over the contact area) and viscoelastic surface deformation (or plowing). The friction laws of polymeric surfaces were first applied to the study of friction between textile fibers by Howell [49][50][51]. Under the assumptions of insignificant surface roughness and zero plowing, he proposed the following equation for friction between two crossed fibers ( Figure 3a):

(p8.5) where a and n are constants depending on the fiber type. In the case of contact between two smooth cylindrical surfaces, the theoretical values of the parameters a and n depend on the shear breaking strength, mechanical properties, and dimensions of the cylinders. Equation (6) can be derived from the famous Hertz contact theory in the contact region between the two elastic solid spheres. Under Howell's assumptions, friction is only proportional to the shear strength of the junctions and the real area of contact such that:

(p8.6) The real contact area for two crossed cylinders is in the shape of a circle with radius a. If we assume that the fibers deform in Hertzian regime, the real contact area can be measured as a function of normal force by:
## (s9) Howell's Friction Law Conditions
(p9.0) Equation (6) was developed in the 1950s by Howell and gained popularity for the study of fiber friction [32]. Since then, it has been the basis of modern nonlinear friction theories between non-adhesive surfaces at the micro and nanoscale [56]. With developments in Surface Force Apparatuses (SFAs), it is possible to collect both single asperity friction and contact area empirical data between two crossed cylinders coated with materials of interest [57]. With SFAs, data on friction and contact area as a function of applied load can be fit to Equation (10) by adjusting the a and n indices or by inserting some known values for both n and K and solving for τ. While Equation (10) is easy to execute and interpret, care must be taken in fitting this equation for study of various contact problems.
## (s13) Nanoscale Adhesion on Viscoelastic Surfaces
(p13.0) Various nanomechanical attributes of surfaces-such as elastic modulus, plasticity, and adhesioncan be measured by quantifying forces acting on the AFM tip as it vertically approaches a surface, slightly indents it, and finally is withdrawn from it [128,129]. This technique has been extensively applied to quantify the surface nanomechanical properties of silicone and polymeric thin films, SAMs, nanocomposite materials, and living cells [128,[130][131][132][133][134]. Nanomechanical properties of plant cell walls have been also investigated [135][136][137]. These studies have provided invaluable insight into the understanding of plant cell growth and development (morphogenesis). In the research reported herein, part of the focus will be on the nanoscale adhesive forces between an AFM tip and the cotton fiber surface, mainly due to the critical contribution of adhesion on the overall frictional responses of the specimen. As mentioned earlier, the correlation between adhesion hysteresis and friction for polymers has been well-studied [57,126]. Additionally, variation in surface adhesion properties has been previously utilized to discriminate between different materials.

(p13.1) Adhesive forces between two surfaces can be extracted from a plot of interfacial forces between the surfaces versus their separation distance, commonly known as a force-distance curve (FDC). Specifically, in the AFM technique, the FDC is obtained from measuring the vertical deflection of a cantilever (which can be converted to unit force) as a function of piezoelectric tube vertical extension (which can be converted to indentation/separation distance) when the tip is brought into contact with the sample and then withdrawn. Similar to microscale friction, the main advantage of adhesion measurements with AFM is the single asperity contact at the molecular level, which removes the ambiguity due to multiple asperity contacts. A hypothetical FDC and its different regions are shown in Figure 6. The general shape of the FDC resembles a typical nonbonding intermolecular force curve between two nonpolar particles. In region A, the tip is in resting position and the net force acting on it is zero. In region B, as the tip is driven toward the surface, at some critical distance, the forces acting on the tip suddenly become attractive, and the tip jumps to contact. In order to accommodate the abrupt movement of the tip, the cantilever experiences an instability and bends forward. By multiplying the vertical deflection of the cantilever in nm with its spring constant in N/m, total forces acting on the tip can be quantified. This sudden large attractive force acting on the tip is defined as the pull-on (or sanp-in) force and its magnitude can be explained by extent of ever-present van der Waals, electrostatic, capillary, and chemical bonding forces. In region C, as the piezoelectric tube continues to extend toward the sample surface, the repulsive forces are first detected and the net force starts to increase. This point is defined as the tip-surface contact point. After this point, the tip starts to penetrate into the sample and causes elastic and/or plastic deformation of the surface (assuming higher stiffness value for the tip). Meanwhile, the cantilever deflection gradually changes from being bent downward to upward. The indentation process continues until ultimate contact is reached at a predefined maximum upward deflection. In region D, the piezoelement movement reverses and it begins to withdraw the tip. When the tip is being retracted, it still remains in contact with the surface until the cantilever exerts sufficient tensile force to overcome the adhesive bonds formed between the tip and the surface (pull-off force). The difference between the pull-off force and the forces acting on the tip at the resting position is proportional to the adhesion force, which is significantly affected by real contact area and chemistry of the two materials. Upon the tip-sample separation (snap-out), depending on its spring constant, the cantilever experiences a second instability and springs back to the resting position in region E. There are three modes of deformation associated with the force measurement technique with the AFM: the cantilever is either bent upward, or downward, or twisted. These cantilever deformations are associated with surface stiffness, adhesion, and friction, respectively. The deformation can be converted to the forces causing it with Hooke's law. That is, the strain (deformation) of an elastic material is proportional to the stress Fc applied to it:

(p13.2) Here, kc is the spring constant of the cantilever, and dc is the deflection of the cantilever. By obtaining forces acting on the cantilever, the force-distance curve of a given material's surface can be acquired (the distance is obtained by adding the piezoelectric motion to dc). Therefore, the force of adhesion, the stiffness of the surface, and the friction between tip and surface can be extracted from the curve. Since the invention of the AFM, one of the main challenges has been how to precisely measure the deflection of the cantilever, dc, as the main output signal of the AFM instrument. In almost all the AFMs available on the market, the deflection of the cantilever is measured with the optical lever technique. In this method, a beam from a diode is adjusted onto the cantilever and reflects from its shiny end. A PSPD monitors the position of the reflected beam. As the cantilever bends, the reflection angle of the beam changes to twice the change of the slope at the end of the cantilever. Therefore, the deflection of the cantilever can be measured as [128]:

(p13.3) Here, l is the length of the cantilever, I is the moment of inertia of the cantilever, E is the Young's modulus of the cantilever, F is the force acting on the cantilever, ∆ is the distance the laser spot moves on the PSPD, and b is the distance between the PSPD and the end of the cantilever. In the optical lever technique, the ∆ is the only output of the instrument. This output is used to calculate dc, the deflection of the cantilever, the variable of interest. Improper adjustment of the light beam on a PSPD while the cantilever is in the resting position can be an important source of error in measuring surface forces. Two other sources of error in using AFM include the possibility of contaminating the tip during scanning and lack of standard procedure to examine the true radius of curvature of the tip before performing nanomechanical testing.

(p13.4) Different aspects of the adhesive force measurement technique with the AFM have been reviewed and studied. Batteas et al. studied the adhesion and wear of colloidal silica nanoparticles at different pH values. In order to simulate the actual particle-particle interaction, they used AFM There are three modes of deformation associated with the force measurement technique with the AFM: the cantilever is either bent upward, or downward, or twisted. These cantilever deformations are associated with surface stiffness, adhesion, and friction, respectively. The deformation can be converted to the forces causing it with Hooke's law. That is, the strain (deformation) of an elastic material is proportional to the stress F c applied to it:

(p13.5) Here, k c is the spring constant of the cantilever, and d c is the deflection of the cantilever. By obtaining forces acting on the cantilever, the force-distance curve of a given material's surface can be acquired (the distance is obtained by adding the piezoelectric motion to d c ). Therefore, the force of adhesion, the stiffness of the surface, and the friction between tip and surface can be extracted from the curve. Since the invention of the AFM, one of the main challenges has been how to precisely measure the deflection of the cantilever, d c , as the main output signal of the AFM instrument. In almost all the AFMs available on the market, the deflection of the cantilever is measured with the optical lever technique. In this method, a beam from a diode is adjusted onto the cantilever and reflects from its shiny end. A PSPD monitors the position of the reflected beam. As the cantilever bends, the reflection angle of the beam changes to twice the change of the slope at the end of the cantilever. Therefore, the deflection of the cantilever can be measured as [128]:

(p13.6) Here, l is the length of the cantilever, I is the moment of inertia of the cantilever, E is the Young's modulus of the cantilever, F is the force acting on the cantilever, ∆ PSD is the distance the laser spot moves on the PSPD, and b is the distance between the PSPD and the end of the cantilever. In the optical lever technique, the ∆ PSD is the only output of the instrument. This output is used to calculate d c , the deflection of the cantilever, the variable of interest. Improper adjustment of the light beam on a PSPD while the cantilever is in the resting position can be an important source of error in measuring surface forces. Two other sources of error in using AFM include the possibility of contaminating the tip during scanning and lack of standard procedure to examine the true radius of curvature of the tip before performing nanomechanical testing.
## (s14) Nanomechanical Properties of Plant Tissues
(p14.0) The plant cells are covered with a thin extracellular membrane, known as the cuticle, which strengthens the overall structural stability of the cell and preserves its physiological integrity [159][160][161]. In the study of plant cell morphogenesis, precise measurements of the nanoscale mechanical properties of plant cell surfaces are crucial for investigations on the role of cuticle biomechanics in a cell shape changes and growth rate [135,162]. The cuticle thickness varies significantly between different plant organs and species and also during cell development. This plant cell outer layer is a hydrophobic multicomponent structure and mainly consists of the biopolyester cutin, various lipid-derived compounds or so-called waxes, and pectins. Cutin is an insoluble biopolymer network makes up of C 16 and C 18 fatty acid monomers cross-linked by ester bonds. Cutin encompasses 40-80% weight of the cuticle and can be submicron to 10 µm thick. Cuticular waxes are chiefly composed of n-acyl alkane derivatives with chain length of C 20 to C 40 . Plant cell waxy components mostly travel through different layers of the cuticular membrane and build up on the outermost layer of the cuticle. After deposition on a plant organ surface, they self-assemble into a thin continuous lipid-film. They form various crystalline microstructures, such as tubules (0.3 − 3 µm long and 0.1 − 0.3 µm wide), platelets, and rodlets. Cuticular waxes directly affect interfacial bioprocesses and environmental interactions of plant organs. Self-assembly and growth of wax crystals has been monitored with AFM time-series images [163]. These observations showed that the morphology of wax crystals depends on the growth conditions, such as temperature and moisture content, the chemical composition of lipid compounds, and the structural template effect of the underlying substrate. Pectin polysaccharides can also be found in the outer surface of the cuticle. Round et al. studied the structure of individual pectin macromolecules extracted from green tomato fruits, using the AFM [164,165]. Their work demonstrated the capabilities of AFM images in revealing molecular weight, length, branching, and aggregation of individual pectin polymers.

(p14.1) Even with recent advances in AFM techniques, quantifying the local nanomechanical attributes of soft biological materials is a challenging subject. Often, due to the natural surface roughness and viscoelasticity of biological materials, accurate measurements of surface nanomechanical properties require an implementation of sophisticated contact mechanics models. Studies have been conducted to examine the surface biophysical behavior of cutin films, isolated from the cuticle of tomato fruits, with AFM [137,166,167]. Round et al. studied the effect of moisture content on the rheology of such films [167]. They reported that the surface elastic modulus, as obtained by fitting the FDCs with the Hertz model, decreases with increasing water absorption in a highly nonlinear fashion. They concluded that the cutin film has a rubbery characteristic and water molecules increase its polymer chain mobility. Bhushan et al. investigated nanoscale friction of four different plant leaves in dried state: lotus, colocasia, fagus, and magnolia [168]. According to the results, the hydrophilic leaves (fagus, and magnolia) showed a higher friction coefficient than the hydrophobic ones (lotus and colocasia). For hydrophilic surfaces, the contact area is higher due to the formation of water meniscus between the tip and the surface.
## (s15) Nanofricitonal and Nanomechanical Properties of Cotton Fibers
(p15.0) A fully developed cotton fiber is composed of five different layers: the cuticle, the primary cell wall, the winding layer, the secondary cell wall, and the cell lumen [169]. The cotton fiber cuticle is mostly made of lipids, alcohols, and fatty acids. These compounds are collectively called "cotton waxes" [170]. The cotton fiber cuticle also contains some portion of pectins [171]. Due to the presence of waxes and pectins in the cuticle, untreated native cotton fibers are hydrophobic [170]. The waxy layer is about 200 to 300 nm thick [169]. Cotton fiber wax content varies significantly among different varieties. Various studies have reported a strong positive relationship between cotton fibers wax content and their surface area [73,74,[172][173][174]. El Mogahzy showed that the frictional properties of cotton fibers are influenced by their wax content [73].
