# A SURVEY ON WELL-BALANCED AND ASYMPTOTIC PRESERVING SCHEMES FOR HYPERBOLIC MODELS FOR CHEMOTAXIS A SURVEY ON WELL-BALANCED AND ASYMPTOTIC PRESERVING SCHEMES FOR HYPERBOLIC MODELS FOR A SURVEY ON WELL-BALANCED AND ASYMPTOTIC PRESERVING SCHEMES FOR HYPERBOLIC MODELS FOR CHEMOTAXIS

CorpusID: 120188312 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f985edd042d75f8500a7ee7480a78cc5e2fdc19e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f985edd042d75f8500a7ee7480a78cc5e2fdc19e)

Fields: Mathematics, Biology

## (s1) 1.2.
(p1.0) Well-balanced scheme for the semi-linear system (5). Now, we present another numerical scheme, in the finite volumes setting, derived to approximate the solutions of system (5) in [50]. Following the Greenberg-Leroux strategy [59], [55], we approximate the system (4) written as :
## (s3) Conclusion.
(p3.0) We have presented in this section two numerical schemes for an hyperbolic semilinear system of chemotaxis (5) : an asymptotic high order scheme and a well-balanced scheme. The two schemes are based on the same idea, that is to say a balance between the flux term and the source term in order to preserve stationary states, which results in stabilizing the numerical flux.

(p3.1) However, we may point out some differences between the two schemes : concretely, the AHO schemes result in a change in the discretization of the source term, whereas the well-balanced technique relies on a change of discretization of the flux. The well-balanced strategy needs the exact computation of the stationary solutions, whereas the AHO scheme requires only a small consistency error for a stationary solution, described by its differential equation. AHO schemes may be of order 2 and 3, when well-balanced are restricted to order 2. However, the mass conservation is straightforward for the well-balanced setting and it should be imposed through appropriate boundary conditions for the AHO scheme.
## (s5) Description of the stationary solutions for models with a non-linear pressure term.
(p5.0) To begin with, let us describe the stationary solutions of (22) with a non-linear pressure of the form (3) and with boundary conditions (9). They satisfy the following equations :
## (s6) 2.2.
(p6.0) Upwinding Sources at Interfaces (USI) scheme for the quasi-linear system (6). In [84,83], we proposed and studied a Upwinding Sources at Interfaces (USI) scheme, constructed following the ideas of [18,20,8,47]. The idea is to add some new values of the unknowns at the interface and to compute them in order to preserve exactly the stationary solutions.

(p6.1) Omitting the equation for φ and denoting by U = (ρ, ρu) t the vector of the two unknowns, density and momentum, the hyperbolic part of system (6) can be written in the following form
