# catalysts Monoliths: A Review of the Basics, Preparation Methods and Their Relevance to Oxidation

CorpusID: 12425239 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5050779cc7df8d50a84623c9d76f8167b7534ff6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5050779cc7df8d50a84623c9d76f8167b7534ff6)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In the past 30 years or so, there has been a gradual increase in the use of monoliths as catalyst supports. During this period, monoliths have mostly been used in environmental applications where high gas throughput and low pressure drop are required [1]. Some of the applications in which these benefits have proven useful include exhaust gas treatment [2,3], selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NO x [4], destruction of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) [5] and catalytic combustion [6]. More recently, there has been renewed interest in the use of monoliths for reactions where energy efficiency and cost reduction are required. In particular, these include catalytic combustion for power generation, the selective oxidation of alkanes and preferential oxidation (PrOx) of CO. In order for researchers to be able to improve on these reactions, an overall knowledge and understanding of the preparation of monolithic catalysts would be required.

(p0.1) There are several key reviews on the preparation of monoliths [1,[7][8][9]. In addition, there are some informative reviews on coating monolith structures [10][11][12]. Also crucial to the preparation of monolithic catalysts can be transport phenomena [13]. However, a summary of the existing literature on the basics, reasoning and understanding behind the preparation techniques of monoliths and coating techniques may better prepare researchers for the application of monoliths, especially as applied to oxidation catalysis.

(p0.2) In this paper, we provide an overview of the literature, elaborating on the basic properties and relevance of monolithic structures. For the preparation of monoliths, we focus on ceramic and metallic structures, since these are most popular in the older and more recent literature. We then address metallic structures, since these are most popular in the older and more recent literature. We then address the coating of monoliths, more especially with alumina as a secondary support. Also, we discuss the coating of metals, zeolites and carbon onto monoliths. In some cases, common issues with the coating techniques are highlighted and solutions or alternatives are provided. Furthermore, extruded monoliths containing zeolites and carbon are discussed. Finally, we provide an outline of the use of monolithic catalysts in the selective oxidation of alkanes, catalytic combustion for power generation and preferential oxidation of CO (CO-PrOx).
## (s2) Monolith Basics
(p2.0) Monolithic structures pose an attractive alternative to conventionally prepared catalyst pellets or powders due to a number of superior properties. Monoliths can offer better mass transfer, a low pressure drop, thermal stability and good mechanical strength over conventional catalyst pellets or powders [7,12,14]. Monoliths are essentially uniform blocks, consisting of parallel channels that can be extruded into different shapes and sizes. These structured supports are primarily sold in ceramic or metallic forms [14]. Monolithic structures can also be extruded from other materials, such as zeolites (Section 2.3.3) or carbon (Section 2.3.4). Major manufacturers of ceramic and metallic monoliths are Corning and Johnson Matthey, amongst others [14].
## (s3) Preparation of Monoliths
(p3.0) Monoliths are commonly manufactured as ceramic or metallic structures. Ceramic and metallic monoliths differ greatly in physical and chemical properties, with respective advantages and disadvantages. Ceramic monoliths have advantages over metallic monoliths with properties such as better porosity, hence good coating adherence, and thermal stability, whilst metallic monoliths offer advantages with respect to better heat transfer, pressure drop, mechanical stability, wall thickness and overall volume [14]. Ceramic monoliths have good thermal stability due to a low thermal expansion coefficient, however, can still crack with significant changes in temperature [5,12,35]. Metallic monoliths, though, are becoming popular despite the difficulty of catalyst adherence. Ceramic and metallic structures are most popular in monolith research literature currently, therefore, the following sections discuss the preparation of these structures, along with their relevance to some applications. 
## (s9) Sol-Gel
(p9.0) A sol refers to the dispersed form of a colloidal solution, and gelating occurs when an interlinked network is formed between colloidal particles, therefore, sol-gel is a dispersed form of the interlinked particles [102]. The sol-gel method used for coating monoliths involves preparing a sol, then coating the monolith and lastly calcining, which results in a γ-alumina layer. The outcome is better pore filling of the monolith as compared to conventional colloidal coating [12]. Sols can be prepared via a hydrolytic route or non-hydrolytic route as shown in Equations (5) and (6) [67].

(p9.1) where M = metal, for example aluminium. Equation (5) shows the hydrolysis reaction of the metal alkoxide using a suitable acid or base and water [67]. During the sol preparation with heat treatment and time, condensation occurs as shown in Equation (6) [103]. A more detailed description of the sol-gel process is provided by Schmidt [103]. Furthermore, Xiaoding et al. reported a study of sol-gel coating of monoliths via three types of aluminium sols, namely pseudoboehmite with urea and nitric acid, hydrolysis of aluminium chloride and aluminium powder, and hydrolysis of tri-sec-butoxide aluminium [10]. It was concluded that sols prepared via pseudoboehmite with urea and nitric acid and hydrolysis of tri-sec-butoxide are most suitable for sol-gel alumina coating of monoliths [10]. A typical sol-gel method of coating involves dipping the monolith in a sol from pseudoboehmite, urea and 0.3 M nitric acid in a weight ratio of 2:1:5, followed by emptying the channels, drying and finally calcination [104]. Sol-gel coating may be advantageous over conventional colloidal coating of monoliths, due to a strong adherence to the monolith, as the alumina layer forms on the surface of the channels. For slurry coating, a monolith, an γ-alumina suspension is prepared with larger particles, preferably between 2 and 5 µm, compared to the pore filling technique [96]. The general procedure involves the use of an acid to disperse alumina, after which the monolith is dipped in the slurry and excess liquid is removed by blowing compressed air through the channels, followed by drying and calcination or direct calcination [94,105]. Wet milling of the gamma-alumina to attain a required particle size is very important, as factors such as pH and viscosity play a key role in adhesion to the monolith surface [105]. The particles inside a typical stirred mill are highly influenced by stress energy, number of stress events and specific energy [106]. Milling can be a tedious process to attain the required particle size; however, γ-alumina is available commercially with an average particle size less than 5 µm. Nitric acid is suggested to be a most effective acid for slurry coating, as it helps to stabilize the slurry and allows for better alumina uptake [107]. The percentage of solids in the slurry also plays an important role in the efficacy and homogeneity of the coating [94]. Important to note is that with this technique, monoliths need to be coated in batches, since continued coating may result in an increase in the viscosity of the slurry mixture. This increase in viscosity may seriously impact the homogeneity and reproducibility of the coating. Also, upon repeated coating, the slurry will become more viscous than the initial concentration, until a point is reached where each coat adds excessive weight on the monolith, coherently affecting homogeneity. Capillary forces allow for water to be drawn into the pores of the monolith structure which creates competition for adherence of the slurry [108]. An intermediate pre-wetting step, discussed by Mogalicherla and Kunzru, allows for a high washcoat loading to be achieved [108]. Agrafiotis and Tsetsekou have reported an optimum slurry concentration of 45 wt % solids and viscosity between 50 and 150 mPa·s [94]. In comparison, Villegas et al. reported homogeneous gamma-alumina coating with 25 wt % solids [90].

(p9.2) Dispersible powders of boehmite or aluminium hydroxide can be used to produce γ-alumina on the monolith surface after calcination [90,96]. It was reported, however, that an average particle size of alumina of 3 µm allowed for a higher loading of alumina and good adhesion properties, as compared to boehmite type powders [90]. Slurry coating may, therefore, be ideal for a high weight percent coating and the particle size of the alumina being coated may be controlled. Slurry coating can offer fewer coating repetitions and good adherence of γ-alumina. Considering advantages such as these, slurry coating may be more practical and less time consuming than the other coating approaches mentioned.

(p9.3) Characterization of the secondary support coating is usually performed by SEM, which may be used to show the coating inside the channels of the monolith as compared to a bare monolith. This characterization technique can further be used to assess the homogeneity of the coating and also aid in measuring the coating thickness. Figure 5 shows a sectioned ceramic monolith prior and after coating with 10 wt % γ-alumina, by the method of slurry coating. After coating of the secondary support, a layer is obtained within the monolith channels, which may provide for better interaction with the active layer as compared to the bare monolith.
## (s21) Catalytic Combustion
(p21.0) Catalytic combustion offers an alternative means for the production of energy (power generation) compared to the previously established gas-phase combustion process, which needs to be operated within flammability limits and can produce undesired NO x gases [215]. In the catalytic combustion approach, methane or natural gas can be converted over a noble metal-based catalyst to drive a gas-turbine for power generation [248][249][250]. Alternatively, syngas can be converted to power in a more portable/smaller scale. This can be achieved by catalytically stabilized thermal combustion, which is currently being investigated by e.g., the Combustion Research Group at the Paul Scherrer Institute (Villigen, Switzerland) [251][252][253][254][255][256][257][258][259]. In these studies, the researchers focus on converting fuel/syngas mixtures, via a combination of heterogeneous-homogeneous reactions, over platinum-based catalysts coated onto micro-channels.

(p21.1) Noble metal-based catalysts, though, can be expensive. In methane combustion, noble metal-based catalysts can also be susceptible to poisoning or thermal stress [260]. Even when supported on monolithic structures, noble metal-based catalysts are expensive and would still be exposed to sintering at the high temperatures employed [261].
## (s23) Conclusions and Perspective
(p23.0) A considerable amount of information on the preparation of monolithic catalysts has been summarized. Applying a secondary support, for example γ-alumina, is an important pre-requisite for an improved catalyst adherence. The simplest technique to achieve strong adherence of γ-alumina on ceramic monoliths is slurry coating, however, a combination of coating techniques may be required for a strong adherence of alumina on metallic surfaces. The loading of γ-alumina coated onto monoliths can vary between 10 and 15 wt %, although loadings can be varied according to preference. The preferred method of depositing metals onto monoliths is via wet impregnation. The main challenge when using wet impregnation is the coating uniformity, which can be improved with a correct choice of drying technique. For coating metallic monoliths, it must be emphasized that it is possible for metals from the monolith structure to diffuse outward to the surface. This clearly must be considered when using metallic structures for some applications. Solution-combustion synthesis provides an interesting alternative to typical alumina/active layer coating, since the layer can be grown onto the support. Zeolites grown onto monoliths also can lead to a better adhesion to the monolith surface compared to slurry coating. Indeed, growing an active layer seems to be the more attractive option over conventional dip-coating techniques. This can be quite complex at times, but should certainly be considered for some applications.

(p23.1) On the application side, monoliths extruded with zeolites seem to have a promising future in pressure-swing adsorption. In the case for carbon, it has become popular to support carbon nanofibers onto monoliths, and more so now to extrude carbon monoliths with meso-and macro-porosity.

(p23.2) Monolithic catalysts show a promising future in oxidation catalysis. Noteworthy is the dearth of literature on the application of monolith catalysts in the partial oxidation of medium chain length linear alkanes, which have low value, yet high abundance. The vast majority of reports have focused on methane to propane. In the oxidation of alkanes, two mechanisms dominate. Homogeneous gas phase reactions can be attributed to the formation of oxygenates, olefins and dienes, whilst synthesis gas is formed catalytically. Similarly, in the catalytic combustion for power generation, a heterogeneous-homogeneous mechanism exists. Replacing noble metals as the active layer for monoliths will be difficult, though, monoliths coated with a perovskite-based catalyst can be an effective replacement for expensive noble metal-based catalysts. Furthermore, monolithic catalysts have been shown to be beneficial to the PrOx reaction and can be employed to reduce the concentration of CO from a reforming mixture to less than 10 ppm. Noble metals and copper-ceria supported on monoliths are reported to perform better for CO oxidation than gold coated on monoliths. Copper/ceria, thus, seems a promising alternative to using noble metals as the active layer on monoliths.

(p23.3) Due to their success in catalytic combustion, it may be reasonable to expect that microchannel reactors will become even more popular in oxidation catalysis in the near future. Also, quite promising in the near future, particularly to oxidation reactions, will be the preparation of conductive monoliths, where heat transfer is maximized by conduction [15,[298][299][300][301].
