# Terahertz imaging using quantum cascade lasers-a review of systems and applications

CorpusID: 122148275 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce6dfa3f3e7d537d2c910f681b00c5c73f892bd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce6dfa3f3e7d537d2c910f681b00c5c73f892bd)

Fields: Engineering, Physics

## (s3) Imaging with high spatial resolution
(p3.0) The higher operating frequencies of THz QCLs compared to TPI sources and electronic frequency-domain sources enable high transverse resolutions with minimum feature sizes smaller than 250 µm [46,47,49,50]. For context, the diffractionlimited beam waist expected for a TEM 00 (Gaussian) mode focused by a lens with f -number f/1, at a wavelength λ = 100 µm (∼3 THz), is calculated to be w 0 = 2λf /π = 64 µm. It is perhaps not surprising, though, that diffraction-limited resolution is seldom realized in experimental systems due to the irregular beam profiles exhibited by THz QCLs. Metal-metal (MM) waveguides offer high modal confinement, enabling the realization of devices with high operating temperatures and low threshold current densities [51]. However, as a result of the sub-wavelength aperture in this waveguide design (typically ∼10 µm thick), the output beam becomes strongly diffracted. The associated beam patterns [52] are extremely poor, limiting the usefulness of this type of waveguide for many potential applications of THz QCLs. The alternative and more common approach is to employ a semi-insulating surface plasmon (SP) waveguide [28]. SP waveguides typically provide lower waveguide losses than MM waveguides as a result of the waveguide mode partially overlapping with the undoped substrate. More significant, though, is the superior beam quality and reduced beam divergence [53,54] that results from this approach. QCL-based imaging systems reported to date have therefore exclusively employed SP waveguides. Nevertheless, the beam profile of such devices is still not ideal. Far-field profiles have been shown to comprise dual emission lobes originating from beam diffraction from both the substrate and waveguide ridge [41,42,55]. The emission profile is also typically characterized by extensive ring-like interference fringes [54,56] that can be understood using a wire laser model that treats the device as a longitudinally distributed source [57].

(p3.1) In order to address these considerations and realize better optimized image resolution, hollow dielectric waveguides have been employed to efficiently couple the QCL emission to the free-space TEM 00 (Gaussian) mode [58,59]. An alternative approach is through spatial filtering of the QCL beam, which has been successfully employed for the development of a transmission-mode THz confocal microscope based on a QCL source emitting at 2.9 THz [50]. In this scheme the QCL beam was first spatially filtered using a 200 µm (∼2λ) aperture placed in the common focal plane of a pair of matched (NA∼0.45) lenses. Figures 1(a) and (b) demonstrate the resulting improvement in beam quality, measured in a plane close to the cryostat window and also close to the aperture. For the purpose of rejecting out-of-focus radiation, this spatially filtered beam was then focused through the sample under test, followed by a 300 µm confocal aperture. This aperture was found to enhance image contrast whilst also reducing the depth of field, and the complete system yielded an impressive transverse resolution better than 70 µm with an axial resolution of ∼400 µm. Figures 1(c)-(e) show THz images of a fresh green leaf containing minute veins, which amply demonstrate the high resolution attainable through this spatially filtered confocal arrangement.
## (s7) Multiple-frequency THz DRI
(p7.0) QCL-based imaging systems have usually employed transmission geometries owing to the reduced experimental complexity when compared with reflective imaging configurations. However, this approach typically precludes the investigation of highly absorbing samples such as bulky (thick) samples or those exhibiting high attenuation coefficients in the THz frequency range. As such, for highly absorbing samples an imaging configuration that collects radiation backscattered or specularly reflected from the sample is required. The capability to spatially map diffusely scattered radiation is also more applicable for practical stand-off imaging systems in which the precise alignment requirements for the collection of specular reflections from samples cannot be guaranteed.

(p7.1) DRI approaches are also particularly suited to the imaging of powdered samples for which a strong component of radiation scattered from beneath the surface of the powder can be expected. The mechanisms relevant to the interaction between radiation and powdered materials have been discussed elsewhere [60]. Notably, the strength of the diffusely scattered component is determined not only by the particle size of the powder relative to the radiation wavelength but also by the complex refractive index of the material, which governs the degree of absorption experienced by incident radiation that penetrates beneath the surface of the sample. This enables DRI techniques to be applied to the analysis of the absorption coefficient of targets, which is a crucial requirement of chemical mapping and fingerprinting applications. This incoherent approach thereby provides a practical and highly applicable alternative to coherent modalities in which the  imaginary component of the refractive index is deduced from the phase shift incurred on Fresnel reflection from the target surface [94,95]. Figure 7 shows an experimental arrangement for DRI using a bound-to-continuum QCL emitting at ∼2.8 THz [61]. Radiation from the source was focused onto the sample at an angle of 60 • relative to the surface plane, resulting in a beam size measuring ∼350 µm × 305 µm on the sample surface. A parabolic reflector, matched to that used for focusing the incident beam, was employed to collect specular reflections from the surface of the sample, which were monitored using a room-temperature pyroelectric detector (D1). For collecting diffusely scattered radiation and non-directional radiation reflected from rough sample surfaces, a second set of optics in an off-axis collection geometry was employed. This weak diffuse signal was monitored using a helium-cooled silicon bolometer (D2). By raster-scanning the sample in two dimensions this system thus enables the simultaneous acquisition of images representing radiation both scattered and specularly reflected from samples. In this demonstration ∼400 µW average power was incident on the sample and an image acquisition rate of ∼170 pps was achieved. Using a weakly absorbing powder as a target, for which ∼1 µW of THz power is coupled to the bolometer, a dynamic range of 20 dB has been measured for this diffuse signal.

(p7.2) The applicability of this DRI scheme to the spatial mapping of powdered materials was initially demonstrated using exemplar powdered admixtures of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) and polystyrene. PMMA exhibits strong absorption in the THz frequency range whereas polystyrene is only weakly absorbing. Nine admixtures with equally spaced mass fractions in the range 0 to 1 were loosely packed inside a sample holder comprising a polystyrene box divided into 10 mm-deep compartments and fitted with a polystyrene lid (see figure 8(a)). Figure 8(b) shows the THz specular image of this sample, which predominantly shows strong specular reflections off the flat lid of the sample holder, whereas the powders are not resolved. The equivalent image obtained by DRI is shown in figure 8(c). In this case, the contribution from specular reflections is negligible and the image clearly reveals the powders. Furthermore, the image intensity corresponding to the nine powdered admixtures is strongly correlated with the mass fraction of highly absorbing PMMA material. This correlation is confirmed in figure 8(d), which shows the sample reflectivity R ∞ measured for each of the nine volume fractions of PMMA. By virtue of the PMMA and polystyrene powders having similar particle sizes (∼5-6 µm) and comparable refractive indices at 2.8 THz (∼1.38-1.42), similar scattering strengths can be expected from each of the nine admixtures. As such, the observed variation in sample reflectivity can be attributed predominantly to differing amounts of absorption within the samples. The values of R ∞ shown in figure 8(d) were obtained from the average image intensity sampled over a 20 × 20 pixel region (corresponding to 5 mm × 5 mm area) from the centre of each compartment, in order to reduce variations arising from laser speckle and structural inhomogeneity of the samples. In this respect, the ability to acquire diffuse reflection images, rather than sampling a single position on the target, is crucial to this technique.
## (s11) Two-dimensional imaging by electrically modulated SM sensing
(p11.0) Due to the cw nature of the SM arrangements described above, a mechanical chopper is commonly used to enable lock-in detection of the relatively weak (∼mV) SM response that is superimposed on the QCL terminal voltage. However, this mechanical modulation imposes an upper limit (∼200 Hz) on the modulation frequency, which is far below the ∼10-100 GHz optical feedback response bandwidth of QCLs. This bottleneck may be overcome through the use of electrical modulation schemes for 2D and 3D imaging.

(p11.1) The electrical modulation technique described here uses a dc driving current just below the lasing threshold, with a square wave modulation used to drive the QCL above threshold, thereby modulating the SM signal. This not only reduces the number of optical components, but the modulation frequency is no longer mechanically limited, thereby enabling faster acquisition. By comparing images acquired using both mechanical and electrical modulation at 200 Hz we have found comparable image clarity with similar figures of merit K under equivalent measurement conditions. Specifically, with 50 ms integration per pixel, we have obtained K = 140 and 155 for mechanical and electrical modulation schemes, respectively. With the electrical modulation frequency increased by more than two orders of magnitude to 60 kHz a comparable value K = 140 was obtained (see figure 15(c)). For this higher modulation frequency it was also possible to decrease the acquisition time per pixel by a factor of ten, limited only by the acquisition hardware, with only a modest degradation in image quality (K = 95). At higher frequencies the SM signal amplitude was found to degrade due to the modulation frequency limit of the laser driver, although we anticipate that the modulation frequency could in principle be increased far beyond this range, enabling significantly greater acquisition rates. A natural extension to this approach would be to form the modulating square wave by alternating the QCL driving current between two different levels, both above the lasing threshold. This could create an SM signal at two lasing frequencies and consequently two different phases of the reinjected electric field. Therefore, the two levels of alternating driving current of this electrical square wave modulation may, for example, be tuned to create the reflected waves perfectly out-of-phase leading to high contrast in the resulting SM signal levels.

(p11.2) The SM phenomenon is fundamentally coherent in nature, and so SM signals naturally depend on the phase of the electric field coupled back into the laser cavity. As the imaging position on the target changes, the length of the external cavity may also change leading to the light and dark fringes observed in figures 15(b) and (c). These fringes reveal the surface morphology of the blades, with adjacent fringes corresponding to a longitudinal displacement of half a wavelength, or ∼58 µm in this case. This coherent nature of the SM sensing approach has recently been exploited for 3D coherent imaging using a THz QCL [38].
## (s13) Swept-frequency interferometric imaging for materials analysis
(p13.0) In all the demonstrations of coherent imaging using a THz QCL reported to date [38,39,59], the phase information encoded in the imaging data has been related to the geometry of the target under investigation. This approach is equivalent to timedomain techniques whereby the temporal delay of the THz wave, measured after reflection from a target, is interpreted in terms of the path lengths corresponding to reflective interfaces within the target. The characterization of coating thickness and uniformity in coated pharmaceutical tablets has been reported based on this technique [9,11]. Alternatively, however, the phase change upon reflection from a target can be related to the complex permittivity of the target material. This is the basis of THz time-domain reflection spectroscopy [117], which enables THz frequency spectroscopic measurements on thick and/or highly absorbing samples including liquids [118]. The coherent nature of the SM approach has recently led to the development of an equivalent swept-frequency technique for both THz imaging and materials analysis in a reflective geometry [95]. Such application of a narrowband QCL source offers the advantage of high output power spectral density, spectral resolution exceeding that offered by TDS by several orders of magnitude, and the capability for high-speed measurements in a compact system.

(p13.1) In an SM imaging system the total phase shift incurred in one round trip of the beam comprises a contribution from the propagation phase shift corresponding to twice the optical path length of the external cavity, which we view as the optical length from the QCL source to the target and back to the QCL source, in addition to the phase shift occurring on reflection at the target. The former of these can be varied, resulting in a series of cavity resonances ('fringes') observable on the SM signal, by either varying the external cavity length or alternatively by applying a chirp to the laser frequency through ramp modulation of the driving current. For this latter frequency modulation approach the temporal separation between the SM fringes, as well as their shape and phase, depend on the external cavity length but also the complex permittivity of the target. Thus, through analysis of the SM waveform, the complex reflectivity of the target may be deduced. Using calibration standards, such an approach has recently been applied to the determination of the complex refractive indices of exemplar plastic materials with high accuracy [95].  In this demonstration the laser was driven in cw just above the lasing threshold, with a sawtooth current modulation superimposed on the dc driving current; this 50 mA peakto-peak modulation corresponded to a 600 MHz chirp of the emission frequency. For image acquisition, the time-domain SM waveform was recorded at each pixel using a digital acquisition card. From these waveforms, both amplitude and phase information could be determined on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Figure 18(a) shows an amplitude-like image of a custom-designed composite target consisting of a 1 inch aluminum cylinder equipped with three cylindrical bores (5 mm diameter) containing different plastics. In this image, the copper colour represents stronger feedback, which arises from the aluminum part of the target, whereas darker regions indicate weak feedback from the plastic bores. Due to the colour scale adopted here and the strong feedback from the aluminum relative to the three plastics, the contrast between the different plastic regions is not immediately apparent from this image. Nevertheless, this amplitude contrast is preserved in the time-domain signals acquired for each plastic, as can be seen in figure 18(c). Also evident in these waveforms is the differing temporal shift of the SM signal relative to the rising edge of the modulation waveform. This phase-like representation of the SM waveforms is shown in figure 18(b). In combination, these amplitude and phase images reveal spatial changes in the magnitude and phase of the complex reflectivity of the target. In particular, through fitting the acquired SM waveforms to a model based on the steadystate solution of the Lang-Kobayashi equations [105], both the refractive index and the extinction coefficient of the target can be obtained on a pixel-by-pixel basis, following appropriate calibration of the model using materials of known complex index. This approach has been shown to enable measurement of material properties with high accuracy [95]. Among the attractive qualities of this SM approach is its compact form and its ability to enable coherent sensing via the laser terminal voltage without the need for an external detector. This technique could therefore be readily extended to arrays of THz QCLs operating at multiple frequencies, or single electrically switchable QCLs, thereby enabling spectroscopic material characterization and identification within a fast and sensitive high-resolution imaging system 6.5. High-resolution ISAR imaging by SM As described previously, the majority of THz QCL-based imaging approaches acquire images by raster-scanning the sample through the focused THz beam (although notable exceptions have been discussed in section 2.3). The resolution of images formed in this manner is determined by the laser beam spot size, which depends on the operating frequency of the laser and the diffraction limits of the optical system. To overcome this limit, however, the coherent nature of SM in THz QCLs has recently been exploited for ISAR imaging, leading to spatial resolution exceeding the diffraction limit [119].

(p13.2) Key to the ISAR approach is the realization that the morphology of the SM signal is influenced by the spatial distribution of the reflection coefficient of the target across the illuminated region. Information about this distribution can be obtained by acquiring a series of SM signals from successive, partially overlapping spots on the target. Using the sweptfrequency approach described in section 6.3, such a set of SM waveforms was acquired by raster-scanning a resolution target through the THz beam. From each of these waveforms the aggregate complex reflection coefficient corresponding to the illuminated part of the target was then obtained, enabling the relative magnitude and phase of the backscattered electric field at the QCL facet to be calculated. Finally, the resulting complex backscattered fields were processed using an ISAR matched-filter algorithm [120] to recover the spatial dependence of the complex reflectivity across the target surface with a high resolution. Figure 19(a) shows the root-mean-square of the SM signal as a function of position across the resolution target, demonstrating that the usual unprocessed raster-scanning approach is able to resolve features down to 3.56 line pairs per millimetre (lppmm). However, it can be seen that the image contrast decreases with increasing spatial frequency. Conversely, the image generated through the ISAR approach is shown in figure 19(b). It can be seen that the bars are more sharply resolved through the ISAR approach, with about 50 dB change in signal level being observed even for the thinnest bars. For comparison, a signal variation of only ∼2 dB is observed in the corresponding unprocessed image. From these results it is clear that the ISAR approach significantly improves the contrast and spatial resolution of SM images whilst retaining the high sensitivity and dynamic range inherent to coherent detection schemes.
