# A REVIEW ON DIFFERENT COMPUTING METHOD FOR BREAST CANCER DIAGNOSIS USING ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK AND DATAMINING TECHNIQUES

CorpusID: 125278095 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a00eb372d73071ec5019634c59797f514e22a9e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a00eb372d73071ec5019634c59797f514e22a9e5)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Introduction:-
(p1.0) Cancer is a big threat to human life. Based on statistics from the World Health Organization (WHO), deaths caused by cancer will reach about 12 million people in 2030.Breast cancer has become the leading cause of death in women in developed countries. There are two types of breast lesions-malignant and benign. The Radiologists study various features to distinguish between the malignant tumor and benign tumor. The objective of these predictions is to assign patients to either a"benign" group that is noncancerous or a"malignant" group that is cancerous. Early diagnosis requires an accurate and reliable diagnosis procedure that allows physicians to distinguish benign breast tumors from malignant ones. Thus, it is very important to finding an accurate and effective diagnosis method. In recent years different methods have been widely used in prediction, especially in medical diagnosis. In medical application medical diagnosis is one of major problem. Several research groups are working world wide on the development of neural networks in medical diagnosis. Neural networks are used to increase the accuracy and objectivity of medical diagnosis. Artificial neural networks (ANNs) and data mining techniques have been recently proposed as a very effective method for diagnosis of breast cancer. This paper summarizes the application of artificial neural network and various methods of data mining for detecting breast cancer in human. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 1.1 and 1.2 describes the framework architecture of neural network and brief summary of data mining process and Section 2 describes literature review based on Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and data mining tools. Here in section 3 provides a conclusion of neural network approaches and data mining methods to breast cancer diagnosis.

(p1.1) Artificial Neural Networks:-Neural networks and fuzzy logic are two approaches that are widely used to solve classification and pattern recognition problems. The main advantage of neural networks is their learning Capabilities and their ease of implementation. Artificial neural networks are also referred to as neural nets artificial neural system, parallel distributed processing systems and connectionist systems. The basic processing elements of neural networks are called artificial neurons, or simply neurons or nodes. In a simplified mathematical model of the neuron, the effects of the synapses are represented by connection weights that modulate the effect of the associated input signals, and the nonlinear characteristic exhibited by neurons is represented by a transfer function. It is necessary for the system to have a labeled directed graph structure where nodes perform some simple computations. From elementary graph theory we recall that a directed graph consists of a set of nodes (vertices) and a set of connections (edges/links/arcs) connecting pairs of nodes. A graph is a labeled graph if each connection is associated with a label to identify some property of the connection. Data Mining:-Data mining is a part of Knowledge Discovery database (KDD) which is an emerging field in recent research for medical diagnosis and prognosis purpose. Data mining process uses data analysis method such as statistics, machine learning and artificial intelligence to attain new non-trivial knowledge, e.g. prediction values, hidden patterns, and dependencies. The aim of DM is extracting new knowledge and deeper insight into a given dataset (often a largescale dataset), which may continue to be used for decision making. Depending on their purpose of application, DM methods are divided into two groups: methods for prediction and methods for data characterization. Characterization tasks are aimed at finding patterns and associations, while prediction tasks are meant to predict certain events or certain unknown values within the relevant sphere of interests. The main methodological difference is that prediction requires a specific variable (class) to be included into the primary data. The solution can be numeric or categorical; respectively, DM methods for prediction are divided into regression and classification. DM methods can 600 be divided into three main categories: supervised learning technique; unsupervised learning technique; other. The first category of "supervised learning technique" includes the tasks of classification and prediction. The second category of "unsupervised learning technique" is assigned to the tasks of clustering and association rules mining. Visualization, outlier detection and link analysis are not classified as "supervised learning technique" or "unsupervised learning technique". A list of the most popular DM methods and techniques according to a survey conducted by KD Nuggets (Piatetsky-Shapiro, 2014) is as follows: decision trees and decision rules (classification); regression; clustering; descriptive statistics; visualization; link analysis; sequence mining; neural networks (classification); support vector machine; Bayes classification and linear genetic programming. Solving DM tasks includes the selection of appropriate algorithms. Both the selection of DM method and algorithm, and parameterization of the optimal algorithm shall depend on the task objectives of the analysis and characteristics of the available data. The most popular DM tasks and methods applied to the medical domain included classification methods: decision trees, neural networks, decision rules, SVM; clustering methods: k-means and hierarchical clustering; association mining and genetic algorithm.

(p1.2) Literature Review:-Literature review reveals that different methods used for diagnosis of breast cancer by using artificial neural networks and data mining approaches particularly in medical system. For the sake of comparison, it is very difficult to get a result as of which system is better one as it depends upon many factors like number of cases to be examined, type of abnormalities and database being used.

(p1.3) In 2010, Dr. K. Usha Rani applied a method of parallel approach by using neural network technique for better classification of diagnosis of breast cancer. The author discussed a variety of different parallelization strategies which have been considered for Artificial Neural Networks like Exemplar Parallelism (EP), Block parallelism, Neuron Parallelism. The experiment in this paper was conducted by considering the single and multi layer neural network models. Back propagation algorithm with momentum and variable learning rate was used to train the networks and MLP was adopted to produce an accuracy of 92% [5].
## (s2) 601
(p2.0) In 2012 Sonia Narang, Harsh K Verma, Uday Sachdev reported a systematic review on breast cancer using adaptive resonance neural networks (ARNN), ART and feed forward artificial neural networks. Here the author highlighted the performance of the network using ART Model, a diagnostics system that performs at accuracy [9].
## (s4) In 2006 Seral Sahana,Kemal Polata, Halife Kodazb, Salih
(p4.0) Gune introduced a new method By hybridizing a fuzzy-artificial immune system with k-nearest neighbour algorithm ,in order to solve diagnosis problem via classifying Wisconsin Breast Cancer Dataset (WBCD) and classification accuracy of 99.14% was obtained [2].

(p4.1) In 2006 Sudhir d. Sawarkar,dr,Ashoka.Ghatol have done a survey on Kohonen self-organizing map neural network for classification of breast cancer. For diagnosis the efficiency of self organizing map neural network showed that it can support the doctors or physicians to consider it as a second opinion of the learning machine to prevent biopsy. This method gave more efficiency nearly 98.88% as compared to SVM method which gives 96.26% [1].
## (s5) In 2010,Sarvestan Soltani A, Safavi A, Parandeh M. N. and Salehi M discussed different neural network such as
(p5.0) Multilayer Perceptron (MLP), Self Organizing Map(SOM), Radial Basis Function (RBF) and Probabilistic Neural Network(PNN) which are used to classify WBC and NHBCD data and compared all the network according to their accuracy. In this paper the author investigated RBF and PNN were proved as the best classifiers in the training set. But the PNN gave the best classification accuracy when the test set was considered [3].
## (s6) In 2010,Orlando Anunciacao, Bruno C. Gomes, Susana Vinga, Jorge Gaspar, Arlindo L.Oliveira and Jose
(p6.0) Rueff has discussed the applicability of Decision Tree for detection of high-risk breast cancer groups [4]. In 2010, Dr. Medhat Mohamed Ahmed Abdelaal and Muhamed Farouq investigated the capability of the classification SVM with Tree Boost and Tree Forest in analyzing the DDSM dataset. In this paper the author used SVM technique and show promising results for increasing diagnostic accuracy [6].
