# Health sector responses to intimate partner violence: A literature review

CorpusID: 12268766 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/332093999f8489b5ef6f7efe0eebe9bc4c389057](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/332093999f8489b5ef6f7efe0eebe9bc4c389057)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s4) The response of the health sector to intimate partner violence
(p4.0) Despite growing recognition that IPV is an important public health issue, there has been a relative lack of evidence regarding the most effective health system responses. 26,27,28 A Cochrane review of IPV interventions concluded that there is insufficient evidence to show whether current health sector-based approaches are effective in reducing violence or improving psychological well-being. 28 This points to a need for the development of new health sector responses, 29 as well as more rigorous evaluations of interventions and their integration into health services and systems, particularly in primary care, which is relatively under-represented in the literature. 27,30 There is, however, sufficient evidence that intervening for IPV in a primary care setting can be beneficial. A recent systematic review of interventions based in primary care found that 76% of 17 included studies showed an improvement in at least one measured outcome, including reductions in IPV, improvement in health-related quality of life and increased safety-promoting behaviours. 31 Included studies were largely of United States origin, with only one study originating in South Africa, one in Peru and one in Hong Kong.
## (s5) Screening and intervening
(p5.0) In primary care, intervention for IPV usually consists of screening or identification of women experiencing IPV, followed either by on-site intervention or referral to further specialised services. 31 Universal screening for IPV is controversial, although the need to identify cases non-routinely in healthcare settings is widely accepted. 32 Since 2013, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has recommended universal screening for IPV in women of childbearing age. 33 However, a more recently-published, well-conducted randomised controlled trial (the WEAVE study) found no difference in primary outcomes between women who were screened routinely for violence and a control group. 34 This trial, in addition to prior evidence, 35,36 has led to the expert conclusion that universal screening for IPV is ineffective in improving health. 29 Although screening is able to identify women experiencing IPV, uptake of interventions is impeded by numerous barriers and is often low and, in the setting of asymptomatic women, current intervention approaches have not been shown to be of benefit.

(p5.1) Inquiring about and discussing violence in specific cases during healthcare encounters (selective screening or case-finding) has been recommended as an alternative approach, 29,37 followed by more complex, individualised interventions. 29 This approach has been demonstrated to be feasible, with a cluster randomised controlled trial showing that training and support can significantly increase the number of women identified and referred to services in the absence of universal screening. 38 Several trials of IPV interventions in primary care have recently taken place, most of them in developed countries, utilising doctors, nurses and lay providers to deliver interventions either on or off-site. 34,35,38,39 These interventions commonly use empathic approaches and attempt to empower women by helping them to understand their situation, improve their safety and access community resources. 31 One randomised controlled trial with two levels of intervention (provision of a referral resource card and a protocol administered by a nurse) found both intervention groups experienced significant decreases in violence, suggesting that even the act of disclosure may be an important driver of change for women experiencing IPV. 39
## (s6) System-level interventions
(p6.0) Reviews of IPV interventions have emphasised that comprehensive, system-wide approaches have been the most effective. 26,40,41 IPV interventions are complex, requiring more than health care provider training to enable effective programme functioning within a health system. For example, a realist review (focusing on programme mechanisms to understand how and why programmes work) found that providers can be supported by four elements of an IPV programme: institutional support at high levels; effective protocols; ongoing training; and immediate access to support services. 40 The evidence base informing the scale-up of IPV interventions and their integration into health systems is lacking. 42 However, examples of published investigations that do exist provide lessons of interest to those wishing to institute an appropriate response to IPV. In Malaysia, the national scaleup of One Stop Crisis Centres, an integrated health sector response to IPV, was investigated. Factors relating to health system structure and organisation, as well as external policy constraints, were found to be barriers to implementation. 42 Several system-level factors arising from this case study could be applicable in other contexts. Commitment at policy level was found to be necessary, which could be communicated to service delivery level by incorporating appropriate indicators into routine reporting. Adequate training, as well as adjustments to service delivery, in order to ensure that providers have the necessary time and privacy available to them, were required. Finally, flexibility of the model was important so as to allow for its implementation at different levels of care.
## (s7) Primary prevention
(p7.0) Primary prevention of IPV, focusing on underlying causes and risk factors, remains a challenge. Two programmes have been tested in South Africa, attempting to address both IPV and HIV by focusing on the gendered nature of these interlinked epidemics.

(p7.1) The Intervention with Microfinance for AIDS and Gender Equity (IMAGE) study implemented a microfinance intervention combined with participatory training that focused on gender and HIV and encouraged community mobilisation. After two years, women enrolled in the intervention group experienced 55% less IPV in the previous 12 months, compared to the control group (risk ratio 0.45, 95% CI 0.23;0.91). 47 Although it was unable to show a difference in HIV incidence in communities, the trial showed that a structural intervention that empowers households economically can decrease violence.

(p7.2) Stepping Stones is a participatory programme aiming to prevent HIV through improving gender equity in relationships, thereby decreasing sexual risk behaviour. This programme was adapted for the South African context and was both implemented and evaluated through a cluster randomised controlled trial. The trial was unable to show a decrease in HIV incidence, but did demonstrate a decrease in incidence of Herpes simplex virus 2; and men who underwent the intervention reported perpetrating IPV significantly less often after two years of follow-up. 48 In India, a programme including a process of community mobilisation, aiming to empower the female sex worker community to work together to decrease their risk of HIV, showed a significant reduction in their experiences of violence. 49 The SASA! model, 50 currently being trialled in Uganda, uses community mobilisation in an attempt to alter the community-level factors that increase risk for both HIV and violence. In order to do this, community members and community leaders, as well as professionals such as healthcare workers and police officers, are trained and supported in order to engage with their communities, create networks and share key messages that develop as the empowered group is expanded in the community.

(p7.3) Other instances of IPV-prevention programmes exist, for example the SHARE project in Uganda 51 and a study comparing different combinations of interventions aiming to promote gender equitable behaviour in Brazil. 52 In addition, a recent systematic review of IPV-prevention interventions specifically targeting adolescents, found that half of the included trials were effective. 53 The interventions focused largely on building awareness, with some focusing on social norms and gender inequity. Interventions that reported positive outcomes were conducted in multiple settings (e.g. school and community). A trial of a structured home visitation programme for high-risk pregnant women in the Netherlands showed a decrease in IPV in the intervention group. 54 These examples not only demonstrate that IPV can be prevented through the efforts of the health sector acting in concert with other stakeholders and the community, but also highlight the importance of addressing gender inequity when responding to both IPV and HIV. Approaches that include community empowerment and mobilisation, explicitly recognising that social and structural factors need to be addressed, appear to be particularly successful.
