# Literature survey on epidemiology and pathology of cardiac fibroma

CorpusID: 12088146 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77ce46cad510497290bc1553053b234e8bec35c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77ce46cad510497290bc1553053b234e8bec35c1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Primary cardiac tumors are extremely rare, with a reported incidence ranging from 0.0017 to 0.019% [1]. Of such tumors, about 75% are benign nature [2,3]. Cardiac fibroma is the second most common primary cardiac tumor in infants and young children after rhabdomyoma [4,5]. Although cardiac fibroma is a benign and solitary tumor [6] composed of fibroblasts and collagen [7,8], it is clinically important as it may present with symptoms such as inflow and outflow obstruction, conduction system disease, and sudden death [9,10]. In contrast to cardiac rhabdomyoma, cardiac fibroma rarely regresses spontaneously [11] and surgical removal in a symptomatic case should be considered [12,13]. Unfortunately, only a few studies have reported the epidemiology, embryology, and histopathology of the cardiac fibroma. Thus, we searched literature databases in July 2011 and selected publications related to cardiac fibroma using a modification of our previously reported method [14] to elucidate the factors predicting poor outcome.
## (s2) Data collection
(p2.0) In July 2011 we searched English and Japanese languages case reports of cardiac fibroma using PubMed http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/ and IgakuChuo-Zasshi http://www.jamas.or.jp/ databases by conducting a search for 'fibroma' with no time limitations. In the PubMed search, 'case report' and 'English' options were used as an additional tool, and the PubMed system automatically conducted 'Medical Subject Headings' or 'All Fields' searches for 'fibroma'.

(p2.1) In contrast, for the IgakuChuoZasshi search the 'shoreihoukoku' (Japanese word meaning case report) option was used as an additional tool. We then reviewed the searched abstracts of publications selected from the databases to determine the cumulative number of reported cardiac fibroma cases. Additionally, we reviewed the references of the selected publications in order to find and include publications that were not recorded in the databases.

(p2.2) We then extracted and sampled the raw data from the selected publications and our autopsy case in relation to factors such as age, gender, clinical symptoms, surgical intervention, outcome, site of the tumor, and maximum diameter of the tumor. In the present study, data collection was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) style [15] as much as was possible.
## (s7) Correlation between tumor occurrence and cardiac chamber weight
(p7.0) To confirm the correlation between tumor occurrence and cardiac chamber weight, we compared the ratio of the number of tumor sites and the muscular weight of the cardiac chamber using the χ 2 test. Muscular weight was determined using examples of previous publication reported by Sandstede et al. [18]. To determine the weight of the interventricular septum in the present study, we divided the left ventricle into four zones comprising anterior wall, lateral wall, posterior wall, and interventricular septum.
## (s8) Correlation between site of cardiac fibroma and outcome
(p8.0) Since a previous report indicated that patients with interventricular septal cardiac fibroma have a poorer outcome [19], we used the χ 2 test to compare mortality between patients whose condition involving or not involving the interventricular septum. We then compared DT/CW between these groups of patients using a Mann-Whitney U test, and compared the incidence of arrhythmia between these groups of patients using the χ 2 test.
