# How important is importance for prospective memory? A review

CorpusID: 12650790 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b592385c38a1e411df8462dc48a5ad44d21ac972](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b592385c38a1e411df8462dc48a5ad44d21ac972)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s3) RELATIVE IMPORTANCE MANIPULATION
(p3.0) In most of the laboratory studies in which the impact of importance on prospective memory performance was investigated participants were either instructed to prioritize the prospective memory task or to prioritize the ongoing task, thus, varying the relative importance of a task (e.g., Kliegel et al., 2001Kliegel et al., , 2004Smith and Bayen, 2004;Loft and Yeo, 2007;Loft et al., 2008). This kind of importance manipulation has been referred to as dual-task-prioritizing (cf. Burgess, 2000). Moreover, prospective memory performance is impaired in situations, in which working memory load is high . A straight-forward explanation is that insufficient cognitive resources are available for the prospective memory task. For example, driving home in rush hour traffic is more likely to cause us to forget to buy groceries along the way than driving home on an empty road. In the laboratory, cognitive loads can be manipulated in several different ways. First, the difficulty of the ongoing task can be varied (e.g., Marsh et al., 2002;McNerney and West, 2007;Khan et al., 2008;West et al., 2011). Second, an additional ongoing task can be added, thus requiring divided attention (e.g., Kliegel et al., 2001Kliegel et al., , 2004Khan et al., 2008). Third, loads can be manipulated by adding and varying the difficulty of a third ongoing task (Wang et al., 2006). Fourth, the prospective memory task can be embedded in an ongoing task environment that requires task switching (e.g., Marsh et al., 2002;McNerney and West, 2007). The difficulty of the prospective memory task can also be varied, for example by using multiple prospective memory targets (cf. Cohen et al., 2008). Consequently, in cognitive loaded situations strategic monitoring for prospective memory targets is impeded. Thus, successfully remembering of an important intention in such situations requires an intentional or explicit prioritizing of the prospective memory task. Kliegel et al. (2001) manipulated relative importance and cognitive loads in two experiments in which the ongoing task was to rate words either on concreteness, familiarity, pleasantness, or seriousness in both experiments. In Experiment 1, the prospective memory task was time-based, that is, participants were asked to press a key every 2 min. They were allowed to monitor time by checking a clock that appeared on the screen whenever they pressed a different key. The results showed more accurate prospective memory responses when the prospective memory task was emphasized. This result suggests that the relative importance of an intention affects performance in time-based prospective memory tasks. In Experiment 2, participants were instructed for an event-based task. They had to press a special key whenever a specific word appeared during the word task. In addition, the load of the ongoing task was manipulated by asking the participants to perform an additional auditory digit detection task. The results showed that importance did not affect performance and neither did the manipulation of ongoing task load. Similarly, the importance manipulation did not generally affect attention allocation as measured as number of missed ongoing task trials (see also Harrison and Einstein, 2010).

(p3.1) In a follow-up study, Kliegel et al. (2004) replicated the latter result with a very similar set-up. Particularly, in their second experiment, the prospective memory targets were defined as words that contained either the letter g or q (i.e., a non-focal target) rather than as a specific word (i.e., a focal target, cf. . In this experiment, the importance manipulation enhanced prospective memory performance. Moreover, the impact of the importance manipulation was stronger when ongoing task load was increased by an additional auditory digit detection task. Strategic monitoring was enhanced by importance as more ongoing task omissions occurred in both experiments when the prospective memory task was emphasized. Smith and Bayen (2004) specifically focused on monitoring costs triggered by emphasizing either the relative importance of the prospective memory or the ongoing task. The ongoing task was a color-matching task, and the prospective memory task was to press a particular key whenever one of six specific target words occurred (i.e., a cognitive "loaded" prospective memory task). The results showed higher prospective memory performance and more monitoring costs when the instructions emphasized the prospective memory task.
## (s5) PROVIDING SOCIAL MOTIVES
(p5.0) Providing social motives to perform a prospective memory task (i.e., instructing participants an intention is important for somebody else) can also increase the importance of a task. This manipulation can be considered as a special case of an absolute importance manipulation. However, in addition, an explicit reason is given why the intention is important.

(p5.1) Using a naturalistic task in a laboratory context, Kvavilashvili (1987, Experiment 2) asked participants to perform a prospective memory task either after a filled or an unfilled retention interval (i.e., an activity-based task). Importance was induced by telling half of the participants that an important telephone call for the experimenter was waiting (i.e., social motive). The other half, the control group, was not given this additional information. The prospective memory task was to remember to hang up a telephone receiver that was suspended during the experiment. In addition, in the retention interval, participants were either engaged in an interesting activity, a monotonous activity, or were told to relax. The results showed that only very few participants forgot to perform the "important" prospective memory task, independent of the retention interval manipulation. In contrast, for participants in the control group forgetting was much more likely when an interesting activity was performed. In fact, Cicogna and Nigro (1998) replicated this finding with a very similar set-up. The only difference was that they asked participants to hang up the telephone after 5 min and then to return to the ongoing task which turned the prospective memory task into a time-based prospective memory task. Thus, it seems that the importance of an intention can shield prospective memory against distractions for both, activity-based and time-based prospective memory tasks. Brandimonte et al. (2010) investigated the influence of providing a social motive and also its interaction with providing a reward. Participants were either told that their results would offer information that was particularly important to the researcher (i.e., social motive condition), that they would receive course credits if they remembered to carry out the prospective memory task appropriately (i.e., reward condition), both of these instructions (social motive and reward condition) or none of this information (i.e., standard prospective memory condition). The ongoing task was to decide whether a verb was regular or irregular. The prospective memory task was activity-based, namely, to sign a form at the end of each experimental block. The results showed that prospective memory task performance was better in the social motive condition compared to both the standard instruction condition and the reward condition. Astonishingly, prospective memory performance was lower when both a social motive and a reward were present. There were no monitoring costs in any of the conditions. Thus, the results of this study suggest that prospective memory performance can be improved by emphasizing the social importance of the task without increasing monitoring. Altgassen et al. (2010) investigated age-effects of providing a social motive on prospective memory and ongoing task performance in a time-based prospective memory task. Participants were engaged in an ongoing visuo-spatial working-memory task and they had the additional instruction to press a designated key every 2 min as the prospective memory task. Moreover, half of the participants received the standard prospective memory task instruction (i.e., control group) whereas the other half of the participants received the social importance instruction. In the latter, they were told that they were doing the experimenter a favor when they would remember to press the key after the 2 min time-periods. Results showed that younger adults generally outperformed older adults in the prospective memory task. However, there was an interaction between age-group and importance manipulation, which showed that younger adults were not influenced by the importance manipulation. In contrast, older adults improved prospective memory performance in the social importance instruction compared to the control group. Critically, this improvement neither did come at costs in the ongoing task nor at an increased time-checking behavior.

(p5.2) In summary, the provision of a social motive to produce importance also enhanced prospective memory performance in all of the reviewed studies. Critically, this did not come at a cost in the ongoing task (cf. Altgassen et al., 2010;Brandimonte et al., 2010).
## (s6) UNDERLYING MECHANISMS OF TASK IMPORTANCE
(p6.0) Most of the results of the reviewed studies showed that the importance of an intention increases prospective memory performance (cf. Meacham and Singer, 1977;Kvavilashvili, 1987;. However, some studies suggest that this is not necessarily the case and that other factors also influence prospective memory performance (Kliegel et al., 2001(Kliegel et al., , 2004Loft and Yeo, 2007;Brandimonte et al., 2010). Furthermore, enhancing prospective memory performance due to an importance manipulation sometimes resulted in costs for the ongoing task (e.g., Loft and Yeo, 2007;Smith and Hunt, 2014), but in a few studies, there was no indication for costs (e.g., Brandimonte et al., 2010). Consequently, we have to take into account differences regarding the type of prospective memory task, cognitive load, and potential processing overlaps. These factors might modulate the impact of task importance on prospective memory and ongoing task performance. The results of the reviewed studies including these factors are summarized in Figure 1.

(p6.1) Next, we will discuss the results of the reviewed studies from the perspective of the PAM theory and the multiprocess model in order to underpin this assumption. According to PAM, successfully remembering to perform a prospective memory task always comes at a cost in the ongoing task, because "preparatory attentional processes" are required to detect a prospective memory target. This induces a change in resource allocation policies to the prospective memory task through strategic monitoring (Smith and Bayen, 2004;Smith and Hunt, 2014; but see Meier and Rey-Mermet, 2012). This theory predicts that when an intention is important increased prospective memory performance is due to a change in resource allocation policies and thus, to increased strategic monitoring.

(p6.2) In contrast, according to the multiprocess model, there are two different routes toward remembering a prospective memory task (see McDaniel and Einstein, 2000;. Similar to PAM, prospective memory may come at a cost in the ongoing task due to strategic monitoring if, for example, a prospective memory target is not distinctive or if the association or the underlying processes between a target and the intended actions are weakly associated. In contrast, automatic retrieval of an intention without ongoing task costs is possible, if, for example, a prospective memory target is distinctive or with high processing overlaps (e.g., for focal cues).

(p6.3) Inducing importance may also lead to a higher activation level of the intention, to a higher sensitivity toward a prospective target event, and thus to higher accessibility of the prospective task. This could be similar to those metacognitive strategies which are also used to enhance prospective memory performance such as implementation intentions, imagery of a prospective memory task, or performance predictions (e.g., Gollwitzer, 1999;McDaniel et al., 2008b;Meeks and Marsh, 2009;Zimmermann and Meier, 2010;Brewer et al., 2011;Grilli and McFarland, 2011;McFarland and Glisky, 2011;Meier et al., 2011;Schult and Steffens, 2011;Rummel et al., 2012).

(p6.4) In light of these considerations, we suggest that inducing importance by providing a social motive or by an absolute importance instruction (i.e., importance instructions without an explicit request to prioritize the prospective memory task) may operate by similar mechanisms as metacognitive strategies, that is, they enhance the prospective memory task-context associations to perform a prospective memory task without increasing strategic monitoring. According to the multiprocess model, in some cases, prospective memory performance is enhanced due to a change in resource allocation policies (e.g., when producing importance by providing a reward depending on prospective memory performance or by a relative importance manipulation), but in other cases it is enhanced due to automatic retrieval (e.g., when producing importance by providing a social motive or by an absolute importance manipulation).
## (s7) CHANGE IN RESOURCE ALLOCATION POLICIES vs. AUTOMATIC RETRIEVAL
(p7.0) The results of the reviewed studies with relative importance manipulations showed that prioritizing the prospective memory task enhanced prospective memory performance, but this came at a cost in the ongoing task. Prioritizing the ongoing task reduced the cost compared to prioritizing the prospective memory task, but it also resulted in lower prospective memory task performance (see , for a detailed discussion of this issue).

(p7.1) However, importantly, the studies that have investigated the effect of relative importance have not included a control condition, in which neither the importance of the prospective memory task nor the ongoing task is emphasized. Such a control condition would be necessary to determine whether an ongoing task cost exists at all, that is, over and above the cost that is typically associated with performing a laboratory prospective memory task (see Figure 2 for an illustration).

(p7.2) The results of the laboratory studies using a reward to produce importance suggested a change in resource allocation policies. However, in most of these studies monitoring costs were not measured, or in one study only a subjective rating was used (Krishnan and Shapiro, 1999). Moreover, there are two studies in which monitoring costs were measured Kliegel et al., 2010), but no monitoring costs occurred. Critically, both of these studies involved activity-based prospective memory tasks. Thus, the type of prospective memory task may modulate the effect of an importance manipulation.

(p7.3) The results of studies with absolute importance instructions showed that prospective memory task performance was increased compared to standard prospective memory task instruction and this increase came at a cost in the ongoing task. This suggests that the retrieval of an important intention may be based on a change of resource allocation policies, also for absolute importance. Nevertheless, so far, solid evidence for the question whether absolute importance also affects ongoing task performance is FIGURE 1 | Effects of importance on prospective memory performance and on ongoing task performance depending on the kind of importance manipulation, type of prospective memory task, cognitive loads, cue focality, and age. Dark gray fields show enhanced prospective memory task performance or ongoing task costs, light gray fields show no changes in prospective memory task performance or ongoing task costs and white fields show knowledge gaps.

(p7.4) lacking, because the instruction of the only study that used a proper absolute importance instruction explicitly pushed participants to find every cue and may thus have induced strategic monitoring (cf. . Further research is necessary to follow up on this result with less suggestive instructions. Importantly, with absolute importance instructions, participants are not directly prompted to prioritize one task over the other. There is no explicit reason to change resource allocation policies to the prospective memory task. Therefore, absolute importance instructions could also enhance prospective memory performance due to automatic retrieval and critically would not necessarily come at costs in the ongoing task (see Figure 2 for an illustration). Future studies are necessary to test this hypothesis.
