# Mechanisms of immunosuppression by mesenchymal stromal cells: a review with a focus on molecules MSCs and their immunomodulatory capabilities

CorpusID: 12906655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c41152398e45131d4f112647b1392ac25f6516c4)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) HLA-G
(p3.0) In humans, unlike classical HLA class Ia (HLA-A, B, C), class Ib (HLA-E, F, G) has low polymorphism [69,70]. HLA-G is a potent tolerogenic molecule, as reviewed by Amiot et al. [71]. Expression of HLA-G is normally limited to a small number of tissues including the cytotrophoblast [72,73], and likely protects the fetus from maternal uterine natural killer cytolysis. HLA-G expression increases in many diseases including cancers, multiple sclerosis, inflammatory diseases, and viral infections and during transplantation [74]. HLA-G neutralizing antibodies can reverse the ability of MSCs to expand CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 + Treg cells In vitro and inhibit the alloproliferative T cell response [75]. HLA-G alters various immune cell functions such as NK cell, cytotoxic T cell, and allogeneic T cell proliferation as well as the maturation of DC cells [75]. Morandi et al. [70] also discussed its potential function to affect chemotaxis in T cells and NK cells.

(p3.1) Nasef et al. [76] reported that an antibody-blocking HLA-G molecule increased lymphocyte proliferation in a MSC/MLR system. Rizzo et al. [77] showed a significant correlation between HLA-G and IL-10 upregulation in MSC/PBMC/PHA culture supernatants and lymphoproliferative inhibition. Experiments with monoclonal Antibodies against HLA-G and IL-10 confirmed the inhibitory ability of HLA-G.

(p3.2) The primary transcript of HLA-G is spliced into seven alternative mRNAs encoding membrane-bound (HLA-G1, G2, G3, G4) and soluble protein isoforms [72]. Selmani et al. [75] showed that MSCs express HLA-G5 as a soluble protein, and using a neutralizing antibody, they showed that HLA-G5 protects MSCs and neighbor cells from NK cytolysis and inhibits IFN-γ secretion by NK cells. The anti-HLA-G5 antibody largely reversed most MSC activity to suppress the alloproliferation of T cells and significantly reduce the expansion of Treg cells.
## (s4) Adenosine
(p4.0) CD39 is an ecto-enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of ATP to 5´-AMP, the substrate for CD73. CD73 catalyzes the reaction that produces adenosine from 5´-AMP. Adenosine is an immunosuppressant that acts mainly through its receptor A(2a) (ADORA2A); upon adenosine binding, this receptor increases intracellular cAMP levels and suppresses T cell functions [81].

(p4.1) Saldanha-Araujo et al. [82] showed that the co-culture led to an increase in the percentage of human BM-MSCs expressing CD39 and T lymphocytes expressing CD73, and resulted in higher adenosine levels. MSCs expressed CD73 with and without T cells. Blocking of ADORA2A with a specific inhibitor also showed that this adenosinemediated effect at least partly accounted for the immunosuppressive effect of MSCs. Sattler et al. [83] showed a similar result with mouse MSCs, but anti-TGF-β and anti-HGF antibodies did not block the suppressive ability of MSCs. Of note, an A(2a) receptor antagonist SCH58261 or the specific CD39 inhibitor polyoxotungstate 1 blocked MSC-mediated suppression of T cell proliferation almost completely. Thus, adenosine seems to be an important mediator of suppression by MSCs.
## (s10) ICAM-1 and VCAM-1
(p10.0) It is important to understand the adhesion molecules that are responsible for MSC-lymphocyte binding. Ren et al. [120] showed that ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 induction in mouse BM-MSCs, using the supernatant of activated T cells, could be blocked by an anti-IFN-γ antibody. Neither anti-TNF-α nor anti-IL-1α showed this inhibition, but the latter cytokines acted synergistically to induce high expression of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 in MSCs. ICAM-1-deficient MSCs had a significantly reduced immunosuppressive effect in an OVA-challenged mouse model. ICAM-1 is likely to have many uncharacterized roles. Using an immune-complex-mediated vasculitis murine model, Jiang et al. [121] showed that MSCs suppressed neutrophil activation. This suppression was due to ICAM-1-dependent engulfment of neutrophils by MSCs. They further showed that MSCs constitutively release SOD3, a soluble extracellular form of superoxide dismutase, which can detoxify the superoxide anion radical. This data suggests that MSCs mount an adaptive antioxidant SOD3 response to protect themselves from the threat of neutrophil oxidative burst.
## (s13) PD-L1 and PD-L2
(p13.0) Several studies including have drawn an attention to the programmed death ligand 1 (PD-1) pathway. Augello et al. [138] showed that co-culturing of BM-MSC with allogeneic splenocytes and PHA increased programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) and PD-L2, although only a part of BM-MSCs showed expression due to heterogeneity. Antibodies blocking PD-1, PD-L1 and PD-L2 showed restoration of the T cell proliferation in the presence of MSCs. Importance of PD-L1 secreted by mouse MSCs is also highlighted by Sheng et al. [139] in the context of IFN-γ priming effect (see below). Priming with TNF-α alone showed no PD-L1 increase [139].

(p13.1) Recent studies on the PD-1 or B7 family pathway involves Luan and coworkers [140,141] that showed that PD-L2 was abundantly expressed in human placenta-derived MSCs and promoted placentaderived MSCs immunosuppressive ability on activated T cells. PD-L1 is expressed in placenta-derived MSCs but almost not B7-H4. PD-L1 monoclonal antibody significantly restored anti-CD3 antibodystimulated T cell proliferation in the presence of placenta-derived MSCs.

(p13.2) Of clinical importance, human placenta-derived MSCs strongly suppressed Th17 responses and this required both IL-25 (also known as IL-17E) and PD-L1 [142]. Gu et al. [144] showed that human placenta-MSCs (hPMSCs) constituently expressed PD-L1 and FasL molecules. Both anti-PD-L1 and anti-FasL antibodies partially but significantly reversed the suppressive effects of hPMSCs on PHA or allogeneic PBMC induced T cell proliferation. Intriguingly, the effects of the two antibodies on early T cell activation measured by CD69 expression were different.
## (s15) microRNA
(p15.0) An increasing number of studies are focusing on involvement of microRNAs (miRs) in the regulation of several immune responses in both innate and acquired immunity [11]. Association of miRs with developmental stages of MSCs is under intensive investigations, and on the other hand, considerable attentions are directed to extracellular vesicles that can transfer miRs to other cells [145,146]. Levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines in placental MSCs from preeclampsia (PE) patients have been shown to be higher than in ones from normal women [148]. Wang et al. [149] and Chen et al. [150] showed miR-16 and miR-494, respectively, could inhibit the proliferation and migration of MSCs from severe PE patients. In Wang et al. [149], for example, increased expression of miR-16 in decidua-derived MSCs from severe PE patients relative to normal patients was observed. In their transfection analysis, over-expressed miR-16 inhibited the proliferation and migration of decidua-derived MSCs and induced cell-cycle arrest by targeting cyclin E1.
## (s16) Other molecules
(p16.0) At the time of this writing, the number of newly characterized immunosuppressive molecules of MSCs appears to be still increasing. CD200 is a transmembrane glycoprotein expressed by cells involving vascular endothelial cells, epithelial cells and lymphocytes and its binding to receptor CD200R expressed on DCs, macrophages and mast cells lead to inmmunosuppresion [155]. In Najar et al. [155], compared to adipose tissue and BM-MSCs, Wharton's jelly MSCs showed higher CD200 expression. IFN-γ treatment increased expression in BM-MSCs. However, blocking CD200 -CD200R interaction did not prevent MSCmediated inhibition of lymphocytes proliferation.

(p16.1) CD276 (B7-H3) is a member of the B7 and CD28 families. Normally induced on antigen presenting cells, CD276 plays a role in the inhibition of T cell function [156]. CD276 is highly overexpressed on a wide range of human cancers and likely suppresses immune responses to tumors. La Rocca et al. [80] showed that human Wharton's jelly MSCs maintain the expression of immunomodulatory molecules such as CD276 and HLA-E, F, and G even after the acquisition of a mature phenotype to osteogenic, adipogenic and chondrogenic differentiation.
## (s18) Timing
(p18.0) To our knowledge, relatively few studies addressed the issue of timing between effector cell stimulations and treatment with MSCs. Valencic et al. [167] examined the timing issue using WJ-MSCs. Human WJ-MSCs cocultured with PBMCs prestimulated with 24hr with phytohaemagglutinin (PHA) failed to inhibit PBMC proliferation. Licensing by proinflammatory cytokines restored the inhibitory effects of MSCs.

(p18.1) Of importance, Mancheno-Corvo et al. [168] prestimulated human PBMCs with microbeads coated with anti-CD2/CD3/CD28 antibodies. When PBMCs after 6hr prestimulation were cocultured with adipose MSCs, proliferation was inhibited. Strikingly, adipose MSCs failed to inhibit proliferation of T cells after 24hr prestimulation, indicating the critical effect of the duration of T cells prestimulation. They further showed that priming with IFN-γ and to a lesser extent with poly (I:C) (TLR3 ligand), but not LPS (TLR4 ligand) and other tested stimuli, enhanced the MSCs ability to inhibit the proliferation of 48hrstimulated T lymphocytes. The inhibitory effects of adipose MSCs were time-dependent and accounted for by Trp depletion by IDO.
## (s20) TLR agonist pretreatment
(p20.0) The effect of TLR stimulation on MSCs has been studied with the goal of understanding MSC behavior in clinical settings. The expression of TLRs in MSCs is now well documented. Murine MSCs express TLR1-8, and human MSCs express TLR1-5 [117]. A recent finding proposed that TLR4 ligation could induce a proinflammatory MSC1 response and TLR3 ligation could result in an anti-inflammatory MSC2 response [174]. Sangiorgi et al. [175] showed that TLR4 stimulation by LPS (TLR4 ligand) compromises the ability of MSCs to suppress the proliferation of T lymphocytes. This pretreatment led to a reduction in IL-10 and IFN-γ mRNA levels in co-cultured T lymphocytes. Intriguingly, stimulation of TLR9 with DSP30 induced the proliferative and suppressive potential of MSCs. In this system, using human BM-MSCs, approximately 45% of cells expressed TLR2 and 70-80% of cells expressed TLR3, TLR4, and TLR9. In addition, TLR3 agonist pretreatment had no effect. It is still a matter of debate whether TLR3 pretreatment reduces or enhances immunosuppression by MSCs [175].
