# A Review of Visual Descriptors and Classification Techniques Used in Leaf Species Identification

CorpusID: 126265733 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88e6b71ff56059fa966d1ed35d91e16441a0b6b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88e6b71ff56059fa966d1ed35d91e16441a0b6b1)

Fields: Computer Science, Environmental Science, Biology

## (s3) Curvature Descriptors
(p3.0) Curvature Scale Space (CSS) is a technique used to measure the contours of shapes, extracts the concavity and convexity of curvature. It is invariant to translation and rotation in a viewpoint direction but not in scale, because it varies with the Gaussian kernel (a) and cannot easily fix the value of the Gaussian kernel. It leads to misclassification of serrated and lobe-shaped leaves. Curvature is a vital property of leaves and curvatures are computed using differential techniques. However, it produces more noise, is sensitive to rotation, and generates different feature vectors with different scales. It is impossible to sustain all the curvature features combined together in one feature vector. Aligning them all in one particular point is a difficult task, because the features differ for each scale.

(p3.1) According to [16] CSS used to identify the starting and Fig. 3 Feature extraction techniques ending points of the venation feature points of leaves by estimating the maximum angles of the leaves. The densities of feature points are estimated using the Parzen window method for non-parametric density estimation and it can be applied to any data distribution. We cannot, however, get to choose the correct window size. According to [17], since veins are represented as strings used for semantic interpretation, there is no need to find the starting and ending points. But these methods cannot be used for imperfect and overlapped leaves. Grinblat et al. [18] used an unconstrained hit or miss transform technique to extract particular patterns in foreground and background pixels. When applied to leaf images, central vein patches are extracted from leaves and various geometric features are calculated for the veins. The SIFT descriptor [19,20] were used to extract key features from an image. It produces good results on the circular orientation of an image, and is well suited to illumination and various viewing conditions. It extracts histogram features from local patches. The authors extracted corner points using Mean Projection transform (MPT) instead of CSS, it produces indistinguishable variations as well as aliasing. To eliminate such problems, the Mean Projection Transform extracts corners that have high curvature. The Flavia dataset produces accuracy of 87.5%.
## (s6) Point and Edge-based Feature Descriptors
(p6.0) A new descriptor called the shape context was introduced in [33] to dissociate shape information from different shapes. It is a technique used to extract point information from a shape's contours, measure similarity differences between feature vectors of various points in an image, and isolate information from the neighbouring pixels of an image. The transformation of an object does not affect shape context information. It is invariant to rotation since it performs log polar operations while computing shape context information. It is invariant to small affine transformations, occlusions, the presence of outliers, and is applicable to clear images. Shape context is used to calculate the local and spatial information of an image. In [34], an advanced shape context method was introduced to reduce computational cost. In this method they used two sets: a voting set and a computing set. While the voting set was used to build the histogram information of the shape, the computing set was used to compute the shape context information of various shapes. This method was used for polygonal shaped leaf images.

(p6.1) The researchers of paper [35] proposed a new technique in shape context termed the Inner Distance Shape Context (IDSC), where the Euclidean distance is used to compute the cost matrix between two shapes. But it does not consider how many line segments are crossed in shape boundaries and, further, increases the computational cost. The technique solves the problem above by calculating the length of the shortest path with in shape boundary, and is invariant to articulation points that requires complex matching algorithm to compare a set of points.
## (s7) Edges and Corner Points
(p7.0) Edges are significant features of leaf images in terms of measuring sharp variations in images. The Sobel edge detection operators were used to extract edge features from images in [45]. From the edges, feature points were found which intersect the edges and achieved 100% accuracy with 13 different plants. The model ascertains damages to veins. Corner features [46] are useful to find the similarity of leaf images because corners are intersections of two different edges or interest points under various different directions and lighting conditions. They are stable across different sequences, useful when there is damage to the corners, and are the same for all leaves. Harris Corner detectors are used to find the different directions of contours directly. The angles are arranged in ascending order, stored in an array and compared to find out the least angle of the unmatched image. Tekkesinoglu et al. [193] used morphological transformation and edge detection techniques to identify the leaf boundary of overlapped (Hevea leaves) rubber tree leaves.
## (s10) Entropy and Pulse Coupled Neural Networks
(p10.0) The pulse-coupled neural network, an artificial neural network model, is used to extract features from leaf images. The image size and neural network size are same. Pulse Coupled Neural Network was used by Wang et al. in [73] to classify leaves using the entropy sequence with Hu and Zernike moment invariants. Liu et al. [74] used an adaptive unit-linking PCNN to extract the centre of the time matrix from images. Different from the PCNN an Intersecting cortical Model (ICM) used by Wang et al. [75] acts as an anti-agent for noise and anti-geometric properties of images. Table 4 summarizes the feature extraction techniques, the features extracted from leaves using those techniques and, the advantages and disadvantages of those techniques.
## (s12) Texture Features Based on Fractals
(p12.0) The topological structure is used to measure how close two objects are to each other. In [80], the authors used a Lie group of region structures to measure the texture of weeds and provide information about pixel intensity and spatial features of broadleaf weeds. The smooth manifolds of local symmetries were derived at by applying the Riemannian Manifold on the leaf surface. The dimension of a region covariance of the leaf surface is lower than that of the original image. It extracts multiple features such as information on edges and directions. Fractals measure the self-similar texture of leaves as well as the roughness of the leaf surface. A multi-scale Minkowsi fractal dimension method was used to analyse and recognize leaf images in [81,82]. This method extracts outline and vein features as curves. Usually, objects and patterns have distinct geometric natures in fractals and, in order to overcome this difficulty, they used the multi-scale Minkowsi fractal dimension technique for classifying Passiflora leaf morphometry. In [83], the researchers used new fractal refinement technique for classifying species based on contour, contour nerves, nervure fractals of three different levels. Mutchar and Fatichah [84] used lacunarity feature for leaf classification as the fractal dimension cannot discriminate between two objects with different patterns/texture. It measures the spatial distribution of gaps with certain image textures. Casanova et al. [85] used Gabor filter to extract texture features from images. It collects various image features and extracts energy signature from leaves. He evaluated 20 different classes of Brazilian flora using Linear Discriminant Analysis and achieved 86.00% of classification accuracy.
## (s13) Local Binary Patterns Based on Texture
(p13.0) The Local binary pattern (LBP) is an image feature, which transforms image into an array of values. It describes about the changes in the neighbouring pixels. Qi et al. [92] introduced a pair-wise rotation invariant co-occurrence local binary pattern (PRICoLBP) and applied to colour images. It represents the local curvature as well as edge contour information. This technique was applied to various databases comprising flower and leaves. An LBP histogram Fourier feature (LBP-HF) [93] identifies uniform patterns using Fourier descriptors. It stores all uniform patterns in a single bin and the authors used all the information on pixels, leaf interiors and exteriors separately. A modified local binary pattern was proposed in [94], where LBP binary values are calculated based on thresholding. It lends same LBP code for two different patterns. To overcome this problem the mean and standard deviation of the neighbouring pixels were taken into account. It captures the structural relationship between the gray values of the pixels in the neighbourhood. The LBP was combined with the gray-level co-occurrence matrix in [95] for tea leaf classification. In the basic LBP, every pixel needs to be calculated for obtaining LBP values, and computing the LBP is a time-consuming process. To circumvent the problem, the authors introduced a non-overlap window that includes a centre pixel and its neighbour pixels in a single gray-level image. There is no overlap between the windows in this technique. Since the GLCM is used to calculate the relationship between two windows, it produces multiscale texture features.

(p13.1) A multiscale local binary pattern was applied on the path integral (pi-LBP) in [96]. In all multiscale LBPs, local information is encoded individually in each scale, but the pi-LBP can effectively encode the cross-scale correlation and provides better texture description. A pixel-based LBP was introduced in [97] instead of computing global information built on a block-based LBP the authors computed LBP based on center pixel of a half-size window which determines how much local and global information is included in the texture descriptor. It produces powerful relations for the intra-class variability of textures. Sumathi et al. [98] used Gabor filter for textural, statistical and spatial frequency domain relationships in leaf classification. The LBP variance [40] was applied to classify Costa Rican plant species. It detects micro texture veins as well as areas between veins and reflections. It returns a histogram of features and counts the position in which it corresponds to the particular leaf texture which has an LBP code. The gray-level co-occurrence matrix was used for herb detection in [99].  [101]. introduced a local n-ary pattern for texture classification which is rotation invariant and produces uniform patterns. However, it produces naturally high dimensional features. Wang et al. [102] used Local binary pattern in decomposed leaf images for extracting the characteristics of texture features of images on ICL and Swedish leaf databases. It is robust to noise, occlusion and clutter.
## (s14) Textons
(p14.0) Textons are used to construct texton dictionaries created based on filter responses in spatial and frequency domains. For rotation invariant databases, the authors of [103] constructed a continuous maximum response descriptor to distinguish between and intra-class variations and a principal curvature descriptor for strong intra-class grouping ability. These techniques are useful for leaf databases with both interclass and intra-class variations. Minu and Thyagarajan [104] used texton with MPEG 7 visual features to recognize flower images. They also presented an ontology-based image retrieval system for asteroideae flower domain in their paper [105].

(p14.1) Guo et al. [106] classified rotation invariant texture by first finding out dominant orientation and then extracting anisotropic features by this orientation. They also proposed two statistical texton based methods to validate their approach. Anisotropic images change in appearance and rotate to produce good quality textures. The average and standard deviations of responses were computed in 8 different directions and a joint sort was used to find the local patch. These methods can be used to classify leaves in rotation invariant leaf databases. Table 5 shows some of feature descriptors used in leaf recognition.
## (s16) State-of-the-Art Classification Techniques
(p16.0) Plant species classification can be carried out by botanists easily, but computer-assisted systems cannot do so as easily. Consequently, plants are classified through leaf shape, vein, color and the texture of the leaves. Plant species are classified through different classifiers. A classifier requires two sets of data, a training set and a test set, but does not consider class relationships and the illumination invariance and positional invariance of images. Certain authors use manifold learning for classification since it preserves local neighbourhood structure, and high dimensional data is mapped into a low-dimensional structure. It also considers all illumination and positional challenges and processes noisy images. Compared to linear and supervised classifiers, manifold learning offers a good accuracy on plant species identification (Fig. 4). 6
## (s19) Moving Center Hyper spheres
(p19.0) A Moving Center Hyper sphere classifier (MCH) [137] was proposed for high-dimensional features. In the KNN and neural network, the classification of plants is a laborious and space-consuming process. In the MCH, however, the features are arranged as n-hyper spheres. Using this classifier, 1200 leaf samples of 20 classes were tested with 23 moment invariant features and achieved 92.6% accuracy.
## (s20) Bayesian Classifiers
(p20.0) The Bayesian classifier, a simple probabilistic classifier based on Bayes' theorem, computes the posterior probability for the targeted output. The researchers in paper [116] used the Bayesian classifier with the Fourier descriptor feature to classify 100 different kinds of leaves and achieved 88% accuracy. They used the linear classifier with the features of the polar Fourier transform, color, vein and 20 features of lancularity, solidity and convexity of shape for classifying the Flavia and Foliage databases and achieved 95.94 and 93.25% accuracy respectively.
## (s22) Principal Component Analysis
(p22.0) The PCA is an algebraic technique used to select important correlated variables from images. Glozarian and Frick [54] used the PCA to classify species of different grasses such as wheat, rye and brome grass by extracting the shape, color and texture features of images and achieved 88 and 85% for Wheat and brome classification accuracy. The PCA with textural features extracted by the gray-level cooccurrence method was used to classify 390 leaves with 13 different kinds of plants and achieved 98% accuracy in [107]. Mebatsion et al. [141] used PCA for classifying different grain types with achieved accuracy of 99%. The authors also extracted shape, texture, and color features from leaf images in [150] and optimized i.e. selected a subset of features using genetic algorithm and Kernel based Principal Component Analysis (KPCA) to improve the accuracy of classification.
## (s23) Random Forest
(p23.0) An ensemble classifier, the random forest is used to construct a large set of trees at random. It runs efficiently on large databases, handles a large number of input variables without variable deletion, effectively estimates missing data, and maintains the accuracy of a classifier. It gives proximities between pairs of classes and, further, estimates crucial features automatically. During multiclass classification, if some data are missed, it leads to an imbalance in the data concerned. To resolve this problem, a direct ensemble classifier [142,143] is used for an imbalanced multiclass learning classifier. It is a combination of the 1-nearest neighbor and Naive Bayes or the K-nearest neighbor and Naive Bayes classifiers.
## (s25) Manifold Learning
(p25.0) Plant leaf data are nonlinear and high-dimensional in nature. Manifold learning is a kind of nonlinear dimensionality reduction technique which discovers the nonlinear structure of the data and can be applied to leaf classification. Hu et al. [146] used multi-scale distance matrix (MDM) to extract global information from an image. It is invariant to translation, rotation, scaling and bilateral symmetry. But it is a time-consuming process, producing point wise matching of an image. They got 91.3% classification accuracy in the ICL and Swedish Leaf Dataset using the Linear Discriminant Classifier.
