# Cost of dengue outbreaks: literature review and country case studies

CorpusID: 1343358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/816853e15cca088d7ed5cd9e194dca66716f18e7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Medicine

## (s3) Evidence level
(p3.0) The reliability of evidence of the papers was not assessed in a thorough manner within the present review. Based on the Beatty et al. [2] classification scheme we identified the level of evidence of those studies prior to 2009 (Table 1).
## (s10) Publications on cost of interventions (group B)
(p10.0) We identified 4 studies calculating the cost of interventions: one in Vietnam on community-based strategies against the vector Aedes aegypti [23], one in Venezuela and Thailand on the cost of routine aedes aegypti control and insecticide-treated curtain implementation [24], one in Australia on costs of cutting mosquito surveillance budgets [25] and one in Brazil on the direct costs of dengue prevention and control programs [26].

(p10.1) For Australia, Vazquez-Prokopec et al. [25] showed the effect of delayed response to dengue outbreaks of 4 to 6 weeks, which would result in 86 times (or 13 million US $ in 2003) and 346 times (or 382 million US$ in 2009) higher dengue illness costs versus a scenario with active surveillance and response within 2 weeks. Their calculations suggest the value of an active and fast dengue surveillance and response system. The calculations of Baly et al. [12] of the costs of control programs in one state in Venezuela (0.38 million US$) and in one province in Thailand (0.08 million US$) and of Kay et al. [23] for Vietnam also suggest the low cost of dengue control measures compared to the cost of uncontrolled dengue outbreaks. Taliberti et al. [26] estimate the cost of dengue prevention and control in Sao Paolo in 2005 to be 12.5 million US$ (or 1.14 US$ per capita).
## (s11) Publication on cost-effectiveness of interventions (group C)
(p11.0) Three publications out of the 9 in group C investigated the cost-effectiveness of a dengue vaccine. Carrasco et al. [27] investigated the cost-effectiveness of future vaccination programs in Singapore, whereas Lee et al. [28] assessed the economic value of a dengue vaccine in Thailand, and finally Shepard et al. [29] evaluated the cost-effectiveness of a paediatric dengue vaccine.

(p11.1) Six publications assessed the cost-effectiveness of interventions aimed at improving dengue vector control. Alphey et al. [30] assessed the cost-effectiveness of genetics-based sterile insect methods for vector control. Suaya et al. [31] investigated the cost-effectiveness  of larviciding campaigns in Cambodia. Baly et al. [24] compared vertical versus community-based approaches in Cuba. McConnell et al. [32] focused on control programs in Puerto Rico, whereas Orellano et al. [33] analysed the cost-benefit of control programs versus no control in Argentina. Luz et al. [34] developed an economic model to assess dengue vector control strategies. The modelling methods used for assessing the economic value of vaccine intervention and the costeffectiveness of vector control programs might lead to future research on the cost-effectiveness of national surveillance systems.
## (s12) Country case studies Vietnam
(p12.0) For Vietnam, a sample of patient records was collected in one hospital, differentiating four groups of patients comprising outpatients, those treated in the general ward subdivided into adults and children (<15 years), and patients in intensive care units (in this case, no distinction between adult and children was made as there was no major cost difference). The analysis was  [9] found similar direct costs (32 US$, that would roughly match our findings if accounting for inflation between 2007 to 2012) and established a ratio of direct versus indirect costs (US$ 32 direct cost to US$ 29 indirect costs). We applied the same ratio to our findings. Other cost components in Vietnam were: government budgets for vector control 5,285,280 US$, or 44%; surveillance 1,029,600 US$, or 9%; and IEC (information, education and communication, 549,120 US$, or 5%. When adding these to the direct (2,700,138 US$ or 22%) and indirect cost (2,447,000 US$ or 20%), we estimated that the outbreak costs for Vietnam in 2011 were around 13 million US$ with 69,680 dengue patients reported (Figure 1).
## (s15) Dominican Republic
(p15.0) In the Dominican Republic 12,171 dengue patients were reported during the outbreak in 2011, of which 292 were outpatients, 11,864 were general-ward patients and 15 were intensive-care patients. In the general ward 68% of patients were adults, and 32% were children (<15 years). The exchange rate used for the analysis was 39.03 DOP/ US$ on June 17th, 2012. For the Dominican Republic, hospital records of 5 outpatients, 9 adult general-ward patients, 28 child general-ward patients, and 15 ICU patients were analysed in terms of resource identification, quantification and valuation. The average direct cost per case without personal costs amounted to 117 US$ in 2012. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtain a ratio of indirect to direct cost of 96% for the Dominican Republic. The corresponding indirect cost estimation based on our direct cost estimate is 112 US$. Shepard et al. (2011) [3] obtained a weighted average estimation of total costs of 430 US$ per dengue case based on their economic model. The cost we obtained for government spending on vector control was a total of 9,165 US$ per year on average over the years 2009 to 2012. Cost for collecting, storing, analysing and communicating surveillance data amounted to 2,550 US$. Our total cost estimate was around 2.8 million US$ (Figure 4). The comparability of the reviewed studies was restricted due to variations in the perspective taken to collect costs, the definition and reporting of costs, and the inclusion or  exclusion of certain cost items within a micro-costing approach. Finally, precise details on the year of cost accounting (year of prices), the exchange rate used and the transformations conducted to calculate costs (discounting, inflation adjustment) were missing. The Asian countries had been neglected in terms of methodologically comparable cost of illness studies as produced by Shepard et al. [3] for the Americas. Sensitivity analyses would increase the validity of produced cost figures.
## (s16) Discussion and conclusions
(p16.0) Moreover, the calculation of dengue costs posed technical problems. Under-and over-reporting of dengue cases made the exact number of dengue cases uncertain, even after correcting with an expansion factor. For example the average expansion factor of 2.3 for the Americas had a range of 1.4 to 3.3 in a hospitalized setting and an average of 15 and a range of 9 to 28 in an ambulatory setting. Moreover the average cost per dengue case varied according to country, treatment (ambulatory, hospitalized) and geographical (urban, rural) setting, patient age and hospital type (private, public) and therefore should be calculated as a weighted average, in those situations when the data for each setting is available.

(p16.1) Average total costs per case for all the countries in the Americas based on the costs collected and modelled by Shepard et al. 2011 [3] showed the important variations in costs between countries studied. Average costs per case in the Americas was given as 571 US$, with a 95% confidence interval of 362 to 752 US$, illustrating the important variation between countries. On average, the share of indirect costs to total costs amounts to 60% (40% direct costs), but there is also large variation between countries in the Americas. Moreover, depending on the year considered, the cost of dengue could vary, which was very well illustrated by Shepard et al. 2011 [3], but had been neglected by prior cost of illness studies in dengue, which did not average costs over several successive years. Finally, variations in total costs were substantial depending on the assumed expansion factor, and the share of hospitalized cases or average ambulatory cost per case -varied from 1 to 4 billion US$ in the Americas according to Shepard et al. 2011 [3].
## (s17) Cost and cost-effectiveness of Interventions
(p17.0) Only one paper from Baly et al. [12] addressed the costs of outbreaks explicitly and, to our knowledge, methodologically accurately in a prospective study. All other papers in group A investigated cost of illness with very different methodological approaches, and so faced 
