# Energy and Exergy analysis of Fuel Cells: A Review

CorpusID: 139231307 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28a538453140a88e62f3878cd30dce97c59dc03c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28a538453140a88e62f3878cd30dce97c59dc03c)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s1) The fuel cell
(p1.0) The fuel cell converts the chemical energy of hydrogen from fuel directly into electrical energy and resulting emits the waste heat and liquid water. The following generalized electrochemical reactions occur between hydrogen and oxygen: rc N rc reactants → pr N pr products (1) F uel + Oxidant → Electric P ower + W aste Heat + W ater (2)
## (s16) Energy and exergy analysis of PEMFC
(p16.0) Proton Exchange Membrane or Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell (PEMFC) is very promising electrochemical energy conversion device for light duty application, maximum temperature of 90 • C, for auto-mobiles, buildings, electronics rechargeable batteries etc. [30]. It has become an eye catching energy conversion device for efficient and eco-friendly because of its maximum conversion of chemical energy into electricity energy without any emission gases and moving parts. The fuel, pure hydrogen, is feed from the anode side plate of the cell and comes in contact with proton exchange membrane thin plastic sheet, coated with active catalysts of metal alloy namely platinum, the catalysts split the hydrogen into electron and proton (hydrogen ions). The electron are passed through a electric circuit where it produced electricity before going directly towards cathode side plate of fuel cell to make a closed loop. At cathode side plate, the oxygen is fed which reacts to defused electron and proton together resulting produced pure 99.9% and heat. A schematic of working principle of PEMFC is shown in Figure 1. The protons transport in PEMFC are classified two categorizes; (i) Grotthuss mechanism and (ii)vehicle mechanism, the difference is shown in Figure 2. PEMFC is provide an alternative source of energy especially replacement of internal combustion engine is transport vehicles.
## (s22) Energy and exergy analysis of SOFC
(p22.0) The solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are normally used for high temperatures approximately 800 • C-1000 • C for stationary applications in industry and utility. In SOFC usually doped zirconia is used as a electrolyte which becomes easily conductive to oxide ions. The temperature at the exhaust of SOFC is around 500 • C-850 • C, which can be further cogeneration application or for other thermal power energy conversion cycles [56]. The fuel is provided at the anode electrode or fuel electrode and air is provided at cathode electrode or air electrode. The oxygen ions are formed at cathode, through a solid electrolyte, and react with CO and 
## (s25) Energy and exergy analysis of MCFC
(p25.0) The molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) is the advancement in fuel cell technology. Due to its high temperature over 600 • C, there is no need of external reforming. Thus, the MCFC has the tendency of internal reforming to generate hydrogen. Along with this, the MCFC allows the recovery of waste heat which is further can be used for cogeneration power distribution systems for stationary applications. A molten-carbonate electrolyte of salt mixture is used in MCFC with ceramic matrix solid electrolyte. MCFC has the high efficiency than other fuel cells around 60% and in hybrid system sometimes efficiency reaches around 80%. There are some challenges such as corrosion, short life time, low oxygen reduction rate, and high cost. However, the diversity of various input fuels like gases from coal gasification, natural gas and biogases [64].
