# Periodontically Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics-A Review

CorpusID: 138198847 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee4195f32d8f3e99539147d1373b81ac922203be](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ee4195f32d8f3e99539147d1373b81ac922203be)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Concept
(p1.0) Periodontally Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics treatment modality is a combination of Distraction osteogenesis & Regional Accelerated phenomenon. It's a combination of selective decortications which facilitated orthodontic technique and alveolar augmentation. In simple words it combines Periodontics and Orthodontics in treating the patient. Growth of new bone by surgically distracting the bone is the concept behind this technique. It is well known that there was a direct correlation between bone injury & the intensity of its healing response. The temporary burst of localized soft & hard tissue remodeling occurring following the regional accelerated phenomenon rebuilds bone back to its normal shape [2].

(p1.1) Following corticotomy reduced mineralization of alveolar bone occurs which leads to rapid tooth movement. The bone is decorticated in Periodontally Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics, unlike corticotomies where it is cut and removed. This is the difference between Periodontally Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics, and corticotomy. By decortications it is meant that some external surface of the bone is removed. The bone then goes through a phase called osteopenia, where the mineral content is decreased temporarily. Due to the release of rich deposits of calcium by the tissue of the alveolar bone, new bone begins to mineralize in about 20-55 days. This enables the orthodontist to move the teeth 2 to 3 times faster than the time required in traditional orthodontic therapy. Patients who have undergone Periodontally Accelerated Osteogenic Orthodontics are with the appliances for about four to ten months. The retainers are given following that for upto six months [2].
## (s6) Role of Orthodontist
(p6.0) Orthodontic treatment after surgery. The orthodontic force should be applied immediately after the surgery, as it was found to be the best time to initiate the movement [4]. But some prefer to start the tooth movement two weeks after the surgery. The orthodontist adjusts the appliances once in every two weeks. Depending upon the individual cases, the orthodontic correction will be over in four to ten months [1,5]. These procedures were found to reduce the treatment time required for the correction of Crowding and they accelerate canine retraction after premolar extraction. Molar intrusions and open bite corrections can also be carried out at a faster pace with this technique.
## (s7) Modifications
(p7.0) It is not always necessary to carry out the periodontal surgical procedure for the full mouth. The surgical procedure can be confined to the site where it is needed as determined by the orthodontist [6,7]. Also the surgical procedure can be split into two procedures and can be carried out in two separate appointments to reduce the complication of necrosis [8]. It can be used to expedite the rate of movement of individual teeth or dental segments. 7. There is an increase in alveolar bone volume after orthodontic treatment; the amount of bone formation around the tooth in its new position is moreindicates a gain in additional strength in long term when compared to traditional techniques. This also gives a better facial profile in some cases.
