# A Review on Solar Tracking System: A Technique of Solar Power Output Enhancement

CorpusID: 133878810 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4182248399e50be9d626c9879f8c5bf903b73b8f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4182248399e50be9d626c9879f8c5bf903b73b8f)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s8) Passive (Mechanical/Chemical) Solar Tracking System
(p8.0) In 1994, Poulek [11] designed and tested a single axis passive solar tracker with Shape Memory Alloy (SMA) actuators. The actuator can easily be deformed at low temperature under 70 0 C and works as a heat engine. It returns back to its original shape when heated above a certain specific temperature. It was concluded that the efficiency of these actuators is almost 2% and is approximately two orders of magnitude higher than that of bimetallic actuators (theoretically).
## (s11) Single (One) Axis Active Solar Tracking System
(p11.0) In 1996, Kalogirou [15] presented a one-axis sun tracking system utilizing three light-dependent resistors (LDRs). The first LDR detected the focus state of the collector, while the second and third LDRs were designed to establish the presence (or absence) of cloud cover and to discriminate between days and night respectively. The output signals from the three LDRs were fed to an electronic control system which actuated a low-speed 12V DC motor in such a way as to rotate the collector such that it remained pointed toward the sun.
## (s12) .2.2. Dual (two) axis Active Solar Tracking System.
(p12.0) In 1992, Agarwal [24] presented a two axis tracking system consisting of worm gear drives and four bar-type kinematic linkages to facilitate the accurate focusing of the reflectors in a solar concentrator system.

(p12.1) In 1995, Mumba [25] developed a manual solar tracking system for a PV powered grain drier working in two positions. A 12V, 0.42A, DC suction fan powered with PV was placed in the air inlet. To improve collector module efficiency, the sun was tracked 30 o from the horizontal. Mumba investigated the performance under four cases: PV fan-off without sun-tracking, PV fan-on without sun-tracking, PV fan-off with sun-tracking and PV fan-on with sun-tracking. In the sun tracking cases the collector module angled manually eastward at 8.00 a.m. and westward at 2.00 p.m. while the collector module was tilted 15 o from the horizontal to match the sun's elevation. It was concluded that from uniform air temperature point of view, the fanon sun-tracking case was the best, giving a temperature of 60.8 o C. From uniform energy gain point of view, the sun-tracking cases performed superior to that of non-tracking ones. It was concluded that a solar air heater with manual sun-tracking facility can improve the thermal efficiency up to 80%.
