# The oldest archeological data evidencing the relationship of Homo sapiens with psychoactive plants: A worldwide overview

CorpusID: 135116632 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61293ee36c44e82ab0d0bc9d4701eb116e06ae64](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61293ee36c44e82ab0d0bc9d4701eb116e06ae64)

Fields: History, Environmental Science

## (s3) Alcohol sources
(p3.0) When it comes to the origin of the human relationship with alcohol, it is worth noting to mention the "drunken monkey hypothesis," proposed by Dudley (2004) and based on the observation that primates have been in contact with this drug since time immemorial, as it occurs naturally in fermenting fruits, meaning this association long precedes the origin of the human species. Following this, it can also be argued that alcophilia among humans is likely rooted deep in the evolutionary history of primates; the scent of alcohol indicates sources of desirable ripened fruit.
## (s15) Lettuce (Lactuca spp.)
(p15.0) The species of wild lettuceof which the most common in the Mediterranean basin are L. serriola L. and Lactuca virosa L. (Compositae)are endowed with psychoactive properties, specifically in the white latex that exudes profusely from the stem when it is cut. The fresh latex is toxic, but when it is dried it transforms into lactucarium, a narcotic-sedative medicine used until the 20th century in Europe as a substitute for opium. At higher doses, lactucarium yields more stimulating and visionary experiences, and at even higher doses it becomes toxic (Harlan, 1986). It has been speculated that the common lettuce of the vegetable garden -L. sativa L.was created by selection from L. serriola by the ancient Egyptians (Lindquist, 1960).
## (s19) Henbane ( Hyoscyamus spp.)
(p19.0) Henbane species are widespread in Eurasia and North Africa. The most ancient findings belong to Egypt, where in the Farafra oasisa site of the Middle Neolithic dating back to the 7-6th millennium BCsome seeds of an indeterminate species of Hyoscyamus have come to light (Fahmy, 2001).

(p19.1) Since ancient times, the practice of adding henbane seeds to beer to strengthen its effects was widespread in Europe. The oldest evidence is dated to 2340 BC and concerns a pottery offering deposited in a sepulchral cave of Calvari d'Amposta (Tarragona, Spain), and in which the presence of beer and hyoscyamine, one of the alkaloids present in henbane, was determined (Guerra Doce, 2006b). In more recent times, at the Celtic site of Hochdorf (Stuttgart, Germany), dated to 600-400 BC, remains of a brewing of malt have been discovered, and among the remains of barley, 15 seeds of black henbane (H. niger L.) were present (Stika, 1996).
## (s21) Fungi
(p21.0) The archeology of psychoactive mushrooms tells us very little as far as direct evidence is concerned, due to the rapid deterioration of fungal tissue. Those prehistoric people integrated mushrooms into their diet would seem to have been recently confirmed by the discovery of microscopic fragments of a superior mushroomperhaps a Boletaceae speciesin the dental calculus of a woman who lived 18,700 years ago, found in the Cave El Mirón, in northern Spain (Power, Salazar-García, Straus, Gonzalez Morales, & Henry, 2015). Two main pharmacological classes of hallucinogenic mushrooms are recognized: the small group of isoxazole mushrooms, mainly pertaining to the genus Amanita (Amanitaceae), and the larger group of psilocybin mushrooms, mainly of the Psilocybe, Panaeolus, and Copelandia genera (Samorini, 2001).
## (s28) Mescalbean (S. secundiflora)
(p28.0) The natives of the Great Plains of North America held elaborate rites that included ingesting the seeds of the leguminous plant S. secundiflora (Ortega) DC., known as mescalbean or frijol rojo. This cult has long since disappeared and was replaced by the peyote cult (Campbell, 1958).
## (s29) Peyote (L. williamsii)
(p29.0) Archeological data have highlighted the antiquity of the human relationship with this hallucinogenic cactus -L. williamsii (Lem. ex Salm-Dyck) J.M. Coult., Cactaceaeof at least 5,700 years. Peyote samples were found in several prehistoric sites in Texas and Northern Mexico. The most studied case concerns the "buttons" of peyote that came to light in the Shumla Cave 5 of the Rio Grande, located at the confluence with the Pecos river. Chemical analyses performed on two of these buttons have shown that they still contained mescaline in a concentration of 2% (El-Sheedi, De Smet, Beck, Possnert, & Bruhn, 2005). After a more careful analysis, it has been determined that these plant findings, previously classified as peyote buttons, were in reality aggregates of ground cactus along with other unidentified plants, which were given a similar rounded and flattened shape and size to those of real peyote buttons. Chronological analyses performed on three of these conglomerates have enabled a dating to the Eagle Nest subperiod of the Middle Archaic Period of the Texan tradition, with absolute ages of around 3200 BC (Terry, Steelman, Guilderson, Dering, & Rowe, 2005).

(p29.1) The visions achieved by the ingestion of peyote may have influenced the Texas and California prehistoric cave paintings, which may depict themes related to the symbolic universe of the peyote. This art is dated between 2200 and 750 BC (Boyd & Dering, 1996).
## (s30) Tobacco (Nicotiana spp.)
(p30.0) The oldest archeological evidences concerning tobacco dates back to 1500 BC, located in North America sites and concern the species N. quadrivalvis Push. (Solanaceae). The use of this species was later abandoned with the arrival of Nicotiana rustica L. from South America (Pauketat et al., 2002).
## (s31) Cocoa (T. cacao)
(p31.0) The cocoa drink, obtained from the fruits of the tree T. cacao L. (Malvaceae), was prepared with different techniques. The most primitive one comprised alcoholic fermented drinks made from the fruit pulp, with alcohol content that reached 5%-7%. Only later did attention focus on the large seeds, which contain the active ingredients theobromine, caffeine, and theophylline (Powis, Valdez, Hester, Hurst, & Tarka, 2002).
## (s33) Waterlilies (Nymphaea spp.)
(p33.0) The ancient Maya employed Nymphaea ampla (Salisb.) DC. as a psychoactive (Emboden, 1983). It is extensively represented in iconography since the dawn of this Mesoamerican culture, starting from at least 750 BC (McDonald & Stross, 2012). Recently, the identification of the Maya Cosmic Tree, widely diffused in the Mayan art, has been revised. Generally identified with the kakop tree (Ceiba pentandra) or with the corn (Z. maydis), McDonald (2016) suggested it has to be identified with N. ampla.
## (s41) Black drink ( I. vomitoria Aiton)
(p41.0) This species was used by the North American southeast natives for the preparation of a drinkcalled Black Drinkutilized ritually as a stimulant and emetic. Its leaves contain low amounts of caffeine and theobromine, but not theophylline. In the pre-Hispanic Cahokia site (IL, USA), whose phase of the greatest development is dated between 1050 and 1250 AD, biochemical analyses of the residues of some glasses have highlighted the presence of caffeine and theobromine in a ratio corresponding to that present in I. vomitoria. Cahokia is more than 500 km away from the natural range of this plant, and this has led to the hypothesis of its long-distance trade or local cultivation (Crown et al., 2012).
