# A Review on the Perforated Impact Energy Absorption of Kenaf Fibres Reinforced Composites

CorpusID: 139121422 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71d3e673d016967a409a375940dd62dfb0e1b077](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71d3e673d016967a409a375940dd62dfb0e1b077)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Materials Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Natural plant fibres can be economically and ecologically useful alternatives to reinforcement fibres in polymeric composites. Due to their low density and low cost in comparison to conventional fibres, natural fibre reinforced composites have great potential in engineering applications. A growing environmental awareness across the world has aroused interest in research and development of environmentally friendly and sustainable materials. Natural plant based fibres are used as reinforcements for composite materials and give various advantages as compared to conventional fibres.

(p0.1) In recent years, industries are attempting to reduce the dependence on petroleum based fuels and products due to the increasing of environmental consciousness. This leads to investigate environmentally friendly and sustainable materials to replace the synthetic fiber. The increasing of productions and consumption of plastics in every sector of our life and is lead to huge plastic wastes. Due to disposal problems, as well as strong regulations and criteria for cleaner and safer environment, have directed great part of the scientific research toward eco-composite materials. Among the different types of eco-composites, those which contain natural fibres (NF) and natural polymers have a key role to overcome a problem [1].
## (s7) Influence of different orientation
(p7.0) According to the research by Sikarwar et al., it can be seen that the energy absorbing capacity are increase with increasing of laminates thickness [20]. In their research, the laminates (0/90) lay-up laminates is much higher than other of lay-up laminates. The (0/90/30/-45) absorb more energy than the (0/90/30/-60) orientation. Thus, it is understood that energy absorption is dependent both on failure strain well as on Young's Modulus. The result in their research can be seen as shown in Table 3.
## (s9) Research problem
(p9.0) In the latest years, there have been many researchers involved in this field of natural fibre reinforced plastics [22]. Most of them are based study on the mechanical properties of composites reinforced with short and non-woven fibres [18,23]. According to previous research [16], studied on low-velocity impact response of non-woven hemp fibre reinforced unsaturated polyester composites and only focus on low velocity impact of non-woven natural fibre using varying layers. Sikarwar et al., in their research focus on influence of fibre orientation and thickness on the response of glass/epoxy composites subjected to impact loading [20]. In experimental, glass/epoxy is laminated with orientation in order to determine the energy absorption capacity. , also studied on orientation permeability of unidirectional fabric. In their study, the characterization of orientation is performed by using numerical analysis ANSYS software [24]. Although there has been research on orientation of material, but commonly uses a unidirectional.
