# A Survey of Pyridoxal 5 ′ -Phosphate-Dependent Proteins in the Gram-Positive Model Bacterium Bacillus subtilis

CorpusID: 148571692 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b99572d1e04b3fc034d5bc00b0f4f0c25f00ff4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b99572d1e04b3fc034d5bc00b0f4f0c25f00ff4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) DE NOVO SYNTHESIS OF VITAMIN B6
(p1.0) Two pathways for de novo PLP synthesis are currently known ( Figure 1B) (Mittenhuber, 2001;Tanaka et al., 2005;Fitzpatrick et al., 2007Fitzpatrick et al., , 2010Rosenberg et al., 2017). The deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate (DXP)-dependent vitamin B6 biosynthesis pathway was identified in the Gram-negative model bacterium Escherichia coli and consists of two branches and seven enzymatic steps. The first three enzymes Epd, PdxB, and SerC of the longer branch convert a pentose phosphate pathway intermediate to 4-phosphohydroxy-L-threonine (4HTP) ( Figure 1B) Drewke et al., 1996;Boschi-Muller et al., 1997;Tazoe et al., 2006;Rudolph et al., 2010). Next, PdxA converts 4HTP to 2-amino-3-oxo-4-(phosphohydroxy)butyric acid, which undergoes spontaneous decarboxylation to 3phosphohydroxy-1-aminoacetone (Cane et al., 1998;Laber et al., 1999;Sivaraman et al., 2003). The PNP synthase PdxJ produces the B6 vitamer PNP from 3-phosphohydroxy-1-aminoacetone and DXP, of which the latter substrate is generated by the DXP synthase Dxs from glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and pyruvate in the short branch of the DXP-dependent vitamin B6 pathway ( Figure 1B) (Takiff et al., 1992;Sprenger et al., 1997;Cane et al., 1999;Laber et al., 1999). The PNP oxidase PdxH catalyzes the final step yielding in the biologically most-relevant B6 vitamer PLP . The DXP-dependent vitamin B6 pathway is present in α-and γ-proteobacteria (Mittenhuber, 2001;Tanaka et al., 2005). Recently, it has been shown that bacteria possess promiscuous enzymes that may feed into the DXP-dependent pathway and bypass a block in pyridoxal-5 ′phosphate synthesis ( Figure 1B) Kim and Copley, 2012;Smirnov et al., 2012;Oberhardt et al., 2016;Thiaville et al., 2016;Zhang et al., 2016;Rosenberg et al., 2018). The hybrid pathways consisting of enzymes of native and nonnative vitamin B6 pathways and of promiscuous enzymes may be improved by metabolic engineering to enhance production of B6 vitamers (Rosenberg and Commichau, 2019).
## (s2) VITAMIN B6 METABOLISM IN BACILLUS SUBTILIS
(p2.0) The Gram-positive model bacterium Bacillus subtilis relies on the PdxST enzyme complex to synthesize the B6 vitamer PLP (Pflug and Lingens, 1978;Sakai et al., 2002b;Belitsky, 2004b;Burns et al., 2005). The B. subtilis PdxST enzyme complex has been biochemically and structurally studied (Raschle et al., 2005;Zhu et al., 2005;Strohmeier et al., 2006;Wallner et al., 2009;Smith et al., 2015). In many Gram-positive bacteria, the expression of the pdxST genes and the genes encoding kinases that phosphorylate the B6 vitamers PM, PN, and PL, are regulated by MocR-like DNA-binding transcription factors (Jochmann et al., 2011;El Qaidi et al., 2013;Belitsky, 2014;Liao et al., 2015;Tramonti et al., 2015;Suvorova and Rodionov, 2016). In B. subtilis the pdxST genes are not subject to transcriptional regulation (Nicolas et al., 2012).
## (s3) TOXICITY OF VITAMIN B6 AND PATHWAY INTERMEDIATES
(p3.0) PLP can be toxic for the cell because the reactive 4 ′ -aldehyde moiety of the B6 vitamer forms covalent adducts with other compounds and PLP-independent proteins containing thiol or amino groups. For instance, PLP was shown to inhibit enzymes that are involved in DNA metabolism and in central carbon metabolism in eukaryotes (Mizushina et al., 2003;Vermeersch et al., 2004;Lee et al., 2005). Moreover, the modification of the E. coli initiation factor 3, the adenylsuccinate synthetase and the PL kinase by PLP results in activity loss (Ohsawa and Gualerzi, 1981;Dong and Fromm, 1990;Ghatge et al., 2012). Recently, it has been shown that the addition of vitamin B6 to the E. coli wild type strain BW25113 and an E. coli mutant strain lacking the ZipA cell division protein affects multiple metabolic pathways, which are involved in amino acid biosynthesis (Vega and Margolin, 2017). Thus, excess of PLP affects different cellular processes. PLP is also prone to damage either due to side reactions that are catalyzed by promiscuous enzymes or due to spontaneous chemical reactions (Linster et al., 2013). In fact, the B6 vitamers PLP and PMP were identified as members of the 30 most damage-prone metabolites (Lerma-Ortiz et al., 2016). However, given the fact that PLP is required for optimal growth in little amounts, the essential cofactor can be synthesized at a minimal necessary rate (Hartl et al., 2017). The low requirement of PLP and its low cellular concentration prevent perturbation of other essential processes in the cell.

(p3.1) In the past years, several attempts have been made to engineer bacteria for the overproduction of the B6 vitamers PL and PN (Rosenberg et al., 2017). In contrast to PL(P), PN(P) is less toxic for living cells (see above; Commichau et al., 2014). Therefore, the DXP-dependent seems to be a promising pathway for engineering bacteria for vitamin B6 overproduction. However, it has also been shown that intermediates of the DXP-dependent pathway can be highly toxic for bacteria. For instance, the erythrose-4-phosphate dehydrogenase Epd generates the DXP-dependent vitamin B6 pathway intermediate 4-phosphoerythronate (4PE), which is required in low amounts for PLP biosynthesis, is toxic for the cells when overproduced (Sachla and Helmann, 2019). Eukaryotic cells do have a phosphatase that hydrolyzes and detoxifies 4PE that is also mistakenly generated by the glycolytic enzyme glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Beaudoin and Hanson, 2016;Collard et al., 2016). 4PE inihibits the 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase from the pentosephosphate pathway (Collard et al., 2016). Recently, it has been demonstrated that 4PE also inhibits the B. subtilis 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase GndA (Sachla and Helmann, 2019). In this organism, 4PE is detoxified by the GTPase CpgA, which is a checkpoint protein known to be involved in ribosome assembly (Campbell et al., 2005). It will be interesting to assess whether 4PE also inhibits the 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase in E. coli because the bacterium does not possess a CpgA homolog. However, the accumulation of 4PE to toxic levels does not seem to be problematic in E. coli because 4PE can be produced in only small amounts that are sufficient for de novo synthesis of PLP. The intermediate 4HTP from the DXP-dependent vitamin B6 pathway is also inhibits bacterial growth. 4HTP interferes with biosynthesis of threonine and isoleucine in E. coli and B. subtilis (Drewke et al., 1993;Farrington et al., 1993;Commichau et al., 2014Commichau et al., , 2015Rosenberg et al., 2016). The toxicity of the pathway intermediates may explain why it is difficult to engineer bacteria that stably express the genes of the DXP-dependent vitamin B6 pathway (Commichau et al., 2014). The understanding of the metabolite toxicity is crucial for the rational design and engineering of bacteria overproducing PN at commercially attractive levels. Moreover, the knowledge about the functions of target proteins of PLP is very important to understand how the B6 vitamer affects cellular metabolism upon overproduction.
## (s4) PLP-DEPENDENT PROTEINS AND ENZYMES INVOLVED IN VITAMIN B6 METABOLISM IN BACILLUS SUBTILIS
(p4.0) To identify the B. subtilis proteins and enzymes that require PLP for activity and are involved in vitamin B6 metabolism, we compared the Enzyme Commission (E.C.) numbers of the proteins from the B. subtilis 168 laboratory strain found in the SubtiWiki database (http://subtiwiki.uni-goettingen.de/v3/) (Zhu and Stülke, 2017) with the E.C. numbers that are deposited in the B6 database (Table 1) (http://bioinformatics.unipr.it/cgi-bin/ bioinformatics/B6db/home.pl) (Percudani and Peracchi, 2009). We also describe proteins from the SubtiWiki database that are specific for B. subtilis and are therefore not present in the B6 database. Publications describing proteins involved in vitamin B6 metabolism in B. subtilis were also added to the Table. A recent mass spectrometry approach in combination with modified pyridoxal analogs identified proteins in the Grampositive pathogen Staphylococcus aureus that probably depend on the B6 vitamer PLP (Hoegl et al., 2018). The study confirmed the binding of PLP to proteins of known and unknown function and identified 4 additional PLP-binding proteins (HemH, HemQ, YtoP, and YwlG) (see below). In total we ended up with 65 PLP-dependent proteins in B. subtilis, of which 61 proteins are bona fide PLP-dependent proteins. The PLP-dependency of four proteins remains to be experimentally validated. Table 1 also contains the PDB identifiers of structures that are available in the PDB database for the B. subtilis proteins. In case the structural information was not available, we have added the PDB identifiers from PLP-dependent homologs showing more than 27% overall sequence identity. We have also included information about the physiological functions of the proteins and their paralogs, the transcription factors that are involved in synthesis of the proteins and information about the sequence similarities with other proteins from the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot. org). The list of proteins involved in vitamin B6 metabolism in B. subtilis will certainly be extended in the future because PLPdependent enzymes are ubiquitous and evolutionary diverse, making their classification based on sequence homology difficult.
## (s6) PLP-DEPENDENT TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS IN BACILLUS SUBTILIS
(p6.0) B. subtilis possesses seven PLP-dependent DNA-binding transcription factors of which only one has been intensively characterized (see below; Table 1). The PLP-dependent transcription factors belong to the MocR-subfamily and contain a GntR-family DNA-binding domain at the N-terminus and an aminotransferase-like sensory domain at the C-terminus (Bramucci et al., 2011;Milano et al., 2015;Tramonti et al., 2015Tramonti et al., , 2017Suvorova and Rodionov, 2016). The MocR-familytype PLP-dependent transcription factors that have been characterized are involved in controlling the expression of genes involved in PLP, γ-aminobutyrate, ecotoine, and taurine metabolism (Suvorova and Rodionov, 2016;Schulz et al., 2017;Tramonti et al., 2018). B. subtilis can utilize γ-aminobutyrate (GABA) as a source of nitrogen (Belitsky and Sonenshein, 2002). The catabolism of GABA requires the activities of the GABA aminotransferase GabT and the succinic semi-aldehyde dehydrogenase GabD that are encoded in the bicistronic gabT-gabD operon. The MocR-family-type regulator GabR activates the transcription of the gabT and gabD genes in a PLPand GABA-dependent manner (Belitsky and Sonenshein, 2002;Belitsky, 2004a). The protein also binds to the gabR promoter and represses gabR transcription in the absence of GABA (Belitsky and Sonenshein, 2002;Edayathumangalam et al., 2013). Structual analysis of GabR revealed that the aminotransferase-like activity at the C-terminus of the protein is not essential for its function as a transcription regulator (Edayathumangalam et al., 2013). It has also been shown that the formation of an external aldimine between GABA and PLP causes a conformational transition from the open form to a closed form in the aminotransferase domain of GabR, triggering transcription activation of the gabT-gabD operon (Okuda et al., 2015a;Milano et al., 2017;Park et al., 2017;Wu et al., 2017). Moreover, the dimerization of the C-terminal domain of GabR enables the N-terminal domain to bind to DNA and the N-terminal domain controls the binding specificity of the effector domain (Okuda et al., 2015b). The analysis of the interaction between GabR and DNA revealed that two cognate binding sites and the bendability of the interjacent DNA sequence are important for transcription factor binding (Al-Zyoud et al., 2016;Amidani et al., 2017). To conclude, the biochemical and structural characterization of the B. subtilis GabR transcriptional regulator has uncovered mechanistic insights into the MocRfamily-type PLP-dependent transcription factors and provides the basis for the characterization of the remaining six putative PLP-dependent DNA-binding transcription factors YcxD, YdeF, YdeL, YdfD, YhdI, and YisV from B. subtilis. Their characterization will presumably uncover novel metabolic pathways and transport systems (Suvorova and Rodionov, 2016).
