# Optimal Duration of Conservative Management Prior to Surgery for Cervical and Lumbar Radiculopathy: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 14935811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07bbb3b97b231438302f389a59665666512d8542](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07bbb3b97b231438302f389a59665666512d8542)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Since the 1970s, spine surgeons have commonly required 6 weeks of failed conservative treatment prior to surgical intervention for various spinal pathologies. 1 However, it is unclear whether this standard has been validated in the literature. We reviewed two common spinal pathologies, namely cervical and lumbar radiculopathy, to determine if the current literature supports the standard practice of waiting at least 6 weeks prior to operating. Few studies have looked at these two topics, and all of them are insufficient to validate the standard. The literature is currently unclear as to why 6 weeks of conservative management prior to surgery has become the standard of care for spine surgeons.

(p0.1) Due to the limited evidence and recent controversy regarding the necessity of 6 weeks of conservative management prior to surgery, we reviewed studies investigating natural history, outcomes, and cost-effectiveness to identify if possible the optimal duration of conservative treatment.
## (s3) Cervical Radiculopathy
(p3.0) Cervical radiculopathy is a common spinal disorder with an annual incidence of 107.3 per 100,000 for men and 63.5 per 100,000 for women. 2 It is sometimes treated surgically following 6 weeks of conservative treatment. 3 Studies relating to the natural history of cervical radiculopathy as well as patient outcomes and cost-effectiveness of surgery were examined.

(p3.1) Only one study reviewed optimal duration of conservative management prior to surgery based on the natural history of cervical radiculopathy. Spurling and Segerberg prospectively investigated 110 patients with cervical radiculopathy who were treated conservatively with 7 to 10 days of bed rest and traction and found that 88% (97/110) had symptom improvement based on subjective patient and investigator perception within the first 4 weeks. 4 This study suggested that a large number of patients may experience relief in symptoms within the first month of conservative management, but more studies investigating the natural history of patients at other periods within 4 weeks are needed before evidence-based conclusions can be made.

(p3.2) Studies that analyzed surgical outcomes based on duration of time before surgery were reviewed to find the optimal time prior to surgery for cervical radiculopathy. Two studies consisting of 279 patients were identified. Räsänen et al prospectively studied 169 patients who were surgically treated for cervical radiculopathy. 5 The authors determined that the 88 patients (52%) who waited less than 60 days before surgical intervention showed greater improvement in the 15 dimensional health-related quality of life (HRQOL) score compared with the 81 patients (48%) who waited more than 60 days before surgery (0.05 compared with 0.02). The group who waited less than 60 days also gained higher quality-adjusted life years (QALYs; 1.68 compared with 0.70). Spurling and Segerberg followed 110 patients, 12% (13/110) of whom were referred to surgery within the first month of conservative treatment due to a lack of perceived symptom improvement. 4 None of the individuals who had symptom improvement within the first month went on to require surgery. Data from Spurling and Segerberg suggest that if symptoms of cervical radiculopathy improve within 1 month, it is unlikely that patients will require surgery. Together, the two aforementioned studies support an optimal duration of 4 to 8 weeks of conservative management prior to surgical intervention; however, both studies do little to determine the optimal duration for nonoperative care for patients with cervical radiculopathy.

(p3.3) The study by Räsänen and colleagues also investigated direct costs of surgery for cervical radiculopathy. 5 The authors found that the cost per QALY gained for patients who underwent surgery within 60 days (88/169 patients) was €1992, whereas in those cases where surgery was delayed (81/169 patients), the cost per QALY was €4836, again illustrating the benefit of performing surgery within 8 weeks following onset of symptoms for cervical radiculopathy.
## (s4) Lumbar Disk Herniation with Radiculopathy
(p4.0) Lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy is a common spinal disorder with an annual incidence of 1.44 per 100 individuals and an annual prevalence of 2.21%. 6 Similarly to cervical radiculopathy, it is sometimes treated surgically following 6 weeks of conservative treatment. Studies relating to the natural history, surgical outcomes, and surgical costeffectiveness of lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy were examined.
## (s5) Natural History
(p5.0) Three studies consisting of 426 patients were identified investigating the natural history of lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy. Vroomen et al prospectively studied 183 patients with sciatica who were randomly assigned to bed rest or normal activities. 7 The authors found that 70% (64/92) of patients assigned to bed rest and 65% (59/91) of patients assigned to normal activities improved within 2 weeks and that 87% (80/92 patients and 79/91 patients, respectively) of both groups improved by 12 weeks. Improvements were based on subjective patient and investigator perception, and the two different nonoperative treatment techniques failed to yield statistically significant differences. Weber and colleagues prospectively studied 208 patients with acute sciatica who were treated with 1 week of bed rest and found that 70% (146/208) of patients had symptom improvement (as measured by visual analog scale and Roland's functional tests) within 4 weeks. 8 Hakelius assessed 38 patients with sciatica who were treated conservatively with bed rest, a corset, and physical therapy. 9 At 24 weeks, the author estab-lished that 88% (33/38) of the patients were symptom-free based on patient perception (►Table 1).

(p5.1) These three studies varied considerably in terms of design, reporting, and execution. Given this heterogeneity, direct comparison of data across studies was not possible. However, based on the studies, 70% of patients treated conservatively had improvement at both 2 weeks and 4 weeks following onset of symptoms. By 12 weeks, 87% of patients improved, and between 12 weeks and 24 weeks, the rate of improvement among patients stabilized at 87 to 88%.
## (s8) Discussion Background
(p8.0) In a study examining surgical practices at one hospital between 1971 and 1977, Lunsford and colleagues stated that lateral cervical disk herniation was treated surgically only after 6 weeks of failed conservative treatment. 1 The reasons for this period, however, were not stated. A 1972 article by Murphy and Gado investigating anterior cervical diskectomies similarly established a protocol requiring patients to be immobilized for 6 weeks in a collar prior to surgery. 21 Similarly, this was not substantiated by scientific evidence.
## (s9) Recommendations
(p9.0) The identified studies indicate that the natural histories of cervical radiculopathy versus lumbar radiculopathy are different and accordingly should warrant different recommendations for nonoperative management. Although 88% of patients with cervical radiculopathy have improvement within 4 weeks following the onset of their symptoms, 4 only 70% of patients with lumbar disk herniation and radiculopathy improve within the same period, with an additional 20% of patients improving between weeks 4 and 12. 7,8 This indicates that surgery following a shorter duration of symptoms may be indicated for cervical radiculopathy compared with lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy.

(p9.1) Despite a lack of historical data regarding the recommendation of 6 weeks of conservative management prior to surgery, evidence demonstrates improvements in patient surgical outcomes and reduced patient costs when performing surgery prior to 8 weeks of symptom duration. Räsänen and colleagues found improvements in HRQOL scores, QALYs gained, and cost per QALY gained for patients who had surgery within 60 days to treat both cervical radiculopathy and lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy. 5 Similarly, Hurme and Alaranta 16 and Rothoerl et al 11 found improved outcomes in patients who underwent surgery for lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy before 60 days of symptoms. Rothoerl et al 11 and Nakagawa et al 17 also indicated that surgery before 4-week duration of symptoms may lead to even better outcomes for patients, depending on the type of disk herniation found.

(p9.2) Overall, we found that due to the differences in the natural histories of cervical radiculopathy and lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy, specific recommendations of conservative treatment duration should be made for individual pathologies. Furthermore, the studies by Weber 10 and Vroomen et al 19 suggested that differences in patient symptoms and physical exam findings may be helpful in determining the success of prolonged conservative management. However, further studies are needed to determine if early surgical intervention is beneficial for patients who are found likely to fail conservative management, as none currently exist.

(p9.3) None of the data presented herein support a specified length of conservative treatment before surgical intervention, as outcomes only differed based on symptom duration and not duration of conservative management prior to surgery. Because the natural history of lumbar radiculopathy does not differ based on whether the patient continues with regular daily activities or undergoes conservative treatment, 7 this approach supports quantifying duration of symptoms and not duration of conservative management.

(p9.4) Based on the available data, surgery should be performed within 8 weeks of onset of symptoms for patients presenting with cervical radiculopathy. A period of 4 weeks may lead to even better outcomes, 4 but additional investigations assessing patient outcomes within this period are needed. Similarly, surgery for lumbar disk herniation with radiculopathy should be performed within 8 weeks as well. However, the natural history study by Weber et al 8  Based on the literature discussed in this review, the standard interval of 6 weeks of conservative management prior to surgical intervention of cervical and lumbar radiculopathies is somewhat arbitrary. Of the studies that form the foundation of this standard, there is substantial heterogeneity in the study design and execution, reporting, outcomes measures utilized, as well as modalities of "conservative" care implemented. Although this review questions the scientific rationale for this standard, it also provides a trajectory for necessary future research to more clearly define the natural history of cervical and lumbar radiculopathy, the most efficacious nonoperative treatment(s), and the most cost-effective approach(es). Such efforts will either validate and invalidate the current standard, but they may also identify more efficacious and cost-effective treatments for specific patient cohorts. It is quite likely that a "standard" interval of nonoperative care will not pertain to or fit all patients with these common disease processes and that care will need to be tailored to specific, yet currently ill-defined, patient characteristics.

(p9.5) There were several limitations with the present review. The natural history studies included were heterogeneous in their design, including differences in follow-up time and analyses of patient improvement. Accordingly, the concept of "improvement" varied between studies, and consequently, the rate of improvement varied as well. However, the natural history data found did seem to generate a consistent timeline of improvement over the weeks following onset of symptoms. Finally, the lack of large, well-designed, prospective studies comparing various periods of conservative management prior to surgery with regards to outcomes and cost-effectiveness limit the ability to make a definitive, evidence-based conclusion based on the data presented.
