# The potential of using biotechnology to improve cassava: a review

CorpusID: 14596624 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df75f398201380f7a5acbc16dcf21fe55fd18667](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df75f398201380f7a5acbc16dcf21fe55fd18667)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Resistance to viruses and whiteflies
(p1.0) In the case of transgenic resistance to viral diseases, this review does not ignore the tremendous amount of research done to understand how RNAi-mediated resistance would work in cassava, particularly approaches involving posttranscriptional silencing of Coat Protein (CP) genes, or the AC1 (Rep), AC2 (TrAP), or AC3 (REn) genes implicated in replication of viral DNAs, in the model cassava genotype 60444 (reviewed by Liu et al. 2011). Some of these studies are referenced in Table 1, for example, Vanderschuren et al. (2012), among others. However, the following text emphasizes cases where the same or similar strategies have been applied to produce transgenic landraces or elite lines that, for obvious reasons, have tremendous value for cassava farmers, especially in Africa and Asia. It is worth clarifying that some authors consider the genotype 60444 a West African cultivar ); therefore, it was included in Table 1.

(p1.1) Like most transgenic crops, the genetic transformation of cassava has been limited by the difficulty in efficient production of transgenic landraces expressing genes of interest. In terms of landrace-specific protocol development to produce transgenic lines for field-testing, the progress seems moderate though important. This indicates that researchers have been able to reduce the recalcitrance of the crop to transformation and regeneration, to the point that transgenic lines of farmerpreferred cultivars have even reached field trials. As an example, the transgenic cassava landrace Adira4, with waxy starch, was the first tested in Indonesian fields, probably several years before it was actually published (Koehorst-van Putten et al. 2012). The transgenic cassava genotype that held promise was a Nigerian landrace, naturally resistant to CMD called TME7, for which engineered resistance to cassava brown streak virus (CBSV) and Ugandan-cassava brown streak virus (UCBSV) was incorporated ). More recently, Chauhan et al. (2015), also introduced resistance to UCBSV, the causal agent of CBSD, and enhanced the nutritional quality of roots of the African landraces TME204 and Oko-Iyawo (TME7). Similarly for Asian varieties, Kasetsart University 50 (KU50) is an elite line widely grown by many farmers in this continent for its high dry matter content. However, it is highly susceptible to CMD caused by the Sri Lankan cassava mosaic virus (SLCMV; Dutt et al. 2005). The good news is that resistance to SLCMV has been engineered in KU50 by RNAi-mediated silencing of the AV1 coat protein and AV2 pre-coat protein genes, resulting in at least four single copy events that turned out to be highly resistant to SLCMV (Ntui et al. 2015).
## (s2) Perspective and Concluding Remarks
(p2.0) The landscape of biotechnology applied to improve cassava has been encouraging given the number of traits and cultivars that entered the pipeline of biotech-based breeding in the last 20 yr. It is remarkable that laboratories in developing countries have been able to adapt and adopt biotechnology as a tool for breeding. However, although we have passed the stage of proof of concept for traits like virus resistance, we still expect GM varieties released in Africa to combat CMD and CBSD. While the problem of loss of natural resistance to CMD gets solved, we must keep thinking on in vitro propagation as the more reliable source of virus-free plants. There is an urgent need to generate more efficient systems for multiplication and hardening of plants, in each country, probably decentralized but with the support of governments, extensionists, and tissue culture specialists, similar to what exists today for the cocoa and timber industry.

(p2.1) There have been few examples of development of rapid propagation, delivery and storage of crops using synthetic seed technology since the late 1970s. Significant progress in Douglas-fir and loblolly pine has been achieved due to the upscaling of SE in bioreactors and the design of new encapsulation protocols. For cassava, synthetic seeds may be viable if protocols minimize the dependency on genotypes to produce abundant SE/FEC in varieties of economic interest, followed by scaling up SE/FEC using bioreactors and finally ensure genetic and phenotypic stability of plants generated from these seeds. It is noteworthy that most low-scale farmers demand free, disease-free planting material. This translates into having to produce synthetic seeds at low cost, which is a potential limiting factor given that industries, which have set up seed systems for other clonally propagated crops, may not be interested in developing them for cassava multiplication. Implementing the technology described in this review will therefore be costly. National agricultural research programs (NARPs) rely heavily on clonal propagation of cassava by stakes often under uncertified phytosanitary conditions. The phytosanitary conditions are difficult to maintain after cycles of propagation in the field. Is this trend changing soon? Can NARPs and the seed industry envision safer, faster, and cheaper propagation systems for cassava? The technology exists, but the willingness may not.

(p2.2) Biotechnological efforts continue to improve traits in cassava, some mentioned in this review such as biofortification of roots and leaves, SLCMV resistance for KU50, waxy cassava (reviewed by Liu et al. 2011), haploid induction, and glyphosate-or PPT-tolerant cassava (  Figure 3. Flowchart for decision making on propagation methods for cassava planting material production. The success of diagram procedures connected by red lines depends solely on the initial material certification as disease free. The lack of such certification results in lack of confidence in the system and may result in the distribution of unhealthy planting material in farmers' fields. One possibility to ensure clean starting material is that gene banks provide certified plants in vitro. Any cassava seed system (blue arrows) must integrate in-vitro platforms with macropropagation schemes to offer high-quality abundant planting material continuously to the end-users. yet a constraint. They must be seen also as a source of new genes, new traits for breeding programs worldwide. Biotechnology is a tool to rapidly add genetic variability and/or to discover the genes behind the features. As said before, several years and funds have been spent searching for a biotechnology-derived product in cassava. There are several transgenic prototypes that, with more investment and less regulation and less opposition, could be pioneer germplasm.
