# A Review: The Current In Vivo Models for the Discovery and Utility of New Anti-leishmanial Drugs Targeting Cutaneous Leishmaniasis

CorpusID: 14668716 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9244c44d14138528df00ef15002d1c8a273da3b0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9244c44d14138528df00ef15002d1c8a273da3b0)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Animal Models for Different Species of Leishmania
(p1.0) It must be noted that there is no validated animal model for CL, although these models are routinely used in several laboratories. Animal model validity refers to the similarity between the model and the human condition. Standardized animal models are used in laboratories that screen drug compounds against Leishmania strains to assure reproducibility. However, the predictive validity of the animal models is often low due to incomplete correlation between animal and human disease mechanisms. The philosophy is that if an agent was ineffective in these models, then no further development would be justified. Besides, some preliminary data on dose response and toxicity may be collected. Certain parameters must be considered when determining the similarity of an animal model to the human disease. These parameters include, but are not limited to, the clinical manifestations and presentations of the disease, disease pathogenesis, and the immunological responses that occur. For an animal model to be considered "validated" and used as part of preclinical development studies of an agent for therapy or prophylaxis, it must be similar to humans with respect to etiology, pathophysiology, symptomatology, and response to the therapeutic or prophylactic agents. For example, the BALB/c-L. major model is far from being a validated model for human CL based on the above criteria. Immunosuppression renders BALB/c mice resistant to L. major infection [6], whereas it has the opposite effect in humans. However, it is convenient, with easy read out using conventional methods. The inbred, resistant strains have many similarities with human disease, but don't have the same pathological features and disease manifestations, such as secretions from the lesions (classically known as wet lesions), chronic persistent lesions, and the variety of disease presentation. Being inbred, these mice don't show the variations in the presentation of the disease seen in humans; nevertheless, they are the most appropriate models available.

(p1.1) Ideally, outbred mice challenged by sandfly bites would be closer to human disease, particularly for vaccine studies, but it would require a large number of mice with complex endpoint evaluation (different disease manifestation) and a setup for sandfly challenge, which would be time-consuming and expensive and also require special expertise. It is therefore not practical for routine screening of drugs.
## (s2) Standardization of Inoculum
(p2.0) It is well known that promastigotes go through developmental stages (metacyclogenesis) during growth in culture. Therefore, the composition and size of inoculum as well as the method, route, and site of inoculation greatly influences the outcome of infection. It is therefore important that all these parameters are standardized for obtaining reproducible results.

(p2.1) During the course of in vitro growth, Leishmania undergo some essential changes (similar to that within sandfly vector) from highly dividing but non-infective form in log phase to nondividing but highly infective metacyclic form in stationary phase [23]. Therefore, most laboratories harvest the parasite during the late stationary phase of growth and employ peanut agglutinin (PNA) to remove non-metacyclic parasites before inoculation. The size of inoculum is also important since, up to a certain level, higher doses produce larger lesions, which develop faster. Generally, 1 × 10 6 metacyclic-enriched parasites were injected subcutaneously in a volume of 40μl. However, with the highly purified infective form of parasites, a few thousands of parasites are injected to simulate delivery by infected sandflies, which are estimated to be <5,000 [24]. The site of injection is also important for development of lesions. Footpads of mice are usually used for drug screening and provide easy measurement of lesion and parasite load at the lesion. The base of the tail of mice and the forehead of monkeys have also been used for vaccine studies. Another interesting site for mouse studies is the ear, which has also been used for inoculation by infected sandflies to simulate natural infection. Needle injections primarily deliver parasites subcutaneously, whereas sandfly introduces the parasite intradermally. The course of infections and the immune responses that ensue are different, primarily due to the type of inflammatory cells that appear soon after the introduction of parasites at the different sites [25]. Ideally, ear infection by infected sandflies would be preferable, particularly for vaccine development, since it is closer to natural infection in humans and has been shown to be different from needle challenge in vaccinated mice [24]. It should be noted that this method should be validated for humans first before making it a prerequisite for testing safe candidate vaccines in human clinical trials. However, this method requires availability of sandflies and consistent maintenance of infection rates. For drug screening, needle injection of a standard inoculum given subcutaneously in the food pad of mice would make it possible for many laboratories to screen drugs, albeit not simulating natural infection.
## (s4) L. tropica
(p4.0) Leishmania tropica is a major cause of CL in the Middle East and some areas of Africa. Infecting BALB/c mice with L. tropica results in non-ulcerating small nodules and delayed type hypersensitivity [43]. A susceptible murine model for infection by the L. tropica strain is needed, as there is insufficient knowledge on the pathogenicity of this parasite in mammalian hosts, due to its difficulty to establish infection in vivo. Previous rodent models for L. tropica infection have involved C57BL/6 and BALB/c mice [44], black rats (Rattus rattus) [45], and Sprague Dawley rats (Rattus norvegicus spp.) [46]. None of these models effectively represent the clinical manifestations of CL in humans. A suitable rodent model for L. tropica infection has only recently come to light in the study by Kobets et al., 2012, which examined the genetics and susceptibility of host response to L. tropica in BALB/c-c-STS/A (CcS/Dem) recombinant congenic (RC) mouse strains [47]. The CcS16 strain is more susceptible to L. tropica than BALB/c, carrying 12.5% of genes from the resistant parental strain STS/A and 87.5% of genes from the susceptible BALB/c strain. There is ongoing work to map the genes for susceptibility and response to L. tropica in CcS-16 [48]. This group deduced that the response to L. tropica is controlled by multiple genes with heterogenous effects, detecting eight loci in the CcS-16 strain that control host-parasite interaction. The identification of these complexities will now allow their functional basis to be elucidated and the subsequent detection of homologous processes in humans. The CcS-16 model therefore shows great potential for the evaluation of new antileishmanial drugs.

(p4.1) There are very few examples of nonhuman primate models infected with L. tropica. The L. tropica infection of rhesus monkey does not follow the same immune pattern of cutaneous infection as it usually does in humans and is not an appropriate host for the parasite [49]. Likewise, none of the four East African nonhuman primates studied by Githure et al., 1987, resulted in infection after challenge with L. tropica [37]. The current nonhuman primate L. tropica models will therefore be ineffective for drug discovery.
## (s5) L. aethiopica
(p5.0) There are very few murine models that show susceptibility to the L. aethiopica strain and the models that currently attempt to utilize it result in poor clinical outcomes that do not represent the human form of the disease. The pathogenesis of L. aethiopica infection has been demonstrated in BALB/c mice [50] whereby no ulceration of the lesion was observed and there were no overt clinical symptoms after 203 days of infection. Likewise, Childs et al., 1984, discovered that only slight swellings of the nose were seen across 12 different strains of inbred mice infected with L. aethiopica, suggesting that murine models show little susceptibility to the parasite [51]. The models do not represent the human form of the disease and thus are poor models for drug discovery.

(p5.1) Experimental infections of L. aethiopica in nonhuman primates have not been studied recently. A report by Hailu et al., 1995, evaluated the susceptibility of three species of monkeyvervet monkey (Chlorocebus pygerythrus), Gelada baboon (Theropithecus gelada), and Olive baboon (Papio anubis)-to the parasite [52]. Infections in all the vervet monkeys and half of the Gelada baboons produced recognizable lesions; however, no lesions were produced during infection in the Olive baboon. The maximum lesion size was observed among vervet monkeys and the scars that formed after complete healing of the ulcerating lesions were typical of the CL scars observed in humans. This species of monkey is, as of yet, the only nonhuman primate that is susceptible to infection with L. aethiopica. However, further experimental studies are needed to explore its potential as a nonhuman primate model of CL for the evaluation of new drugs, due to infection with L. aethiopica.
## (s6) L. mexicana
(p6.0) Most inbred mice will display susceptibility to L. mexicana and its subspecies at high doses. However, when infected via a model that mimics natural transmission, the mice display marked differences in their ability to control parasite growth. Of the three strains of mice (BALB/c, C57BL/6, and CBA/J) that were subjected to a low parasite dose of 10 3 L. mexicana promastigotes inoculated via the intra-dermal route of infection, BALB/c proved to be the most susceptible, despite all mice strains previously showing an equal susceptibility when inoculated with high dose (10 6 ) L. mexicana promastigotes subcutaneously [53].

(p6.1) The recent model by Sosa-Bibiano et al., 2012, made use of local mammalian fauna, the Yucatan deer mouse (Peromyscus yucatanicus), as a model host to study the development of L. mexicana infection with the aim of mimicking natural infection conditions [54]. The typical human patient will develop a localized cutaneous nodular ulcerated lesion when infected by L. mexicana, and this symptom presented itself in seven of 36 (19.44%) P. yucatanicus. Additionally, the scars that resulted in P. yucatanicus were round or oval-shaped with smooth surfaces, and showed a depression along with hypopigmentation, much like the healed lesions in humans with CL. However, the absence of these local clinical signs was observed in 29 of the 36 animals (80.55%). Although these former results support the utility of P. yucatanicus as a novel experimental model to study LCL caused by L. mexicana, more work is needed to utilize the model for drug discovery.
## (s7) L. amazonensis
(p7.0) Infection by L. amazonensis may lead to the development of diffuse CL in a few human patients, which is characterized by nodular lesions. Recently, L. amazonensis-infected female BALB/c mice were used to evaluate the efficacy of different CL treatments [55]. The animals were inoculated with 10 7 promastigotes through subcutaneous injections at the base of the tail. Despite some treatments showing promising results in vivo, limitations of the study included the use of an extremely susceptible animal model and the lack of an extended period to follow up on healing lesions. Many additional mouse strains are susceptible to L. amazonensis, in particular, the CBA strain, which develops severe lesions in comparison to C57BL/6, presenting small chronic lesions [56]. An advantage of the C57BL/6 mouse is the large number of gene knockout lines in the C57BL/6 background that can be used to address important questions such as the contribution of a specific immune response to drug efficacy. In the study by Charret et al., 2013, the CBA strain was chosen over the BALB/c strain due to its susceptibility to infection by L. amazonensis, developing cutaneous lesions without intense parasite dissemination [18]. It was also noted from Lemos de Souza, et al., 2000, that CBA mice infected with L. amazonensis produce increased levels of IL-4 and IL-10, whilst CBA mice infected with L. major produced IFN-γ and IL-10 [57]. In humans, IL-4 is associated with disease development and thus the similarity in immune response suggests the CBA strain has potential in replicating the human form of CL. This CBA-L. amazonensis model shows potential for use as a method for the development of new anti-leishmanial drugs.

(p7.1) Dose-dependent lesion development was observed in both the rhesus monkey (Macaca mulatta) and tufted capuchin (Cebus apella) infected by L. amazonensis [58,59]. Amaral et al., 1996, infected rhesus monkeys with L. amazonensis and found that animals inoculated with 10 8 promastigotes consistently resulted in establishment of infection, including earlier onset and/or larger size of lesions [58]. The cutaneous lesions of infected monkeys shared the pathologic features of CL in humans: amastigotes with mononuclear infiltrate of macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells, with the formation of tuberculoid-type granulomas. However, the DCL that could occur in humans was not observed in the animals during the time course of experiments and it is likely that the anergic form would not have developed according to the level of immune responsiveness found. Garcez et al., 2002, successfully used the C. apella monkey for experimental studies of American CL and as a model for vaccine trials [59]. An intermediary dose of 2 × 10 6 promastigotes was sufficient to induce consistent cutaneous lesions in these monkeys. This dose is extremely large in comparison with the dose injected by a vector in natural infection that varies from 10 to 1,000 promastigotes [60]. However, under this high dose, all animals presented nodular lesion development. C. apella monkeys only developed an erythematous nodule during primary infection that varied in size and persistence, curing spontaneously, unlike humans infected by L. amazonensis that typically developed characteristic ulcerations that do not typically self-cure. Although this L. amazonensis-C. apella model is considered to be a good model for vaccine trials, it is perhaps not as good as other models (such as the L. amazonensis-rhesus monkey), due to many aspects of infection that are dissimilar to the same disease in humans.
## (s8) L. braziliensis
(p8.0) Less experimental work has been conducted involving the infection of rodents with L. braziliensis, despite its wide distribution and burden in South America. L. braziliensis does not grow easily in vitro [61]. Most mouse strains are resistant to infection by L. braziliensis due to the inability of this species to inhibit the Th1 immune response [62]. Mouse strains such as C3H/ HeJ, C57BL/6J, and CBA/CaJ show no evidence of infection by L. braziliensis, whereas strains AKR/J and CBA/J showed only a slight and transient swelling of the infected tissue, when parasites were inoculated in the snout [51]. Additionally, the L. braziliensis parasite has previously been shown not to produce severe or lasting cutaneous lesions in the BALB/c mouse strain [20], which has even been shown to kill the L. braziliensis parasite after infection and is therefore highly resistant [62]. However, a few reports have employed a BALB/c model in vaccination studies that successfully obtained chronic ulcerated lesions after infection by L. braziliensis promastigotes [63,64]. The addition of salivary gland exudates promotes infection in mice due to the presence of highly active vasodilators. Some of these proteins (LJM11) are now being used to generate blocking antibodies/cellular response in vaccine studies to reduce infection and lesion formation [65].
## (s10) L. guyanensis
(p10.0) There are very few examples of L. guyanensis-rodent animal models. However, the golden hamster has been shown to provide an experimental model for most L. Viannia species, including L. guyanensis [72,73]. The extent of the model's usefulness is limited, however, and not representative of the human disease. Very little research has been conducted into L. guyanensisnonhuman primate models of infection and hence their use for the evaluation of potential antileishmanial compounds remains unclear.
## (s12) β-galactosidase
(p12.0) β-galactosidase is widely used as an intracellular reporter gene and is the product of the bacterial lacZ gene. The primary advantages of using β-gal as a reporter gene is its simplicity, low cost and sensitivity. Depending on the substrate used, it offers a number of detection options [81]. The reporter molecule cannot be applied directly in vivo to observe the parasite load and progression in real time analyses, but β-galactosidase-positive L. amazonensis parasites were easily detected in mouse tissue as blue spots after staining with X-Gal [82]. Nevertheless, a considerable drawback to this method is the large size of the β-gal-expressed protein (116kDa) and its endogenous expression within most mammalian cell lines (macrophages), resulting in a false positive readout for parasite growth [81]. For this reason, the molecule is inaccurate for the quantification of parasite load, especially when determining the efficacy of a potential drug.
## (s13) β-lactamase
(p13.0) Unlike β-galactosidase, the reporter molecule β-lactamase shows no endogenous expression by mammalian cells and hence proves to be an excellent choice for protozoan reporter gene assays [83,84]. Betalactamases are a family of bacterial enzymes that cleave penicillins and cephalosporins [81]. The method is rapid, sensitive, and nonradioactive. Bukner and Wilson, 2005, engineered strains of L. major and L. amazonensis expressing the β-lactamase gene in an episomal vector [83]. Their method facilitated the relatively high throughput screening of the intracellular stages of the Leishmania strains against chemical libraries with potential antileishmanial activity. However, its utility was still limited as it was necessary to keep strong selective pressure over the parasite in culture to avoid the possible elimination of the parasite's episomal construct. This colorimetric assay also requires the lysis of cells, and repeated measurements are not always possible. The β-lactamase reporter gene system devised by Mandal et al., 2009, uses transgenic parasites to optimize their utility in amastigote-macrophage drug screening assays, and is a vast improvement of the 2005 Buckner and Wilson model [84]. Currently, the β-lactamase reporter gene has not been applied directly in vivo.
## (s15) Green Fluorescent Protein
(p15.0) All of the above mentioned reporter genes require exogenous substrates, which limit their use and introduce an extra step in the detection of reporter expression. Using fluorescence for determining parasite load has many advantages over other reporter molecules. The fluorescent proteins work intrinsically, which allows real-time analysis of the molecular events in living cells. Additionally, fluorescent reporters do not require specific substrates and the fluorescence emitted is very stable over time. The use of fluorescence allows greater simplicity, easier kinetic monitoring, low cost, and enhanced biosafety [88], and thus has great potential for in vitro HTS of potential drug candidates. Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) is the most commonly used fluorescent reporter molecule. It has been used over a large number of species for in vitro drug screening due to its flexibility, sensitivity, and the additional possibility of automization of the screening process using flow cytometry or fluorometry [88]. Variants of the GFP have been developed, which have optimal properties for high-throughput screening. These variants have different emission spectra and can fluoresce at wavelengths longer than that of native GFP, as seen in the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) [89]. More recently, the stable transfection of the EGFP reporter has been found suitable for in vivo as well as in vitro infection studies, showing potential use in drug screening assays in vivo, as there are no considerable variations in virulence or infectivity due to the genetic manipulation of the parasites [89,90]. Infrared fluorescence has recently been utilised as a tool for in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo models of visceral leishmaniasis [91]. Here, in vivo noninvasive imaging of the visceral infection in BALB/c mice was achieved using transgenic fluorescent parasites. It is possible that this method may be transferred to studies of CL, opening up the possibility of testing vast amounts of potential drug compounds.
## (s16) Discussion
(p16.0) To summarize, animal models that show the greatest potential for the evaluation of new potential anti-leishmanial drugs have not been certified, and this review goes some way in clarifying our understanding of the predictive validity and representativeness of the models for human disease. Currently, the BALB/c-L. major model is one of the most widely used. The idea of using BALB/c mice for drug studies is based on the notion that if the BALB/c mice can be protected or cured from the parasite disease, then so can the resistant mouse strains. However, using this model will possibly result in the inability to detect potentially useful compounds due to the stringencies and peculiarities associated with it. The risk of overlooking such compounds is too great, and thus, the model has limitations. Despite this, it should be noted that the choice of a rodent model strongly depends on the research question that is being addressed. The use of BALB/c-L. major can be justified in drug testing, as it is reproducible and generally accepted to be a rigorous test. CL progresses quickly in this non-healing model; hence, when a lesion size and parasite load reduction is obtained, it is likely to lead to reduction in other self-cure models. The in vivo model should be considered solely as a predictive tool in a complete set of experiments involving in vitro and additional in vivo work in which each experiment answers a different defined question, as demonstrated by Grogl et al., 2013.
