# Health-Promoting Properties of Eucommia ulmoides: A Review

CorpusID: 1458402 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b23faac7c2a7107ab33330d0ae00042d8de376e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b23faac7c2a7107ab33330d0ae00042d8de376e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Eucommia ulmoides (EU) (commonly called "Du Zhong" in Chinese language) belong to the family of Eucommiaceae, a genus of the small tree native to Central China [1]. This plant is widely cultivated in China on a large scale because of its medicinal importance. About 112 compounds have been isolated from EU which include lignans, iridoids, phenolics, steroids, and other compounds. Complementary herbs formula of this plant (such as delicious tea) has shown some medicinal properties. The leaf of EU has higher activity related to cortex, flower, and fruit [2,3]. The leaves of EU have been reported to enhance bones strength and body muscles [4], thus leading to longevity and promoting fertility in humans [5]. Delicious tea formula made from the leaf of EU was reported to reduce fattiness and enhance energy metabolism. Flavonoid compounds (such as rutin, chlorogenic acid, ferulic acid, and caffeic acid) have been reported to exhibit antioxidants activity in the leaves of EU [6].

(p0.1) Although there has been enough literature on phytochemical properties of EU, few studies however existed on the pharmacological properties of the various compounds extracted from the barks, seeds, stems, and leaves of EU. This review paper will elucidate detailed information regarding different compounds extracted from the various parts (barks, seeds, stem, and leaf) of EU and the prospective uses of these compounds in health-promoting properties with scientific lines of evidence and thus provide a reference material for the application of EU. 
## (s6) Other Ingredients and Chemicals.
(p6.0) Amino acids, microelements, vitamins, and fatty acids have also been isolated from EU [17,[21][22][23]. Sun et al. also discovered new compounds such as n-octacosanoic acid, and tetracosanoic-2,3dihydroxypropylester from EU [24]. Fatty acid composition of oil extracted from the seed of EU showed different concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids such as linoleic acid, linolenic acid (56.51% of total fatty acids, TFAs), and linolelaidic acid (12.66% of TFAs). Meanwhile, the main monounsaturated fatty acid isolated from the seed was found to be isoleic acid (15.80% of TFAs). Dominant saturated fatty acids isolated include palmitic acid and stearic acid which represent 9.82% and 2.59% of TFAs, respectively [25].
## (s7) Health-Promoting Compounds of
(p7.0) Eucommia ulmoides 3.1. Protective Effects on Cardiovascular System. In Chinese traditional medicines, Eucommia is considered as a major herbal tonic for cardiac patients. Eucommia bark extract is an active component used for antihypertensive formulations. It has been confirmed in many human as well as animal models as a vasorelaxant. Lignan from EU when administered to rats of the Okamoto strain (SHR) at the dose rate of 300 mg/kg for 16 weeks resulted in improved vascular remodeling and reduced mean arterial blood pressure. EU minimizes blood pressure at the dose of 500-1000 mg/kg. However, in high fructose fed diet, it develops insulin resistance and hypertension [26][27][28]. Supplementation of 500 and 1000 mg of EU for 8 weeks and thrice daily for 2 weeks showed minimal reduction in blood pressure and reduction in systolic and diastolic blood pressure [29]. Antihypertensive effect on the parasympathetic nervous system has been reported following the application of EU [30]. EU also serves as a vasorelaxative agent depending on nitric oxide and assumed to be linked with potassium channels [31]. EU has beta blocking potential which at 0.5% w/v reduces isoproterenol-stimulated lipolysis from 2.67 to 1.4 times the buffer control [29]. EU has been demonstrated to prevent hypertensive remodeling which is associated with aldose reductase inhibition [32]. The application of lignans from EU under condition of hypertension due to vascular remodeling was reported to serve as a new therapeutic agent [33]. EU also showed antihyperlipidemic properties by suppressing hepatic fatty acid and cholesterol biosynthesis [34]. In hyperlipidemic hamsters, dietary supplementation with Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 3   Evidence-Based Complementary and Alternative Medicine 5  [44] leaf extract of EU at the dose of 0.175 g/100 g for 10 weeks reduced the concentrations of triglycerides, total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), nonhigh-density lipoprotein cholesterol (non-HDL-C), and free acids in plasma and hepatic lipids compared to control group (fed 10 g, coconut oil, 0.2% cholesterol, w/w) [34]. In a similar manner, 1 mg or 5 mg intraduodenal injection of EU leaf extract reduced plasma triglyceride levels [65].
## (s8) Antioxidant Effects. Antioxidant compounds from
(p8.0) Eucommia plant reduced the level of free radicals [66,67] and improved the disease condition caused by oxidative stress [68,69]. Strong antioxidant properties of EU have been established under in vivo and in vitro studies [70,71]. Extracts from EU reduced the level of hydrogen peroxide which expresses some caspase proteins by MC3T3E1 cells up to half concentration from 12.5 to 25 g/mL [71]. Extract of EU was reported to increase the actions of erythrocyte, superoxide dismutase, and catalase and glutathione peroxidase and reduce the concentration of hydrogen peroxide and lipid peroxide in erythrocytes, liver, and kidney [70]. Studies on diabetic rats indicated that superoxide dismutase (SOD) can be enhanced by Eucommia bark. Eucommia also increases the level of other antioxidant enzymes in the blood to neutralize free radicals [70]. Phenolics and flavonoids of medicinal herbs contributed significantly to oxidative activities in EU [34,[69][70][71][72]. Phenolics and flavonoids safely react with free radicals by donating a hydrogen atom or an electron and terminate chain reaction before the vital organs are damaged [73]. Antioxidant properties from leaves of the EU roasted cortex and seeds were analyzed by calculating radical scavenging activity of 2,2diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl and ferric reducing antioxidant power and lipid peroxidation inhibition capacity in acarotene/linoleic acid system. Results indicated that leaf of the extract showed maximum DPPH radical scavenging activity with reducing rate and inhibition rate of 81.40%, followed by butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) (76.60%) and the roasted cortex extract (16.72%). However, the seed extract had the lowest activity of 7.65%. In ferric reducing antioxidant power assays, the order of ferric reducing activities of EU extracts from leaf, seed, and roasted cortex was compared with positive control. In the -carotene/linoleic acid emulsion system, the leaf extract showed better antioxidant capacity (43.58%) than the roasted cortex extract (26.71%) or seed extract (25.10%) [74].

(p8.1) In addition, aucubin compounds of EU have been demonstrated to exhibit photoprotective effects against oxidative stress. Ultraviolet (UV) B radiation produces free radicals in the skin which induce the synthesis of metalloproteinases (MMPs) causing photoaging in the skin, wrinkling, and discoloration which are prone to cancer. Aucubin played a vital role in defense mechanism against free radicals caused by UV irradiation [75].
## (s11) Neuroprotective Effects.
(p11.0) The stem bark extract of EU exhibited acetylcholinesterase inhibition properties in vitro (172 g/mL) IC 50 and neuroprotective effects against betaamyloid proteins [4]. It also inhibits 30-70% of cytotoxicity and efficacy of oxidative biomarkers when applied at a concentration of 2.5 g/mL [10]. Stem bark extract of EU showed higher protection activity against memory dysfunctions at the dose of 10-20 mg/kg with intracerebral injection of betaamyloid proteins in rats [4].
## (s12) Metabolic Modulation and
(p12.0) Bones. Eucommia cortex extract can be used in the control of osteoporosis. This is because Eucommia extract is actively involved in mechanisms which initiate osteoblast, enhance osteogenesis, decrease osteoclast, and thus prevent osteolysis [82]. Total glycosides from Eucommia ulmoides seed (TGEUS) have been shown to improve bone density and femur strength in rats [83]. Daily administration of TGEUS at the rate of 400 mg/kg body weight/day to normal and Dawley rats was reported to significantly increase bone mineral density and showed improvements in microarchitecture structure of the femur bone [83].
## (s13) Phytoestrogenic
(p13.0) Properties. EU was reported to exhibit phytoestrogenic and androgenic properties [84]. Eucommia bark contains isoflavonoids, with estrogen like properties, which bind to human estrogen receptors. None of these isoflavonoids has male hormone like effect that interacts with human androgen receptor. Eucommia bark has been reported to show bimodal phytoandrogenic and hormone enhancing effects [84]. Androgen receptors play a key role in male as well as in female physiology such as skeletal muscle development, bone density, and sex drive [86,87]. Ethanol extracts of Eucommia bark were reported to attach in a weak manner to activated androgen receptors with high affinity and produce testosterone at the rate of 5-25 ng/mL in mammalian COS-7 cells [84]. Oral induction of the ethanol extract showed no increase in prostatic weights at the dose of 1-50 mg. However, 20% increases in prostatic weights were observed by increasing the dosage up to 5000 g injection [84]. Application of EU at a concentration of 50 ng/mL enhanced the signals of estradiol in a manner similar to androgen receptors [84]. However, the promoting effect of EU on the cortisol and progesterone receptors was not observed [84].

(p13.1) In vivo animal studies conducted using oral administration of EU extracts potentiated androgenic and hormonal effects. A form of tripartite synergism between sex steroid receptors, sex hormones, and lipidic augmenters isolated from EU was found by Ong and Tan [84]. It has been shown that the activities of sex hormone in the body are optimized with the application of EU [84].
## (s14) Hepatoprotective Effects.
(p14.0) Study was conducted on different doses of Eucommia ulmoides and carbon tetrachloride on Sprague Dawley male rats to investigate the protective effects of EU in response to CCl 4 induced acute liver lipid accumulation. Results demonstrated that Eucommia ulmoides Oliv. cortex extracts (EUCE) significantly decreased the hepatic lipid accumulation induced by CCl 4 . EU enhances lysosomal enzyme activity relieving protein folding requirement which turns into attenuation of ER stress. ApoB secretion was improved by effects of ER stress; along this, it regulates biotransformation of CCl 4 and its resultant inhibition of ROS accumulation [88].  
