# Role of androgens, progestins and tibolone in the treatment of menopausal symptoms: a review of the clinical evidence

CorpusID: 14234658 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65d6ea8cf4bf340ba7fdb4b8ebb5f6bd1e220f4a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/65d6ea8cf4bf340ba7fdb4b8ebb5f6bd1e220f4a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Menopausal symptoms
(p2.0) The vast majority of women going through menopause will experience symptoms related to the hormonal changes during this transition. Of these, vasomotor symptoms such as hot fl ushes and night sweats are the most characteristic, and are the main reason why women seek treatment (Kronenberg 1994).

(p2.1) The vast majority of women going through menopause will experience symptoms related to the hormonal changes during this transition. Of these, vasomotor symptoms such as hot fl ushes and night sweats are the most characteristic, and are the main reason why women seek treatment (Kronenberg 1994).
## (s10) Testosterone
(p10.0) Testosterone is the most potent female androgen. The primary indication for the use of supplemental testosterone has been the treatment of low libido in post-menopausal women. However, the question of whether there is a syndrome of female androgen insuffi ciency and whether supplementary androgens have a benefi cial effect on libido, energy or sense of wellbeing in pre and postmenopausal women remains unresolved. In the absence of high quality evidence expert opinion is divided. Whilst some high quality RCTs have demonstrated that increases in total and free testosterone in the physiologic range in postmenopausal women are associated with improvement in sexual satisfaction, general well-being, and mood. , other studies have not confi rmed this. There has been a lack of standardization in the measurement of female sexual function which makes direct comparisons between studies diffi cult.

(p10.1) A recent consensus statement from the Endocrine Society recommend against making a diagnosis of androgen defi ciency in women at present because of the lack of a welldefi ned clinical syndrome and normative data on total or free testosterone levels across the lifespan that can be used to defi ne the disorder. They recognized that there is evidence for short-term effi cacy of testosterone in selected populations, such as surgically menopausal women, but advised against the generalized use of testosterone by women, because the indications are inadequate and evidence of safety in long-term studies is lacking (Wierman et al 2006). In contrast, other expert groups have argued there are ample data to suggest that adrenal androgens play a role in the development of axillary and pubic hair, and that testosterone is critical for women's libido and sexual function (Traish et al 2007).

(p10.2) In addition, there are a number of practical restrictions to the diagnosis and management. No lower limit of total or free testosterone has been shown to be diagnostic of female androgen insuffi ciency and there is no "normal range" for postmenopausal women. Further, most available assays are unable to accurately measure testosterone in the lower female range. Most circulating testosterone is protein-bound but only the free fraction is clinically active. Hence an estimate of free testosterone is thought to be the most useful measure of endogenous testosterone levels. However, commonly available direct free testosterone assays are notoriously imprecise (Wells et al 2002), and it is generally agreed that free testosterone is most reliably calculated by the laboratory using the Sodergard equation if both total testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin are known (Riphagen 2000).

(p10.3) A further confounding factor for clinical practice is that circulating estrogen levels will impact on free testosterone via an increase in SHBG. Most investigators recommend that androgen therapy should be offered only when the patient continues to have problems while receiving adequate estrogen replacement therapy (Braunstein 2002).

(p10.4) Since the measurement of serum testosterone is fraught, the main indication for measurement should be to exclude women from therapy because of a mid range or higher testosterone value or to ensure that levels do not become supraphysiological if exogenous androgens are prescribed.

(p10.5) The decision to prescribe testosterone to a woman needs to be based upon clinical assessment, which includes exclusion of factors such as fundamental relationship diffi culties, clinical depression and other common causes of low wellbeing during midlife such as iron defi ciency and thyroid disease. Testosterone preparations include a transdermal patch, cream, gel, and spray.
## (s11) DHEA
(p11.0) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).

(p11.1) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).
## (s13) Mood and cognitive disturbances
(p13.0) A range of other symptoms, including depression, nervousness, agitation, insomnia, arthralgia, and poor concentration are associated with the menopause (Bachmann 1998), but the relationship between these symptoms and low estrogen is more diffi cult to determine. Such psychological and mood changes around the time of menopause may be the result of a complex interplay between environmental stimuli and other factors such as sleep disturbance and fatigue. Sleep disturbance is a pervasive and distressing menopausal symptom and may occur independently of hot fl ushes and night sweats (Cardozo et al 1998). A community-based longitudinal study gave no support for mood symptoms being part of the menopausal syndrome (Avis et al 1994;Baker 1994;Khan et al 1994;Dennerstein et al 2004).

(p13.1) Any improvements in these symptoms or in general wellbeing noted while taking ET/EPT may be due to improvements in vasomotor symptoms, urogenital symptoms, sexual function, and quality of sleep (Brown et al 2001).
## (s17) Menopausal symptoms
(p17.0) The vast majority of women going through menopause will experience symptoms related to the hormonal changes during this transition. Of these, vasomotor symptoms such as hot fl ushes and night sweats are the most characteristic, and are the main reason why women seek treatment (Kronenberg 1994).

(p17.1) The vast majority of women going through menopause will experience symptoms related to the hormonal changes during this transition. Of these, vasomotor symptoms such as hot fl ushes and night sweats are the most characteristic, and are the main reason why women seek treatment (Kronenberg 1994).
## (s25) Testosterone
(p25.0) Testosterone is the most potent female androgen. The primary indication for the use of supplemental testosterone has been the treatment of low libido in post-menopausal women. However, the question of whether there is a syndrome of female androgen insuffi ciency and whether supplementary androgens have a benefi cial effect on libido, energy or sense of wellbeing in pre and postmenopausal women remains unresolved. In the absence of high quality evidence expert opinion is divided. Whilst some high quality RCTs have demonstrated that increases in total and free testosterone in the physiologic range in postmenopausal women are associated with improvement in sexual satisfaction, general well-being, and mood. , other studies have not confi rmed this. There has been a lack of standardization in the measurement of female sexual function which makes direct comparisons between studies diffi cult.

(p25.1) A recent consensus statement from the Endocrine Society recommend against making a diagnosis of androgen defi ciency in women at present because of the lack of a welldefi ned clinical syndrome and normative data on total or free testosterone levels across the lifespan that can be used to defi ne the disorder. They recognized that there is evidence for short-term effi cacy of testosterone in selected populations, such as surgically menopausal women, but advised against the generalized use of testosterone by women, because the indications are inadequate and evidence of safety in long-term studies is lacking (Wierman et al 2006). In contrast, other expert groups have argued there are ample data to suggest that adrenal androgens play a role in the development of axillary and pubic hair, and that testosterone is critical for women's libido and sexual function (Traish et al 2007).

(p25.2) In addition, there are a number of practical restrictions to the diagnosis and management. No lower limit of total or free testosterone has been shown to be diagnostic of female androgen insuffi ciency and there is no "normal range" for postmenopausal women. Further, most available assays are unable to accurately measure testosterone in the lower female range. Most circulating testosterone is protein-bound but only the free fraction is clinically active. Hence an estimate of free testosterone is thought to be the most useful measure of endogenous testosterone levels. However, commonly available direct free testosterone assays are notoriously imprecise (Wells et al 2002), and it is generally agreed that free testosterone is most reliably calculated by the laboratory using the Sodergard equation if both total testosterone and sex hormone binding globulin are known (Riphagen 2000).

(p25.3) A further confounding factor for clinical practice is that circulating estrogen levels will impact on free testosterone via an increase in SHBG. Most investigators recommend that androgen therapy should be offered only when the patient continues to have problems while receiving adequate estrogen replacement therapy (Braunstein 2002).

(p25.4) Since the measurement of serum testosterone is fraught, the main indication for measurement should be to exclude women from therapy because of a mid range or higher testosterone value or to ensure that levels do not become supraphysiological if exogenous androgens are prescribed.

(p25.5) The decision to prescribe testosterone to a woman needs to be based upon clinical assessment, which includes exclusion of factors such as fundamental relationship diffi culties, clinical depression and other common causes of low wellbeing during midlife such as iron defi ciency and thyroid disease. Testosterone preparations include a transdermal patch, cream, gel, and spray.
## (s26) DHEA
(p26.0) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).

(p26.1) Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) is a female androgen increasingly available commercially as a supplement aimed at improving libido and well-being in post-menopausal women. However, there is scant evidence to support the use of DHEA for this purpose, and safety data for DHEA therapy are lacking. DHEA and its sulfate DHEAS are the most abundant circulating sex steroid hormones in women, providing a large precursor reservoir for the intracellular production of androgens and oestrogens in non-reproductive tissues. Levels of DHEA and DHEAS decline with age. In premenopausal women, levels of DHEA correlate with feelings of vitality (Bell et al 2006). It has been proposed that restoring the circulating levels of these steroids to those found in young people may have anti-aging effects and improve well-being and sexual function. However, this is not supported by the published literature and there is currently no clear clinical role for DHEA (Panjari and Davis 2007).
## (s28) Mood and cognitive disturbances
(p28.0) A range of other symptoms, including depression, nervousness, agitation, insomnia, arthralgia, and poor concentration are associated with the menopause (Bachmann 1998), but the relationship between these symptoms and low estrogen is more diffi cult to determine. Such psychological and mood changes around the time of menopause may be the result of a complex interplay between environmental stimuli and other factors such as sleep disturbance and fatigue. Sleep disturbance is a pervasive and distressing menopausal symptom and may occur independently of hot fl ushes and night sweats (Cardozo et al 1998). A community-based longitudinal study gave no support for mood symptoms being part of the menopausal syndrome (Avis et al 1994;Baker 1994;Khan et al 1994;Dennerstein et al 2004).

(p28.1) Any improvements in these symptoms or in general wellbeing noted while taking ET/EPT may be due to improvements in vasomotor symptoms, urogenital symptoms, sexual function, and quality of sleep (Brown et al 2001).
