# Sirolimus-eluting coronary stents: a review

CorpusID: 14858449 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/538615ddd7a4ada2210130b447ee625537343dc2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/538615ddd7a4ada2210130b447ee625537343dc2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Pathophysiology of restenosis
(p1.0) Stent-induced restenosis involves a complex interplay of biological events. We now know that stent placement causes endothelial injury as well as deeper injury due to lacerations of the arterial wall. Injury stimulates smooth muscle cells to both proliferate excessively and migrate from the underlying vessel wall (Scott 2006).

(p1.1) Despite the scaffolding effect of the stent, the smooth muscle cells accumulate gradually, impinging upon the lumen. Tissue growth continues to be a problem because stents do not stop smooth muscle cell proliferation (Spier et al 1995). Currently, drug-eluting stents have emerged as the most promising approach in the fi ght against restenosis.
## (s3) Clinical studies
(p3.0) The First-in-Man feasibility study, conducted in Sao Paulo, Brazil and Rotterdam, the Netherlands showed the CYPHER ® sirolimus-eluting stent (Cordis Corporation, Johnson & Johnson, Warren, NJ, USA) to be remarkably effective in eliminating the occurrence of restenosis (Sousa et al 2001).
## (s6) Late loss: a key measurement in differentiating drug-eluting stents (DES)
(p6.0) Late loss is the angiographic metric that allows post-stent neointimal hyperplasia to be most accurately and reliably quantifi ed. It refl ects the ability of DES to inhibit the infl ammatory and hyperplastic processes that translate into adverse clinical outcomes such as binary restenosis and target lesion revascularization (Mauri et al 2005).

(p6.1) When the CYPHER vs TAXUS head-to-head trials are organized in order of increasing patient and lesion complexity (REALITY → SIRTAX → ISAR-DIABETES → ISAR-DESIRE) a trend emerges showing an association between lower late loss and superior clinical outcomes (restenosis and TLR). As the patient population becomes more complex, the gap between CYPHER and TAXUS in terms of late loss and restenosis widens, showing an increasing benefi t with the CYPHER stent (Fig. 2).

(p6.2) It has been seen that there is an association between late loss, restenosis, and complexity in CYPHER vs TAXUS studies. Late loss and in-stent restenosis increase as patient populations become more complex, and these increases are consistently higher in TAXUS populations. This trend is expressed as a "complexity curve". When the ENDEAVOR III results for late loss are mapped onto this complexity curve it can be seen that the late loss and restenosis rate are high considering the relatively straightforward patient population evaluated in ENDEAVOR III (Fig. 3).
## (s9) Safety of a broad therapeutic window
(p9.0) Sirolimus has been shown to have a broad therapeutic window. In pre-clinical animal trials, sirolimus has demonstrated biological activity in doses ranging from 18 to 1200 µg without displaying toxicity to the vessel wall (Cordis Corporation, Warren, New Jersey, USA, data on fi le).

(p9.1) • The highest dose now tested is approximately 6 times that of the CYPHER stent, with no adverse effects (no evidence of necrosis, aneurysm, or other pathology with 1200 µg in an exaggerated dose study. • The broad therapeutic profi le of sirolimus means that overlapping stents can be deployed without the risk of toxicity due to overdosing (Suzuki et al 2001). SIRIUS data from over 27% of patients with 2 or more overlapping stents demonstrate the safety and effi cacy when overlapping SES (Moses et al 2003;Munoz et al 2004). Additional data come from the RESEARCH registry, based on a study population of patients who had a combination of ≥2 overlapping stents at a minimum length of 41 mm (ie, one 33 mm SES overlapping an 8 mm SES) to treat native de novo coronary lesions. The investigators monitored the incidence of major cardiac adverse events (death, non-fatal MI, and TLR). Clinical follow-up was available for all patients at a mean of 320 days (range 265-442). Angiographic follow-up at 6 months was obtained in 67 patients (71%). Binary restenosis rate was 11.9% and in-stent late loss was 0.13 +/-0.47 mm. At long-term follow-up (mean 320 days), there were 2 deaths (2.1%), and the overall incidence of major cardiac events was 8.3%. The investigators concluded that SES implantation appears safe and effective for de novo coronary lesions requiring multiple stent placement over a very long vessel segment (Aoki et al 2005).

(p9.2) • The fl at dose-response curve of sirolimus demonstrates a consistent, homogeneous anti-proliferative and anti-infl ammatory effect at all doses evaluated, with no indication of cytotoxicity (Cordis Corporation, data on fi le).
