# Finite-Temperature Form Factors: a Review ⋆

CorpusID: 14542562 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d19d0b38ac3ee38ace07d6f8f8538199cb8da8e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d19d0b38ac3ee38ace07d6f8f8538199cb8da8e)

Fields: Physics

## (s2) Traces
(p2.0) Physical correlation functions at finite temperature are obtained by taking a statistical average of quantum averages, with Boltzmann weights e −βE where E is the energy of the quantum state and β is the inverse temperature. They are then represented by traces over the Hilbert space:

(p2.1) Since all matrix elements of local fields are known in many integrable models, it would seem appropriate to write the trace as an explicit sum over all states of the Hilbert space, and to introduce resolutions of the identity between operators inside the trace, in order to evaluate finite-temperature correlation functions. However, this method does not account correctly for the fact that at finite temperature, states that contribute to the trace are very far from the vacuum. Yet, it turned out to give good results in the case of correlation functions with only one operator [33,34,32].
## (s3) Quantization on the circle
(p3.0) On the other hand, traces as above can be represented by vacuum expectation values on the Hilbert space H β of quantization on the circle of circumference β. Indeed, a consequence of the imaginary-time formalism [12] is the Kubo-Martin-Schwinger (KMS) identity [13,14],

(p3.1) where (−1) f O is a sign accounting for the statistics of O (it is negative for fermionic operators and positive for bosinic operators), and where the dots (· · · ) represent local fields (that are also local with respect to O) at time t and at positions different from x. Then, finite-temperature correlation functions can be written as

(p3.2) where s is the spin of O, and there are factors e −iπs/2 for all operators in the correlation function. The operatorÔ(x, τ ) is the corresponding operator acting on the Hilbert space H β of quantization on the circle, with space variable x (parameterizing the circle of circumference β) and Euclidean time variable τ (on the line). The vector |vac β is the vacuum in this Hilbert space. Below, we will mostly be interested in fermionic models, that is, models with a "fundamental" fermion field (which creates from the vacuum single-particle states). For such models, one can think of at least two sectors in the quantization on the circle: Neveu-Schwartz (NS) and Ramond (R), where the fundamental fermion fields are anti-periodic and periodic, respectively, around the circle. The trace (3.1) with insertion of operators that are local with respect to the fermion fields naturally corresponds to the NS sector due to the KMS identity. This is the sector with the lowest vacuum energy. The representation (3.3) immediately leads to a large-distance expansion of finite-temperature correlation functions, through insertion of the resolution of the identity on the Hilbert space H β :

(p3.3) where the eigenstates of the momentum operator and of the Hamiltonian on the circle are parametrized by discrete variables n j 's. The vacua |vac 1 β and |vac 2 β may be in different sectors, and these sectors may be different than the sector where the excited states |n 1 , . . . , n k β lie (this situation occurs when considering semi-local operators as is recalled in the Subsection 3.3 below). The quantity ∆E is the difference between the vacuum energies of the vacuum state |vac 1 β and of the vacuum above which the states |n 1 , . . . , n k β are constructed. The states |n 1 , . . . , n k β and the excitation energies E n 1 ,...,n k may also depend on additional discrete parameters (quantum numbers, particle types), on which one has to sum as well. This form is valid for any integrable model on the circle. However, this Hilbert space has a very complicated structure, even in integrable quantum field theory; for instance the energy B. Doyon levels E n 1 ,...,n k are not known in closed form. Also, there is yet no known procedure in general integrable quantum field theory for evaluating form factors on this Hilbert space. Moreover, this representation does not provide large-time (real time) expansions, since it inherently gives finite-temperature correlation functions in Euclidean time.
## (s5) A space of "f inite-temperature states" in integrable quantum f ield theory
(p5.0) In [2], it was suggested that the difficulties in obtaining large-distance or large-time expansions of finite-temperature correlation functions can be overcome by constructing a finite-temperature Hilbert space in terms of objects with nice analytic structure, in analogy with the zero-temperature case. The program was carried out explicitly in the free massive Majorana theory (considering, in particular, "interacting" twist fields). As we said in the introduction, the idea of a finite-temperature Hilbert space is far from new, but it is in [2] that it was first developed in the context of an integrable quantum field theory.
## (s16) A tool for evaluating traces and mapping to the cylinder
(p16.0) This is again a generalisation of a concept introduced in [2]. It is possible to construct the left action ofZ α through the operators Z † α and Zᾱ (the right action is more complicated, from the definition of the operators Z † α and Z α , but it is sufficient to consider the left action). Indeed, one can verify that the mapping φ L (Z α (θ)) = Z † α (θ)g α (θ) + Zᾱ(θ)gᾱ(θ) (ᾱ = (a, −ǫ) for α = (a, ǫ)) (6.5)
## (s17) B. Doyon
(p17.0) But using the algebra (6.4), one can see that Υ = dθ a Z (a,−) (θ)Z (a,+) (θ)g (a,−) (θ) (6.10) has the right properties. Hence we have found an explicit expression for the map, acting on the space of operators on H, that transform finite-temperature form factors into zero-temperature form factors. This is the generalisation of the concept of "mapping to the cylinder" in conformal field theory. Finite-temperature form factors can then be calculated using (a 1 ,+),...,(a k ,+),(a ′ l ,−),...,(a ′

(p17.1) It is important to note, however, that the operator e Υ does not act on the initial Hilbert space H, but rather on the space of operators acting on it L. In the quantization on the line, this is not isomorphic to H. In conformal field theory, one usually thinks about the quantization on the circle around a fixed point (radial quantization), and by the operator-state correspondence, one then has an operator acting on the Hilbert space that performs the mapping to the cylinder. The action of e Υ on A ∈ L can be made more explicit using (6.10). Indeed, taking A = Z α 1 (θ 1 ) · · ·Z α k (θ k ), we can write

(p17.2) to bring all the Z α (θ) to the right, annihilating 1 H . This leads to a natural generalisation of Wick's theorem, whereby e Υ A is written as A + operators where more and more contractions have been performed, the contractions being given by

(p17.3) If the S-matrix S α,α ′ (θ − θ ′ ) is equal to ±1 (free models), then this gives the standard Wick's theorem, and in particular it can be applied to linear combinations of the type dθZ α (θ)f θ as well. In free models certain linear combinations of this type indeed represent local fields, and this immediately leads to the phenomenon of "mixing" that was described in [2] (using slightly different arguments). Of course, local fields in interacting models and twist fields in general are not simply such linear combinations, but rather are sums of operators with more and more factors ofZ α (θ) (since many-particle form factors are non-zero). Hence all term will contribute to any given finite-temperature form factor, and it is a non-trivial matter to re-sum these contributions.
## (s22) Untwisted case
(p22.0) In [2], the (untwisted) finite-temperature form factors (4.7) of the twist-field operators above were shown to solve a Riemann-Hilbert problem of the type found at zero temperature, but with important modifications. We repeat here the results.

(p22.1) Consider the function f η (θ 1 , . . . , θ k ) = F Oη +,...,+ (θ 1 , . . . , θ k ; β)

(p22.2) where O η is the operator with branch cut on its right (η = +) or on its left (η = −) representing any twist field: this can be the order field σ ± or the disorder field µ ± , or any of their conformal descendants (that is, fields which reproduce conformal descendants in the massless limit). Conformal descendants include space derivatives, as well as other fields related to action of higher conformal Virasoro modes on twist fields. A way of describing such descendants is by taking the limit x → 0 of the finite part of the OPE O(x)σ ± (0) or O(x)µ ± (0), where O is any bosonic operator formed out of normal-ordered products of fermion operators. The function f solves the following Riemann-Hilbert problem:
## (s24) Other local f ields
(p24.0) It is worth noting that points 1, 2 and 4 are in fact also valid for fields that are local with respect to ψ andψ. The analytic structure, point 3, for such fields, is much simpler: the finitetemperature form factors are entire functions of all rapidities. In fact, the finite-temperature form factors of ψ andψ themselves are exactly equal to their zero-temperature form factors, and for other fields, a phenomenon of mixing occurs, as described in [2] and as can be calculated using the techniques of Section 6.
## (s26) Results for twisted and untwisted finite-temperature form factors
(p26.0) Again, we repeat here the results of [2], and generalise them to the twisted case. Note that the method of computing one-particle finite-temperature form factors by solving the Riemann-Hilbert problem with this asymptotic is very similar to the method used by Fonseca and Zamolodchikov [21] for calculating form factors on the circle.

(p26.1) For the order and disorder operators, σ ± and µ ± the solutions to the Riemann-Hilbert problems above are completely fixed (up to a normalization) by the asymptotic ∼ O(1) at θ → ±∞, imposed by the fact that they are primary fields of spin 0. For the one-particle finite-temperature form factor of the disorder operator with a branch cut on its right, the solution is
## (s27) Form factors on the circle from finite-temperature form factors
(p27.0) As explained in Subsection 4.4, there is a relation between finite-temperature form factors and form factors in the quantization on the circle. In the present case of the Majorana theory, this relation was written explicitly in [2], and was proven by independent means. A slight extension to the twisted case gives it as follows:

(p27.1) where there are k positive charges and l negative charges in the indices of ω F O , and where α n are defined in (7.6). Here, s is the spin of O. This formula is valid for any excited states in the sector above |vac 1 2 +ω (see the discussion around (3.9)). That is, if ω = 0, it is valid for excited states in the NS vacuum, hence with n i ,ñ i ∈ Z + 1 2 . For ω = 1 2 , it is valid for excited states in the R vacuum, hence with n i ,ñ i ∈ Z.

(p27.2) When O is a twist field, its associated branch cut changes the sector of the bra or the ket, hence formula (7.18) can then be applied only if one of the bra or the ket is the vacuum, and if the branch cut associated to the twist field is chosen so that this vacuum is in the opposite sector (in order to keep the excited states in the same sector). If ω = 0, the vacuum will then be in the R sector, and if ω = 1 2 , it will be in the N S sector. For a branch cut to the right, it is the bra that must be chosen as this vacuum, whereas for a branch cut to the left, it is the ket.
## (s28) Perspectives
(p28.0) We have developed partly the concept of finite-temperature form factor in the general context of factorised scattering theory, and we completed the program in the case of the Majorana theory. The most important next step is, of course, to complete this program in models with non-trivial scattering. We believe that ideas concerning the relation between finite-temperature form factors and matrix elements in the quantization on the circle will lead to restrictive conditions that will greatly help fully fix finite-temperature form factors in interacting models. Also, the operator implementing the generalisation of CFT's "mapping to the cylinder" may be useful, and this method is not far from the explicit construction of "boundary-creating operator" in integrable boundary QFT. The generalisation to interacting models is a very important step, and will open the way to results about large-distance and large-time behaviours of correlation functions in interacting, integrable models. Another interesting avenue is to generalise the program to the free Dirac theory; this should not pose any difficulties, and will clarify the structure of finite-temperature form factors of more general twist fields (two-point functions at finite-temperature were already studied in [49]). Then, it would be interesting to understand the structure for descendants of twist fields in such free fermionic models, perhaps using the operator Ω defined in (6.7) that provides a "mapping to the cylinder".
