# Tissue Modeling and Analyzing with Finite Element Method: A Review for Cranium Brain Imaging

CorpusID: 14523345 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c98ae71f17498f559dca45408eb81ef3cb49fe07](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c98ae71f17498f559dca45408eb81ef3cb49fe07)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Introduction
(p1.0) The creation of digital copies of humans is an innovation in anatomy education. These 3D meshes create a new alternative for students and researchers. It also allows the remote access and the manipulation of the pieces without manual consuming. The 3D visualization of the human skull represents an advance in the interpretation of images, because it makes possible the volumetric analysis of the anatomical structures and it evidences more clarity in its space configurations and its relations with other organs [1]. Indeed, research is focusing more and more on the acquisition of models and simulation parameters from real people rather than procedurally simulating their appearance and movements [2].
## (s4) The Basic
(p4.0) Steps of the Finite Element Method. The solving steps for the strains of cranial cavity with the ICP changes are shown in Figure 1. The specific numerical solution process is [8] (1) identifying the discretized cranial cavity,
## (s9) The Geometric Model.
(p9.0) Reconstructions of the finite element model of cranial cavity are mostly through the multi-CT scanning technology at home and abroad [29,30], which is simple and of high precision. However, the object being scanned is only a single individual. It is difficult to scan multiple images of individual unity for the universal data. Based on the average measured data of human skull of 104 Chinese people from 18 to 76 years of age, including 67 male and 37 female [31], the three-dimensional model of cranial cavity is directly drawn in the Ansys program. This paper studied importantly the deformation of cranial cavity, including brain tissue, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain blood flow with the ICP changes. So the model of cranial cavity was properly simplified: only the cavity in which the brain lies, that is, a closed cavity, is made up of the parietal bone, occipital, frontal, and temporal bones, and a layer of dura mater. For the approximate symmetry of person's head, the 1/2 cranial cavity model is built in this paper (Figure 9).

(p9.1) In Figure 9, the thickness of parietal, frontal, occipital, and temporal bones, as well as dura mater, is, respectively, 5.3560 mm, 6.5558 mm, 7.5286 mm, 2 mm, and 0.4 mm [32,33]. From outside to inside each layer in turn, the thickness of external compact bone and the Diploe and internal compact bones is about 3 mm, 1.8 mm, and 1 mm. Due to International Journal of Biomedical Imaging  the smoothness, the parietal bone is regarded as the main measured position. By the Extrude command, in Figure 10 the volume can be formed. After bonding the border among the frontal, parietal, occipital, and temporal bones and the dura mater with the glue command, the model of cranial cavity is shown in Figure 11.
