# An overview of sustainable business models for innovation in Swedish agri-food production

CorpusID: 158128117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99ceda7cbb7c07734b47015ca4ed1bedfceafd88](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99ceda7cbb7c07734b47015ca4ed1bedfceafd88)

Fields: Business, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s6) A combined SOI and SBM archetypes framework
(p6.0) In this article, we combine the framework by Adams et al. (2016) focusing on sustainability-oriented innovations (SOI) with that of Bocken et al.'s (2014) eight different SBM archetypes (see Table 3).

(p6.1) The idea behind combining these two frameworks is to categorize the business model innovations and study the organizational change (the orientation of the sustainability innovation practices and processes) taken by companies in the agri-food sector of Sweden.
## (s13) The telephone survey
(p13.0) Further, 31% (64/204: Table 4) of the food producers match to more than one of the eight SBM archetypes. At the high end, four companies match to six archetypes, and 12 companies match to five archetypes. This is consistent with the research that companies may follow multiple business models (e.g. Casadesus-Masanell and Tarziján 2012; Aspara et al. 2013). Table 5 shows the distribution match of the SBM archetypes by companies. The total number of companies SBMS are 258 rather than 204 because various companies use more than one SBM archetype, a phenomenon that has been noted in the literature (Bocken et al. 2014).

(p13.1) The archetype 'Maximize material and energy efficiency' is one of the two mostly matched (57) of the eight SBM archetypes (Table 5). This is not surprising since the agrifood sector in Sweden has been under pressure for several decades. The focus has been to survive and to be as effective as possible with given resources has been of great importance.

(p13.2) To 'Adopt a stewardship role' was matched by 50 of the companies as a SBM archetype (Table 5). This finding is consistent with stewardship theory where a commitment to all stakeholders, rather than simply to self-interest, is an owner/ manager priority (Harvey 2001;Bocken et al. 2013). Stewardship is a fundamental ethic among agri-food producers.

(p13.3) The archetype 'Re-purpose the business for society/environment' is one of the two least matched of the eight SBM archetypes together with the archetype 'Encourage sufficiency'. Both these archetypes focus on collaboration with society to a larger extent and such a collaboration might take time from a survival focus in the companies.

(p13.4) The finding that all eight archetypes are represented, is interesting when it points to the heterogeneity of the agricultural firms. This seems not to be the case in other industries. For instance in a review by Klewitz and Hansen (2014) they show that traditional SME´s is a homogenous group when it comes to SBM. Table 6 is an analysis of the companies' SBM archetypes grouped by company size in terms of annual turnover.

(p13.5) Most companies have no primary SBM. This is true, regardless of company size in terms of annual turnover or in terms of product type (whether derived from livestock or crops). Most companies select 'Maximise material and energy sufficiency' as the SBM archetype that most closely matches their SBM (96 % = (96 + 76 + 24)/204): Table 6). The second most common business model is 'adopt a stewardship role' (41 % = (76 + 8)/204). As previously mentioned companies may follow multiple business models (e.g. Casadesus-Masanell and Tarziján 2012; Aspara et al. 2013) and that is also in line with the results of this survey. Table 7 tabulates the companies' success measurements in terms of financial success, social benefit or a combination of the two.

(p13.6) Most of the companies, 81% (165/204: Table 6), measure success primarily in financial terms but also take into account social and environment terms secondarily. An additional 9% (18/204: Table 6) prioritize social and environmental benefits. Only 10% (21/ 204: Table 6) measure success solely in financial terms.

(p13.7) Sustainability is focused more and more in society and the agri-sector has historically worked to a large extent with the future in mind. The inherited tradition of preserving land for future generations and the caring for animal welfare, etc. in Sweden makes this result seem relevant and not surprising.
## (s17) companies (9%)
(p17.0) Company A s main business is to produce and sell milk to a large milk distributor higher up in the value chain. There are 190 milk cows at the farm. The company is owned by two brothers with their families. Beside the two owners, there are six employees at the company. The company has historically experienced few possibilities to develop and change the business model. However, during the last decade, the owners/managers have prioritized their competence building through several leadership and management courses, and have now formulated a new vision for the company: "Our vision is to be a well-functioning farm for animals and humans, a modern machine station with the customer in focus. As a company, we want to build a good reputation in our district".

(p17.1) They have diversified their business model and activities in several directions; the have started a mechanical workshop and a custom hire service. In the workshop, farming companies and other companies can buy services as maintenance and repair of vehicles and farming machinery. In the custom hire service, the customer can buy services as harvesting and for applying fertilizer and pesticides, etc. Since last year, the company has diversified even more. The company has started to sell a minor part of their milk production directly to end consumers in their farm shop and in some of the larger groceries in the neighbouring city.

(p17.2) The owners have developed the sustainability focus of the company step by step (in accordance with research regarding sustainability-oriented innovation, Adams et al. 2016). They started their journey towards sustainability according to the archetypé maximise material and energy efficiency' and it is still the dominating archetype. It also means that from a sustainability oriented innovation-perspective, they are focusing operational optimization (doing more with less).

(p17.3) However, the development of their sustainable business model is ongoing. A minor part of their business model fits the archetype 'deliver functionality, rather than owner-ship´. Further, the managers have continuously developed their stewardship role over the last years (which could be seen in the vision of the company). The company's sustainable business model is moving towards Organizational transformation (doing good by doing new things).

(p17.4) Company B is a dairy cooperative company owned by 28 small and medium-sized milk farms (between 30 and 500 milk cows on each firm). The dairy's main business is production and selling of high quality cheese.

(p17.5) The dairy was founded 1930, when milk prices were low and it was hard for the producers to get paid well-enough. The farmers in one neighbourhood developed a new business model before the concept even consisted. They joined together in a cooperative association and started their own dairy, which produced and sold milk, cheese and other dairy products. The vicinity was important for the founders of the dairy and it is still important today. All the milk are produced on farms which are situated within 25 min travel time from the dairy.

(p17.6) Most of the milk and cheese are sold in groceries in southern Sweden. A minor part is sold directly to end consumers at the dairy. The quality of their products, based on sustainability and vicinity, has made their brand well-known. Last year the dairy had over 100 busloads with visitors, exceeding 23 000 visitors. The dairy has recently decided to use biofuel for heating of the premises. The surplus heat will be used for heating of the neighbouring municipality senior housing.

(p17.7) Since the dairy products create larger value for end customers than the products sold by large international processing companies, the dairy company can sell their products at higher prices. Consequently, the farms owning the dairy have larger revenues than other farms which deliver to the large international processing companies.

(p17.8) The business model of the company as such has not changed much since the company was founded, but the development of society has renewed it. From the start, the business model was based on economic necessity but also on the founding farmers' stewardship perspective. A business that was regarded as out of date has now become both modern and sustainable. One of the owners says:
## (s18) Integration of results from both the survey and the case studies within the combined framework of sustainability-oriented innovations (SOI) and different SBM archetypes
(p18.0) In this section we will integrate the findings from both the survey and the case studies within the combined framework of sustainability-oriented innovations (SOI) (Adams et al. 2016) and the eight different SBM archetypes (Bocken et al. 2014). Table 8 show the orientation of the sustainability innovation practices and processes taken by companies in the agri-food sector of Sweden.
