# Risk, Liability, and Economic Issues with Long-Term CO 2 Storage-A Review

CorpusID: 156263858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01293f2c73e6de674401963a6f0b1cd575771e6d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01293f2c73e6de674401963a6f0b1cd575771e6d)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science, Law

## (s8) Rubinstein and Mahani
(p8.0) According to the International Energy Agency Greenhouse Gas R&D Programme (IEAGHG) (2013) report on induced seismicity, there had not been any significant seismic events directly tied to injections of CO 2 , but the volumes of CO 2 injected thus far are only a fraction of that being considered for future projects . At the Illinois Basin-Decatur Project, 1 million metric tons (Mt) of CO 2 was injected using 1 injection well over a period of 3 years, and no felt seismicity was observed (Kaven et al. 2015). Injecting this small amount of a volume of CO 2 over this long period allowed injection pressures to be far below reservoir fracture pressure. As such, injection of CO 2 probably did not create any new fractures, and scientists observed only some microseismicity in the same zones where natural (background) seismicity was already occurring ). This example illustrates some of the difficulties in differentiating what proportion of fluctuations in seismic activity could be induced from seismicity, which is naturally occurring (Bauer et al. 2016;Smith and Jaques 2016). In addition, it could be very difficult to predict the risk of induced seismicity for commercial-scale GCS projects based on evidence from relatively small-scale projects .
## (s10) LIABILITY ISSUES
(p10.0) In the United States, an activity that is considered abnormally dangerous could be subject to strict liability. To determine whether an activity is abnormally dangerous, one or more of the following questions will need to be considered (Cypser and Davis 1998; JGC Corporation 2013):

(p10.1) 1. Is there a high degree of risk of some harm to people, land, or the property of others? 2. What is the likelihood that such harm will exceed acceptable thresholds? 3. Can taking reasonable measures still not eliminate the risk? 4. To what extent is the activity not common? 5. To what degree is the activity inappropriate, given the location where it is carried out? 6. To what extent is the value of the activity to the public outweighed by its hazardous nature?
