# HTRF: A Technology Tailored for Drug Discovery -A Review of Theoreti- cal Aspects and Recent Applications

CorpusID: 159469 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5afe5674634cdefd5677811f9034774884e820b6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5afe5674634cdefd5677811f9034774884e820b6)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Utilizing rare-earth lanthanides with long emission halflives as donor fluorophores, HTRF technology combines standard FRET with the time resolved measurement (TR) of fluorescence [1,2]. This powerful combination provides significant benefits to drug discovery researchers in high throughput screening (HTS), including assay flexibility, reliability, increased assay sensitivity, higher throughput, and fewer false positive/false negative results. These features, allied with automated liquid handling and robust detection instrumentation, allow for a broad range of applications in HTS.
## (s4) Serine/Threonine Kinase Assays
(p4.0) Protein kinases are key elements in intracellular signaling pathways that control many physiological processes and the activities of protein kinases are altered in a number of human diseases such as cancer and autoimmune disorders [31][32][33]. The rapidly growing interest in kinases as potential targets for therapeutic intervention has prompted the development of many kinase assay technologies. HTRF-based tools for HTS could apply to all kinases, with specific applications for Tyrosine (Tyr) and Serine/Threonine (Ser/Thr) kinases. This kinase screening platform offers the ability to use a single technology for both universal and specific kinase assays, saving valuable development time and cost (Fig. 7). A comprehensive review summarized the recent literatures and meeting reports on HTRF kinase assay [34].

(p4.1) HTRF KinEASE is a universal and sensitive assay allowing for profiling and HTS of a large range of Ser/Thr a b Fig. (6). The comparison of "sandwich" assay and competition assay. a. "Sandwich" assay. HTRF signals are generated through the energy transfer from donor to acceptor that are labeled on the antibodies recognizing the target at different regions. b. Competition assay. Targets generated through biological events compete binding activity to the donor labeled antibody with the target labeled with acceptor so that the decrease of the HTRF signals are measured.

(p4.2) kinases. This platform consists of three different biotinylated substrates and a single proprietary monoclonal anti-phospho antibody labeled with Eu 3+ cryptate recognizing only the phosphorylated substrates, and streptavidin-XL665. Each peptide has a common C-terminal phospho-serine epitope with three different N-terminal sequences allowing access to a large range of kinases. FRET signals are generated once the monoclonal antibody binds to the phosphorylated serine in the biotinylated peptide that in turn is bound to streptavidin-XL665. It is highly likely that many more kinases will phosphorylate one or more of the three peptides. Using this universal kinase activity detection tool and other more specific substrates, numerous assay systems have been successfully built to monitor protein kinase activity with purified enzymes, as well as with cellular lysates and membrane preparations, including COT [35], AKT [36], and Rock II [37]. Recently a cellular Ser/Thr-kinase platform was developed by co-expression of targeted kinases with a generic peptide substrates followed by quantification of phosphorylation on intracellular substrate by HTRF [38]. Although the development of this platform is still in the early stage, the proof-of principle assays were shown that activity of cellular AKT, B-RAF and CamK2 could be detected and IC50 could be measured [38]. To date, this KinEASE screening platform has been validated on over 160 kinases.
## (s8) Cell Surface Protein Interaction
(p8.0) It is well established that membrane receptors may dimerize to regulate the activity of each member of the dimer or to work cooperatively to bind ligand on one receptor while mediating intracellular signaling through the other. In 2004, the Pin lab pioneered the work demonstrating the application of HTRF in studying dimerization of glutamate and -aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors [51]. In this study, anti-tag (Flag, HA, and 6-His) antibodies labeled with donor Eu cryptate and acceptor AlexaFluor 647 or XL665 were used to generate fluorescent signals. The mechanism of this dimerization was further pursued by HTRF technology [29]. Recently, the application of HTRF on GPCR oligomerization and receptor-ligand binding was further expanded with SNAP-Tag technology as mentioned above [30] (and data not shown). The Pin lab later conducted a series of studies using HTRF to demonstrate the dimerization of other GPCRs, such as metabotropic glutamate-like receptors (mGluR) [28,52], vasopressin and oxytocin receptors [53]. Ciruela et al. developed an HTRF assay to measure the heterodimerization of adenosine A 1 receptors (A 1 Rs) and A 2 A receptors (A 2 ARs), revealing a more precise modulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission by adenosine [26]. The human hemagglutinin (HA)-A 2 AR and Flag-A 1 R constructs were generated and transiently transfected into HEK cells. The level of heterodimerization of the receptors was reflected through the FRET generated when Eu-labeled anti-Flag antibody and XL665-labeled anti-HA antibody were incubated with these transfected cells [26].

(p8.1) In addition to utilizing HTRF to study GPCR dimerization such as the dimerization of orphan GPR50 receptor with MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors [54], many groups have used HTRF technology to study higher order oligomer formation of the Dopamine D2 receptor [55], oligomerization of human histamine H4 receptor [56], and to determine the function of C-terminal ends of mGluR1 in subunit association [57]. It has also been used to study chemokine receptors (reviewed by Wang and Norcross [58]) and the interaction of surface molecules, such as Trail receptor 4 and OX40 [59], CD80 and CD28 [60], and adhesive molecule Chemokine (C-X3-C motif) ligand 1 (CX3CL1) aggregation [61]. Moreover, the protein -peptide interaction was demonstrated with HTRF technology in cell surface calreticulin (CRT) and Shared Epitope (SE) from HLA-DR chain [62].
## (s10) Protein/DNA Binding Assay
(p10.0) HTRF technology has also been useful in monitoring the interaction of protein/DNA, such as transcription factors binding with their regulatory elements on DNA or RNA. The MutS protein is part of the dam-directed MutHLS mismatch repair pathway in Escherichia coli. By using directly labeled MutS with europium cryptate, Lopez-Crapez et al. have developed an HTRF assay to measure interactions between MutS and mismatched DNA or DNA containing the most common lesion of the anticancer drug cisplatin [66].
## (s11) Biomarker Detection
(p11.0) Monitoring the production of biomarkers is a useful tool for examining aberrant cell signaling processes often associated with diseases in therapeutic areas such as inflammation, metabolism and neuroscience. Understanding the relationship between the production of these downstream signaling products and the upstream effectors of signaling cascades is not only important for mapping the signaling pathways, but is also useful in identifying specific agents of therapeutic value for a particular disease state.

(p11.1) In this light, HTRF has proven a viable technology for constructing assays that can be used to examine the in-vivo production of biomarkers measured in either whole cells or cell supernatants, as well as serve as a platform for monitoring the in-vitro production of biomarkers via the enzymatic modifications of proteins. Such assays typically involve a sandwich or competition format.

(p11.2) Cell based assays employing HTRF to the direct measurement of protein biomarkers have allowed researchers to gain a better understanding of the biology behind signaling processes. Elucidation of signaling pathways and their regulatory mechanisms allows researchers to better identify targets for therapeutic intervention. By applying HTRF assays to directly measure IL-6 and IL-8 production by cells resulting from TNF stimulation, as well as stimulation by other immune stimuli, researchers were able to establish the essential functional role of a regulatory protein, called TMEM9B, in the production of these cytokines [67].

(p11.3) HTRF biomarker detection assays can also be used to monitor cellular responses to novel pharmacological substances and screen for potential therapeutic agents in many disease pathways. Two such biomarker detection assays include the measurement of insulin and cortisone. Insulin has been well established as a key regulator in glucose homeostasis. Deficiency of insulin leads to insulin-dependent (type 1) diabetes, whereas abnormal insulin secretion and resistance to insulin action is common in non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes. An HTRF assay for the measurement of insulin has been developed that can be used to quantify both secreted and intracellular insulin. Such an assay has clear utility for the investigation of novel anti-diabetic agents. Researchers used HTRF to measure the insulin response of cells treated with various amounts glucose as well as an agent of potential therapeutic value to ascertain its effectiveness at promoting insulin production [68]. Other recently published applications of HTRF in cell-based assays have highlighted its utility for monitoring cortisol production in cell cultures. This application was used to characterize and identify inhibitors of the enzyme 11beta-Hydroxysteroid Dehydrogenase Type 1 . Inhibition of this target is believed to have therapeutic value in the treatment of type 2 diabetes as well as in metabolic syndrome. Cell-based assays directly measuring cortisol production have been used to monitor the activity of 11 -HSD1 in screening for inhibitors of the cellular enzyme [69,70].
## (s13) CONCLUSION
(p13.0) HTRF is widely used in drug discovery and HTS. Even though this technology is extremely sensitive, versatile, and well adapted to automation for HTS, intrinsic limitations also exist, for example, quenching generated by external interactions with the intramolecular excitation process (electron transfer, FRET, and bleaching) and fluorescence of library compounds or biological proteins. It is our experience that the results obtained by using fluorescent techniques that do not use ratiometric measurement and/or time resolution should be carried out and validated with great care in order to avoid false positive or negative results.

(p13.1) Recently alternative methods were developed to measure the second messenger accumulation. However, classical HTRF applications on other cell signaling process such as phosphorylation, proteolysis, ubiquitination, and glycosylation, remain irreplaceable. The different photophysical properties of Terbium cryptate and its compatibility with not only red acceptors but also green acceptors open new doors to multiplexing with HTRF. Moreover, ligand-binding assays that are selective for cell-surface receptors run more efficiently with Terbium than Europium cryptates (unpublished data). Most recently, the introduction of Terbium cryptate and SNAP-Tag into the HTRF portfolio broadens HTRF applications, for instance, by allowing to study receptor dimerization, receptor mechanistics (internalization and dimerization), and by providing a non-radioactive alternative to ligand binding assays on whole, live cells [30].
