# sustainability Metallurgical Wastes Employed as Catalysts and Photocatalysts for Water Treatment: A Review

CorpusID: 159368718 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/91a2d22b03118c6f0fdfff44fa9010d4af6873c0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/91a2d22b03118c6f0fdfff44fa9010d4af6873c0)

Fields: Chemistry, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Slag is the solidified or fused residue of high-temperature industrial processes. The term includes the noncombustible fraction remaining from waste incineration [1][2][3][4] and solid biofuels [5,6]. Waste materials can also be combined and heat-treated to reproduce the useful properties of blast furnace slag [7] in a synthetic product. While there is a considerable body of literature focusing on management, recycling, and valorization of these products, the present work will limit itself to metallurgical slag which is produced during the extraction and refinement of metals from their ores. These slags are divided into nonferrous and ferrous slag, with the latter subdivided into blast surface slags, steel slags, and alloy steel slags. Current valorization strategies may differ significantly between the different categories and feasibility depends strongly on the specific physical and chemical characteristics of the product.
## (s5) Use of Copper Slag as a Photocatalyst
(p5.0) The original hypothesis for the use of copper slag (CS) as a photocatalyst was based on its high iron content, which would promote heterogeneous Fenton-like reactions. This hypothesis is now rejected. Huanosta-Guttiérez et al. studied the degradation of phenol using CS and H 2 O 2 , with and without UV irradiation. They reported up to 50% reduction in total organic carbon (TOC). During the process, toxicity peaks were observed as the result of the formation of intermediate degradation products. They concluded that the process can be optimized to obtain maximal biodegradability of the residual products, particularly in the presence of the UV source [49].

(p5.1) Solís-López et al. studied the use of a heterogeneous photo-Fenton process for the disinfection of water contaminated by Ascaris suum eggs, where hydroxyl radicals play the role of damaging cell membranes and disrupting the function of RNA during the cell cycle. They suggested that fayalite (Fe 2 SiO 4 ) was the main actor in the photocatalytic process and that the strongly negative charge of the CS promoted the efficient formation of ·OH radicals under solar irradiation at neutral pH. Under optimal conditions, a 90% decrease in the viability of the parasite eggs was observed [50].

(p5.2) Arzate-Salgado et al. compared copper slag with steel slag in the degradation of diclofenac under simulated solar radiation and in the presence of H 2 O 2 . While steel slag provided rather modest results, CS reduced the concentration of diclofenac to below the detectability limit of 0.1 mg L −1 in 90 min, with a starting concentration of 120 mg L −1 at neutral pH [51].

(p5.3) The slag used in these studies was obtained from a smelter in northern Mexico. The first step in the characterization of such material as a catalyst consisted of mechanical grinding and sieving, with the fraction passing through the 400-mesh used in the tests. Morphological characterization was performed using petrographic microscopy ( Figure 3) and SEM observation (Figure 4), with phase identification through EDX. XRF and XRD were used to analyze chemical composition and crystalline phases. Characterization of the specific surface area was performed by means of the Brunauer-Emmet-Teller isotherm by adsorption/desorption of N 2 . The microstructure of the raw copper slag consisted of the orthorhombic fayalite in the form of long needles separated by opaque zones which consisted of a glassy phase (Figure 3). Magnetite was present as small equiaxed particles. This result coincided with what was observed by XRD [50]. The morphology of the product after milling is shown in Figure 4. Here, the fayalite is seen as grey elongated zones, the amorphous phase is dark grey, and the magnetite is present as white equiaxial grains on the particle surface. This morphology can be explained by the normal cooling sequence of CS at intermediate cooling speed [80]. No significant porosity was found for the granular product, which had a specific surface area of 1 m 2 g −1 .  Fayalite is seen as grey elongated zones, the amorphous phase is dark grey, the magnetite is present as small white equiaxial grains.

(p5.4) Characterization of a slag for photocatalysis also requires the determination of semiconductor properties. The bandgap can be determined by analysis of the Tauc curve by the Kubelka-Munk equation using data obtained from UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy with wavelengths in the range of 200 to 800 nm [81,82]. Electrochemical characterization of the slag has been performed by means of the Mott-Shottky analysis using the techniques described by Ramírez-Ortega et al. [83]. The  Fayalite is seen as grey elongated zones, the amorphous phase is dark grey, the magnetite is present as small white equiaxial grains.

(p5.5) Characterization of a slag for photocatalysis also requires the determination of semiconductor properties. The bandgap can be determined by analysis of the Tauc curve by the Kubelka-Munk equation using data obtained from UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy with wavelengths in the range of 200 to 800 nm [81,82]. Electrochemical characterization of the slag has been performed by Fayalite is seen as grey elongated zones, the amorphous phase is dark grey, the magnetite is present as small white equiaxial grains. Characterization of a slag for photocatalysis also requires the determination of semiconductor properties. The bandgap can be determined by analysis of the Tauc curve by the Kubelka-Munk equation using data obtained from UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy with wavelengths in the range of 200 to 800 nm [81,82]. Electrochemical characterization of the slag has been performed by means of the Mott-Shottky analysis using the techniques described by Ramírez-Ortega et al. [83]. The band gap associated to CS was measured as 2.7 eV, which roughly confirms earlier results of 2.5 eV [50]. This value corresponds to literature data for fayalite, as determined from calculation [84] and experiment [85] and rejects earlier hypotheses that the photocatalytic activity was related to magnetite or other iron oxides. The Mott-Shottky analysis shows that CS is an n-type semiconductor, which means that it acts as a hole donor.

(p5.6) The band gap energy of fayalite indicates that CS is active as a photocatalyst under solar light. The amount of Fe leached from the slag into the solution was below the detectability limit (0.25 mg·L −1 Fe), showing that the process is heterogeneous photocatalysis and not provoked by leached ions. This combination of a favorable band gap value, inertness of the material in the reaction medium used, and low cost makes it an ideal candidate for the use in raceway reactors. The high efficiency in photo-Fenton processes using this photocatalyst can be explained by its nature as an n-type semiconductor (hole donor). The Fenton reaction is initiated by the splitting of the H 2 O 2 molecule into either ·OH + OH −1 , with the acceptation of an electron from the Fe-based catalyst, or ·OOH + H + , donating an electron to the catalyst. At the surface of an n-type semiconductor, excess holes can be captured, and two hydroxyl radicals can be generated instead of one. In the absence of H 2 O 2 , the degradation kinetics are slower but still significant as ·OH radicals are formed at the surface of the catalyst [49].
## (s6) Photocatalysis Based on Magnesium Slag
(p6.0) Zhang et al. produced a photocatalyst for the degradation of methyl orange dye. The slag used consisted principally of calcium silicate (Ca 2 SiO 4 ), wollastonite (CaSiO 3 ), and calcium magnesium aluminium oxide silicate (Ca 54 MgAl 2 Si 16 O 90 ), which was treated with Na 2 SiO 3 in aqueous medium followed by an ion-exchange process between Na + and NH 4 + . A composite material was then produced by aqueous impregnation with NiO or CuO. They observed that the nanocomposite obtained in this process was capable of degrading 93% of the dye in 100 min, as opposed to the pure metal oxides, where degradation levels slightly above 50% were measured, which the authors attributed to a synergic effect between oxides and substrate [86].

(p6.1) In a follow-up study, the authors varied the contents of NiO and CuO, showing that higher oxide contents improve the photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite [87]. In this study, UV-Vis diffuse reflectance studies were used to assess the photoelectric characteristics of the composite. They concluded that the oxide species delay electron-hole recombination and enhance the capability for producing the ·OH radicals. Whether the substrate or the oxides were the source of e − -h + pairs was not addressed.
## (s7) Photocatalysis Based on Silicomanganese Slag
(p7.0) Compared to the former three materials, silicomanganese slag is produced in much lower volumes. Two interesting catalyst applications have been developed for this waste product. Zhang et al. used thermoalkalic activation in the presence of carbon black, the latter to improve the electron transport in the product. Basic violet 5BN dye was successfully degraded by the resulting product [88].

(p7.1) In a second work, they developed an electrically conductive geopolymer composite by combining CaMoO 4 with ferromanganese slag. In a first step, the geopolymer was synthesized by alkaline hydrothermal treatment in the presence of carbon black. After curing and crushing, a multistep process was developed for the impregnation of this material with CaMoO 4 . The resulting material showed good electrical conductivity and a maximum photoluminescence in blue wavelengths, which makes it particularly attractive for its use under solar irradiation. They achieved a 99.6% degradation violet 5BN Sustainability 2019, 11, 2470 9 of 16 dye in 90 min. The composite catalyst showed a higher efficiency than pure CaMoO 4 and commercial catalysts [89].
## (s9) Hydrogen Production by Wastewater Treatment
(p9.0) Heterogeneous photocatalytic water treatment can become bifunctional if hydrogen is produced during the degradation of pollutants [58][59][60][61]. Hydrogen, as a fuel, has an energy content which is thrice as high as conventional fuels and does not produce CO 2 upon combustion. Water reduction or water splitting under solar radiation presents an option to minimize the carbon footprint of H 2 production. The pollutant acts a sacrificial agent which fulfils the role of a hole scavenger, preventing electron-hole recombination and promoting the water reduction into hydrogen [93], with the oxygen participating in the degradation of the organic molecules [94].

(p9.1) Zhang and Chai evaluated the use of blast furnace slag for the synthesis of a nanocatalyst by alkaline activation. They found that the activation process produced a mesoporous aggregate consisting mostly of calcium silicate hydrate and calcium aluminum hydrate. They reported the production of 52 mmol g −1 H 2 under simulated solar light and attribute the photocatalytic activity to the presence of iron and titanium oxide nanoparticles within the activated slag nanoparticles [95].

(p9.2) Zhang et al. used blast furnace slag which was activated under alkaline conditions and loaded this material with 15 and 5% CaWO 4 . They used a Na 2 SO 3 /Na 2 S mixture as sacrificial agent and a Xe lamp of 300 W to simulate solar irradiation. Activated slag and the activated slag loaded with CaWO 4 presented the same photoluminescence excitation band at 469 nm (violet-blue), with a lower intensity at 5% CaWO 4 , indicating that this compound inhibits the recombination of electron-hole pairs. They measured bandgap values of 3.92 eV and 3.73 eV for 1% and 5% CaWO 4 , respectively, and a maximum H 2 production of 50 mmol L −1 after 6 hours with the latter material [96].

(p9.3) The same research group also reports doping of the activated slag by CeO 2 nanoparticles at 1, 8, and 16% (wt) [97]. This shifts the band gap to between 1.8 and 2.28 eV, which allows photocatalysis in the visible spectrum. The material with 8% CeO 2 showed the highest hydrogen production at 68 mmol L −1 after 6 hours. They also report on a study where graphene 0.001, 0.01, and 0.02% (wt) was incorporated at the activated slag surface [98]. Using the same reaction conditions as mentioned before, they obtained a production of 1.9 mmol L −1 H 2 for the material with 0.02% graphene, as compared to 1.4 mmol L −1 H 2 without graphene. Further improvement of this catalyst was obtained by incorporation of ZnO [99].

(p9.4) Sahraei et al. [100] used Ni-impregnated titania-rich slag from an iron-titanium ore for the steam reformation of glycerol, which is a low-value waste from biodiesel production. This material consists mainly of complex metal oxides. The authors found that the resulting catalyst was more efficient in terms of hydrogen production and glycerol conversion than commercial catalysts and showed a superior long-time behavior and cyclability. Dega et al. [101] studied H 2 production from methane using the same catalyst, demonstrating a superior behavior with respect to existing commercial catalysts. They attribute this performance to the synergic effect of the complex Ni-Fe-Mg-Al oxides in the material. The slag-based catalyst is significantly less expensive than commercial alternatives.

(p9.5) The present authors have studied the production of hydrogen with copper slag as a photocatalyst, using glycerol and several alcohols (methanol, propanol, isoamyl alcohol) as a sacrificial agent under UV radiation (Hg lamp) and simulated sunlight (Xe lamp) [101]. For glycerol degradation, pH was varied from 2 to 12, slag doses from 0.4 to 2 g/L, and glycerol concentration from 0.06 to 1.74 (%v/v). For the other three alcohols, the slag dose was fixed at 1 g L −1 , pH at 6.5, and the initial concentration of alcohols was set at 0.125 M. Hydrogen production was monitored for 6 h. The reduction of total organic carbon during the processes was significant, but hydrogen production was low. The latter observation can be explained by the fact that the positively charged H + can be effectively adsorbed on the surface of the n-type semiconductor.
