# Multi-criteria decision making approaches for green supply chains: a review more multi-criteria models for real-life GSCs, especially with inclusion of uncer- tainty in parameters that are associated with GSCs

CorpusID: 157976762 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e390b556106da981d2e16487f44542f4077513c)

Fields: Business, Computer Science, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s1) Conceptual framework
(p1.0) We started this research by identifying recent and relevant literature reviews on the topic of green supply chain management, which refers to integrating environmental thinking in SCM (Srivastava 2007). This resulted in 10 review articles which were used as a basis for the development of the conceptual framework for this study. First of all, Dekker et al. (2012) discussed issues related to green logistics, and revealed Operations Research contributions to supply chains with environmental considerations. Seuring (2012) and Brandenburg et al. (2014) focused on forward supply chains and reviewed modelling approaches used for SCs with sustainability considerations. Seuring and Müller (2008) reviewed literature on forward sustainable supply chain management. Srivastava (2007) presented a state of the art literature review on green supply chain management with a focus on reverse logistics, whereas Carter and Rogers (2008) and Ashby et al. (2012) reviewed and discussed literature on supply chain management within the context of sustainability. Three review articles focused on perishable products. Perishability is an important source of inefficiency because it contributes to production of waste. Food production chains are characteristic example of supply chains where perishability and changing product quality is evident. Akkerman et al. (2010) reviewed quantitative approaches used for distribution management of food products and focus on quality, safety and sustainability; Shukla and Jharkharia (2013) reviewed literature in agri-fresh produce SCs and discussed operational issues causing postharvest wastage; and Soysal et al. (2012) reviewed quantitative models used for sustainable food logistics management.

(p1.1) Analysing the key words and frameworks used in the ten reviews and mapping these on the use of MCDM approaches in GSCs, we developed a conceptual framework for the literature analysis. This framework identifies which economic and environmental performance indicators are used to account for sustainability, categorise decision problems in SCs, and outline the impact of specific product characteristics on the decision problems and indicators (Fig. 1). These characteristics are further explored as they should be included in MCDM models developed for GSCs. The proposed framework is used to identify relevant articles and conduct the literature review.
## (s2) Eco-efficiency indicators in supply chains
(p2.0) During the production of final products from raw materials, and the delivery of products to final customers, supply chains inevitably harm the environment (Tang and Zhou 2012). In Supply Chain Management with environmental concerns, the main business objectives are cost reduction, responsiveness improvement, and avoidance of permanent environmental damage (Soysal et al. 2012). In order to quantify the economic and environmental impact of supply chain activities and to improve environmental and economic performance, a set of indicators for ecoefficiency must be selected and considered to support decision making at SC level. Apart from commonly used indicators for economic performance of supply chains, such as total costs or profit, the analysis of the 10 review papers shows that important indicators to account for eco-efficiency are greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy consumption and water consumption (Dekker et al. 2012;Seuring 2012;Soysal et al. 2012).

(p2.1) Each supply chain is unique in its characteristics. Products are characterised by quality, fluctuations in demand and prices, seasonality, and perishability (Akkerman et al. 2010;Quariguasi Frota Neto et al. 2009;van der Vorst et al. 2009). These factors are associated with uncertainty. For instance, in Food Supply Chains (FSCs) these various sources of uncertainty lead to production of substantial amount of losses (Shukla and Jharkharia 2013). Perishability and continuous quality change of products over time is not exclusively associated with food products, but holds for other products as well, e.g. other fast moving consumer goods. Quality change over time is also associated with uncertainty because the change in quality is usually not precisely known as it depends on environmental conditions. We conclude that product quality, uncertainty, and perishability should be taken into account when designing eco-efficient GSCs.
## (s3) Decision problems in supply chain management
(p3.0) Research has been focusing on improving the environmental performance of SCs (Brandenburg et al. 2014). To categorise decision problems in the conceptual framework we adapt the classification proposed by Shukla and Jharkharia (2013), and distinguish between three decision problems that have an impact on ecoefficiency in GSCs: production planning, distribution planning, and inventory management.

(p3.1) Production planning commonly refers to decisions on how the production is organised, how, when, and how many products are produced, and when the products become available, to minimise operational costs of production and simultaneously use available resources and capacities efficiently. Within production planning two aspects play an important role (Dekker et al. 2012). The first aspect is the production process and the way the product is produced, i.e. what resources are used to make the product and what is the environmental impact related to production. Associated decisions include e.g. which raw materials and technology to use at which location to create the right number of finished products on time to satisfy the customer's demand. These decisions have an impact on eco-efficiency as they determine the amounts of (raw) material, energy, water, and fuel use, as well as the total amount of waste produced. The second relevant aspect with respect to production planning is whether a product's value can be (partly) recovered after its use. This issue is relevant also for FSCs, as products that cannot be sold (due to quality requirements) and are considered as post-harvest losses often still possess valuable nutrients. If products (or their components) can be processed and reused, it might improve ecoefficiency by reducing the total amount of waste and reducing the need for using other raw materials.
## (s9) Solution approaches
(p9.0) It is observed that the use of MADM approaches to balance conflicting criteria in eco-efficient SCs is well represented. Numerous approaches such as AHP, TOPSIS, ANP, PROMETHEE, DEMATEL, VIKOR and their combinations are used. In 78 out of 188 studied articles (41%) one or more MADM approaches were applied. The most commonly used approach is AHP (32 publications), TOPSIS (23 publications), and ANP (16 publications). Most of the MADM approaches are applied to supplier selection or evaluation problems (44 publications, 56% of all MADM approaches), and technology or material selection (9 publications, 12%). Within the relevant publications, 129 articles (69%) use an MODM approach, mostly based on linear and non-linear programming problems. In some studies two or more approaches are presented. It is observed that MODM approaches most commonly focus on deriving a set of Pareto-efficient solutions (or Pareto-efficient frontier). Pareto efficient solutions are derived to aid a decision maker in selecting most preferable solution that balances environmental and economic objectives. The methods most frequently used are the e-constraint method (44 papers, 34% of all MODM approaches) and weighting methods (35 papers, 27%). Some problems are solved using heuristics (in case the problem is too difficult or takes too much computational effort to solve with standard optimisation approaches), such as genetic algorithms (14 papers, 11%), other evolutionary algorithms, multi-objective gravitational search algorithm, memetic algorithm, multi-objective heuristic based on variable neighbourhood search, or greedy heuristic. Additionally, in 19 publications (10%) MADM and MODM approaches are combined to arrive at a final solution. In these articles AHP, ANP, and/or TOPSIS are used to obtain weights for multi-objective optimisation problems, and a single solution out of the efficient set is selected, e.g. in Validi et al. (2014a) an AHP constraint is introduced to include decision makers' consensus opinions for vehicles used for distribution, and TOPSIS approach is used to evaluate results generated by (three genetic algorithm-based) optimizers to highlight the best candidate to a decision maker.

(p9.1) Among publications assigned to MODM approaches, we included Bouchery et al. (2012) which studies the SOQ model and analyses the efficient frontier analytically. The authors also develop an interactive procedure to find a balance between the considered objectives. Five publications concerned with supply chain network equilibrium problems (Cruz 2013;Cruz and Matsypura 2009;Nagurney et al. 2007) are also assigned to MODM approaches. The authors model the behaviours of multiple decision makers in the supply chain and derive the equilibrium conditions and optimality conditions for all actors, with the variables such as product flows, prices, or levels of social responsibility activities.
## (s11) Discussion and conclusions
(p11.0) As observed by Dekker et al. (2012), environmental performance can often be improved substantially at a marginal expense of economic performance, and MCDM approaches can be very useful within this context. To the best of our knowledge, no reviews have specifically focused on MCDM approaches in GSCs and related production, distribution, and inventory problems. The aim of this paper was to review studies and to identify research opportunities in this field. While MCDM approaches are important to identify solutions balancing environmental and economic concerns, there are other approaches that can be used to take environmental issues into account, e.g. financial evaluation of environmental criteria, for instance carbon tax as presented in Chaabane et al. (2008), or using economic objective and environmental constraints (or vice versa). In this manuscript, however, we focused on papers that as a starting point apply MCDM approaches to balance (conflicting) criteria of economic and environmental performance.

(p11.1) We found that MCDM approaches to support production, distribution and inventory decisions in GSCs gain an increasing interest in recent years. However, using MCDM approaches to design green supply chains is currently absent in many Operations Management and Supply Chain Management journals, which shows a gap in literature. Most of the studied publications focus on production and distribution problems. There are not many MCDM studies focusing on inventory management. The reason may be that inventory management decisions do not heavily influence the environmental impact. Storage of food products, however, often requires temperature controlled conditions that are associated with energy consumption. Nonetheless, we did not find any publications on inventory management for food products, which shows a gap in literature. In fact, multicriteria approaches in green food supply chains are especially scarce, despite the perishability of the products that often results in trade-offs between quality decay and costs. It is also surprising that no attention has been given to the closed loop principles in publications concerned with perishable products, as we are aware of technologies that can process agri-food waste into raw materials used in the same supply chain, as presented in e.g. Zisopoulos et al. (2015).
