# Epigenetic treatment of solid tumours: a review of clinical trials

CorpusID: 15757866 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f3273c0df09c42f3bbade5c1be3801888fd6b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e4f3273c0df09c42f3bbade5c1be3801888fd6b)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Pharmacological aspects
(p1.0) An effective treatment, based on a sound scientific rationale, requires the identification of the relevant target(s) and the demonstration that the target(s) can be inhibited without excessive toxicity, and that the duration of this effect is sufficient to interfere with cell growth.

(p1.1) In the case of epigenetic treatment, it is necessary to prove that one of the different mechanisms that finely regulate gene expression (see above) is altered. Even if this mechanism is well established for many molecules, for some compounds such as CI-994 (N-acetyl-dinaline), an inhibitor of class I HDACs, the actual relevance of an epigenetic mode of action remains uncertain [27,48,49].

(p1.2) The list of epigenetic drugs is becoming longer every day and it also includes "old" drugs: Hydralazine, for example, has long been used as an anti-hypertensive agent, but it has recently been recognised as a demethylating agent [50,51].

(p1.3) An effective treatment, based on a sound scientific rationale, requires the identification of the relevant target(s) and the demonstration that the target(s) can be inhibited without excessive toxicity, and that the duration of this effect is sufficient to interfere with cell growth.

(p1.4) In the case of epigenetic treatment, it is necessary to prove that one of the different mechanisms that finely regulate gene expression (see above) is altered. Even if this mechanism is well established for many molecules, for some compounds such as CI-994 (N-acetyl-dinaline), an inhibitor of class I HDACs, the actual relevance of an epigenetic mode of action remains uncertain [27,48,49].

(p1.5) The list of epigenetic drugs is becoming longer every day and it also includes "old" drugs: Hydralazine, for example, has long been used as an anti-hypertensive agent, but it has recently been recognised as a demethylating agent [50,51].
## (s6) 5-aza-cytidine
(p6.0) Decitabine Hydralazine         Toxicity: somnolence, confusion, neutropenia VPA levels correlate with acetylation in PBMC Plasma VPA higher than in vitro effective concentrations [44] References are included at the end of the text A.I. aromatase inhibitor, This also happens for HDAC inhibitors that include old molecules (such as valproic acid (VPA) [52] and a dozen compounds that have been recently synthesised [53].

(p6.1) Decitabine Hydralazine         Toxicity: somnolence, confusion, neutropenia VPA levels correlate with acetylation in PBMC Plasma VPA higher than in vitro effective concentrations [44] References are included at the end of the text A.I. aromatase inhibitor, This also happens for HDAC inhibitors that include old molecules (such as valproic acid (VPA) [52] and a dozen compounds that have been recently synthesised [53].
## (s8) Pharmacokinetics
(p8.0) To obtain an authentic effect on epigenetic mechanisms, the choice of the dose and schedule of administration is crucial since, especially for demethylating agents, if the drug concentration is too high this may result in cell toxicity or in a "traditional" antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, when a combination is used, the epigenetic effect must persist during chemotherapy (and possibly also later) in order to obtain an adequate synergism. This concept is guiding recent studies on new schedules of drug administration, as is the case for romidepsin [54]. Detailed data on pharmacokinetics have been published for several drugs (see Tables 1 and 2 for a complete list). The pharmacology of demethylating agents has been originally described in the past, and recent analyses mostly concern their interaction with other agents used in combination, such as temozolomide [55].

(p8.1) The pharmacology of HDAC inhibitors is particularly complex since many of these compounds act as enzyme inducers and may therefore modify their own kinetics when repeated dosing is used, or the pharmacology of associated drugs.
## (s9) Pharmacodynamic effect
(p9.0) The most interesting part of the evaluation of anticancer drugs, particularly when dealing with an innovative mechanism of action, is the study of their effect in tumour cells. Several technical problems arise when trying to quantify the effect of epigenetic drugs, especially in solid tumours: it is difficult to decide what to measure, when and where.

(p9.1) Concerning demethylating agents, the effect is generally measured by evaluating global DNA methylation, but some authors determined the methylation status of specific genes that had previously been selected [60][61][62] and the level of expression of foetal haemoglobin has also been used as a PD marker [63]. The subject of DNA methylation may also be related to drug resistance caused by the activity of O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) that has been described in cerebral tumours [3,64]. Decitabine has been used in an attempt to reduce methylation of genes involved in DNA repair in melanoma patients treated with temozolomide [55] but no such effect was evident even if decitabine caused hypomethylation of the HbF gene promoter.

(p9.2) The situation is more complex for HDAC inhibitors since not all drugs inhibit the different enzyme classes that are present in eukaryotic cells to the same extent. Some molecules have a wide inhibiting effect [65]; some are more restricted, and class-specific inhibitors such as CHR-3996, specific for class I HDACs enzymes [45], are being introduced in the clinics. Furthermore, the inhibition of de-acetylating enzymes may result in acetylation not only of histones, but also of other proteins, such as tubulin and Hsp90 that are involved in anticancer drug activity/resistance or in unrelated cellular pathways [66,67].

(p9.3) An additional difficulty derives from the definition of a cut-off value: some authors, for example, required a doubling of histone acetylation to consider a result as "relevant" [68] but this was not mandatory in many other studies.

(p9.4) The effect of HDAC inhibitors was generally determined in terms of enzymatic activity, but in some cases histone acetylation, particularly H3 and H4, has been used as marker of activity. A consistent increase of H3 acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) at effective doses has been observed with several agents, even if large inter-patient variations were often reported [69], and, more importantly, intratumoral H3 acetylation increase did not always correlate with response [70].

(p9.5) The effect of epigenetic treatment has also been evaluated by looking at specific genes in terms of expression [57,62] or re-activation [71]. It is becoming clear that many elements are involved, and that it may be difficult to identify a consistent pattern in gene activation-inactivation [72] to be used as a marker of epigenetic activity.

(p9.6) The gold standard of pharmacodynamic studies is the evaluation of the effects in tumours. The study of malignant cells is certainly more complicated in patients with solid tumours than in leukaemia since cancer cells are more difficult to obtain, especially at multiple time points. Some reports on the evaluation of epigenetic therapy in solid tumour tissues have been published and deserve special consideration. The number of evaluable samples was often low, but informative results were obtained and reported [41,73]. In ovarian cancer, it has been possible to evaluate the activity of demethylating agents on cells obtained from ascitic fluid and a gene-specific reduction of DNA methylation was evident [74]. Serial biopsies were obtained from patients with in head-and-neck carcinomas [70], glioblastoma [75], cervical and breast cancer and other tumours [57,58,66].

(p9.7) To overcome the difficulty in obtaining tumour samples, several groups have focused on the identification of surrogate markers. PBMC represent the most commonly used alternative. It is possible to measure HDAC activity and histone acetylation or DNA methylation. PBMC have also been used, in studies of drug combinations, to measure the target of non-epigenetic drug [76]. When PBMC and tumour biopsies were compared, however, results were not always consistent [66]. PBMC represent a "surrogate" tissue, and further improvement is required in order to make results obtained in these cells more representative of what is actually taking place in cancer.

(p9.8) A promising technique is the evaluation of circulating cell-free DNA [77] on which several specific analyses to identify epigenetic modifications can be performed [78]. The activity of demethylating agents has been evaluated by measuring the methylation status of circulating cellfree DNA in plasma in patients with refractory advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [62]. This is an interesting alternative with applications in many aspects of medicine, but further studies are required before it can be considered a reliable marker of epigenetic activity.

(p9.9) To obtain an adequate effect, sufficient drug concentrations must persist in the target cells for an adequate time. If there is a relationship between plasma kinetics and tissue effect (PK/PD relationship), drug dosing may be adapted on the basis of PK parameters that are easier to obtain. The permanence of a sufficient drug concentration or of a measurable effect has been evaluated in different tumour types and provides a rationale for the antitumour activity observed (see Tables 1 and 2 for details). Concerning the PK/PD relationship, data are difficult to interpret: no correspondence was found between plasma levels of valproate and histone acetylation in cervical cancer [79] so that PD assays may be required until we can devise more efficient PK models.

(p9.10) The most interesting part of the evaluation of anticancer drugs, particularly when dealing with an innovative mechanism of action, is the study of their effect in tumour cells. Several technical problems arise when trying to quantify the effect of epigenetic drugs, especially in solid tumours: it is difficult to decide what to measure, when and where.

(p9.11) Concerning demethylating agents, the effect is generally measured by evaluating global DNA methylation, but some authors determined the methylation status of specific genes that had previously been selected [60][61][62] and the level of expression of foetal haemoglobin has also been used as a PD marker [63]. The subject of DNA methylation may also be related to drug resistance caused by the activity of O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) that has been described in cerebral tumours [3,64]. Decitabine has been used in an attempt to reduce methylation of genes involved in DNA repair in melanoma patients treated with temozolomide [55] but no such effect was evident even if decitabine caused hypomethylation of the HbF gene promoter.

(p9.12) The situation is more complex for HDAC inhibitors since not all drugs inhibit the different enzyme classes that are present in eukaryotic cells to the same extent. Some molecules have a wide inhibiting effect [65]; some are more restricted, and class-specific inhibitors such as CHR-3996, specific for class I HDACs enzymes [45], are being introduced in the clinics. Furthermore, the inhibition of de-acetylating enzymes may result in acetylation not only of histones, but also of other proteins, such as tubulin and Hsp90 that are involved in anticancer drug activity/resistance or in unrelated cellular pathways [66,67].

(p9.13) An additional difficulty derives from the definition of a cut-off value: some authors, for example, required a doubling of histone acetylation to consider a result as "relevant" [68] but this was not mandatory in many other studies.

(p9.14) The effect of HDAC inhibitors was generally determined in terms of enzymatic activity, but in some cases histone acetylation, particularly H3 and H4, has been used as marker of activity. A consistent increase of H3 acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) at effective doses has been observed with several agents, even if large inter-patient variations were often reported [69], and, more importantly, intratumoral H3 acetylation increase did not always correlate with response [70].

(p9.15) The effect of epigenetic treatment has also been evaluated by looking at specific genes in terms of expression [57,62] or re-activation [71]. It is becoming clear that many elements are involved, and that it may be difficult to identify a consistent pattern in gene activation-inactivation [72] to be used as a marker of epigenetic activity.

(p9.16) The gold standard of pharmacodynamic studies is the evaluation of the effects in tumours. The study of malignant cells is certainly more complicated in patients with solid tumours than in leukaemia since cancer cells are more difficult to obtain, especially at multiple time points. Some reports on the evaluation of epigenetic therapy in solid tumour tissues have been published and deserve special consideration. The number of evaluable samples was often low, but informative results were obtained and reported [41,73]. In ovarian cancer, it has been possible to evaluate the activity of demethylating agents on cells obtained from ascitic fluid and a gene-specific reduction of DNA methylation was evident [74]. Serial biopsies were obtained from patients with in head-and-neck carcinomas [70], glioblastoma [75], cervical and breast cancer and other tumours [57,58,66].

(p9.17) To overcome the difficulty in obtaining tumour samples, several groups have focused on the identification of surrogate markers. PBMC represent the most commonly used alternative. It is possible to measure HDAC activity and histone acetylation or DNA methylation. PBMC have also been used, in studies of drug combinations, to measure the target of non-epigenetic drug [76]. When PBMC and tumour biopsies were compared, however, results were not always consistent [66]. PBMC represent a "surrogate" tissue, and further improvement is required in order to make results obtained in these cells more representative of what is actually taking place in cancer.

(p9.18) A promising technique is the evaluation of circulating cell-free DNA [77] on which several specific analyses to identify epigenetic modifications can be performed [78]. The activity of demethylating agents has been evaluated by measuring the methylation status of circulating cellfree DNA in plasma in patients with refractory advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [62]. This is an interesting alternative with applications in many aspects of medicine, but further studies are required before it can be considered a reliable marker of epigenetic activity.

(p9.19) To obtain an adequate effect, sufficient drug concentrations must persist in the target cells for an adequate time. If there is a relationship between plasma kinetics and tissue effect (PK/PD relationship), drug dosing may be adapted on the basis of PK parameters that are easier to obtain. The permanence of a sufficient drug concentration or of a measurable effect has been evaluated in different tumour types and provides a rationale for the antitumour activity observed (see Tables 1 and 2 for details). Concerning the PK/PD relationship, data are difficult to interpret: no correspondence was found between plasma levels of valproate and histone acetylation in cervical cancer [79] so that PD assays may be required until we can devise more efficient PK models.
## (s11) Toxicity of demethylating agents
(p11.0) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.

(p11.1) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.
## (s12) Toxicity of HDAC inhibitors
(p12.0) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p12.1) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].

(p12.2) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p12.3) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Epigenetic therapy is being more and more recognised as an effective and well-tolerated treatment of cancer. Data in leukaemias and myelodysplastic syndromes are now consistent, and the success obtained in cutaneous lymphomas represents a proof of principle that solid tumours may also respond. This is also supported by preclinical data; still clinical results fall short of expectations: several reasons may explain this discrepancy.

(p14.1) We are convinced that, similarly to what has been observed for tyrosine-kinase inhibitors in cancer [89], we need a better selection of tumours and of patients that may benefit from these treatments. It has already been stated that epigenetic drugs, and HDAC inhibitors in particular, "might be useful only in those tumours in which HDACs are directly involved in the pathogenesis" [27].

(p14.2) It is not surprising that clinical results have generally been disappointing: standard evaluation of anticancer activity, mostly based on tumour volume reduction, may not be an adequate index of activity for epigenetic treatment. Epigenetics is a complex mechanism of gene regulation: it will take time before we can exploit it at its best. We definitely need more appropriate tests to select potentially responding tumours, but we also need agents with demonstrated epigenetic activity and solid data in order to choose the most effective dose and schedule.
## (s26) Pharmacological aspects
(p26.0) An effective treatment, based on a sound scientific rationale, requires the identification of the relevant target(s) and the demonstration that the target(s) can be inhibited without excessive toxicity, and that the duration of this effect is sufficient to interfere with cell growth.

(p26.1) In the case of epigenetic treatment, it is necessary to prove that one of the different mechanisms that finely regulate gene expression (see above) is altered. Even if this mechanism is well established for many molecules, for some compounds such as CI-994 (N-acetyl-dinaline), an inhibitor of class I HDACs, the actual relevance of an epigenetic mode of action remains uncertain [27,48,49].

(p26.2) The list of epigenetic drugs is becoming longer every day and it also includes "old" drugs: Hydralazine, for example, has long been used as an anti-hypertensive agent, but it has recently been recognised as a demethylating agent [50,51].

(p26.3) An effective treatment, based on a sound scientific rationale, requires the identification of the relevant target(s) and the demonstration that the target(s) can be inhibited without excessive toxicity, and that the duration of this effect is sufficient to interfere with cell growth.

(p26.4) In the case of epigenetic treatment, it is necessary to prove that one of the different mechanisms that finely regulate gene expression (see above) is altered. Even if this mechanism is well established for many molecules, for some compounds such as CI-994 (N-acetyl-dinaline), an inhibitor of class I HDACs, the actual relevance of an epigenetic mode of action remains uncertain [27,48,49].

(p26.5) The list of epigenetic drugs is becoming longer every day and it also includes "old" drugs: Hydralazine, for example, has long been used as an anti-hypertensive agent, but it has recently been recognised as a demethylating agent [50,51].
## (s31) 5-aza-cytidine
(p31.0) Decitabine Hydralazine         Toxicity: somnolence, confusion, neutropenia VPA levels correlate with acetylation in PBMC Plasma VPA higher than in vitro effective concentrations [44] References are included at the end of the text A.I. aromatase inhibitor, This also happens for HDAC inhibitors that include old molecules (such as valproic acid (VPA) [52] and a dozen compounds that have been recently synthesised [53].

(p31.1) Decitabine Hydralazine         Toxicity: somnolence, confusion, neutropenia VPA levels correlate with acetylation in PBMC Plasma VPA higher than in vitro effective concentrations [44] References are included at the end of the text A.I. aromatase inhibitor, This also happens for HDAC inhibitors that include old molecules (such as valproic acid (VPA) [52] and a dozen compounds that have been recently synthesised [53].
## (s33) Pharmacokinetics
(p33.0) To obtain an authentic effect on epigenetic mechanisms, the choice of the dose and schedule of administration is crucial since, especially for demethylating agents, if the drug concentration is too high this may result in cell toxicity or in a "traditional" antiproliferative effect. Furthermore, when a combination is used, the epigenetic effect must persist during chemotherapy (and possibly also later) in order to obtain an adequate synergism. This concept is guiding recent studies on new schedules of drug administration, as is the case for romidepsin [54]. Detailed data on pharmacokinetics have been published for several drugs (see Tables 1 and 2 for a complete list). The pharmacology of demethylating agents has been originally described in the past, and recent analyses mostly concern their interaction with other agents used in combination, such as temozolomide [55].

(p33.1) The pharmacology of HDAC inhibitors is particularly complex since many of these compounds act as enzyme inducers and may therefore modify their own kinetics when repeated dosing is used, or the pharmacology of associated drugs.
## (s34) Pharmacodynamic effect
(p34.0) The most interesting part of the evaluation of anticancer drugs, particularly when dealing with an innovative mechanism of action, is the study of their effect in tumour cells. Several technical problems arise when trying to quantify the effect of epigenetic drugs, especially in solid tumours: it is difficult to decide what to measure, when and where.

(p34.1) Concerning demethylating agents, the effect is generally measured by evaluating global DNA methylation, but some authors determined the methylation status of specific genes that had previously been selected [60][61][62] and the level of expression of foetal haemoglobin has also been used as a PD marker [63]. The subject of DNA methylation may also be related to drug resistance caused by the activity of O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) that has been described in cerebral tumours [3,64]. Decitabine has been used in an attempt to reduce methylation of genes involved in DNA repair in melanoma patients treated with temozolomide [55] but no such effect was evident even if decitabine caused hypomethylation of the HbF gene promoter.

(p34.2) The situation is more complex for HDAC inhibitors since not all drugs inhibit the different enzyme classes that are present in eukaryotic cells to the same extent. Some molecules have a wide inhibiting effect [65]; some are more restricted, and class-specific inhibitors such as CHR-3996, specific for class I HDACs enzymes [45], are being introduced in the clinics. Furthermore, the inhibition of de-acetylating enzymes may result in acetylation not only of histones, but also of other proteins, such as tubulin and Hsp90 that are involved in anticancer drug activity/resistance or in unrelated cellular pathways [66,67].

(p34.3) An additional difficulty derives from the definition of a cut-off value: some authors, for example, required a doubling of histone acetylation to consider a result as "relevant" [68] but this was not mandatory in many other studies.

(p34.4) The effect of HDAC inhibitors was generally determined in terms of enzymatic activity, but in some cases histone acetylation, particularly H3 and H4, has been used as marker of activity. A consistent increase of H3 acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) at effective doses has been observed with several agents, even if large inter-patient variations were often reported [69], and, more importantly, intratumoral H3 acetylation increase did not always correlate with response [70].

(p34.5) The effect of epigenetic treatment has also been evaluated by looking at specific genes in terms of expression [57,62] or re-activation [71]. It is becoming clear that many elements are involved, and that it may be difficult to identify a consistent pattern in gene activation-inactivation [72] to be used as a marker of epigenetic activity.

(p34.6) The gold standard of pharmacodynamic studies is the evaluation of the effects in tumours. The study of malignant cells is certainly more complicated in patients with solid tumours than in leukaemia since cancer cells are more difficult to obtain, especially at multiple time points. Some reports on the evaluation of epigenetic therapy in solid tumour tissues have been published and deserve special consideration. The number of evaluable samples was often low, but informative results were obtained and reported [41,73]. In ovarian cancer, it has been possible to evaluate the activity of demethylating agents on cells obtained from ascitic fluid and a gene-specific reduction of DNA methylation was evident [74]. Serial biopsies were obtained from patients with in head-and-neck carcinomas [70], glioblastoma [75], cervical and breast cancer and other tumours [57,58,66].

(p34.7) To overcome the difficulty in obtaining tumour samples, several groups have focused on the identification of surrogate markers. PBMC represent the most commonly used alternative. It is possible to measure HDAC activity and histone acetylation or DNA methylation. PBMC have also been used, in studies of drug combinations, to measure the target of non-epigenetic drug [76]. When PBMC and tumour biopsies were compared, however, results were not always consistent [66]. PBMC represent a "surrogate" tissue, and further improvement is required in order to make results obtained in these cells more representative of what is actually taking place in cancer.

(p34.8) A promising technique is the evaluation of circulating cell-free DNA [77] on which several specific analyses to identify epigenetic modifications can be performed [78]. The activity of demethylating agents has been evaluated by measuring the methylation status of circulating cellfree DNA in plasma in patients with refractory advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [62]. This is an interesting alternative with applications in many aspects of medicine, but further studies are required before it can be considered a reliable marker of epigenetic activity.

(p34.9) To obtain an adequate effect, sufficient drug concentrations must persist in the target cells for an adequate time. If there is a relationship between plasma kinetics and tissue effect (PK/PD relationship), drug dosing may be adapted on the basis of PK parameters that are easier to obtain. The permanence of a sufficient drug concentration or of a measurable effect has been evaluated in different tumour types and provides a rationale for the antitumour activity observed (see Tables 1 and 2 for details). Concerning the PK/PD relationship, data are difficult to interpret: no correspondence was found between plasma levels of valproate and histone acetylation in cervical cancer [79] so that PD assays may be required until we can devise more efficient PK models.

(p34.10) The most interesting part of the evaluation of anticancer drugs, particularly when dealing with an innovative mechanism of action, is the study of their effect in tumour cells. Several technical problems arise when trying to quantify the effect of epigenetic drugs, especially in solid tumours: it is difficult to decide what to measure, when and where.

(p34.11) Concerning demethylating agents, the effect is generally measured by evaluating global DNA methylation, but some authors determined the methylation status of specific genes that had previously been selected [60][61][62] and the level of expression of foetal haemoglobin has also been used as a PD marker [63]. The subject of DNA methylation may also be related to drug resistance caused by the activity of O(6)-methylguanine DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) that has been described in cerebral tumours [3,64]. Decitabine has been used in an attempt to reduce methylation of genes involved in DNA repair in melanoma patients treated with temozolomide [55] but no such effect was evident even if decitabine caused hypomethylation of the HbF gene promoter.

(p34.12) The situation is more complex for HDAC inhibitors since not all drugs inhibit the different enzyme classes that are present in eukaryotic cells to the same extent. Some molecules have a wide inhibiting effect [65]; some are more restricted, and class-specific inhibitors such as CHR-3996, specific for class I HDACs enzymes [45], are being introduced in the clinics. Furthermore, the inhibition of de-acetylating enzymes may result in acetylation not only of histones, but also of other proteins, such as tubulin and Hsp90 that are involved in anticancer drug activity/resistance or in unrelated cellular pathways [66,67].

(p34.13) An additional difficulty derives from the definition of a cut-off value: some authors, for example, required a doubling of histone acetylation to consider a result as "relevant" [68] but this was not mandatory in many other studies.

(p34.14) The effect of HDAC inhibitors was generally determined in terms of enzymatic activity, but in some cases histone acetylation, particularly H3 and H4, has been used as marker of activity. A consistent increase of H3 acetylation in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) at effective doses has been observed with several agents, even if large inter-patient variations were often reported [69], and, more importantly, intratumoral H3 acetylation increase did not always correlate with response [70].

(p34.15) The effect of epigenetic treatment has also been evaluated by looking at specific genes in terms of expression [57,62] or re-activation [71]. It is becoming clear that many elements are involved, and that it may be difficult to identify a consistent pattern in gene activation-inactivation [72] to be used as a marker of epigenetic activity.

(p34.16) The gold standard of pharmacodynamic studies is the evaluation of the effects in tumours. The study of malignant cells is certainly more complicated in patients with solid tumours than in leukaemia since cancer cells are more difficult to obtain, especially at multiple time points. Some reports on the evaluation of epigenetic therapy in solid tumour tissues have been published and deserve special consideration. The number of evaluable samples was often low, but informative results were obtained and reported [41,73]. In ovarian cancer, it has been possible to evaluate the activity of demethylating agents on cells obtained from ascitic fluid and a gene-specific reduction of DNA methylation was evident [74]. Serial biopsies were obtained from patients with in head-and-neck carcinomas [70], glioblastoma [75], cervical and breast cancer and other tumours [57,58,66].

(p34.17) To overcome the difficulty in obtaining tumour samples, several groups have focused on the identification of surrogate markers. PBMC represent the most commonly used alternative. It is possible to measure HDAC activity and histone acetylation or DNA methylation. PBMC have also been used, in studies of drug combinations, to measure the target of non-epigenetic drug [76]. When PBMC and tumour biopsies were compared, however, results were not always consistent [66]. PBMC represent a "surrogate" tissue, and further improvement is required in order to make results obtained in these cells more representative of what is actually taking place in cancer.

(p34.18) A promising technique is the evaluation of circulating cell-free DNA [77] on which several specific analyses to identify epigenetic modifications can be performed [78]. The activity of demethylating agents has been evaluated by measuring the methylation status of circulating cellfree DNA in plasma in patients with refractory advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) [62]. This is an interesting alternative with applications in many aspects of medicine, but further studies are required before it can be considered a reliable marker of epigenetic activity.

(p34.19) To obtain an adequate effect, sufficient drug concentrations must persist in the target cells for an adequate time. If there is a relationship between plasma kinetics and tissue effect (PK/PD relationship), drug dosing may be adapted on the basis of PK parameters that are easier to obtain. The permanence of a sufficient drug concentration or of a measurable effect has been evaluated in different tumour types and provides a rationale for the antitumour activity observed (see Tables 1 and 2 for details). Concerning the PK/PD relationship, data are difficult to interpret: no correspondence was found between plasma levels of valproate and histone acetylation in cervical cancer [79] so that PD assays may be required until we can devise more efficient PK models.
## (s36) Toxicity of demethylating agents
(p36.0) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.

(p36.1) The best known agents that interfere with DNA methylation are decitabine and 5-azacytidine. More limited data are available for zebularine [46]. Since these agents also have traditional antiproliferative activity, the dose used plays a key role. At high doses, 5-azacytidine can cause neutropenia [68], similar to what is described for traditional anticancer drugs. It is generally assumed that in order to exploit the epigenetic action, it is necessary to use very low doses that are insufficient to cause any antiproliferative effect.
## (s37) Toxicity of HDAC inhibitors
(p37.0) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p37.1) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].

(p37.2) VPA is the best known molecule in this class since it has been used for many years as an antiepileptic drug: it is extremely well tolerated by patients, and also its long-term effects are well known. The most commonly reported complaints are neurological symptoms (such as dizziness) that are generally transitory and reversible [79,80]. Neurological symptoms may become excessive when VPA is combined with other agents [63].

(p37.3) When vorinostat (SAHA) was tested in mice, relevant systemic toxicity was observed only at high doses [81]. In patients, anaemia, anorexia, hyperglycaemia, thrombo cytopenia, fatigue and nausea have frequently been reported [82]. Similar toxic side effects were described for SB939 [83], for rosminostat [69] and romidepsin [70]. ECG abnormalities of different severity are the most concerning toxic side effects of CHR3996 [45] and of romidepsin [54].
## (s39) Conclusions
(p39.0) Epigenetic therapy is being more and more recognised as an effective and well-tolerated treatment of cancer. Data in leukaemias and myelodysplastic syndromes are now consistent, and the success obtained in cutaneous lymphomas represents a proof of principle that solid tumours may also respond. This is also supported by preclinical data; still clinical results fall short of expectations: several reasons may explain this discrepancy.

(p39.1) We are convinced that, similarly to what has been observed for tyrosine-kinase inhibitors in cancer [89], we need a better selection of tumours and of patients that may benefit from these treatments. It has already been stated that epigenetic drugs, and HDAC inhibitors in particular, "might be useful only in those tumours in which HDACs are directly involved in the pathogenesis" [27].

(p39.2) It is not surprising that clinical results have generally been disappointing: standard evaluation of anticancer activity, mostly based on tumour volume reduction, may not be an adequate index of activity for epigenetic treatment. Epigenetics is a complex mechanism of gene regulation: it will take time before we can exploit it at its best. We definitely need more appropriate tests to select potentially responding tumours, but we also need agents with demonstrated epigenetic activity and solid data in order to choose the most effective dose and schedule.
