# Enteral Nutrition in Pancreaticoduodenectomy: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 15840350 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b7daa2157cf944ece5180d52b7595238de80193](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b7daa2157cf944ece5180d52b7595238de80193)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Length of Stay
(p5.0) One hundred and twenty-one patients with suspected operable upper gastrointestinal cancer (including 54 esophageal, 38 gastric and 29 pancreatic neoplasms) were randomized to receive early EN or control management (nil by mouth and IV fluids) in a prospective multicentre randomized controlled trial [43]. The results showed a clear advantage for EN in terms of length of stay (LOS) both intention-to-treat and per-protocol analysis (16 days vs. 19 days, p = 0.023 and p = 0.011, respectively) and there were no statistically significant differences between the two groups for hospital readmission after discharge. Even if it did not include only patients with pancreatic cancer, the importance of this study is that it represents the first adequately powered prospective randomized trial of early EN vs. "nil by mouth" in patients undergoing upper gastrointestinal resectional surgery in the United Kingdom.

(p5.1) Regarding the use of EN after PD to reduce the LOS, while several retrospective studies did not report any clear advantages compared to other nutritional route [35,46], Zhu et al. demonstrated a lower LOS combining EN with parental nutrition compared to TPN postoperative regimen (13.2 days vs. 16.8 days, p < 0.05) [47].
## (s6) Infectious Complications
(p6.0) Several studies reported that the use of EN reduced the risk of infections. A meta-analysis by Braunschweig et al., combining 27 randomized controlled trials (n = 1828), found a significantly lower risk of infections with enteral nutrition (RR = 0.64) compared to parental feeding. [51].
