# Effects of colchicine on pericardial diseases: a review of the literature and current evidence

CorpusID: 16891342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47d38a036c04349e7a813e24f118eb47d39d6021](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/47d38a036c04349e7a813e24f118eb47d39d6021)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Effusions
(p1.0) Postoperative effusions (including pleural or pericardial) are relatively common after cardiac surgery complication ( Table 3). Most of these effusions are perioperative, occurring within the first week as a direct consequence of the surgical procedure ('non-specific effusions'). They usually follow a benign course 32Á34. Nevertheless, large symptomatic effusions may require medical therapy. As with PPS, use of colchicine in postoperative effusions have not yet been well studied. However, there have been some trials that have studied these uses to a limited scale. A substudy of the COPPS trial suggested that colchicine significantly decreased the incidence of postoperative pericardial (relative risk reduction 43.9%) and pleural effusions (relative risk reduction 52.3%) as compared with the control subjects, despite similar baseline values (35). Case reportÁlevel literature has also shown effectiveness of colchicine even in large postoperative pericardial effusions with life-threatening complications, as compared with other drug therapies (36,37). However, apart from the aforementioned large randomized trial and a few case reports, the effect of colchicine on effusions has not been extensively studied. Given these positive preliminary outcomes, the future therapeutical use of colchicine looks promising and deserves to be studied further.
