# BMC Genomics Genome-wide survey of putative Serine/Threonine protein kinases in cyanobacteria

CorpusID: 16037674 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad934e28d16d5367f7441fba6cb7b3cb41f9e84d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad934e28d16d5367f7441fba6cb7b3cb41f9e84d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Identification of STK proteins
(p2.0) The 21 cyanobacterial genomes fully available from IMG database (Version 2.0, as of Jan 2007) were considered in our analysis (Fig. 1, Table 1). Synechococcus elongatus PCC6301 and Synechococcus elongatus PCC7942 are virtually identical except for a chromosomal inversion, but both were included in our analysis. Using BlastP and TBlastN programs to look for proteins similar to proven cyanobacterial STKs, we obtained 303 protein sequences from the 21 cyanobacterial genomes, 284 of which were originally annotated as protein kinase or Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase. The remaining 19 proteins were accepted as STKs in this study after sequence alignment and SMART analysis [27]. Seventeen out of these were originally annotated not by their STK domains but by other additional domains, such as ATPase and WD40 repeats, and the last two were annotated as hypothetical proteins [16]. 17 proteins, all originally annotated as STKs, from the 303 proteins identified by sequence similarity lack all or part of at least one important catalytic domains [13], and these were excluded from further consideration. Some slightly truncated proteins, such as CwatDRAFT_6607 and CwatDRAFT_1979, lacking structural motifs I, II or XI but possessing all catalytic motifs were retained. Nine proteins (including four STKs in marine unicellular Prochlorococcus and Synechococcus, 6803_slr1443, CwatDRAFT_090 1, Tery_0088, Tery_4781 and Ava_3867) exhibit some deviations from the canonical motifs (Fig. 2) that were deemed tolerable. In all 286 putative STK sequences were considered in this study ( Table 1).
## (s3) Conserved domain features
(p3.0) The core catalytic domain contains 12 conserved subdomains, within which a total of 12 amino acids are invariant or nearly invariant in eukaryotes: two G residues in subdomain I, K in subdomain II, E in subdomain III, D and N in subdomain VIb, D and G in subdomain VII, E in subdomain VIII, D and G in subdomain IX, and R in subdomain XI [13]. In cyanobacteria, 12 similar conserved
## (s7) Phylogenetic analysis
(p7.0) Phylogenetic analysis was performed using the conserved catalytic domains of STKs rather than their whole sequences, as the additional domains with their possibly separate evolutionary histories might confuse the phylogeny. The STK catalytic domains, about 280 amino acids in length, were identified using SMART and CDD databases [27,44].

(p7.1) The STK phylogenetic tree was rooted in the archaeal STKs, deviating from the canonical view of the universal phylogenetic tree rooted in eubacteria [45]. This STK phylogenetic tree indicates that these STK proteins display complicated relationships, at odds with the phylogeny of the species. STK proteins from the unicellular marine Synechococcus and Prochlorococcus cluster together and have a close relationship with Slr1443 from Synechocystis PCC6803. STKs from the unicellular cyanobacteria, Synechocystis PCC6803, Synechococcus elongatus PCC6301, Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942, and Thermosynechococcus elongatus BP1 are dispersed throughout the phylogenetic tree. Seven pairs of STK orthologs are found in two Syne-chococcus strains, JA-2-3Ba and JA-3-3Ab, that share a close evolutionary relationship and are located at the bottom of 16S rRNA tree, along with Gloeobacter violaceus PCC7421 (Fig. 1). STKs from Trichodesmium erythraeum IMS101 and Gloeobacter violaceus PCC7421 each form several separate clusters indicating obvious lineage-specific duplication events in these strains. Most kinase sequences from Anabaena and Nostoc are orthologs for their close evolutionary relationships, while the nonorthologous STK genes in Anabaena and Nostoc may have been produced by recent gene duplication or lateral transfer. This phylogenetic tree shows also that cyanobacterial STKs do not cluster strictly according to their structural characteristics, except for members of cbSTKIII which are clustered together in a big clade. Most STKs of cbSTKII do not cluster according to their additional domains, while some with specific additional domains, such as Pentapeptide and WD40, do cluster together (Fig. 4).

(p7.2) Thirty-eight STKs in cbSTKIII belong to a large cluster that also includes four STK proteins that do not contain HisKA and ATPase domains and therefore have been placed in other families. Tery_2857 and Tery_3863 have GAF domains and belong to cbSTKII, while Tery_2107 and Npun02008276 have only the STK domains and belong to cbSTKI-other (Fig. 4). To test the evolutionary relationships amongst the catalytic domains of dual protein kinases, their HiskA domains, and their GAF domains, a detailed analysis was performed by constructing three separate phylogenetic trees (Fig. 5). Only two groups of orthologs as defined by the catalytic domain (highlighted in Fig. 5) clustered together in the other two phylogenetic trees, indicating that two original genes were formed and appeared in the lineage prior to the divergence of Nostoc and Anabaena. Genes ancestral to orthologs that are conserved only in Anabaena PCC7120 and Anabaena ATCC29413 are assumed to have formed before the divergence of these two strains. Apparent incongruities may be explained by new recruitment or domain shuffling. For example, the HiskA domain of N. punctiforme gene Npun02001148 appears to have a distinct history from the HiskA domains of Anabaena PCC7120 All0323 and Anabaena ATCC29413 Ava_4716, but the three proteins share a common history with respect to their catalytic and GAF domains (see proteins highlighted in blue in Fig. 5) The second GAF domains in All3691, Ava_3596, Npun02004457, and Npun02004756 and the third GAF domain in Npun02004457 bear only a distant relationships with other STK GAF domains in cyanobacteria, including those in the same genes, indicating a recently recruitment. Alr0709 and Alr0710 lie adjacent to each other on the chromosome of Anabaena PCC7120 and show 75% similarities, indicating a recently gene duplication.

(p7.3) Phylogenetic analysis of the conserved catalytic domains of STKs Figure 4 Phylogenetic analysis of the conserved catalytic domains of STKs. A phylogenetic tree based on the catalytic domains of cyanobacterial STKs was constructed as described in Methods. Strain names are as in Figure 1. Bootstrap values >50% are indicated on the branches. Additional domain names are also given following the gene names. STKs from subfamily cbSTKI-TM are marked in red and bold and those from cbSTKI-I are marked in red, bold, and italics. STKs with additional domains from cbSTKII are marked in bold and some major additional domains are marked in color: green WD40; blue DUF323; purple TPR; and magenta pentapeptide. Members of the family cbSTKIII family are highlighted in a cyan box. Archaeal and eukaryotic STK proteins are in yellow boxes.
## (s8) Discussion
(p8.0) Ser/Thr protein kinases, members of signal transduction systems, play important roles in responses to the environmental changes and intra-cellular signals [29]. This may be vital for their host cyanobacteria, which originated 2.5-3.5 billion years ago and exhibit the widest range of diversity in growth habitats of all photosynthetic organisms. Some of these kinases have demonstrated, in at least one case, possibly essential roles, illustrated by Sll0776 (SpkD) in Synechocystis PCC6803 which could not be completely knocked out [30].

(p8.1) The STK proteins used in this study were identified by Local Blast rather than from the COG database in IMG, and were manually checked to avoid false-negative and false-positive hits that commonly arise during large-scale automated analyses. Sequence alignment of conserved catalytic domains show that cyanobacterial STKs contain nearly the same subdomains as eukaryotic STKs but seem to be more conserved except in subdomain I. Eukaryotic STK proteins shared 12 nearly identical residues. Whereas a total of 15 highly conserved (shared by >90% sequences) sites were found in cyanobacteria, seven of them were the same in eukaryotes. Such conserved motifs and amino acids may provide useful targets to evaluate their functions, and the high proportion of conserved res-idues shared by both eukaryotic organisms and cyanobacteria indicate a quite similar mechanism for domain organization and catalyzation.
