# Measuring the Quality of Corporate Governance -A Review of Corporate Governance Indices**

CorpusID: 168969683 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e4098f33876efc7d35bf8831bfa07bd91114641](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e4098f33876efc7d35bf8831bfa07bd91114641)

Fields: Business, Economics, Law

## (s2) REVIEW OF CORPORATE GOVERNANCE INDICES
(p2.0) Despite the common belief in the importance of governance mechanisms for resolving agency problems, the empirical literature on individual governance mechanisms has not consistently established a relation between governance and performance which stems from the fact that governance mechanisms are numerous and interaction effects are quite probable. In other words, examining the effect of only one dimension of a firm's governance system on performance is quite constraining. That is, without a doubt, a factor contributing to the attention aimed at governance indices, which combine various dimensions of governance into one number. Moreover, another coercive reason for the success of governance indices is the simplicity of having a single number for capturing the multidimensionality of corporate governance.

(p2.1) Corporate governance indices vary considerably with regard to which dimensions of firms' corporate governance are considered sufficiently important to be included. The initial foray into creating these indices was academic inquiry. In the following sections, we provide an overview of significant indices currently in use by academics and commercial vendors (specialized rating agencies). Section 1.01 3.1. Gompers, Ishii and Metrick's G-Index Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2003) (hereinafter GIM) constructed an index on the basis of 24 governance provisions that, according to the authors, reflect the balance of power between shareholders (owners) and managers. The G-Index was constructed from data on the governance characteristics for more than 1,000 public companies amassed by the Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC) and published in 2003.
