# Diabetes and pulmonary tuberculosis: a global overview with special focus on the situation in Asian countries with high TB-DM burden

CorpusID: 16097514 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc083a15740cd7eb94c8a9dc5b4b30b096938021](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc083a15740cd7eb94c8a9dc5b4b30b096938021)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) Quantitative estimate of active TB cases among DM patients in developing Asian countries
(p4.0) The prevalence of TB is 4 times greater in the DM population than in the general population [14,35,55]. Our study identified 6 studies that addressed quantitative estimates of active TB in diabetic individuals -2 from China and 1 from each of the following countries: Bangladesh, Korea, Nepal, and Pakistan.

(p4.1) A prospective study conducted in Dhaka, Bangladesh in 2011 included 17,344 DM patients screened for pulmonary TB and found that the incidence of confirmed TB cases among DM patients was double the one observed in the general population (213.33/100,000) [56]. In China, TB case notification rates in screened DM patients were several times higher than those of the general population (774/100,000) [57]. In another prospective study conducted in China, the rate of TB diagnosis was almost 3 times higher than that found in the general population in Yunnan province [58].
## (s5) Bi-directional screening in Asian countries with high TB-DM burden
(p5.0) Since India and China represent countries with some of the highest burdens of DM-TB in the world, the International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease (the Union) launched a project aiming to investigate the links between DM and TB through the implementation of bi-directional screening in selected health facilities in India and China. National stakeholder meetings between the Union, the World Health Organization (WHO), the World Diabetes Foundation (WDF), and national DM and TB authorities were held in China and India and standardized procedures of screening DM patients for TB and vice versa, a monitoring tool, and a quarterly system of reporting were developed. Forty health care providers from China and India were trained in bi-directional screening of DM and TB, data analysis, and writing scientific papers on DM and TB. In China, the implementation of the bidirectional screening programme started in September 2011 [32,57]. Our search identified 4 studies that specifically addressed bi-directional screening in patients with TB-DM comorbidity ( Table 2).

(p5.1) The Union is currently carrying out several projects similar to the one completed in India and China, aiming to develop primary care settings guidelines for screening of DM in TB patients and vice versa, and to train a great number of health care professionals for systemic screening. Such projects are ongoing in Pakistan and Indonesia.

(p5.2) Although it is obvious that bi-directional screening is highly needed in countries with TB-DM comorbidity, there are still many strategic issues to be resolved. One of the most important issues in developing countries is the cost-effectiveness of the screening. India and China are countries with a very high TB prevalence, but a large proportion of TB cases discovered in the studies in India and China were already diagnosed and on treatment prior to screening [64]. Thus, the cost-effectiveness of this approach has to be cautiously assessed. Furthermore, it is unclear whether screening should be directed at all patients or targeted at those with high-risk characteristics [64]. Although there is a large amount of data on the risk factors associated with TB-DM comorbidity, they are very ambiguous and further research is needed to identify populations at risk.

(p5.3) Another problem is related to the technologies for diagnosing TB and DM in routine settings. Fasting blood glucose testing was proved to have low sensitivity, whereas oral glucose tolerance test performed better as a screening tool when combined with HbAc1 [42]. TB diagnostic approaches that rely on sputum smear examination and chest radiography have low sensitivity as well [65]. Further work is needed to determine whether new TB and DM screening technologies, such as rapid nucleic acid amplification technology for TB diagnosis and autofluorescence-based readers or sudomotor function devices for DM screening, are feasible, more sensitive, and cost-effective.

(p5.4) The best time to screen TB patients for DM has not been defined either. Although screening at the time of registration would be easiest, stress-induced hyperglycaemia may lead to false-positive diagnoses. On the other hand, if the screening is performed at the end of the initial or continuation phase, the possibility of early DM intervention or TB treatment improvement will be lost [64].

(p5.5) Another issue in bi-directional screening is a lack of non-communicable disease programme or systematic, decentralized DM programme in these countries. Hence, it is very difficult to diagnose DM systematically, track what happens to the patient post-DM diagnosis, or implement TB screening among diabetic patients [64]. Given the escalating proportions of TB-DM comorbidity in Asian countries, more evidence is urgently needed to answer important questions about bi-directional screening in different settings.
## (s7) Poor glycaemic control
(p7.0) Achieving optimum glycaemic control is hard in Asian countries due to scarcity of adequate health care facilities, low educational status, and economic disparities. A 5-year survey, documenting changes in diabetes practice in developing regions that included 11,799 patients out of which 5,888 were Asian, showed that only 20-30% of patients were at the HbA1c < 7% goal [66]. The Diabcare-Asia project, a cross-sectional survey of 24,317 diabetic patients from Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Thailand, and Vietnam, found that 55% of patients had values of HbA1c exceeding 8% [67].

(p7.1) Poor glycaemic control in Asian populations represents a potentially important risk factor for TB. Restrepo and colleagues conducted one of the first studies which revealed that persistent hyperglycaemia could play a key role in altering the immune responses to M. tuberculosis in diabetic patients [68]. The study showed that poor DM control (as indicated by HbA1c level) was associated with differences in the innate and cellular cytokine responses to stimulation with purified protein derivative from M. tuberculosis, thus facilitating progression to active TB [68]. Another recent study, that recruited 4,690 elderly diabetic patients in Hong Kong, showed that the patients with greater HbA1c value (>7%) had a hazard risk of active TB that was 3 times increased compared with those who had HbA1c < 7% (HR 3.11; 95% CI 1.63-5.92, p < 0.01) [69]. A cohort study with 123,546 individuals performed in Taiwan found that, during a median follow-up period of 4.6 years, diabetic patients with poor glycaemic control had a significantly higher hazard risk of TB (adjusted HR 2.21; 95% CI 1.63-2.99, p < 0.01) compared to those without DM [70]. The evidence of poor glycaemic control in Asian patients, along with the fact that poor glycaemic control represents an important risk factor for TB, call for further therapeutic actions in order to decrease TB-DM prevalence in developing Asian countries.
## (s9) Genetic make-up
(p9.0) It is striking that even when they are not in their home countries, people of Asian or Indian/subcontinental origin show a higher prevalence of DM in the presence of TB than the rest of the population. A study examining 4 ethnic groups in Englandwhite, black, 'Asian' (people from the subcontinent), and other (which included Chinese)found 3,461 new cases of pulmonary TB during 2005. Of those, 384 (11.1%) were attributable to DM. The group most affected from both diseases was that of patients of subcontinental and Asian origin (55%). Black and white populations were affected in almost equal proportions (22% and 23%). The authors concluded that about one-third of Asians with newly diagnosed TB will have DM [78]. Similarly, Suwanpimolkul et al. gathered information from a TB clinic in San Francisco from 2005 to 2012 [79]. They recruited 791 patients with TB, of which 29.2% were born in the US, 26.7% in Asia, 11% in Mexico, and the remaining 33.1% were from other countries. Calculated prevalence of DM among patients with TB was 15.9%. Of these, 26.7% were patients of Asian origin (China and Philippines), accounting for the highest percentage of the non-Americans affected by both diseases [79]. These data suggest that there is something in the genetic make-up, or in early childhood, which makes people from these regions particularly sensitive to TB-DM comorbidity.

(p9.1) Although the possible genetic basis of high TB-DM susceptibility in Asians remains unclear, suggested genetic causes of predisposition to insulin resistance and DM in Asians may partially explain a higher prevalence of TB-DM in this group. Radha et al. investigated the prevalence of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)-gamma Pro12Ala polymorphism (known to have a protective role against diabetes) in Caucasians, in a migrant population of South Asians, and in a homogeneous population of South Asians residing in India [80]. In all 3 populations, the authors observed a similar prevalence of the 12Ala allele. However, while the frequency of this allele was significantly lower in the diabetic Caucasians when compared with the nondiabetic Caucasians, South Asian diabetic and nondiabetic subjects had virtually the same prevalence of 12Ala allele [80]. This finding suggests that PPARgamma Pro12Ala polymorphism is protective against DM in Caucasians but not in South Asians. Chang et al. identified a novel risk-conferring genetic variant of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) for DM2 in a Chinese population, different from the variants observed in populations of European ancestry [81]. Further studies are needed to discover whether these genetic polymorphisms, specific to Asian populations, are responsible for higher rates of DM and insulin resistance and consequently for higher susceptibility to TB in this patient group.
