# A SURVEY OF CLONES ON INFINITE SETS

CorpusID: 16450005 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a375b6d3204e6d64c5377f76dbc4d2e41dc97fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a375b6d3204e6d64c5377f76dbc4d2e41dc97fd)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s1) Non-structure of the clone lattice
(p1.0) The size 2 2 |X| of Cl(X), the fact that it contains copies of all clone lattices over finite sets as intervals, and several "non-structure results" that will be discussed later in this survey have long indicated that the clone lattice is complicated, and that there is no hope of describing it completely. Recently, it has been shown that the clone lattice is in some sense the most complicated algebraic lattice of its size.

(p1.1) Theorem 1 (Pinsker [Pin07]). Let L be an algebraic lattice which has not more than 2 |X| compact elements. Then Cl(X) contains a copy of L as a complete sublattice.

(p1.2) Since the compact elements of Cl(X) are just the finitely generated clones, their number is not larger than |O| = 2 |X| , and it is easy to construct 2 |X| functions that all generate distinct clones: Characteristic functions of subsets of X as used in the introduction are an example. Since it is known that a complete sublattice of an algebraic lattice cannot have more compact elements than the original lattice, the lattices of Theorem 1 exhaust all complete sublattices of the clone lattice. We remark that the analogous theorem does not hold on finite X. That is, the clone lattice over finite X has countably infinitely many compact elements, but does not have every algebraic lattice whose number of compact elements is countable as a complete sublattice. For example, the lattice M ω (i.e., the lattice consisting of countably infinitely many incomparable elements plus a smallest and a greatest element) does not embed into the clone lattice over any finite set [Bul01].

(p1.3) Note that Theorem 1 implies that Cl(X) does not satisfy any non-trivial lattice (quasi-)identities. This also follows from the fact that the latter is the case already for finite X if |X| ≥ 3 (|X| ≥ 4 for quasi-identities), by a result of Bulatov [Bul93] ( [Bul94] for quasi-identities), since all clone lattices over a finite set embed as intervals into Cl(X).
## (s6) Minimal clones
(p6.0) A clone is called minimal iff it is an atom in Cl(X), i.e., iff the only clone below it is the clone of projections. Clearly every minimal clone is generated by a single operation. We call operations which generate minimal clones, and which have minimal arity in the sense that no operation of smaller arity generates the same clone, minimal as well. An obvious necessary and sufficient condition for an operation f ∈ O (n) to be minimal is that all non-trivial terms which it generates have arity at least n and generate f .

(p6.1) Example. For every n ≥ 2, let f n ∈ S be a permutation which has only one finite cycle of length n, and which is the identity otherwise. If n is a prime number, then it is easy to see that all non-trivial iterates of f can reproduce f , so f is minimal. If n is divisible by some k with 2 ≤ k < n, then the function f k obtained by iterating f k times cannot generate f , hence f is not minimal.

(p6.2) On finite X, the clone lattice is atomic, which is to say that every clone (except for the clone of projections) contains a minimal clone; see e.g. the survey papers [Csá05] or [Qua95] for a proof. If X is infinite, then this is not so, as can be seen from the following simple example:

(p6.3) Example. Let f ∈ S be a permutation which has only infinite cycles, so if f k (where k ≥ 1) is any iterate of f , then f k (x) = x for all x ∈ X. The interval [J , {f } ] is isomorphic to the lattice of all submonoids of the monoid (N, +, 0). In particular, it is not atomic.
## (s13) The local clone lattice
(p13.0) Fix some index set I, and let R ⊆ X I be an I-ary relation, i.e., a set of I-tuples with entries in X. If f ∈ O, then we say that f preserves R iff f (r 1 , . . . , r n f ) ∈ R for all r 1 , . . . , r n f ∈ R (f (r 1 , . . . , r n f ) denotes the I-tuple that results if we apply f to the tuples r j componentwise; this notation also agrees with the "composition" notation introduced at the beginning of Section 1). We have seen this concept earlier in this paper: If I = X n for some natural number n ≥ 1, then R ⊆ X X n is just a set of n-ary operations and f preserves R iff f ∈ Pol(R). Another important case is when I is a positive natural number, and R is a finitary relation on X. On a finite base set, the operators Pol and Inv are a strong tool for describing clones, since in that case finitary relations suffice to describe all clones: If C ⊆ O is any set of operations, then C is a clone iff C = Pol Inv(C ). In other words, every clone C is determined by the finitary relations it preserves. Moreover, for any C ⊆ O, C = Pol Inv(C ). Since clones preserve fewer relations the larger they are, this method is particularly useful when describing large clones, such as precomplete ones, whereas small clones are often better described by (functional) generating systems.

(p13.1) If X is infinite, then not every clone is of the form Pol(R) for a set R of finitary relations, although sets of operations of this form are still clones. Rosenberg [Ros72] observed first that every clone is of the form Pol(R) for a set of infinitary relations: For example, it follows from our observations in the beginning of Section 3 that {C (1) , C (2) , . . .} is such a set for any clone C .

(p13.2) A clone is called locally closed or local iff it is of the form Pol(R) for some set of finitary relations R. This naming is made clearer by the following alternative definition which is easily seen to be equivalent. A clone is local iff it satisfies the following additional closure property: For every f ∈ O, if for all finite A ⊆ X there exists g ∈ C of the same arity as f which agrees with f on A, then f ∈ C . This is the same as to say that for every n ≥ 1, C (n) is closed in the product topology (Tychonoff topology) on X X n , where X is taken to be discrete. In other words, C is local iff it contains all operations that can be "locally" approximated (i.e., interpolated on every finite set) by functions from C . This generalization of the Galois connection Inv − Pol from the case where X is finite is due to Romov [Rom77].

(p13.3) To emphasize the distinction between clones and local clones, we may call the former global clones; that is, a global clone is just a clone which is not necessarily local. Arbitrary intersections of local clones yield local clones, and the local clones on X form a complete lattice Cl loc (X), which is not a sublattice of Cl(X): In general, the clone generated by two local clones (in Cl(X)) need not be locally closed.

(p13.4) Example. Let X be the set of integers Z, and let f ∈ S be the permutation that switches 0 and 1, and is the identity otherwise. Let g ∈ S be the permutation that maps every x ∈ Z to x + 1. Consider the local clones C and D locally generated by {f } and {g, g −1 }, respectively. The only nontrivial unary operation in C is f , and in D we only have the operations g k and g −k , for all k ≥ 1. Now one can verify that the join of C and D in Cl loc (X) contains S , which cannot be the case for the join in the global clone lattice Cl(X), since this join is countable but |S | = 2 ℵ 0 .

(p13.5) We are grateful to the referee for pointing out that Cl loc (X) is not algebraic. In fact, Cl loc (X) has no compact elements, except for the clone of all projections:
