# The TNBS-induced colitis animal model: An overview

CorpusID: 16208822 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43de143a22b9a9b738a29bece0b2fd89ae45c94](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b43de143a22b9a9b738a29bece0b2fd89ae45c94)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Crohn's disease is a chronic, relapsing immunologic disorder that primarily affects the gastrointestinal tract [1] The estimated incidence of the disease approximates 20.2 cases per 100.000 persons in Northern Europe and USA and it should be emphasized that incidence depends on the exact geographic region. In the modern era, intense research has provided insight on the pathogenesis of the disease and the current understanding relates Crohn's to a dysregulated immune response towards gut microbiota in genetically predisposed persons. Despite recent advances, the exact pathogenesis remains not well defined. Thus, Crohn's disease is still an incurable, life-long disease that warrants better understanding and more efficient treatment.
## (s1) Pathogenesis
(p1.0) The exact mechanisms that mediate pathogenesis in that particular model remain elusive. As it has already been emphasized TNBS colitis does not recapitulate the aetiopathogenesis of Crohn's disease. However, the relevance of the model to Crohn's disease in terms of pathogenesis is evident by the involvement of NOD2 (a key CD susceptibility gene) in the pathogenesis of TNBS colitis [6]. Specifically, the administration of plasmid carrying intact NOD2, but not plasmid carrying associated frame-shift-mutated NOD2, makes mice more resistant to this colitis [7].
## (s2) Pathophysiology of TNBS-induced colitis
(p2.0) Based on the original report by Morris et al. [8] ethanol and TNBS (Trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid) at a dose of 100 mg/kg are coadministered intra-rectally to rats. Ethanol is used as a means to effectively disrupt intestinal barrier and enable the interaction of TNBS with colon tissue proteins [9,10]. Trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid, a classical skin contactant serves as a hapten and as Little et al. suggested as early as 1966 [11], when coupled with proteins with high molecular weight can elicit significant immunologic responses by rendering those proteins immunogenic to the host immune system. A single administration of the combined substances leads to the development of an excessive cell mediated immune response reflected by acute Th1 inflammation [12].
## (s5) Pathological characteristics of TNBS colitis
(p5.0) TNBS colitis invokes certain lesions in a histopathological level [21]. Those lesions can be assessed either macroscopically or microscopically. Multiple scores and assessment tools have been developed in an effort to quantify the impact of inflammation on colonic tissue and furthermore evaluate the effect of various compounds in preventing or treating those lesions. Macroscopically, inflammation is spreading in a transverse fashion and ends up to the development of transmural colitis [22]. That is a shared feature with the hallmark of human Crohn's disease. Moreover, mucosal edema, distortion of crypts and the formation of abscesses occur during the course of the disease [23,24]. Macroscopic evaluation of the colon and rectum up to 24 h after TNBS treatment revealed the presence of mucosal edema and hemorrhagic ulcerations. Conglutination was obvious later.

(p5.1) Histologic examination has showed predominant infiltration of leukocytes and erythrocytes in mucosa and submucosa in the first week. Neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes infiltrated in mucosa, submucosa and muscularis propria 14 d later. Fibroblasts and granuloma-like structures were also obviously seen. No damage  [29] Wistar rats (180e220 g) 7.5 mg 40% 1 e TRPV1 and TRPA1 may be promising targets in pain modulation. Abad et al. [30] BALB/c mice 6e8 weeks 3-mg 50% 2 3e10 d VIP has beneficial prophylactic and therapeutic effects in TNBS-induced colitis Petrella et al. [31] Wistar rats (200e250 g) 60 mg/kg 1 4 d Low doses of N/OFQ significantly decrease the colonic inflammatory profile Chen et al. [32] Rats; 0.6 mL 50% 1 1e21 d NF-kB also regulates ICAM-1 expression during colonic inflammation. Pretreatment of PDTC may attenuate the inflammation development. Fitzpatrick et al. [33] Wistar rats Neonatal rats-3w. 8  The use of the model as described above allows the construction of long-term databases which can serve as a reference for future strain comparisons Natah et al. [37] SpragueeDawley rats (250e300 g) 30 mg 50% 1 1, 2, 3, 7 and 21 d colitis transiently increased permeability to sodium fluorescein and led to a mild disruption of BBB Motavallian et al.
## (s7) Conclusion
(p7.0) TNBS induced colitis is a commonly utilized animal model that shares significant properties with human Crohn's disease. The advantages of its use include the reproducibility, the technical simplicity and the low cost [25]. The model is applicable in both rodents and guinea pigs with significant strain-dependent differences. Collectively, despite the introduction of genetic and spontaneous models that mimic Crohn's disease, TNBS-colitis remains a potent tool in our armamentorium to study immunopathogenesis and potential treatments of the disease. Of note, the model has several inherent limitations and does not recapitulate the disease in terms of aetiopathogenesis. Being aware of the model's limitations will enable researchers to properly use the model. More research is warranted to shed light on the exact mechanisms that underlie its pathogenesis and specifically the role of gut microbiota.

(p7.1) Figs. 1 and 2 [26] Changes into the large bowel wall, eosin e hematoxylin stain, 100Â original magnification. Severe colitis with ulceration (I) and colitis with intraluminal abscesses (II e arrow).
