# Gastric cancer: Overview

CorpusID: 16275797 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Etiology
(p2.0) Gastric cancer is a multifactorial disease. There is a variety of environmental, infectious, and host-related factors that may interact favoring the development of the disease. Some worthy of mention are: H. pylori. In 1994 the International Agency for Research on Cancer recognized the H. pylori infection as a type I carcinogen 8 . It has been estimated that the infection with this bacterium is responsible for 77% of the cases of distal gastric cancer and is associated with both types, intestinal and diffuse, but not with carcinomas originating in the gastric cardia 9 . Helicobacter pylori is also recognized as an etiologic agent in lymphomas originating in the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphomas).

(p2.1) Helicobacter pylori is a Gram-negative spiral bacterium with a wide variety of mechanisms that allow for colonization of the gastric mucosa and evasion or modification of the host´s immune response 10 . The infection is usually acquired in childhood and can persist for decades unless treatment and eradication of the bacteria is accomplished. No one knows exactly what the transmission mechanism is, but it is believed to be acquired orally from person to person. Infection of the gastric mucosa by H. pylori induces an acute and chronic inflammatory reaction whose intensity depends on factors associated with the host and the bacterium. This prolonged inflammatory reaction, or active chronic gastritis, is believed to be one of the main factors contributing to the malignant transformation of the epithelium. Multiple mechanisms have been described for carcinogenesis associated with inflammation caused by H. pylori. Among them, it is important to note the production of reactive oxygen species that lead to oxidative DNA damage and mutations, aberrant DNA methylation (mainly hypermethylation of CpG islands in the promoter regions of certain genes) that leads to silencing of tumor suppressor genes. In one of our studies in Colombian patients from the province of Nariño, significantly greater methylation levels of RPRM (reprimo, a tumor suppressor gene) were found in the gastric mucosa of subjects living in an area of high risk for gastric cancer (Túquerres) than in one of low risk (Tumaco). In addition, significantly elevated methylation levels were found in patients infected with the virulent cagA-positive vacA s1/m1 H. pylori strains 11 .

(p2.2) There is great genetic variety among H. pylori strains, with variable pathogenic and carcinogenic potential, and a given individual may be infected simultaneously with multiple strains. H. pylori is equipped with a number of adhesin which allow it to adhere to the gastric epithelium. This adhesion is essential for ensuring the prolonged persistence of the bacterium in the stomach and for the injection of CagA and other proteins into epithelial cells, using a type IV secretion system. CagA is an oncogenic protein, a product of the bacterial gene cagA. This gene is part of a DNA region called the cag pathogenicity island (cag PAI), which is not present in all strains of H. pylori and is considered a virulence marker 12 . Infection with cag-positive strains is associated with a greater risk of severe gastritis, premalignant gastric lesions, and gastric cancer than is infection with cag-negative strains 13 . Almost all East Asian strains are cag-positive, while 60-70% are cag-positive among strains of the Western world. In Colombia, it is estimated that 80% of the adult population is infected with H. pylori and that 70-80% of the strains obtained from symptomatic patients are cagpositive 14,15 . A greater prevalence of cag-positive strains has been observed in regions with a greater incidence of gastric cancer 14 .

(p2.3) After entering the epithelial cells, CagA is phosphorylated in motifs containing the amino acid sequence EPIYA, which triggers a series of events that leads to morphological epithelial alterations 12 . These EPIYA motifs are classified into types A, B, C or D, according to the amino acids flanking the EPIYA sequence. The number and type of EPIYA motifs varies among strains of H. pylori. In Western countries, the strains have EPIYA types A, B, and C. In East Asian countries, strains contain type D sequences instead of type C. The presence of more than three EPIYA sequences is a factor that significantly increases the risk of gastric atrophy, intestinal metaplasia and gastric cancer 12,16 . In vivo and in vitro studies have shown that CagA induces ruptures of the epithelial intercellular junctions, loss of epithelial polarity, increased cell proliferation, reduced apoptosis, and development of adenocarcinomas 12 .

(p2.4) Another H. pylori gene associated with virulence is vacA, which encodes a bacterial toxin (VacA) that induces cytoplasmic vacuoles, pores in the mitochondrial membranes and apoptosis of epithelial cells. Although all H. pylori strains possess the vacA gene, genetic variations determine the functional activity of VacA and the risk of gastric disease 17 . The regions of greatest genetic variation are: the s (signal) region with alleles s1a, slb, slc, or s2; the m (middle) region with m1 or m2 alleles; and the i (intermediate) region with type i1 or i2 alleles. VacA s1/m1 or vacA s1/m1/i1 strains are more associated with an increased risk of progression of premalignant lesions and with gastric cancer than are vacA s2/ m2 or vacA s2/m2/i2 strains 12 .

(p2.5) Additionally, certain adhesion proteins present on the outer membrane of some H. pylori strains are associated with virulence. BabA (blood-group antigen-binding adhesin) is encoded by babA2, a gene not found in all strains. BabA adheres to the Lewis b blood group antigen present on the membrane of gastric epithelial cells. Infection with babA2-positive strains is associated with increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma 12 .

(p2.6) The association between the prevalence of H. pylori infection and the risk of gastric cancer seems to be challenged in some parts of the world. In some African countries, the prevalence of H. pylori infection is very high but the risk of gastric cancer is very low, a phenomenon called the African enigma 18 . This phenomenon has been described in other parts of the world and has stimulated numerous epidemiological studies aimed at finding its causes. In addition, despite its relatively recent implication as an etiological agent of gastric cancer and its broad worldwide distribution, less than 1% of persons infected with H. pylori will develop stomach cancer. H. pylori has been part of the human microbiome from ancient times. Both species (Homo sapiens and H. pylori) migrated together from Africa about 60,000 years ago and spread to the other continents 19,20 . Helicobacter pylori strains display an extraordinary genetic diversity, mainly due to high rates of mutation and genetic recombination. Based on the study of gene sequences, a growing variety of phylogenetic groups and subgroups of H. pylori have been described over the past decade that reflect human migrations: hpEurope, hpAfrica1 (including hspWAfrica and hsp-SAfrica), hpAfrica2, hpEastAsia (including hspAmerind, hspEAsia and hspMaori), hpAsia2 and hpSahul 21 .

(p2.7) In one of our studies in Colombia, H. pylori strains and gastric histopathology of 80 adult patients with dyspeptic symptoms were analyzed 22 . The study included residents of Túquerres, in the Andean Mountains, where the risk of gastric cancer is very high, and of Tumaco, on the Pacific coast, where the risk is much lower. Of a total of 64 cagA-positive vacA s1m1 H. pylori strains, all strains from the mountainous area (n= 35), where the population is mainly mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European origin), were classified as hpEurope, indicating the exposure of Amerindian strains to those of European origin. In contrast, among the 29 cagA-positive vacA s1m1 strains obtained from the inhabitants of Tumaco (of mixed African and European ancestry), 10 were classified as hpEurope and 19 as hpAfrica1 22 . Regardless of the place of residence, patients infected with European strains had significantly more advanced precancerous histological lesions and greater oxidative damage in the gastric mucosa than did those infected with strains of African origin. These findings suggest that among cagA-positive vacA s1m1 strains, considered virulent in general, the phylogenetic classification may be a determining factor in the risk of progression to stomach cancer. African strains seemed to be less virulent than strains of European origin.

(p2.8) Results of this and other studies indicate that European and African immigrants brought their own H. pylori strains, which have been preserved over the centuries, extensively replacing Amerindian strains from the native people of America. It is likely that some combinations of H. pylori and Homo sapiens of different ancestral origins lead to interactions that may modify gastric cancer risk.

(p2.9) Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Multiple studies in different parts of the world have found the presence of EBV in 5 to 16% of gastric carcinomas, which supports its possible role as an etiologic agent 23,24 . A meta-analysis of 70 studies found a pooled prevalence of EBV positivity of 9% in gastric cancer cases. This prevalence was similar in cases from Asia, Europe, and the Americas 25 . Male patients were twice as likely to have EBV-positive tumors as female patients, and tumors arising in the gastric cardia or corpus were more than twice as likely to be EBV-positive as those in the antrum. Tumors in postsurgical gastric stump/remnants had a prevalence of EBV four times higher than primary non-remnant tumors. No difference in EBV prevalence between intestinal and diffuse histologic types was found, and a strong association (> 90%) of EBV with the uncommon lymphoepithelioma-like carcinoma was confirmed 25 . A recent multicentric study suggests that EBV positivity is a favorable prognostic indicator of survival 26 .

(p2.10) One of the strongest observations that support the role of EBV as a causative agent is the clonal presence of the virus uniformly distributed in all malignant cells of EBV-positive tumors. This is not observed in the non-tumoral epithelial cells that surround the tumor 23 . However, the role of EBV in gastric carcinogenesis is not yet clearly defined.

(p2.11) Environmental and lifestyle factors. Tobacco smoking is a recognized risk factor for the development of gastritis, ulcers, intestinal metaplasia, and both proximal and distal gastric cancer. It is estimated that up to 18% of stomach cancer cases are attributable to tobacco smoking 27 and there is evidence supporting a positive interaction between tobacco smoking and H. pylori infection.

(p2.12) Among dietary factors, high salt intake is associated with an increased risk of gastric cancer. A proposed mechanism is the direct damage to the gastric mucosa with subsequent inflammatory response and increased cell proliferation. Additionally, in the presence of H. pylori infection, high salt intake further increases the risk of gastric cancer. As a mechanism associated with this interaction, in vitro studies have shown increased expression of the oncogenic protein CagA when H. pylori is grown in media with high salt concentrations. Analysis of 36 cagA-positive H. pylori strains from Colombian patients demonstrated considerable heterogeneity in salt-regulated CagA expression. These differences are attributable to variation in a DNA motif in the cagA promoter region 28 . Host iron levels have also been associated with gastric cancer risk. In a Colombian population at high risk of gastric cancer, significantly lower serum ferritin levels were found in subjects with advanced gastric precancerous lesions when compared with subjects with non-atropic gastritis 29 . In addition, H. pylori isolates from subjects with the lowest ferritin levels showed greater virulence potential in vitro than isolates from patients with the highest ferritin levels 29 .

(p2.13) Meat consumption is a possible risk factor for gastric cancer. Some studies have found a significant positive association between processed meat consumption and gastric cancer. A large scale European study found a significant association between meat consumption and distal gastric cancer; this association was stronger in subjects infected with H. pylori 30 . With regard to alcohol consumption, results have been inconsistent, although a recent metaanalysis found positive association between heavy alcohol drinking and gastric cancer risk 31 . A factor associated with decreased risk of gastric cancer is the adequate intake of fresh fruits and vegetables 30 . It is thought that the protective mechanism is related to the antioxidant capacity of these foods.
## (s3) Host factors
(p3.0) Genetic polymorphisms. A great variety of genetic polymorphisms have been associated with gastric cancer risk, mainly in some inflammation-related genes, such as IL-1B,IL-1RN,IL-10 and TNF. Interleukin (IL)-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α are potent pro-inflammatory cytokines with suppressive properties for the production of gastric acid. IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine that counteracts the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and variants have been identified in IL-10 that influence its production. The colonization of the gastric mucosa by H. pylori elicits an immune response that includes a wide variety of pro-and antiinflammatory cytokines. It is believed that the gastric acid suppression caused by IL-1β and TNF-α favors the spread of H. pylori from the antrum to the gastric body and fundus, leading to a more extensive and severe gastritis that results in gastric atrophy and subsequently in cancer. In addition, an animal model has demonstrated that elevated levels of IL-1β are sufficient to induce dysplasia and gastric cancer 32 . Subjects carrying the IL1B-511T allele are high producers of IL-1β 33 , and multiple studies confirm this polymorphism as a risk factor for intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma in Caucasian populations (or in non-Asian populations) but not in Asian populations 34,35 . Carriers of IL1RN2 of non-Asian origin have shown an increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma (intestinal and diffuse types) predominantly for distal tumors 35 . Also associated with increased risk of gastric cancer are: the allele TNF-308A in Caucasian populations and the IL8-251AA genotype in Asian populations. A reduced risk of gastric cancer has been found in carriers of IL1B-31C of Asian origin and in carriers of IL10-592A (including all ethnic groups).

(p3.1) Genome-wide association studies, a powerful new approach to identifying susceptibility loci, are used to analyze hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms simultaneously in large populations. Several gastric cancer susceptibility loci have been identified opening new doors in cancer research 36 .

(p3.2) Familial gastric cancer. The risk of developing gastric cancer is two to ten times greater in subjects with a family history 30 . Most familial cases are considered sporadic and seem to be influenced by shared environmental factors, such as H. pylori infection, diet, and socioeconomic status. However, gastric cancer can develop as part of familial cancer syndromes including hereditary diffuse gastric cancer syndrome, Lynch syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and Li-Fraumeni syndrome 37 . Hereditary diffuse gastric cancer is a rare, autosomal dominant disorder that causes 1-3% of cases of familial gastric cancer cases. This syndrome is caused by a variety of mutations of the gene encoding E-cadherin, a cell adhesion protein essential for the maintenance of epithelial tissue architecture 38 . In the presence of one of these mutations, the lifetime risk of developing gastric cancer is 70% to 80%. Therefore, a prophylactic gastrectomy is recommended around 20 years of age.
## (s4) Classification Systems
(p4.0) Gastric adenocarcinomas are classified into two main groups: early and advanced, which are associated with prognosis. The 5-year survival rate in patients with early gastric cancer is between 85 and 100%, while it is only 5-20% for advanced gastric cancer. Early gastric carcinoma is defined as limited to the mucosa or submucosa, regardless of lymph node invasion 39 . Advanced gastric cancer is classified based on the gross appearance into four types: I) polypoid, II) ulcerated with well-defined borders, III) ulcerated with irregular and infiltrative borders, and IV) diffuse infiltrative, with no evidence of mass or ulcer 39 . The last type is usually observed in diffuse type adenocarcinomas and it is known as linitis plastica.

(p4.1) According to their anatomical location, gastric adenocarcinomas are classified as proximal (originating in the cardia) and distal (originating distal to the cardia). The gastric cardia is an ill-defined region, 0.1 to 1.0 cm in length, located immediately distal to the squamocolumnar junction. Tumors involving the squamocolumnar junction are frequently discovered in advanced stages when the size of the tumor makes it difficult to properly assess the site of origin as the esophagus or stomach. Previously, it was left to the judgment of the physicians involved to classify the tumors located at the esophagogastric junction as esophageal or gastric. Currently, a new approach is followed due to the recognition of proximal and distal adenocarcinomas as two distinct biological entities with different clinical features and epidemiological characteristics. Unlike distal adenocarcinomas, cardia adenocarcinomas have shown increased rates in the last several decades, especially in industrialized countries, affect predominantly Caucasian populations, and are associated with gastroesophageal reflux disease but not with H. pylori infection. In addition, cardia adenocarcinomas seem to have a more aggressive natural history with deeper gastric wall invasion, greater lymph node involvement, and a worse prognosis than distal adenocarcinomas 5,40 . In the United States, the five-year survival rate for proximal and distal carcinomas is 14% and 26%, respectively. 5 Based on these observations and due to the similar characteristics shared by esophageal and esophagogastric adenocarcinomas, the 7th edition (2009) of the American Joint Classification of Cancer (AJCC) Tumor Staging Manual, uses the esophageal cancer staging system for all cancers arising in the esophagogastric junction and any cancer arising in the proximal 5 cm of the stomach with involvement of the esophagogastric junction 41 .
## (s5) Histological Classification
(p5.0) There are several histological classification systems, but the most frequently used worldwide is the Laurén classification 42 . Other widely used systems include that of the World Health Organization (WHO) 1 and the classification of the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association 39 . The Laurén classification recognizes two main histological types: intestinal and diffuse, which present differences in clinical and epidemiological characteristics. A small percentage of adenocarcinomas are mixed, presenting features of both types.
## (s6) Prevention and early detection
(p6.0) General measures for gastric cancer prevention are the adequate consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, the avoidance of excessive salt intake and the avoidance of exposure to tobacco smoke. Treatment and eradication of H. pylori infection is recommended in patients with gastritis, and there are a number of studies showing the benefit of anti-H. pylori treatment in reducing both the progression of precancerous lesions and the risk of gastric cancer [50][51][52] . Large-scale H. pylori eradication as a preventive measure for gastric cancer has been the object of controversy. This measure is not recommended due to the risk of the appearance of antimicrobial-resistant strains, not only for H. pylori but for other infectious agents as well. Furthermore, although the efficacy of treatment regimens have shown recent improvements, virtually all schemes present some margin of failure in eradicating the bacteria and the rates of re-infection are often high. Moreover, since H. pylori has accompanied human beings from ancient times, strong arguments exist that consider this bacterium as part of the human gastric microbiome and its elimination as the cause of the increase in prevalence of diseases such as gastroesophageal reflux, Barrett's esophagus, and esophageal and cardia adenocarcinoma 10 .
