# Clinical associations between renal dysfunction and vascular events: A literature review

CorpusID: 16410181 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06d7269d4ae3a72d4a00534eb7b18b4531992ec8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06d7269d4ae3a72d4a00534eb7b18b4531992ec8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) As more new data is gained through the newly published studies, it has become more evident that kidney diseases can result in vascular disorders and ominous events. In chronic kidney diseases, it has been suggested that mortality more often occurs due to cardiovascular events than the kidney disease itself. 1 Several explanations have been proposed for the observed connections by different authors. In this literature review, we try to summarize the existing data that relates kidney disorders to cardiovascular (CAV) and/or cerebrovascular (CBV) events.

(p0.1) The first part of the present review will, therefore, focus on the epidemiological evidence of links between CAV events and impairment of renal function. The second part will deal with the same relationship between CBV and kidney failure. In the third part we will focus on the newly introduced parameter of renal function, cystatin C, which has been proposed as the most accurate biomarker that shows kidney function irrespective of patients demographic factors including age, sex, muscular property, and etcetera. The forth part more delicately analyses the associations between different stages of kidney disease, and incidence and outcome of the mentioned vascular events. In the fifth part we will review data on the treatment of CAV and CBV events in renal disease patients. Finally, in the sixth and last part we make a conclusion of the reviewed articles.
## (s1) Epidemiology of cardiovascular disorders in kidney dysfunction
(p1.0) Epidemiological evidence for the relationship between renal dysfunction and adverse CAV events is most apparent in the hemodialysis population where the mortality rate associated with cardiovascular events exceeds that of the original renal disease; at least 50% of the mortality in the population has been attributed to the CAV events. 2 Therefore, it is observed that cardiovascular disorders are very prevalent in the dialysis population. 40% of patients starting dialysis have evidence of coronary artery disease, and 85% of the same patients represent abnormal left ventricular structure and function. 3 In peritoneal dialysis patients, it has been reported that 44% have left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). 4 In another study, this proportion in pediatric patients on peritoneal dialysis has been reportedly over 48%. 5 In hemodialysis patients, the condition is even worse and a single center reported that 69% of their hemodialysis patients had LVH compared to 45%
## (s2) Review Article
(p2.0) www.mui.ac.ir 14 May in their peritoneal dialysis patients. 6 In pediatric patients, hemodialysis patients have a higher rate of LVH than peritoneal dialysis patients (85% vs. 68%, respectively). 7 Yet, progressive LVH is supposed to be the strongest predictor of sudden death in dialysis patients. 8 The rate of LVH has also been attributed to the degree of creatinine clearance; with more severe hypertrophy in lower rates of creatinine clearance. 9,10 Prolonged QT interval is also a strong predictor of long term mortality in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) patients. 11 It has also been shown that QTc in dialysis patients significantly increases and can be determined in up to 46% of patients. 12,13 A comparable rate of QTc prolongation has also been observed among peritoneal dialysis patients with a prevalence of 41%. 14 The risk of cardiovascular events in pre-dialysis patients of renal function disorders is also augmented. Data from the hypertension optimal treatment (HOT) study indicates that the adjusted relative risks for total mortality and for major cardiovascular and/or cerebrovascular events were 1.65 and 1.58, respectively, in subjects with glomerular filtration rate or GFR < 60 mL/min compared with those with a GFR > 60 mL/ min. 15
## (s3) Epidemiology of cerebrovascular disorders in kidney dysfunction
(p3.0) The topic of cerebrovascular events occurring in the context of renal disease has recently received high levels of attention. The Northern Manhattan Study (NOMAS) followed 3298 stroke-free subjects of mean follow-up time of 6.5 years for vascular outcomes. This study showed that renal failure patients with GFR levels of between 15 and 59 mL/min are at a high risk for stroke (hazard ratio (HR) 2.65; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.47 to 4.77). 16 Moreover, impaired kidney function has been associated with cerebral microbleeding. 17 The incidence of stroke and associated mortality is also higher in kidney disease patients compared with the general population. Presence of anemia, hypoalbuminemia, malnutrition, uremia, and hyperhomocysteinemia in patients with kidney failure are confirmed factors associated with higher incidence of stroke. 18 Hemodialysis and renal transplant patients are at a higher risk of stroke compared with those who do not require renal replacement therapy. In a large cohort of dialysis patients and people of the general population, after adjustment for age, gender, and race, estimated rates of hospitalized stroke were markedly higher for dialysis patients compared to the general population. The highest relative risk of stroke was among Caucasian females on dialysis compared to the general population (relative risk or RR: 6.  21 On the other hand, receiving hemodialysis, alone, worsens the outcome of acute stroke. 22 A very interesting population based study in Japan showed that even a minimal kidney function decline is associated with a significantly higher rate of silent lacunar infarctions and white matter lesions. 23
## (s4) Cystatin C
(p4.0) Cystatin C is a cysteine protease inhibitor excreted by almost all human cells and released into the bloodstream. It is, also, a serum index of renal function which appears to be independent of age, sex, and lean muscle mass, and is reportedly superior to GFR for this estimation. Therefore, it would be a good parameter to investigate the early stages of renal failure and, in this review article, its potential relations to cardiac diseases. This issue has recently attracted much attention.  26 Again, serum creatinine concentrations had much weaker associations with each outcome and only predicted cardiovascular death. This study showed that even minor alterations in kidney function can augment CAV and CBV events and outcomes. A research studied the relevance of cystatin C for stroke events, and the risk of hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke, as compared with the first (lowest) quintile. This study found that the hazard ratios (and 95% CIs) for stroke were as follows: second quintile, 1.97 (1.07 to 3.64); third quintile, 2.71 (1.50 to 4.90); fourth quintile, 3.79 (2.12 to 6.75); fifth quintile, 6.38 (3.60 to 11.32). 27 Followup of the patients and controls also showed that high cystatin C levels were associated with high prevalence of cardiovascular events or death from all causes.  24 In another study, Shlipak et al. investigated a similar issue in elderly patients with normal kidney function based on creatinine based calculations. 29 All these studies show that, irrespective of the parameter used for the definition of GFR, having higher stages of renal disease is associated with higher rates of CAV and CBV www.mui.ac.ir 14 May events, and mortality. This urges us to develop preventive strategies for patients with any stage of renal disease.
