# Personalization in Geographic information systems: A survey

CorpusID: 16804028 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eda3ef0dee2845e720a8207d54b7b27ceaf72cf1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eda3ef0dee2845e720a8207d54b7b27ceaf72cf1)

Fields: Computer Science, Geography

## (s2) Content-based approaches:
(p2.0) The content-based approaches use past actions of individuals to predict their future behavior [10,11]. In content-based methods, systems analyze the content of items and create customer profiles that are a representation of a user's interest in terms of items. Then, the systems establish a comparison between the user profile and the content of items unknown to the user and estimate which of items could be interesting to the user. Recently this methodology has been extended to the spatial context where the items are represented by spatial components (e.g. spatial layers or spatial objects) and the user profile is presented by an interest score to each item on the GIS [12].
## (s6) GIS recommendation approaches
(p6.0) Bellatore and al [5] propose an approach for recommending spatial items to the users basing on the context of analysis and the user profile. The proposed system (named RecoMap) deducts user interests by studying the user's interaction and context to provide personalized spatial recommendations. Two types of spatial recommendations are proposed: recommendations of spatial layers and recommendation of spatial objects. The personalized recommendations change according to the evolution of the user's interaction and behavior with the system. This approach is original in the sense that the recommendation process takes into account both the user interactions with the system as the user context: (user location, user speed, time of the day). Moreover, the approach provides a recommendation system based on an implicit extraction of the user's preferences through his interactions with the system (mouse clicks and other events). The proposed approach can be applied on PDA, PC and phones. Fig. 3 summarizes the Recomap approach. Wilson and al [6] propose an approach for personalizing map content in geographic information system. A system called MAPPER (MAP PERsonalization) that customizes map feature content to the preferences of users interacting with maps is proposed. An implicit method is used to derive the user preferences expressed in the form of a score of importance attached to each frame. Researchers distinguish between weak actions that cannot indicate the exact preferences of the user and strong actions from which it is possible to extract the user profile. The user's preferences are expressed as a preference score for each layer in the map and using data mining techniques, similarities between map layers is established and similar layers are recommended together in personalized maps. The similarity measure between two layers is calculated using the Manhattan distance. The approach is applied whatever is the devise used by the user (mobile or desktop). The approach of Bellatore and al [5] is more complete than the approach of Wilson and al [6]  personalization's factors and the type of recommendation actions. In fact, the approach of Bellatore and al takes into account both the user context and the user behavior with the system in the personalization process. However, the approach of Wilson and al relies only on the user's interactions with the system. Moreover, Bellatore and al propose various type of recommendation (maps recommendations and spatial objects' recommendations), However, Wilson and al, propose only map layers recommendation.

(p6.1) However, the originality of the approach of Wilson and al comparing to the other approaches is that researchers distinguish between weak actions that can not indicate the exact preferences of the user and strong actions from which it is possible to extract the user profile. Only strong actions are used to extract the user's preferences which are expressed as a preference score for each layer in the map. Moreover, this approach ignores personalization of user preferences for each specific element of the map but rather they look at preferences in terms of layer. Finally, data mining techniques are used to establish similarities between layers so that, similar layers can be recommended together in personalized maps. The similarity measure between two layers A and B (simAB) is calculated using the Manhattan distance between A and B.

(p6.2) Oppermann and al [7] propose a system called "Hippie" that proposes personalization and recommendations actions in the domain of museum tours. The input of the personalization approach are the context presented by the current position and direction of the user, the user characteristics like knowledge and interests and the environmental conditions like technical tools and physical arrangements. The information is adapted to the knowledge, interests and preferences of the user. The adaptation to the preferences of the user consists in presenting an adaptive tour and in object's recommendations. Indeed, the recommended objects are new tours containing several selected artworks that have attributes that fits the user interest.
