# Chitosan Composites for Bone Tissue Engineering-An Overview

CorpusID: 17307201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8135b4b176dacad020c1618d3c04e91d7ee511fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8135b4b176dacad020c1618d3c04e91d7ee511fd)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Preparation of chitosan by chemical methods
(p2.0) Chitin (Figure 1) is the second most abundant natural polymer after cellulose. CTS is produced from chitin, which is a natural polysaccharide found in crab, shrimp, lobster, coral, jellyfish, butterfly, ladybug, mushroom and fungi. However, marine crustacean shells are widely used as primary sources for the production of CTS [8,9]. Crab and shrimp are important marine species of great commercial importance in the tropical and subtropical waters of the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans. The waste from crab and shrimp processing has recently become a serious issue in coastal areas. Selective isolation of bioactive material from these wastes is the simplest way to decrease the pollution. It not only reduces the environmental pollution because of the disposal of this under utilized by products of crabs and shrimps, but also increases the potential applications of CTS. Moreover, the chemical hydrolysis and enzymatic methods, widely used for the isolation for CTS from marine crustaceans shell, are quite inexpensive.  In chemical hydrolysis method, four main steps are involved in order to produce CTS from marine crustacean shell as depicted in Figure 2. They are (i) demineralization; (ii) deproteinization; (iii) discoloration and (iv) deacetylation. To produce 1 kg of 70% deacetylated CTS from shrimp shells, 6.3 kg of HCl and 1.8 kg of NaOH are required [8,9].
## (s3) Enzymatic hydrolysis method
(p3.0) Chitosan can be isolated directly from the cell walls of certain fungi, but commercially available CTS are usually prepared from chitin. CTS can be produced via traditional chemical method, however, problems exist related to poor quality and environmental chemical pollution [10]. The enzymatic method could provide an alternative to the current chemical production method. The degree of deacetylation and molecular weight of the CTS depends on the source and preparation method (molecular weight ranges from 300 to over 1,000 kDa, degree of deacetylation from 30% to 95%). CTS can be degraded by enzyme and form various small molecular weight fragments. Chitosanase has been used for the preparation of small molecular weight CTS with various methods such as batch reactor, column reactor and ultrafiltration membrane reactor [11]. The CTS has been extracted with various enzymes like lysozyme, snailase, neutral protease and novel chitin deacetylase from Scopulariopsis brevicaulis. The average molecular weight of CTS obtained using the enzymatic method (267.97 kDa) has been reported to be far greater than that obtained by chemical method (84.04 kDa) [10,12].
## (s4) Properties and application of chitosan
(p4.0) CTS is a copolymer consisting of β-(1→4)-2-acetamido-d-glucose and β-(1→4)-2-amino-D-glucose unit linkages ( Figure 3) [13,14]. Over the past two decades, CTS has been developed considerably in biomedical applications due to its high biocompatibility, biodegradability, porous structure, suitability for cell ingrowth, osteoconduction and intrinsic antibacterial nature [15], CTS offers a wide range of applications, including cartilage tissue engineering [16], wound healing [17] and orthopedic applications [15]. Degradable polymeric implants eliminate the need for a second surgical operation and can prevent some of the problems associated with stress shielding during post-healing, and can also be used simultaneously to deliver therapeutic drugs to treat infections or growth factors to accelerate new bone growth [18]. There is a growing interest in exploiting the field of bone tissue engineering for composite preparation. This has created a wide range of application in the preparation of artificial organs.
## (s5) Composite Materials for Bone Tissue Engineering
(p5.0) Composite materials are now playing predominant role as scaffolds in bone tissue engineering. CTS has numerous advantageous properties for orthopedic applications, as described above and elsewhere [15], which make it ideal as a bone graft substituent. CTS scaffolds are flexible and their mechanical properties are inferior to those of normal bone, as it is unable to support load bearing bone implants. Moreover, CTS itself is not osteoconductive, although addition of ceramic materials improves its osteoconductivity and mechanical strength.

(p5.1) CTS scaffolds alone cannot imitate all the properties of natural bone. The substantial development of composite materials with CTS mimics all the properties of bone. As proven, calcium phosphate materials are osteoconductive to mimic the inorganic portion of natural bone, while CTS/HAp composite materials show promise in mimicking the organic portion as well as the inorganic portion of natural bone. Several studies have been conducted with CTS/HAp composite materials for bone tissue engineering [15,18,[21][22][23][24][25][26][27][28][29][30]. Calcium phosphate compounds are of great interest in the field of bone tissue engineering. Hydroxyapatite [Ca 10 (PO 4 ) 6 (OH) 2 ] is one of the most stable forms of calcium phosphate and it occurs in the bone as a major component (60 to 65%) [31]. HAp also possesses a variety of uses, including orthopedic, dental and maxillofacial applications. Therefore, HAp has recently emerged as an important compound for artificial bone preparation. It stimulates osteoconduction being gradually replaced by the host bone after implantation. It is being used for orthopedic replacements, especially in bone regeneration and dental implant treatment. The mechanical properties of HAp are poor, though, so it cannot be used for load bearing bone tissues. Polymers have been used to improve the mechanical properties of HAp (compressive strength, Young's modulus, fracture toughness) [32]. When CTS is combined with HAp, it might be able to mimic the function of natural bone.
## (s8) In vitro study of CTS/HAp composites
(p8.0) CTS have been widely used in orthopedic treatment since it was shown to promote osteoblastic cell growth. When CTS is incorporated with HAp, it remarkably increases the osteoblastic cell growth on the scaffolds [15,21,24,25,27]. The 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method has been frequently used to determine the cytotoxicity of CTS composite materials. All the scaffolds' results showed that the CTS/HAp composite had no cytotoxicity with positive cell attachment and proliferation growth of the osteoblast cells [15,[23][24][25]50,51]. The composite scaffolds possess a pore size of 100-200 µm, providing a spatial arrangement of cells (10-30 µm) and thus cells are able to migrate towards the composite [55]. It was observed that when the osteoblast cells were cultured in the medium of phosphorylated CTS/HAp, the cell morphology changed within 30 min of seeding and later became triangular at 24 h, polygonal at 48 h, and finally, aggregated to be indistinct at 5 days [56]. Apart from HAp, other calcium phosphate minerals also provide adhesion and cell proliferation when combined with CTS. The cell proliferation and adhesion has been found with osteoblast mouse cells MC3T3-E1 and L929 cells in CTS/calcium phosphate specimens [28,57].

(p8.1) The alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP) is considered to be an important marker of the differentiation of osteoblast cells at a relatively early bone forming stage and has been widely used to evaluate ALP for scaffold materials. The CTS/HAp composite scaffolds possess higher ALP activity compared to the CTS scaffold whereas the highest ALP activity has been achieved in the composite containing 30-40% of HAp with good cell proliferation; however, cell proliferation decreases with an increase in the HAp concentration [21,51,58]. The modified CTS and its composites are found to have good cell proliferation and higher ALP activity then compared to non modified CTS. CTS glutamate and HAp containing cultured osteoblasts were found to be promising biomaterials for repair bone defects in vivo [56,59].
## (s9) Chemical interaction of CTS/HAp composites
(p9.0) Ca 2+ ions appear on the terminated surface of HAp crystals, which have coordination number of seven and are strictly held in the structure (Figure 4). Therefore, there is a possibility to form coordination bonds between the -NH 2 of CTS and Ca 2+ of HAp [24,60]. 
## (s10) Carbon Nano Tubes for Bone Tissue Engineering
(p10.0) Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are allotropes of carbon with a cylindrical nanostructure and constructed with length-to-diameter ratio of up to 28,000,000:1. These cylindrical carbon molecules have novel properties, which make them potentially useful in many applications in nanotechnology, electronics, optics and materials sciences. CNTs have a high Young's modulus (1.0-1.8 TPa), high tensile strength  and high elongation at break (10-30%). In addition, they have extremely small size (about 1-10 nm in diameter), high aspect ratio (>1,000), high structural and chemical stability, and stiffness, as well as remarkable electrical, thermal, optical and bioactive properties [61,62]. All these properties make CNTs especially promising candidates as reinforcement fillers in the development of nano composites. It has been observed that the combination of CNT with CTS leads to an enormous increase in the mechanical strength of the composite [63].

(p10.1) CNTs hold great interest with respect to biomaterials, particularly those to be positioned in contact with bone such as prostheses for arthroplasty, plates or screws for fracture fixation, drug delivery systems, and scaffolding for bone regeneration. The most important concerns for the use of CNTs as a biomaterial are tissue safety, but only few reports have addressed the toxicity of CNTs. In particular, bone tissue compatibility is extremely important for using CNTs in biomaterials. Usui et al., who first developed CNT, found that these tubes have good bone tissue compatibility and are capable of permitting bone repair and becoming closely integrated with bone tissue and accelerate bone formation stimulated by recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein-2 [64].

(p10.2) A big challenge in the bone tissue engineering is mechanical strength improvement of the scaffold materials. One of the main purposes of creating CTS composites is to improve the mechanical strength of the material. CNT is a promising material to fulfill that gap due to its strong mechanical properties. Several authors have developed many composites as well as scaffold materials with CNT. It has been observed that cell adhesion on multi-walled CNT (MWCNT) coated dish is much higher than that on the collagen coated dish [65].
## (s11) Preparation of CTS/CNT composite
(p11.0) One of the major problems in the preparation of CTS with CNT materials is the difficulty to disperse the CNTs well in the polymer matrix. Several methods have been used for this purpose such as controlled surface deposition and cross linking process [66], simple solution evaporation method [63], thermally induced phase separation followed by freeze drying [67], electrodeposition [68], spray layer by layer technique [69], pH and electrical actuation [70] and wet spinning method [71].
## (s12) Mechanical properties of CTS/CNT composite
(p12.0) Wang et al. reported that CNT is homogeneously dispersed throughout the CTS matrix. When 0.8% of CNT was introduced in the CTS matrix, the mechanical properties, including the tensile modulus and strength of the nanocomposite were greatly improved by about 93% and 99% [63]. A small addition of CNTs significantly improves the tensile properties of CTS matrix, and the mechanical properties increase with the increase of CNTs' loading (0.4 wt% of CNTs filler) whereas the tensile modulus and strength of the nanocomposite increases dramatically by about 78% and 94%. Due to the aggregation of CNTs within the CTS matrix at higher concentrations, with further increases of the loading level of CNTs, the tensile modulus only increases slightly, while the tensile strength remains stable. For instance, with 2.0 wt% of MWNTs filler, the tensile modulus of the CTS matrix is 2.15 GPa, only 0.07 GPa higher than that of 0.8 wt% of MWNTs. The tensile test results indicate the mechanical properties of the CTS/CNTs [63].

(p12.1) In another study, the tenacity of neat CTS fiber was recorded as 96 MPa, whereas that of CTS reinforced with purified but non-functionalized single-walled CNTs (p-SWCNTs) increased from 132 MPa for 0.01 wt% SWCNT addition to 180 MPa for 0.4 wt% SWCNT addition. Even at very low SWCNT concentration (0.01 wt%), a significant increase in tenacity was observed. On the other hand, on incorporation of functionalized CNT (f-CNT), the tenacity increased from 136 MPa for 0.01 wt% SWCNT addition to 226 MPa for 0.4 wt% addition. This continuous improvement in tenacity (even at higher SWCNT concentrations) may be ascribed to better dispersion as well as interaction of functionalized nanotubes in CTS [70]. This might be because of the strong chemical interaction as functionalized CNT's COOH group interacts with amine group of CTS matrix.
## (s14) Chemical interactions between CTS/CNT
(p14.0) The raw CNTs are mainly hydrophobic and poorly miscible with water. The acid treated CNTs contain many defects and hydrophilic groups, such as -OH and -COOH, which are very helpful for improving the solubility of CNTs in water. CTS, a hydrophilic biopolymer, possesses three kinds of functional groups viz. amino, primary, and secondary hydroxyl groups in a glucosamine unit, and the functionalized CNTs contain carboxylic and hydroxyl groups. There is great possibility that strong hydrogen bonds may form between chitosan and the CNTs ( Figure 5). The compatibility and strong interaction between MWCNTs fillers and the matrix greatly enhances the dispersion as well as the interfacial adhesion, thus significantly increasing the mechanical properties of the matrix [63]. The covalent functionalisation of CTS and CNT improves the interaction between CTS with CNT, reduces the damage of CNT and increases its mechanical properties. 
## (s15) Remaining Challenges and Future Directions for Bone Biomaterials
(p15.0) The organic portion plays a major role in bone implants, therefore their matrices are often hybrid in composition. Apart from CTS, HAp and CNT, large numbers of synthetic polymers have been used for the preparation of composite materials for artificial bone. It was observed that they showed better results in the case of cell viability, cell proliferation, alkaline phosphate activity and mineralization assays [75]. Several synthetic polymers have been used to prepare artificial scaffolding materials but have a number of disadvantages. One of the major drawbacks of synthetic polymers are their degradation times which are half than that of a natural polymer. Nowadays, synthetic polymers like poly lactic acid, poly-L-lactide acid, polyethylene glycol, polyhydroxyl ethyl methacrylate with carbon nano tubes [76], poly caprolactone and polylactic-co-glycolic acid are widely used for scaffold materials. The synthetic polymer not only increases the scaffold strength, but also acts as a drug delivery device to induce bioactivity. Whether synthetic polymers would be able to reinforce the mechanical properties of HAp, is still a burning question.

(p15.1) Even though CNT have tremendous mechanical strength and are able to mimic the natural bone function, the uniform dispersion of CNT in the CTS and HAp matrix still remains a challenge. CNTs are not easily dispersed and bundles form in the polymer matrix. CNT should also be in a very pure form for biomedical applications as metal-containing CNTs are toxic to cells, and the production of pure forms of CNTs is another challenge. The cytotoxity of CNT is still a controversial topic due to errors in cytotoxic analysis techniques, as reported earlier, and the toxicity of CNT might vary depending on the cell type, purity of the CNTs and functionalisation.
