# Categorisation of continuous risk factors in epidemiological publications: a survey of current practice

CorpusID: 17948491 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c85e709e39444c1c85c95f07504c34d55fa8ec0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c85e709e39444c1c85c95f07504c34d55fa8ec0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Estimation and Inference
(p5.0) Estimation. Twenty-nine articles presented a continuous analysis (8 continuous only and 21 with both categorical and continuous) ( Table 7). Of these, 23 (79%) presented a point estimate per 1-unit increase of the exposure variable, one presented the exposure effect as the difference between the 90 th and 10 th percentile [33], while five articles provided no point estimate. Twenty-two articles also provided a confidence interval (CI) or standard error (SE) for the estimate.

(p5.1) Fifty articles presented categorical analyses (29 categorical only and 21 both continuous and categorical). Of these, 10 (20%) presented an estimate by group for all groups usually (50%) accompanied by a CI or SE. Thirty-eight (76%) articles presented an estimate by group relative to a reference group, accompanied by a CI or SE in all but one case. Of those, most (n = 30, 79%) selected an extreme category (highest: n = 5, 13%; lowest: n = 25, 66%) as the reference group, whilst 21% (n = 8) chose a category in the middle of the distribution. When selecting the reference group of non-equally distributed categories, the largest group may be selected. For example, in categorising calcium intake to assess its effect on prostate cancer risk, Park et al. [32] selected the second of six predefined groups which, we note, is the largest group.

(p5.2) Inference. Most articles reported results in terms of statistical significance, either by formal hypothesis testing (i.e. by reporting p-values) or by an inferred hypothesis test via interpretation of confidence intervals (Table 7). Of the 29 articles with a continuous analysis, 27 performed statistical testing either formally by use of p-values (19 articles) or implicitly by interpreting confidence intervals (8 articles). Risk of mild-moderate intellectual disability, by % optimal birth weight [21]. Reason for inclusion as an example. Seven groups in a large cohort, reference is middle group. Numbers in each group were not provided in the table. Of the 50 articles with a categorical analysis, 20 used some kind of trend test: most commonly by assigning a score to each category (where a 1-unit increase in the score corresponded to moving to the next highest category in the order of categories). One alternative was to assign a category mean or median to each member of a category and then analyse that as a continuous variable in the appropriate statistical model, e.g. Park et al. [32]. Overall, global tests across all categories without use of their ordering were used in 8 articles, all using p-values. Pairwise tests comparing all groups to a reference group were used in 26 articles, 11 by p-values and 15 via interpretation of confidence intervals.
## (s6) Discussion
(p6.0) Understanding the relationship between a continuous exposure variable (risk factor) and a health outcome involves determining the direction, strength and shape of that relationship. Our survey demonstrates that categorisation is commonly used (86% of such articles surveyed), as was seen in an earlier survey (84% of such articles surveyed) [14]. With its breadth of information, the current survey has shown that there is great diversity in practice. The categorisation of continuous confounding variables and continuous outcome variables, although not addressed in this article, also plays an important role in the analysis of epidemiological data.
## (s7) Motivation for categorisation
(p7.0) Much research exists detailing the advantages and disadvantages of categorisation vs. analysing variables continuously (Appendix 2). From a statistical viewpoint, categorisation of a continuous variable can often result in a loss of statistical efficiency [4][5][6]. Some authors [10,11] advise against the practice of categorisation irrespective of the number of categories. More practical considerations, however, may favour categorisation for ease of interpretation of parameter estimates, their presentation to less statistically-minded public health professionals, and may be motivated by use of clinically relevant 'cut points' if they exist. Categorisation is often used in conjunction with a continuous analysis, for example, to check for, or model, non-linear effects. Some authors [12,13] have advocated the use of alternative, more flexible modelling approaches using the continuous variable such as spline regression modelling and generalised additive models to model non-linear outcome-exposure relationships, which avoid the need to categorise. Such modelling approaches are more statistically complex which may limit their wide-spread use, and can pose difficulties of interpretation e.g. is statistical uncertainty adequately expressed, and does the model extrapolate beyond the observed range of the data.
## (s8) Specific Choice of Categorisation
(p8.0) When categorisation of a continuous risk factor is performed, decisions on the nature of the categorisation are For the 58 articles with a continuous risk factor. a More than one estimate type and more than one statistical test is possible: 40 (69%) articles had one type of estimate (8 from 'continuous', 27 from 'categorical' and 5 from 'both') whilst 18 (31%) articles had two types of estimate (2 from 'categorical' and 16 from 'both'); 35 (60%) articles had one type of statistical test (8 from 'continuous', 20 from 'categorical' and 7 from 'both'); 21 (36%) articles had two types of statistical test (9 from 'categorical' and 12 from 'both') and 2 (3%) articles (from 'both') had three types of statistical test. b A continuous analysis estimate given as difference between 90 th and 10 th percentile. c Reference group is the background population overall i.e. standardised incidence. d One article gave hazard ratios per one category increase, another article compared 1 st and 4 th quartiles only, the final article reported the mean by categories. e A t-test comparing means in two outcome groups.

(p8.1) needed i.e. the number of categories and the choice of cut-points. These may differ depending on the reason for categorisation and the size of the study. For example, a larger number of groups may be used when the study is large or when the purpose of categorisation is to check for non-linear effects. When the purpose is to assess effect modification (subgroup analyses) lack of statistical power may necessitate fewer groups.

(p8.2) There is much theoretical work on the nature of categorisation [4][5][6]. Equally-sized groups (such as using quartiles) have the merit of objective simplicity but are not the most statistically efficient choice. For instance, with Normal data it is more efficient to have larger groups in the centre of the distribution making the extreme groups smaller and hence even more extreme. Statistical efficiency increases with the number of groups [4,6], i.e. the more crude the grouping (e.g. 2 groups), the greater the loss of statistical power. Statistical efficiency is usually greatest using a continuous analysis, provided the model fit (e.g. linearity assumption) is good.

(p8.3) In selecting the category boundaries it is necessary to determine how many categories will be formed as sufficient individuals/events are needed in each group. Sensibly, only studies with large sample size or a strong exposure-outcome relationship would be able to support a large number of categories. If 'natural' or clinically important cut-points are relevant for the exposure variable then it is still important to verify that sufficient information is present in each of the categories for a robust analysis. If not, merging of some of the categories may be required.

(p8.4) Dichotomisation of the exposure variable is strongly advised against. In terms of statistical power, it is equivalent to discarding a third of the data [1,2] and makes it impossible to detect non-linearity in the exposure-outcome relationship. In our survey, no article solely presented results from dichotomisation, but three articles did place more emphasis on dichotomised results.

(p8.5) Multiple alternative categorisations should be undertaken with care and interpreted cautiously, as deliberate or subconscious data dredging could lead to a choice of grouping that accentuates an association thus increasing the risk of a false positive finding, and/or an exaggerated estimate of the exposure/outcome relationship. However, additional investigation of effect modification (subgroup analyses) may necessitate a secondary categorisation with fewer groups.

(p8.6) Inevitably readers can only assess categorisations reported in publications: other categorisation choices may have been analysed but not included. As a result, our survey of current practice is limited to what is published with no awareness of authors' selections in what they chose to report so that a full critical evaluation of those choices is not possible here. Authors usually did not explicitly report the reasons for the number of categories and choice of category boundaries, or specify whether these were chosen prior to analysis and whether they were the only categories explored.
