# Treatments for reversing warfarin anticoagulation in patients with acute intracranial hemorrhage: a structured literature review

CorpusID: 17017693 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6413d2e151cb0adadfc19f51caf9ca335df9a69](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6413d2e151cb0adadfc19f51caf9ca335df9a69)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Results
(p3.0) The available literature consists primarily of small case series and retrospective cohort studies with the majority classified as low, thus limiting the strength of findings [14]. Variation in federal regulatory drug agency approvals also impacts reporting as PCC is approved and considered a standard reversal treatment in most nations [6]. The US Federal Drug Agency, however, has yet to approve a PCC formulation that is sufficient for warfarin reversal, thus leaving thawed plasma as the only available clotting factor option for rapid reversal.

(p3.1) This review focuses on warfarin-associated intracranial hemorrhage (WAICH) from spontaneous causes; however, the acute management of WAICH appears to include the same treatments regardless of whether the ICH was spontaneous or traumatic. However, the literature on traumatic WAICH is limited because of small sample sizes (Table 1) [15][16][17][18].
## (s5) Administration of prothrombin complex concentrates versus fresh frozen plasma
(p5.0) Warfarin inhibits the production of vitamin K-dependent clotting factors; therefore, patients with WAICH should have their clotting factors repleted. Treatment options for the repletion of clotting factors include FFP and PCC.

(p5.1) FFP contains all coagulation factors in non-concentrated form. FFP is more universally available at hospitals, especially in the US, compared to PCC. Administration of FFP, a blood product, requires compatibility testing and carries the risk of blood borne infection transmission and transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI). FFP is stored frozen, thus requiring at least 15-20 min to thaw [6]. Large FFP volumes (800 to 3,500 mL) are often needed to treat serious hemorrhages [22]. This large volume may result in acute decompensated heart failure in patients with atrial fibrillation or cardiac valve disease and ventricular dysfunction. Less common adverse events including allergic reactions are also possible with FFP [6].

(p5.2) PCC contains coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X, and proteins C, S, and Z in concentrated form [6]. European and Australian practice protocols recommend the use of PCC in bleeding emergencies [6]. PCC is not widely available in US hospitals, and, while cheaper than rfVIIa, it is more expensive than FFP. PCC risks include potential thrombotic complications and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) [6]. The optimal PCC dosing is calculated according to patient age, body weight, severity of INR prolongation, and desired level of INR correction with typical dosages of 25 to 50 IU/kg [19].

(p5.3) Studies have compared the use of PCC and FFP in patients with WAICH, measuring which treatment corrected the INR faster (  FIXCC, similar to other PCC formulations, contains high concentrations of activated vitamin K-dependent factors (factors II, VII, IX, and X). The study included 13 patients, 8 receiving FFP alone and 5 receiving FFP and FIXCC. All patients received vitamin K 10 mg subcutaneously (SQ). They reported significant differences in time to correction, rate of correction, and volume of FFP required for correction between the FFP group (mean 8.9 h, 2,700 cc) and the FIXCC + FFP group (mean 2.95 h, 399 cc) [22]. Another study retrospectively evaluated ten patients treated with FIXCC + FFP + vitamin K and nine patients treated with FFP + vitamin K alone [26]. FIXCC used along with FFP and vitamin K trends toward faster normalization of INR than with FFP and vitamin K alone.

(p5.4) In conclusion, PCC is statistically significantly faster than FFP at correcting the INR in patients taking warfarin. None of these studies, however, demonstrated a statistically significant clinical outcome difference between those treated with FFP or PCC.
## (s6) Does rapid correction of anticoagulation improve patient mortality?
(p6.0) Numerous small studies ( Table 4) have reported that the warfarin reversal agents result in more rapid INR normalization and decreased intracranial hematoma expansion [36][37][38][39][40]. The medical literature's reporting of these reversal agents' impact on patient survival is limited to relatively small, primarily retrospective, studies that have investigated whether treatment with a single agent, combination therapy of FFP, vitamin K, PCC, or no reversal therapy affects patient mortality (  [20]. Either single therapy or combinations of vitamin K, factor IX, FFP, or no therapy was administered. There was no evidence that any treatment strategy was superior to the other [20]. Huttner et al. looked at 55 patients with WAICH and compared vitamin K, PCC, and FFP alone or in some combination. They found the incidence and extent of hematoma growth were significantly lower in the PCC-treated group [42]. If the INR was normalized within 2 h, then the influences of FFP and PCC on hematoma growth were similar [42].

(p6.1) In conclusion, multiple small retrospective studies with many treatment arms did not find any difference in one treatment over another or no treatment at all in correcting the INR of those patients with WAICH [20,21,41,42]. However, these may very well reflect a type II error given their underpowered sample sizes. A large well-designed prospective study is still needed to determine whether rapid correction of anticoagulation is effective at improving patient-oriented outcomes (i.e., 
