# Clinical Interventions in Aging Dovepress Nonpharmacological interventions to treat physical frailty and sarcopenia in older patients: a systematic overview -the SeNATOR Project ONTOP Series

CorpusID: 1710343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d04b00b3a7329b3f159392fea4fdbe813ab9af)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) This paper is part of the ONTOP project, a work package of a European Union-funded FP 7 research named SENATOR (Software ENgine for the Assessment & Optimization of drug and non-drug Therapy in Older persons [www.senatorproject.eu]); detailed methodology of ONTOP has been published previously. 18 Briefly, the ONTOP objective is to develop a literature overview of reviews of nonpharmacological treatments of 10 prevalent medical conditions affecting older people. The present paper reports evidence-based interventions for the treatment of sarcopenia and frailty in older people.
## (s4) Risk of bias assessment
(p4.0) Assessment of bias in the included primary studies was carried out by using criteria from the Cochrane Collaboration. 21 Domains assessed were random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other potential biases such as differences in baseline conditions. Overall risk of bias was graded by including each study in one of three categories: low risk, high risk, and unclear risk. Two reviewers independently assessed the risk of bias of individual studies, and any differences in quality assessment results were resolved through consensus.
## (s10) Primary studies
(p10.0) Overall, the 10 SRs 22-31 yielded 140 primary studies, of which 7 32-38 satisfied the inclusion criteria, but three of these presented the results of the same study. An additional relevant study was included after manual search 39 (Table 4). The six primary studies finally included are listed in Table 5. Table 6 summarizes the risks of bias in each study, which was mostly low due to the nature of the interventions except for performance bias.
## (s11) Sarcopenia
(p11.0) Five out of 10 SRs 22-26 included sarcopenic populations. From these SRs, only one primary study (Kim et al) 32 satisfied the inclusion criteria. In most cases, subjects were not defined by having sarcopenia, but by a range of other conditions, and in many cases, healthy subjects were included (Supplementary material 2). In addition, one relevant study was found after manual search. 39 evidence of exercise and amino acid supplementation (AAS) to treat sarcopenia in community-dwelling older people  
## (s14) PF
(p14.0) Five out of 10 SRs 27-31 included physically frail populations. From these SRs, 4 RCTs 33-38 (described in 6 articles) were included; three articles [33][34][35] described different aspects of the same study (the Frailty Intervention Trial -FIT), so that they are reported together here. Again, the main reason of exclusion was the use of varied nonstandard definitions of frailty (Supplementary material 3). The number of patients included in these trials ranged from 32 to 241. All trials included participants over 70 years old, except one study performed in nursing homes, that included patients aged over 85 years. 36 One trial included only women. 38 The study characteristics are described in Table 5. In general, risk of bias was low, except for blinding of participants (Table 6).
## (s19) Summary of main results
(p19.0) This overview was aimed to identify SRs of nonpharmacological interventions used to treat PF and sarcopenia in older patients from different care settings. From 10 SRs 22-31 meeting the inclusion criteria, data from 5 RCTs (7 articles)  and one additional identified RCT, 39 all published in the last 4 years were examined. In order to provide a summary for decision makers and guideline developers, the risk of bias (RoB) and the GRADE quality of evidence were assessed across outcomes for each individual study. The overall GRADE quality of evidence was judged to be low (Tables 7 and 8). In summary, this evidence points to some efficacy of physical exercise programs (that include resistance and balance training) in improving relevant outcomes. An additional relevant finding is the small number of articles that use standard definitions of frailty and sarcopenia.
## (s23) 738
(p23.0) Lozano-Montoya et al seem to support this recommendation, as it showed significant improvement on MS and PP (SPPB, gait speed) with a multidisciplinary intervention based on the assessment of deficiencies versus usual care. In addition, the BGS 44 recognizes that exercise, in particular strength and balance training, improves both mobility and functional ability. However, the optimal exercise regimen to minimize frailty and sarcopenia remains uncertain. Moreover, the BGS indicates that nutritional interventions also need to be considered, although evidence to support this remains limited. Nutrition recommendations currently include optimizing protein intake and correcting vitamin D insufficiency. The European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism (ESPEN) 40 recommends that the diet should provide at least 1.0-1.2 g protein/kg body weight/day and up to 1.2-1.5 g protein/kg body weight/day for malnourished/at risk of malnutrition older people, but this recommendation is based on data coming from longitudinal epidemiological studies, not on intervention trials. Higher intake of proteins is recommended for individuals with severe illness or injury. Daily physical activity or exercise (RT and aerobic exercise) should be undertaken by all older people, for as long as possible. These recommendations are in line with the results of the study by Kim et al in 2012 32 included in this overview: an improvement in MS and PP (measured by GS) was achieved with the combination of exercise and AAS. However, in the study by Kim et al in 2015, 38 based on nutritional supplementation with phospholipids, an improvement only on PP was shown.

(p23.1) Although MS and PP are relevant intermediate outcomes, 41 the studies included in this overview did not show improvements on hard outcomes, such as reduction in the incidence of falls or improved basic ADLs, with the exception of the only study performed in a very old population living in a nursing home. 36 In this study, exercise significantly reduced the incidence of falls and attenuated ADL functional loss. Current guidelines of frailty do not consider these outcomes.
## (s24) Strengths and weaknesses of the study
(p24.0) This study has several strengths compared with previously published studies, namely: 1) The authors conducted comprehensive searches in four electronic databases to ensure all published trials were identified. The search terms for this overview of SRs were intentionally broad to capture all studies, and this led to .9,000 abstracts. They used a multidisciplinary review group of authors with experience in conducting SRs to independently examine and select studies.

(p24.1) 2) This is the first overview of SRs fully designed to gather the evidence of nonpharmacological interventions on specific populations defined by validated definitions of PF and sarcopenia; hence, the populations considered in this review are relatively homogeneous. An issue raised in previous SRs was the heterogeneous populations defined by very different and nonstandardized criteria, both for sarcopenia and frailty.

(p24.2) 3) The interventions considered are deliverable in clinical practice. 4) The outcome measures considered in this study were pre-specified by a panel of experts and use validated and reproducible measures. Variability in outcome measures is limiting research in this area. 42 5) The strength of evidence is evaluated according to the GRADE system.
