# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Archaeal/Eukaryal RNase P: subunits, functions and RNA diversification

CorpusID: 18566669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d38dab7a59bedc7f6f0fb3ed4d8458b76b9e21e8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) NEW FUNCTIONS FOR EUKARYAL RNASE P
(p1.0) Recent discoveries have unveiled an unexpected role for human RNase P in transcription of small non-coding RNA genes (ncRNA) by RNA polymerase III (Pol III) and in efficient transcription of rRNA genes by Pol I (68)(69)(70). NcRNA genes, such as those that code for rRNA, 5S rRNA, tRNA and 7SL RNA, are essential for protein translation and cell growth. Another surprising discovery relates to the observations that long ncRNAs, such as the metastasis associated in lung adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1) and multiple endocrine neoplasia b (MEN-b) transcript, are processed by human and mouse RNase P (71,72). These transcripts are cleaved at pre-tRNA-like structures located upstream of their 3 0 -end cleavage/polyadenylation signals (71,72). The 3 0 -end cleavages of mRNA and snRNA transcripts are typically carried out by specific endoribonucleases that exist in multiprotein complexes, i.e. CPSF/CstF and Integrator, respectively (73,74). These latter complexes associate with chromatin and operate cotranscriptionally through their recruitment by Pol II (73,74). Therefore, it  Figure 1. Conservation and evolution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P. Archaeal RNase P has five proteins: Rpp21, Rpp29, Rpp30, Pop5 and Rpp38 (L7Ae). The association of Alba with archaeal RNase P remains in question (see text). Human nuclear RNase P has ten distinct protein subunits, termed Rpp14, Rpp20, Rpp21, Rpp25, Rpp29, Rpp30, Rpp38, Rpp40, Pop1 and Pop5. Five of these subunits share archaeal homologs. Rpp20 and Rpp25 are homologous to Alba in archaea. In Eukarya, an ancestral RNase P RNA likely gave rise to RNase MRP RNA by a gene duplication mechanism; MRP RNA is part of RNase MRP and MRP-TERT (see text). Except for Rpp21, all the other proteins of human RNase P are shared by RNase MRP, but it remains unknown if these proteins are also associated with MRP-TERT. In S. cerevisiae, nucleolar RNase MRP possesses two additional proteins, termed RMP1 and SNM1 (see ref.
## (s3) FUNCTIONAL H1 RNA AND MRP RNAs IN THE CYTOPLASM?
(p3.0) H1 RNA (human RPR) is present at 50 000 copies per cell, while there are 30 000 copies of MRP RNA (87). These two transcripts can be detected in the nucleus as well as in the cytoplasm of cells, with the bulk of H1 RNA in the latter (88,89). Although at least one form of human mitochondrial RNase P activity includes an RNP comprising H1 RNA (87,90), the entire cytoplasmic H1 RNA is likely not reflecting the pool en route to mitochondria. It remains unknown if H1 RNA associates with its cognate protein subunits in the cytoplasm to form a RNP complex before being transported to the nucleus, as is the case with the spliceosomal U snRNPs. Therefore, the functional implications for the existence of H1 RNA in the cytoplasm remain unclear. Nevertheless, recent findings reveal that an active form of Pol III exists in the cytoplasm (91,92). Pol III senses foreign DNA in the cytoplasm and uses it as a template to synthesize 5 0 ppp-RNA that activates type I interferon production and mount an innate immune response (91,92). Since H1 RNA is required for Pol III transcription in the nucleus (68,70), it is worth testing if H1 RNA (free or as part of an RNP) is required for the biogenesis of cytoplasmic Pol III products generated using either poly dA-dT or viral DNA as templates.

(p3.1) Computer-aided comparative searches of databases for putative RPRs revealed a camelpox virus gene candidate, which exhibits 98% homology with all other orthopoxviruses and encodes an RNA with some secondary structure similarity to bacterial/archaeal RPRs (93); but this RNase P-like viral RNA did not show any pre-tRNA processing activity when tested in vitro. While this viral transcript is expressed in infected HeLa cells, it reduced by only 20% the pre-tRNA processing activity of endogenous RNase P, thus ruling out its ability to sequester human Rpps in vivo (93). However, it is unclear if such a modest effect on RNase P activity might somehow translate into viral replication gains. Nonetheless, the camelpox virus RNase P-like RNA might be used to interfere with Pol III transcription. If Pol III is employed as a sensor of viral DNA, then it is possible that Pol III is targeted by viral RNase P-like RNA decoys to counter the antiviral response mechanism of the host. Therefore, an experiment to assess if the camelpox virus RNase P-like RNA can inhibit Pol III transcription in extracts or cells merits consideration.
## (s4) EVOLUTION AND FUNCTIONAL DIVERSIFICATION VIA RNA
(p4.0) The eukaryotic genome is pervasively transcribed for the production of short and long ncRNAs (94,95). Genomic means for the invention of new regulatory and functional RNAs include DNA-and RNA-mediated mechanisms (96). Diversification of RNA function through gene duplication is one such DNA-mediated mechanism (96). Gene duplication is a key path to the evolution of new biological functions, a phenomenon called neo-functionalization, since one or more of the new gene copies would be liberated from selection placed on the original copy and would have the chance to develop a new function (56,97). It is widely accepted that an ancestral RNase P RNA gave rise to RNase MRP RNA (Figure 1) via gene duplication in eukaryotes (98,99), although some other less likely alternatives have been considered (98). The RNA moiety of RNase MRP is related in sequence and structure to the RNase P RNA (100). Like RNase P, RNase MRP acts as an endoribonuclease but with altered specificity in processing of rRNA (100,101). This nucleolar RNase MRP shares most of its protein subunits with RNase P (100), even though the specificity and function of its catalytic RNA moiety have diverged in evolution. In yeast, RNase MRP cleaves the 5 0 -UTR of the B-type cyclin (CLB2) mRNA, and triggers rapid degradation of this mRNA by the 5 0 to 3 0 exoribonuclease Xrn1p (102). Since ubiquitination-mediated CLB2 protein degradation by the anaphase promoting complex is critical for progression of cells to anaphase, cleavage of the CLB2 mRNA by RNase MRP, which occurs in cytoplasmic specialized TAM (temporal asymmetric MRP) bodies is vital for the completion of mitosis (102).

(p4.1) A recent discovery uncovered the association of human RNase MRP RNA with the telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) to form an RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (103). TERT utilizes the MRP RNA as template to generate dsRNA, which is then processed in a Dicer-dependent manner to generate small interfering RNAs that silence the expression of the RMRP gene, which codes for the MRP RNA (103). RMRP-TERT does not affect the expression of the human RPPH gene, which codes for H1 RNA, but it remains unknown if this silencing complex exerts its influence on the expression of other genes and if it possesses non-TERT protein components, especially ones shared with RNase P/MRP (Figure 1).
## (s5) PROSPECTS
(p5.0) RNase P is best known for its activity as an RNA enzyme with endoribonucleolytic activity. Recent findings, however, implicate this RNP complex in transcription and processing of short and long ncRNAs. Although one might argue that the scope of these recent assignments remain to be broadly investigated, we decided to emphasize these new facets of RNase P because these functional roles shed a different light on this primordial RNP. The exact contribution of the RNA and protein subunits of RNase P to each of these latter assignments remains to be determined. Nonetheless, the functions of the RNA moiety have been elaborated in the nucleus (68,(70)(71)(72).

(p5.1) Both the RPR and Rpps should therefore be seen from an inclusive perspective in which these subunits can fulfill one or more roles in large RNP complexes. For example, a form of nuclear RNase P is associated with the transcription machinery and with chromatin of target genes (Figure 2; 107). However, the RNase P-interacting partners relevant to this functional linkage remain to be identified. Moreover, the exact role of RNase P in the Pol III transcription cycle needs to be determined (Dehtiar et al., manuscript submitted for publication).

(p5.2) Evolution has used the RNA moiety of RNase P for functional diversification; this is not surprising given that the active site resides in the RNA, even though the RNase P RNP includes ten proteins. Nevertheless, recent findings of a protein-only RNase P activity in human mitochondria and in Arabidopsis mitochondria and plastids (108,109) point to a far more complicated evolutionary scenario for RNase P activity and 5 0 -end processing of tRNA. Although Arabidopsis organellar RNase P activity can functionally substitute for its RNP cousin in E. coli (109), these organellar variants are unrelated to the proteins present in the RNP forms of bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic (nuclear) RNase P. It remains to be determined if the ancestral RNA-containing RNase P has been replaced by a protein-based catalyst or whether the two forms evolved independently to fulfill different functions. Regardless, the existence of proteinaceous RNase P activity does not serve as a paradigm for the evolution of an RNP to a protein enzyme, a transition perhaps best exemplified by the signal recognition particle in chloroplasts (110). The functional diversity of RNase P, however, highlights the existence of multiple routes for generating similar active sites from different subunit compositions.

(p5.3) The emergence of RNase MRP and MRP-TERT from RNase P provides a unique paradigm for an RNA-based evolutionary mechanism that facilitated the recruitment of pre-existing protein cofactors to support new functions. One could argue that MRP-TERT is distinct from RNases P and MRP in that it is not an RNA-processing enzyme; nevertheless, it is an illustration of adapting a cellular RNA for a new function by virtue of altering protein partners. Another example is found in yeast nucleolar and mitochondrial RNase MRP, which share RNA but not protein subunits (111).

(p5.4) As RNase P, MRP and MRP-TERT are three catalytic RNPs which share sequence-related RNAs and/or protein subunits, one might expect that their expression, function and evolution are interconnected. In fact, Maida et al. (104) demonstrated an inverse correlation between MRP-TERT and RNase MRP, a relationship that is based on the role of MRP-TERT in silencing RNase MRP. Since TERT is activated by insertion of retroviruses in its promoter/enhancer (112), the down-regulation of MRP in the pathobiology of cancer merits scrutiny. Mutations in telomerase are found in patients with dyskeratosis congenita while mutations in the RNase MRP RNA are associated with cartilage hair hypoplasia (113); since both these diseases result from stem cell failure, it is worth investigating how RNase P, RNase MRP and/or MRP-TERT contribute to stem cell function. Moreover, a recent study points to a potential role for a regulated Rpp transcript in the neurobiology of autism, a developmental brain disorder (114).

(p5.5) Finally, the existence of RNase P RNA-and RNase MRP RNA-like genes in the human genome (Figures 3) adds a new layer to the regulation, function and evolution of RNase P and its related RNPs.
