# Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY Survey on Privacy-Preserving Detection of Sensitive Data Exposure

CorpusID: 18027917 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/acec97048b71aaaadff7d69b5a9e5271cf6b725c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/acec97048b71aaaadff7d69b5a9e5271cf6b725c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Related Work
(p1.0) In previous system, they tend to propose a data-leak detection answer which can be outsourced and be deployed during semi honest detection surroundings. Also design, implement, and evaluate our fuzzy fingerprint technique that enhances knowledge privacy throughout data-leak detection operations. Their approach is based on a quick and sensible unidirectional computation on the sensitive knowledge (SSN records, classified documents, sensitive emails, etc.). It permits the information owner to firmly delegate the content-inspection task to DLD suppliers while not exposing the sensitive knowledge. victimization our detection technique, the DLD supplier, who is shapely as associate honest-but-curious (aka semi-honest) adversary, will solely gain restricted data regarding the sensitive data from either the discharged digests, or the content being inspected. Victimization the techniques, an online service provider (ISP) will perform detection on its customers' traffic securely and supply data-leak detection as associate add-on service for its customers. In another situation, people will mark their own sensitive knowledge and raise the administrator of their native network to discover knowledge leaks for them.

(p1.1) In [5], present an method for quantifying data leak capability in the network traffic. Instead of trying to sense the occurrence of sensitive information an impossible task in the universal case-their goal is to calculate and limit its highest volume. They also propose the measurement algorithms for the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), the main protocol for web browsing . The results were best for the blog Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY scenario because the blog website. The main advantage of this paper is that this paper insight that most network traffic is repeated or determined by external. In this system network traffic is so voluminous that manual inspection would be unreasonably expensive.
