# MOJ Orthopedics & Rheumatology A Literature Review Comparing the Results of Wrist Arthroplasty and Wrist Fusion in Rheumatoid Patients A Literature Review Comparing the Results of Wrist Arthroplasty and Wrist Fusion in Rheumatoid Patients 2/3 A Literature Review Comparing the Results of Wrist Arthroplasty and Wrist Fusion in Rheumatoid Patients 3/3

CorpusID: 196472370 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/51adb2e9d1bf2d81bcc6f47533374aecfba2ea1a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/51adb2e9d1bf2d81bcc6f47533374aecfba2ea1a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disease affecting the synovium leading to joint damage and bone destruction. It is common with a worldwide prevalence of 1% in men and 3% in women. The peak age of disease onset is in the fifth decade. It is multifactorial in nature and it is thought to result from an interaction between genetic and environmental factors [1].
## (s3) Wrist arthrodesis
(p3.0) Wrist arthrodesis is performed to achieve bony ankylosis of the wrist joint. The aim is to produce a wrist that is strong, stable and pain free but this comes with a compromise, loss of movement. In current practice wrist arthrodesis is the procedure performed most often for end stage rheumatoid arthritis of the wrist. Multiple techniques are described in the literature, all with fairly predictable results and rates of fusion. The options are fusion with a pin/rod or plate or without implants.

(p3.1) Pin/rods are generally preferred since it is difficult to secure plate fixation on rheumatoid arthritis bone. Clayton was the first author to describe an operative technique for wrist arthrodesis by means of an intramedullary Steinman pin. Mannerfelt popularized this technique by using a rush pin and additional fixation with staple. Results have been mixed. Elherik et al. [5] used the Mannerfelt arthrodesis procedure and reported a 65.4% improvement in overall pain outcome. In a retrospective study of 115 patients Rauhaniemi [6] evaluated the outcome of total wrist fusion using the Mannerfelt technique. Results were disappointing with only 40% of patients being satisfied with the results.

(p3.2) In the 1960s, AO plate fixation was introduced by Muller et al and refined later in the 1980s with the advent of the dynamic compression plate. Toma et al. [7] retrospectively compared wrist arthrodesis using the Mannerfelt technique and AO plate. They found methods to improve pain and function however there were no statistical difference between the two techniques in terms of activities of daily living (ADL) scores, patient subjective outcomes or complications.
## (s4) Total wrist arthroplasty
(p4.0) Total wrist arthroplasty has been in use for 40 years however it hasn't gained widespread acceptability in the same manner that arthroplasty has for other joints. This is due to a number of factors namely higher complication and failure rates, and expense. They were first used in the 1970s; the total wrist arthroplasty has undergone several refinements over the generations.

(p4.1) This first implant used was flexible silicone spacers that are not strictly total wrist arthroplasty. Short term results were favourable however later reports were somewhat disappointing. Long term results highlighted several problems such as implant breakage, and osteolysis caused by a foreign body reaction to particulate manner. It manifests clinically as the re-occurrence of pain, stiffness and swelling after the initial relief of symptoms. Kistler et al. [8] report a revision rate of up to 50%. They recommend the use of total wrist arthroplasty as an alternative to wrist fusion only for low demand patients with good bone stock and restricted motion.

(p4.2) The next generation of total wrist arthroplasty combined metal and polyethylene and they were distally fixed into the metacarapals. Results were not great. Dennis et al. [9] reviewed 30 of these arthroplasties performed in patients with stage 3 or 4 rheumatoid arthritis. 60% rated good or excellent, 27% rated fair, 13% rated poor. Newer devices are better than their predecessors but continue to have high revision and failure rates compared to large joint arthroplasties. Third generation designs require less bone resection and avoid the need for metacarpal fixation. The results are modest with limited numbers and short follow ups. Two devices are described below.
## (s5) Discussion
(p5.0) There is a gap in the literature comparing the wrist fusion and total wrist arthroplasty. In some studies there have been patients with total wrist arthroplasty on one side and fusion on the other almost all preferred the total wrist arthroplasty. In a study by Goodman et al. [14], ten patients had wrist fusion on one side and arthroplasty on the other. They felt that the arthroplasty wrist was more functional due to a greater range of movement.

(p5.1) Utility and decision analysis studies by Cavaliere et al. [3] demonstrate that arthroplasty is associated with higher quality adjusted life year than arthrodesis in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. They also performed cost analysis which demonstrated that both total wrist arthroplasty and arthrodesis are cost effective. Using a validated outcome survey and review of reported surgical complications, Murphy et al. [4] compared 503 total wrist arthroplasties and 860 wrist fusions. There was no statistical difference between the two groups. Of note the patients who underwent total wrist arthroplasty has older general metalpolyethylene implants which require the distal component to be fixed into the metacarpals.

(p5.2) We conclude that patients with end stage rheumatoid arthritis with good bone stock may have total wrist arthroplasty or arthrodesis. Total wrist arthroplasty should be with the latest generation implants. Those patients with poor bone stock or soft tissues should have wrist arthrodesis. It remains an area of great debate with surgeon and patient preference playing a key role.
