# royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsif Constructing living buildings: a review of relevant technologies for a novel application of biohybrid robotics

CorpusID: 198980764 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae4fe5aef597a630f40d7e99178a3b9415380e4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s4) Robots that interact with organisms
(p4.0) One approach to biohybrid robotics described in the literature is to use engineered tissues as part of the machine [119,120]. In this review focused on construction as application, we review robots that influence intact organisms, as we are interested in their behaviours of depositing or growing building material. Robotics that incorporate biological organisms can have any of the following interaction types:
## (s5) Coupling with individual animals
(p5.0) Today's technology fails in delivering centimetre scale robots which are able to perform autonomously and effectively in unknown dynamic environments. In contrast, natural insects are able to easily navigate in most environments while successfully maintaining control and stability. Therefore, as a compromise, a biobiotic approach (i.e. cyborg system [121]) could be followed, allowing the wireless control and navigation of insects to perform meaningful tasks in such environments.
## (s6) Interaction with groups of animals or environments
(p6.0) Animal behaviour as a response to events in the environment or to local interaction between group members has been modelled by several methods, described above. Robotics approaches can allow further investigation of animal behaviour, by replacing swarm individuals with biomimetic robots and then establishing cause-and-effect interaction sequences. The ASSISI Project (Animal and robot Societies Self-organize and Integrate by Social Interaction) [127], introduced a biohybrid society composed of animals (e.g. fish and honeybees) and robots. First, the robots interact with the animals, learning their behaviour and adapting to it in order to be socially accepted. Then, they feed information into the society through physical channels, influencing the system to move towards desired states. Robots and animals can make collective choices in their habitats, while the robots couple separated habitats by sharing information between them [128].

(p6.1) In one approach, [129] develop autonomous robots integrated into groups of live cockroaches to influence collective decision-making. The robots were designed to exhibit similar behaviour to cockroaches and were coated with a chemical blend to bear an acceptable chemical signal. In this work, the robots were able to introduce bias into the decision-making process by influencing the cockroaches into aggregating towards a less favourable shelter. da Silva Guerra et al. [130] follow a different approach for physical acceptance within living crickets (Gryllus bimaculatus). By installing decoys (live cricket heads) on the robots to increase the acceptance and allow for proper interaction, the robotic crickets were able to trigger specific insect behaviours by performing certain repeated movements (e.g. courtship or agonistic behaviour). Also, in the Chicken Robot project [131], a mobile robot (i.e. PoulBot) was developed to collaborate and control a group of chicks. Based on a learned filial imprinting model, the robot was able to integrate and show leadership behaviour using acceptable movement patterns and appropriate emitted sounds.

(p6.2) To investigate interaction with marine animals, [132] construct a robotic fish (stickleback Gasterosteus aculeatus L. replica) which can be remotely controlled to move around in a fish tank. The robotic fish was able to exhibit leadership behaviour by recruiting a single fish from a refuge, and by initiating a turn in singletons and in groups of 10. An interesting observation is that the individuals would respond to the robotic fish to a greater degree than to others. The reasons for this could be the behavioural model (i.e. the robotic fish moves faster than other fish and without stopping) or positioning (i.e. the presence of the robotic fish at the front of the group). In similar work [133], see figure 2b, experiments were conducted implementing the following behavioural patterns with guppies (Poecilia reticulata): swarm following, integration, predator, and recruitment behaviours. Interestingly, a robotic fish was able to recruit a group of fish to the non-favourable area at the centre of the tank. Executing a sequence of behaviours (first integration then recruitment) helped the robotic fish to be integrated and accepted within the swarm, hence, succeeding in its recruitment mission to the desired target points. Later, [136,137] investigate acceptance of the robotic fish within the swarm in further detail. The results indicated that natural appearance and motion significantly increases the acceptance level of the artificial individual. Hence, the precise modelling of animal behaviour and individual characteristics is crucial. Along this line of work, [138] develop a robotic fish (zebrafish Danio rerio replica) which can beat its tail with different frequencies and amplitudes. The experiments concluded that the tail beating rate increases the acceptance level of the robotic fish within the shoal.

(p6.3) The safety of both animals and robots is important within biohybrid environments. The classical robotic task of collision avoidance was re-approached by Gribovskiy & Mondada [139] and Gribovskiy et al. [140] using methods such as fuzzy control with the constraints of the new systems. Interesting tasks for this system are mapping and exploration [141] where the topological information about an unknown environment is obtained based on local interactions without localization. Whitmire et al. [142] follow an acoustic approach where the biobots are equipped with a microphone. The swarm of biobots was able to localize a sound source which allows further investigation in search and rescue applications. In a similar context of search and rescue missions, the concept of an invisible fence composed of biobots as a reliable wireless sensor network is introduced by Latif et al. [143]. Also, the approach allows the biobots to guide each other towards light sources in order to charge their batteries using solar energy in extended mission durations. Yang et al. [144] introduced a protocol for manoeuvring spiders. The spiders were steered successfully in the left or right directions using electrical simulation. This work is considered an important step towards creating a spider biorobot.

(p6.4) Research has also dealt with technological intervention at the scale of full ecosystems, via distributed sensing, tracking, and monitoring of wildlife [145], including animals that can exhibit self-organizing behaviours in groups, such as birds [146,147]. Beyond monitoring, the restoration of overall ecosystem health via mobile robotics has been proposed, to increase biodiversity and combat desertification [148].
## (s11) Scaffolds for animals depositing material
(p11.0) In structural systems involving animals that exhibit materialdepositing behaviours, mechanical scaffolds are designed to steer deposition patterns specific to the species used. Silkworms are guided by density in the scaffold, while honeybees are guided by voids. In the Silk Pavilion project by Oxman et al. [183,184], shown in figure 3b, a domed room-sized scaffold forms the substrate for silkworms to deposit their threads. The scaffold comprises frame modules, each of which is prefabricated and robotically wound with a sparse pattern of silk threads. When released, the silkworms seek to patch gaps in the pattern of existing silk threads, as they naturally would for cocoon-building. The silkworms do not cover the entire scaffold in dense silk fibres-rather, their deposition is guided by density of the robotically wound threads, as they are not able to cross gaps larger than their body size. Therefore, intentional windows in the sparse pattern of the scaffold are maintained when the silkworms fill in their dense matte of fibres. In the Co-occupied Boundaries project by Ilgun & Ayres [185], an object-sized 3D printed polymer scaffold is shaped to leave voids for honeybees to construct their comb according to their natural behaviours, as shown in figure 3a. The printed polymer filament forming the scaffold is dense, but maintains gaps large enough for honeybees to pass through, giving them pathways to all sides of the scaffold. The rough material texture of the scaffold and the sloping angles of its sides create surfaces to which the honeybees can easily attach comb. The placement of comb is guided by creating large voids with two or more sides of enclosure. In both of these examples, the mechanical scaffold must be structurally sufficient to support the load of the biologically placed material. In the case of the [183,184] Silk Pavilion, the fibres placed by the silkworms are not selfsupporting and cannot serve a structural role on their own. In the case of the [185] Co-occupied Boundaries, the honeybee comb is self-supporting once formed, although it requires a scaffold for initial placement. The structural properties of the comb are not further investigated by Ilgun & Ayres [185], but due to the wax material of comb, it is unlikely that it would be able to support large external loads. Material deposited by animals, while often capable of serving some structural role on the scale of the associated animal, is unlikely to be stiff enough on its own to carry building scale loads or human occupants. Stiffening methods such as resin impregnation could be investigated for these materials to prepare them for a structural role, but this may be a prohibitively inefficient construction process. Alternatively, these materials could be investigated for non-structural roles in building construction, such as thermal insulation or façade cladding.
## (s12) Scaffolds for microorganisms
(p12.0) Microorganisms are integrated with mechanical scaffolds as part of structural systems, as well as for other functional roles such as the cleaning of pollution. For structural systems, [186] cultivate bacterially produced cellulose on 3D printed polymer scaffolds. The bacterial cellulose grows to fully coat the surfaces of the scaffold, and additionally forms membranes across gaps. Similar to the silk fibres described above, these cellulose membranes are unlikely to bear building scale loads, but might be investigated for other roles such as thermal insulation or moisture membranes. In a different approach, mycelium fungus is investigated for soil decontamination by Sollazzo et al. [187] in their Symbiotic Associations project. The mechanical scaffold, in this case, does not serve a structural role for a building, but exclusively supports the growth of the fungus. Though not a direct part of the typical construction process, this approach could be investigated for use on the larger building site or as part of a structure's foundation.
## (s29) Realizing constructive robot collectives
(p29.0) Technically speaking, self-organization can be understood as the distribution of control of a system over a considerable set of its components [270]. This immediately applies to systems comprised of autonomously acting agents, as each of those follows its own agenda. Thus, biological systems are 0.2 mm 0.2 mm inherently self-organizing. When designing technological systems, one also has to consider that large systems that have to work flexibly and be robust to local failures and changes in the environment, can only be realized if individual components may act autonomously-otherwise, the managerial overhead, the communication overhead and the risk of single points of failure do not allow scaling up of the number of involved components or subsystems [271].
## (s30) Materials for self-organized construction
(p30.0) In order to conceive both robotics hardware and self-organized behaviours for construction tasks in the context of biohybrid systems, we first shed some light on rigid and amorphous materials-the two categories that have been considered in the literature.

(p30.1) Magnenat et al. [273] made robots deploy cubic bricks to bridge gaps and to stack them up as tower constructions. Consistent alignment and cohesion between the bricks was established by magnets. Similarly, [37] made use of deployment-ready building blocks. In order to better support structural loads, protrusions on the surface ensured a tight bonding mechanism between the elements. Aluminium rods were deployed by Stroupe et al. [274]. Its size rendered collaborative transportation by two robots necessary. An alternative, also to render the transport easier is realized by blocks of polyurethane foam [275]. The foam blocks were glued together applying an adhesive. A less persistent approach is to establish magnet bonds by means of electronic components as realized by Werfel et al. [276,277].
## (s32) Discussing options for deployment
(p32.0) The precision and supposed ease of deployment of rigid construction materials greatly depends on the rigour of the building blocks' manufacturing process. In addition to these efforts, there are other drawbacks such as the need for pre-designed joint mechanisms or the use of additional adhesive materials, as well as an inability to build directly on uneven terrain. However, rigid materials can bring about great stability. Obviously, the less precise but adaptive and ad hoc deployable amorphous materials can compensate for the lack of flexibility of rigid materials. Therefore, [268] concluded that a multi-stage process that considers different materials at different times, similar to traditional building construction, might be most beneficial. They also suggested that a heterogeneous set of airborne and ground robots might be most successful considering their individual strengths and weaknesses-high risks but easy manoeuvrability of airborne units and inflexible but strong and robust grounded robots.
## (s34) Control
(p34.0) Construction of living buildings by biohybrid robots is currently too underexplored for the literature to include established, purpose-specific approaches to control. Instead externally standard approaches are used and novel approaches are borrowed from other fields. Here, we restrict our discussion mostly to multi-robot systems. The standard approach in multi-robot set-ups is to limit the robot controllers to simple behaviours for two reasons. First, multiple interactions between robots complicate the system [294,295], hence, one wants to keep as many components simple and manageable as possible. Second, the idea is to create complex behaviours from the interactions between robots and their collaboration, not from complex individual behaviours. This is in line with the concepts of swarm intelligence [296] and emergence [297].

(p34.1) The applied underlying concept for these rather simple controllers is often behaviour-based robotics, such as the subsumption architecture by Brooks [298]. The approach by Mellinger et al. [299] uses standard techniques of (centralized) control theory. Allwright et al. [287] use an ad hoc approach resembling partially the idea of behaviour-based robotics. Werfel et al. [37] use reactive control based on behavioural rules. The main research question here is, how to derive or generate these rules (see §4.3.3).
## (s38) Biohybrid design and control
(p38.0) von Mammen et al. [317,318] presented a prototype of an augmented reality interface for biohybrid system design ( figure 11). They outfitted the user with a head-mounted display augmented with a pair of cameras to provide a stereoscopic video feed of the environment. This video feed could be overlaid with information about a simulated biohybrid system. In the given case, the user was able to seed simple plant-like structures that would grow upwards and towards light sources. The strategic placement of lamps allowed the user to steer the structural growth, for instance, to climb around a pole. This augmented reality (AR) prototype already hints at the potential design and use-case for the next generation of AR prototypes for biohybrid system design and control. In addition to the different kinds of system components that could be deployed ( plants and lamp-'bots') and configured (at least the technical devices), the system allowed the user to fast forward into the near future and explore the result in a real-world context. Heinrichet al. [319] explored user control of self-organizing construction more generally, through an interactive evolution approach.
## (s41) Discussion
(p41.0) Living organisms as building components have to be considered not only as continually growing entities, but also as dynamic, open systems that change structurally and morphologically in time. Many species are subjected to regular changes. For instance in plant organs, mechanical properties change due to the seasons and the developmental stages, and annual plants do not disappear after dying but will continue to mechanically impact the system. In a living system, certain animal depositions and plant organs not only develop but may spontaneously be withdrawn if they are no longer fulfilling their intended role. Planning and coordination of biohybrid construction processes will involve cycles of spatial expansion and reduction.

(p41.1) Living organisms sense and respond to environmental changes by adjusting their internal processes to overcome threats and to take advantage of changed conditions. Organisms successfully realize their developmental programmes due to their plasticity. In addition, organisms actively shape their environment. For example, trees change light conditions for their lower branches, they change the soil structure, underground water conditions, and the ambient air. The QR-code gamepad DK2 and OVRvision Figure 11. Augmented reality interfaces for user interaction with simulations of biohybrid living construction [318]; image from [318] and used with license. (Images reprinted from fig. 8 (subfigures a and b) of the Frontiers in Robotics and AI paper of von Mammen et al. [318], DOI, open access. Used with Creative Commons license CC BY 4.0. Authors holding the image copyright approved the license at publishing.) (Online version in colour.) activities of living plants change the originally provided conditions, such that future growth is not guaranteed. In biohybrid construction, environmental conditions and the physiological reactions of organisms will have to be monitored and perhaps modulated continually, on long timescales and large spatial scales.

(p41.2) The artificial elements of a biohybrid system also influence the environment. There are intentional influences, by stimulating physiological reactions or providing scaffolds, but there can also be side effects. For example, robots will increase the temperature locally due to waste heat, influencing animal behaviours and plant generative organs in close proximity. This may not be harmful; flowers generate complex heat patterns to attract and assist pollinators towards flowers. In biohybrid construction the system will need to autonomously deal with non-anticipated situations-a pervasive challenge throughout robotics, which is not yet solved. One advantage of approaching this challenge within a biohybrid system is that many actions may be required only on intermediate and long timescales, compared to typical robotics applications.
