# Recent advances in endometrial cancer: a review of key clinical trials from 2015 to 2019 [version 1; peer review: 2 approved] Reviewer Status v1

CorpusID: 195185531 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7ee10f02bdda9ced77537b625f6e7d5383f47ff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7ee10f02bdda9ced77537b625f6e7d5383f47ff)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s6) Understanding the molecular biology of endometrial cancer
(p6.0) Advances in our classification of endometrial cancer with molecular profiling may enable us to better stratify risk and recommended therapy. MSI and polymerase-ε (POLE) lead to neoantigens, fragments of proteins expressed by tumor cells that may sensitize the immune system 52 . The molecular profile of a tumor may better define its prognosis and response to therapy than histology and stage alone.  , The Cancer Genome Atlas Collaborative (TCGA) 53-55 , and the GOG 210 investigators 53-55 have developed different molecular classification schema to better stratify patient risk.

(p6.1) The TCGA project determined four molecularly defined subgroups of endometrial cancer, which yielded excellent prognostic results 53 . However, the methods required for classification are currently quite expensive and require special handling of the tissue, limiting applicability. Talhouk  GOG 210, an NRG Oncology/GOG study of the molecular classification for risk prediction in endometrioid endometrial cancer, was published in Gynecologic Oncology in August 2017 55 . The investigators sought to develop a classification system for endometrioid endometrial cancers, the most common and potentially challenging endometrial cancer histology to classify. They assessed tumors for mismatch repair (MMR) defects (MSI, MMR IHC, and MLH1 methylation), POLE mutations, and loss of heterozygosity. Using four classifications (MMR deficient, copy number altered (CNA), copy number stable, and POLE mutant), they were able to stratify patients by PFS and OS. Their classification system remained statistically significantly related to clinical outcomes in multivariable analyses. CNA had the worst PFS and cancer-specific survival, whereas the POLE group had the best outcomes. The authors advocate prospective validation of this system and recommend that clinicians consider using it to universally screen for Lynch syndrome and identify additional prognostic information to guide treatment decisions.

(p6.2) Biomarkers and molecular alterations are increasingly being used to guide systemic therapy in the recurrent setting. Table 2 outlines common biomarkers in endometrial cancer, noting differences between type I (grade 1 or 2 endometrioid) and type II (grade 3 endometrioid, serous, clear cell, and carcinosarcoma) endometrial cancers as well as potential targeted therapies (Table 2). In our practice, we test all primary endometrial cancers with IHC for MMR proteins and, if findings are consistent with Lynch syndrome (absence of staining and no evidence of promoter methylation), proceed to confirmatory testing. In addition, we perform MSI testing if there is a high clinical suspicion for Lynch syndrome even with intact proteins. We perform IHC for HER2/neu status in all serous cancers and confirm overexpression with fluorescence in situ hybridization. We have not yet adapted routine molecular classification; however, we optimistically await further results to guide systemic therapy by molecular class. In the recurrent setting, we recommend molecular profiling, testing for immunotherapy biomarkers (programmed death ligand-1 (PD-L1), MSI, and tumor molecular burden), HER2/neu status in serous cancer, and determining ER and PR status.
