# polymers A Review on Porous Polymeric Membrane Preparation. Part II: Production Techniques with Polyethylene, Polydimethylsiloxane, Polypropylene, Polyimide, and Polytetrafluoroethylene

CorpusID: 199469400 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/978eefd89f142a143cab4b27d97126f362ce22bb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/978eefd89f142a143cab4b27d97126f362ce22bb)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s4) Morphological Characterization
(p4.0) In general, the most important morphological parameters for a membrane are porosity, pore size, pore size distribution, tortuosity, surface roughness, molecular weight cutoff, and thickness. For example, the pore size plays a critical role in the membrane classification [40][41][42]: microfiltration (50-500 nm) [42,43], ultra-filtration (2-50 nm) [42,43], nano-filtration (≤2 nm) [42,43], reverse osmosis (0.3-0.6 nm) [42,44], and forward osmosis (0.3-0.6 nm) [42,44]. Furthermore, the membrane performances directly depend on its morphology (pore size and distribution), thus morphology control is the key factor in membrane fabrication.
## (s5) Properties of PE Membranes
(p5.0) In general, PE is composed of a -C2H4-repeating unit ( Figure 1). The polymer is an odorless and non-toxic semi-crystalline polymer with good acid and alkali corrosion resistance, low water absorption, and excellent electrical insulation. However, PE has a relatively low melting point (around 120 °C) and low temperature resistance [continuous service temperature (CST)] of 60-80 °C for low density (LDPE) and 80-100 °C for high density (HDPE). Based on these properties, the two main methods to prepare PE microporous membranes are thermally induced phase separation (TIPS) and MSCS [20]. 
## (s6) TIPS
(p6.0) As the main method to produce microporous PE membranes, TIPS is distinguished from other methods because the membrane microstructure can be more easily controlled [52,[55][56][57][58][59][60][61][62]. For example, compared to NIPS, the homogeneous solution from which the membrane is formed is converted into a two-phase mixture via thermal energy removal, which is faster than by non-solvent exchange from the solvent, as described later [5].
## (s7) TIPS Processing
(p7.0) The general procedure for TIPS is as follows. Firstly, to form a homogeneous mixture, a certain amount of a high-melting point polymer and a low molecular weight diluent (liquid or solid) mixture is placed between a pair of stainless steel plates. A Teflon film with a square opening in the center is inserted between them to adjust the membrane thickness, as shown in Figure 2. The sample is melted by heating at elevated temperature with pressure. It should be pointed out that during this step, the initial temperature (T1) must be lower than the boiling point of the diluent and is typically 25-100 °C higher than the melting temperature (Tm) or the glass transition temperature (TG) of the neat polymer. Secondly, a homogeneous mixture is formed into the desired shape, which is usually a flat sheet, tube, or hollow fiber. Thirdly, a phase separation is induced by cooling at a controlled rate (thermal quenching). Then, the diluent is typically removed by solvent extraction. Finally, a micro-porous structure is produced by removing the extractant (typically by evaporation) [4]. The key point of the technology is to induce a phase separation in the membrane fabrication by removing the thermal energy of a homogeneous dope solution. Hence, the TIPS process is a balance between phase inversion path, polymer-solvent thermodynamics (interaction), cooling kinetics, 
## (s8) TIPS
(p8.0) As the main method to produce microporous PE membranes, TIPS is distinguished from other methods because the membrane microstructure can be more easily controlled [52,[55][56][57][58][59][60][61][62]. For example, compared to NIPS, the homogeneous solution from which the membrane is formed is converted into a two-phase mixture via thermal energy removal, which is faster than by non-solvent exchange from the solvent, as described later [5].
## (s9) TIPS Processing
(p9.0) The general procedure for TIPS is as follows. Firstly, to form a homogeneous mixture, a certain amount of a high-melting point polymer and a low molecular weight diluent (liquid or solid) mixture is placed between a pair of stainless steel plates. A Teflon film with a square opening in the center is inserted between them to adjust the membrane thickness, as shown in Figure 2. The sample is melted by heating at elevated temperature with pressure. It should be pointed out that during this step, the initial temperature (T 1 ) must be lower than the boiling point of the diluent and is typically 25-100 • C higher than the melting temperature (T m ) or the glass transition temperature (T G ) of the neat polymer. Secondly, a homogeneous mixture is formed into the desired shape, which is usually a flat sheet, tube, or hollow fiber. Thirdly, a phase separation is induced by cooling at a controlled rate (thermal quenching). Then, the diluent is typically removed by solvent extraction. Finally, a micro-porous structure is produced by removing the extractant (typically by evaporation) [4]. The key point of the technology is to induce a phase separation in the membrane fabrication by removing the thermal energy of a homogeneous dope solution. Hence, the TIPS process is a balance between phase inversion path, polymer-solvent thermodynamics (interaction), cooling kinetics, extractant selection, and drying condition. 
## (s10) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
(p10.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solidliquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid 
## (s11) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
(p11.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. 
## (s12) Effect of TIPS Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
(p12.0) The TIPS process for membrane formation can be represented in terms of a temperaturecomposition phase diagram. As shown in Figure 3 [63,64], the membranes produced via TIPS often follow two different paths: a solid-liquid (S-L) or liquid-liquid (L-L) separation with subsequent crystallization [65]. Several investigations showed that the phase separation mechanism significantly alters the resulting membrane structure [4,5,65,66]. At the same time, the membrane performance strongly depends on the membrane pore size and porosity. As a consequence, a good control of the microporous structure is of the utmost importance in membrane fabrication [52]. Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solidliquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid separation with subsequent crystallization at relatively lower polymer fractions. Note that if the  Usually, when the polymer concentration is above the monotectic point (typically >30%), the dope solution goes through the crystallization temperature boundary then directly enters the solid-liquid (S-L) separation region. Conversely, the phase separation proceeds via liquid-liquid separation with subsequent crystallization at relatively lower polymer fractions. Note that if the initial polymer content in the casting solution is lower than the critical point, a continuous solvent-rich phase and a discontinuous polymer-rich phase could be formed. As a result, the final products are powders instead of a solid membrane. If a suitable polymer concentration is selected, the separation path plays a critical role on the membrane morphology [63].
## (s14) Effect of Phase Separation Kinetics on the Membrane Morphology
(p14.0) An upper critical solution temperature (UCST) is defined as a system undergoing phase separation as the temperature is lowered. As the temperature is increased, systems undergoing phase separation are said to have a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) [65]. A focus on TIPS for UCST systems is made next. 
## (s15) Effect of Phase Separation Kinetics on the Membrane Morphology
(p15.0) An upper critical solution temperature (UCST) is defined as a system undergoing phase separation as the temperature is lowered. As the temperature is increased, systems undergoing phase separation are said to have a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) [65]. A focus on TIPS for UCST systems is made next.
## (s16) Solid-Liquid Phase Separation
(p16.0) In L-S separation, since the membrane micropores are produced by removing the diluent expelled from the growing crystal, polymer crystallization kinetics-and in some cases, that of solvent crystallization-play a major role. It can be shown that the pore size in L-S separation follows specific trends:

(p16.1) (I) Decreases with increasing quench temperature and cooling rate Since lower nucleation rate and longer growth period are associated with slower cooling, this allows more time for PE crystal growth without qualitatively altering the structure. Consequently, the membrane pores morphology after extraction is directly affected. Comparison of the SEM results ( Figure 7) from the S-L phase separation of a 19 wt. % HDPE in mineral oil solution quenched in water via controlled cooling from 175 to 30 • C shows that the membrane morphology was clearly affected by the cooling rate. In the quenched sample, the homogeneous mixture is virtually frozen, i.e., the spherulites position is fixed, leading to the pores formed by extracting droplets densely distributed with smaller pore sizes. For slowly cooled samples, the diluent is expelled from the growing spherulites, then the diluent diffuses to the surface, leading to a local concentration gradient and some lamellae gradually crystallizing from the polymer-diluent mixture [5].

(p16.2) Since lower nucleation rate and longer growth period are associated with slower cooling, this allows more time for PE crystal growth without qualitatively altering the structure. Consequently, the membrane pores morphology after extraction is directly affected. Comparison of the SEM results ( Figure 7) from the S-L phase separation of a 19 wt. % HDPE in mineral oil solution quenched in water via controlled cooling from 175 to 30 °C shows that the membrane morphology was clearly affected by the cooling rate. In the quenched sample, the homogeneous mixture is virtually frozen, i.e., the spherulites position is fixed, leading to the pores formed by extracting droplets densely distributed with smaller pore sizes. For slowly cooled samples, the diluent is expelled from the growing spherulites, then the diluent diffuses to the surface, leading to a local concentration gradient and some lamellae gradually crystallizing from the polymer-diluent mixture [5]. 
## (s18) (II) Decreases with increasing polymer concentration
(p18.0) In the highly polymer-rich case, since the initial composition is beyond the eutectic composition, the L-S phase separation is triggered by the polymer crystallization. As shown in Figure 8, pore sizes decrease with increasing polymer concentration. There are two main reasons for this phenomenon. Firstly, a change in the phase separation temperature is consistent with polymer concentration change, as reported in Figure 4. The temperature difference between the phase separation temperature and the crystallization temperature increases with increasing polymer concentration. This results in greater driving force and longer time for crystal growth. Thus, spherulite size increases as the polymer concentration increases, as less space is available for the exuded dilute droplets. Secondly, the viscosity of the polymer-rich matrix phase increases with the polymer concentration. Thus, it is more difficult for the diluent droplets to flow and aggregate. After the extraction of the diluent droplets, the membrane has a corresponding pore size distribution. wt. % (left) or 34 wt. % (right) HDPE solution, adapted from [5]. Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90].  Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90]. wt. % (left) or 34 wt. % (right) HDPE solution, adapted from [5]. Figure 9 shows that, for some diluents, when their crystallization temperature is higher than the polymer, diluent crystallization occurs before the polymer. This phenomenon continues until the eutectic solidification begins. This induces a fixed structure-an integrally skinned porous membrane produced by extracting the diluent crystals from the solidified samples [90]. (III) Decreases with the presence of nucleating agents Due to the extremely high nucleation density, the polymer crystals size is much smaller with the presence of a nucleating agent (heterogeneous nucleation). This substantially affects the membrane porosity in terms of higher pore numbers and smaller pore sizes [5,94]. (III) Decreases with the presence of nucleating agents Due to the extremely high nucleation density, the polymer crystals size is much smaller with the presence of a nucleating agent (heterogeneous nucleation). This substantially affects the membrane porosity in terms of higher pore numbers and smaller pore sizes [5,94].
## (s21) Effect of Extractant Selection and Drying Conditions on the Membrane Morphology
(p21.0) As shown in Table 4, 10 extractants were used to remove the diluent in the TIPS process to produce microporous PE membranes [89]. The membrane dimensions decreased with increasing surface tension and boiling point, leading to decreasing porosity, pore size, and permeability. Obviously, by varying the diluent and the extractant in the TIPS process, it is possible to control the membrane morphology and performance [89]. 
## (s23) Effect of Temperature
(p23.0) In the MSCS process, the annealing temperature is an important factor affecting the micropores formation process and the pore structure of PE hollow fiber membranes [99]. It is known that the crystalline structure is reorganized when PE membranes are annealed. The aligned PE crystallinity is effectively characterized by birefringence (BR) measurements. When recrystallization occurs, more "perfect" crystalline structures are produced, and the BR increases [99,110]. Some researchers quantitatively examined the BR variation with respect to the annealing temperature [20,99]. It was shown that increasing the annealing temperature increased the BR, indicating that the micropores became more oriented. It was also found that the lamellar thickness further increased at higher annealing temperature.

(p23.1) As shown in Figure 12, the unique microporous structures showing a slit-like shape in a pocket fashion are highly affected by the annealing temperatures. Lee et al. [99] suggested that the effect of annealing temperature on the pore structure is mainly by changing the concentration and the strength between the stressed tie molecules in the amorphous region and the crystallites lamellae. By increasing the annealing temperature, the segments of loose tie chains can be drawn into the crystallites, leading to thicker lamellae and higher overall degree of crystallinity. Elyashevich et al. [111] suggested that higher annealing temperature results in narrower length distribution of tie chains, meaning that more stretched tie chains are produced in the inter-lamellar regions. Chen et al. [110] also confirmed that the lamellae thickness increased with increasing annealing temperature up to the peak melting temperature, but higher temperature led to the formation of long-period lamellar spacing. It is assumed that the application of an annealing temperature during the stretching process can control the final structure. Xi et al. [22] suggested that it is necessary to control the stretching process with a proper temperature in MSCS, such as the application of a two-step stretching process. In the first stretching step, the interaction between the lamellae is mainly broken under the stretching of annealed hollow fibers, and then microvoids are created on the fiber wall. Subsequently, the second stretching step results in the formation of larger micropores. In order to smoothly develop the microvoids into larger micropores, a suitable temperature below the PE melting point is the main factor to prevent microvoids collapse during the second stretching process.

(p23.2) As a next step, the morphology (porosity) and the permeability (Gurley value, N2 permeation) of PE hollow fibers are used to determine the performance variation by increasing the stretching temperature, as shown in Figure 13, where the Gurley value is an indicator of air permeability. Low It is assumed that the application of an annealing temperature during the stretching process can control the final structure. Xi et al. [22] suggested that it is necessary to control the stretching process with a proper temperature in MSCS, such as the application of a two-step stretching process. In the first stretching step, the interaction between the lamellae is mainly broken under the stretching of annealed hollow fibers, and then microvoids are created on the fiber wall. Subsequently, the second stretching step results in the formation of larger micropores. In order to smoothly develop the microvoids into larger micropores, a suitable temperature below the PE melting point is the main factor to prevent microvoids collapse during the second stretching process.

(p23.3) As a next step, the morphology (porosity) and the permeability (Gurley value, N 2 permeation) of PE hollow fibers are used to determine the performance variation by increasing the stretching temperature, as shown in Figure 13, where the Gurley value is an indicator of air permeability. Low Gurley values are associated with high air permeability. In Figure 13, the Gurley values are normalized by film thickness [112]. It is known that flexible molecular chains in the amorphous region of crystalline polymers have less resistance; therefore, molecular chains have higher mobility and orientation possibility under the applied external force and temperature. At a relatively high temperature, more molecular chains would be drawn out from the amorphous region and rearranged into fibrils along the stretching direction. Thus, higher porosity is developed by bridging the separated lamellae. This significant improvement can offer higher air permeability by optimizing the annealing temperature. This is suitable for applications such as distillation and seawater desalination [22].

(p23.4) It is assumed that the application of an annealing temperature during the stretching process can control the final structure. Xi et al. [22] suggested that it is necessary to control the stretching process with a proper temperature in MSCS, such as the application of a two-step stretching process. In the first stretching step, the interaction between the lamellae is mainly broken under the stretching of annealed hollow fibers, and then microvoids are created on the fiber wall. Subsequently, the second stretching step results in the formation of larger micropores. In order to smoothly develop the microvoids into larger micropores, a suitable temperature below the PE melting point is the main factor to prevent microvoids collapse during the second stretching process.

(p23.5) As a next step, the morphology (porosity) and the permeability (Gurley value, N2 permeation) of PE hollow fibers are used to determine the performance variation by increasing the stretching temperature, as shown in Figure 13, where the Gurley value is an indicator of air permeability. Low Gurley values are associated with high air permeability. In Figure 13, the Gurley values are normalized by film thickness [112]. It is known that flexible molecular chains in the amorphous region of crystalline polymers have less resistance; therefore, molecular chains have higher mobility and orientation possibility under the applied external force and temperature. At a relatively high temperature, more molecular chains would be drawn out from the amorphous region and rearranged into fibrils along the stretching direction. Thus, higher porosity is developed by bridging the separated lamellae. This significant improvement can offer higher air permeability by optimizing the annealing temperature. This is suitable for applications such as distillation and seawater desalination [22].  In addition to the annealing temperature, the spinning temperature also affects the crystallinity and the degree of orientation of the hollow fibers. For a polymer melt, the viscosity increases with decreasing temperature, which is necessary to increase the stress in the spinning process, leading to a higher level of orientation in the fibers. Therefore, hollow fibers spun at higher temperature have lower birefringence, higher bubble point pressure, smaller pore size, and more uniform pore distribution [20].
## (s24) Effect of the Stretching Ratio
(p24.0) The degree of melt extension can be described by the stretching ratio (R = V 2 /V 1 ) defined as the ratio between the extrusion speed (V 1 ) and the take-up speed (V 2 ). This parameter mainly governs the morphology in terms of pore size, distribution, orientation, geometry, etc.

(p24.1) The stretching ratio has been reported to affect the stress along the fiber direction [99,102]. For example, increasing the stretching ratio from 1.35 to 2.28 led to more elongated fibrils, and the space between the separated lamellar crystals became larger [22]. Also, increasing the stretching ratio from 2.3 to 3.3 led to more uniform pore size distributions, and the amount of pores (diameter < 1 µm) rapidly increased to become the main part of the pore size distribution. Several theories were proposed to explain these results [113,114]. Firstly, from a position originally perpendicular to the fiber direction, the lamellae rotated to a position parallel to the fiber direction. Secondly, molecular chains in the lamellae were oriented, and then the microvoids linked by fibrils were formed. Thus, higher stretching ratio means that more fibrils bridging the separated crystalline lamellae are developed. Therefore, microvoids or micropores continuously grow in size. However, there is a critical stretching ratio for which the fibrils in the microvoids break, resulting in the formation of cracks and leading to poor structures [22].

(p24.2) By increasing the stretching ratio within a reasonable range, higher porosity and permeability of PE microporous hollow fiber membranes can be produced. Experimental results confirmed that the relationship between the stretching ratio, the porosity, and the N 2 permeation of PE membranes is directly correlated to the stress range. When the ratio increased from 100 to 170%, the N 2 permeation increased by 31%, while the porosity increased by 13% [102].
## (s25) Effect of the Stretching Rate
(p25.0) To get a better understanding of the stretching rate effect on the PE hollow fiber membrane structure and properties, the mechanism of resistance to stress cracking is used. During the stretching process, the formation of fibrils recovered in the PE hollow fiber wall and break-up in the hollow fiber wall occur at the same time. With an increased stretching rate, more fibrils are formed and destroyed. As a result, the amount of smaller size pore (average pore size < 1 µm) increases. As shown in Table 5, under a relatively high stretching rate, the average pore sizes slightly decreases, and the pore size distribution gets more uniform, and the N 2 permeation and the porosity further increase with a more uniform porous structure, leading to better performance of the PE hollow fiber membranes with increased stretching rate [22]. 
## (s26) Effect of Cooling Ways
(p26.0) Luo et al. [21] prepared hollow fiber membranes by MSCS and selected air, water, and di-isononyl-cyclohexane-1,2-dicarb-oxylate (DINCH) as the cooling media to investigate the effect of various cooling methods and cooling rates on the membrane morphology. The results showed that when water and DINCH were used as the heat transfer medium, a layer of amorphous phase and fewer uniform pores-which only had a small part of the slit-shaped pores-were obtained on the surface, because the fast cooling rate froze the surface molecules and decreased the crystallinity and orientation. However, when air was used as the cooling medium, higher crystallinity and better orientation of the annealed hollow fibers were obtained, mainly due to the slow cooling rate. As a result, hollow fiber membranes prepared by slow cooling had better pore interconnectivity and performances [21].

(p26.1) As demonstrated above, although several parameters must be controlled in MSCS, the key factors significantly influencing the membrane morphology can be classified into temperature, stretching ratio, stretching rate, and cooling conditions. The stretching ratio and the stretching rate mainly govern the crystalline lamellae alignment, while the stretching temperature and the cooling conditions significantly influence the number of stretched tie chains and fibrils bridging the narrow cracks [22,99,102,103,110]. It is possible to control these four key parameters inside an optimum range during the stretching process to improve the porous structure and the overall performances of hollow fiber membranes. For higher membrane porosity and more uniform pore distribution, the following strategies can be used:
## (s27) PDMS Membranes
(p27.0) Based on the outstanding advantages of PDMS, such as non-toxicity, high hydrophobicity, chemical resistance, gas permeability, optical transparency, environmental friendliness that does not bio-accumulate, flexibility, low costs, and good molding capability [34,115], through-hole PDMS membranes found wide applications in the biomedical and chemical fields, such as sterile filtration, cell sorting, biomolecular separation, termed organs-on-a-chip systems, microfluidic devices, thin film extraction, lab-on-a-chip devices, micro total analysis systems, and permeation passive samplers [34,[115][116][117][118].

(p27.1) A number of methods have been reported to fabricate PDMS through-hole membranes [33,34,119,120]. A focus on micromolding, imprinting/soft molding, manual punching, and the novel three-dimensional (3D) printing technique is presented here.
## (s28) Properties of PDMS Membranes
(p28.0) PDMS is made of a flexible (Si-O) backbone and a repeating (Si(CH 3 ) 2 O) unit (see Figure 14). For PDMS, the molecular weight varies from 1 × 10 4 to 6 × 10 4 gmol −1 due to the amount of (Si(CH 3 ) 2 O) repeating units. Consequently, several material properties, such as viscoelasticity, are affected [121]. Furthermore, these viscoelastic properties can be modified by cross-linking (vinyl cross-linking) [122] or by filler addition (silicon dioxide) to the polymer network to meet the requirements of the current applications [123]. Table 6 lists some typical PDMS properties, especially because it is hydrophobic and translucent [115,124]. Today, PDMS is widely used in nanomembranes because of its remarkable advantages, such as chemical resistance, mechanical properties, gas permeability, optical transparency and biocompatibility, as well as its high molding capacity, leading to the production of nanomembranes and micro/nanofluidic systems [34,37,120,125].   
## (s30) PSµM Processing
(p30.0) A novel micromolding process based on polymer phase separation has received increasing attention in recent years, and Figure 15 presents a schematic representation of this method. The main process of spin-coating on molds consists of four steps as follows [32][33][34]:

(p30.1) 1. Firstly, fabrication of dedicated patterning systems occurs. In most case, an additional coating of anti-sticking layers on the molds prior to the injection of the pre-polymer is needed to release the nano-membrane from the mold. 2. Subsequently, there is prepation of a PDMS solution with a specific composition, and then the solution is spin-coated over the fabricated molds. 3. To open the through-holes, the cured PDMS membranes are further processed via etching or thermal compression. 4. Finally, remove the photoresist posts to expose the through-holes. 
## (s32) PSµM Processing
(p32.0) A novel micromolding process based on polymer phase separation has received increasing attention in recent years, and Figure 15 presents a schematic representation of this method. The main process of spin-coating on molds consists of four steps as follows [32][33][34]:
## (s37) Effect of Gas Stream Pressure
(p37.0) Kang et al. [135] reported a simple method using spin-coating of the PDMS pre-polymer on the Si wafer followed by gas blowing followed by a recovery process to obtain well-defined, flat PDMS membranes. This method can make well-defined holes in a PDMS membrane prepared at both high and low RPM. Furthermore, it can be repeatedly and selectively used, even with the PR mold fabricated by the single-step lithography as well as two-step lithography. The air-blowing process through the nozzle was maintained for several seconds on the SU-8 patterns to remove the PDMS prepolymer from the pattern. The results showed that 8-15 kPa was the optimum pressure range. For air pressures above 15 kPa, damages on the PDMS surface for 40 µm thickness membranes were observed, while pressures below 8 kPa were too low to blow off the residual prepolymer from the PR post.

(p37.1) As presented above, the key parameters controlling the structure include etching time, power, and pressure. By increasing the etching time, the membrane thickness decreased. Low power and the pressure within an optimum range were better than high power with very high or very low pressure. For a clearer understanding, Figure 19 presents a schematic representation of the different factors that control the PDMS membrane morphology via PSµM. the PR post.

(p37.2) As presented above, the key parameters controlling the structure include etching time, power, and pressure. By increasing the etching time, the membrane thickness decreased. Low power and the pressure within an optimum range were better than high power with very high or very low pressure. For a clearer understanding, Figure 19 presents a schematic representation of the different factors that control the PDMS membrane morphology via PSµM.  
## (s38) Imprinting/Soft Molding
(p38.0) A technique of transferring imprinting pattern is called soft molding [35,36]. Figure 20 presents the process of through-hole pattern on a flat PDMS membrane via imprinting/soft molding. Firstly, the PDMS solution was spin-coated to a specific thickness on a substrate with an adhesion reduction layer. Then, a selected mold was carefully placed on the PDMS membrane with an appropriate pressure to displace and penetrate through the uncured PDMS membrane to form the desired patterns. Susquently, the membrane with the mold was fully cured while maintaining the load, hence a desired perforated membrane was sucessfully produced [131]. It is worth mentioning that the volume shrinkage of the photopolymerizable polymer used for imprinting during the photopolymerization was different, resulting in the mold being easily released after imprinting, hence a polymeric membrane with the desired through-holes was obtained [119,136]. 
## (s39) Imprinting/Soft Molding
(p39.0) A technique of transferring imprinting pattern is called soft molding [35,36]. Figure 20 presents the process of through-hole pattern on a flat PDMS membrane via imprinting/soft molding. Firstly, the PDMS solution was spin-coated to a specific thickness on a substrate with an adhesion reduction layer. Then, a selected mold was carefully placed on the PDMS membrane with an appropriate pressure to displace and penetrate through the uncured PDMS membrane to form the desired patterns. Susquently, the membrane with the mold was fully cured while maintaining the load, hence a desired perforated membrane was sucessfully produced [131]. It is worth mentioning that the volume shrinkage of the photopolymerizable polymer used for imprinting during the photopolymerization was different, resulting in the mold being easily released after imprinting, hence a polymeric membrane with the desired through-holes was obtained [119,136]. The imprinting process consists of pressing a positive pillar mold into a pre-polymer layer coated on a flat surface. Based on the formation process of through-hole PDMS membranes, some researchers reported that the main parameters include the imprinting pressure and the drying method [119,131,136,137]. However, this method is not suitable to produce uniform PDMS nanomembranes over large areas due to increased pre-polymer viscosity, which leads to the difficulty of achieving the required pressure to produce the complete through-holes. Moreover, excessive pressure leads to higher production costs [34]. The imprinting process consists of pressing a positive pillar mold into a pre-polymer layer coated on a flat surface. Based on the formation process of through-hole PDMS membranes, some researchers reported that the main parameters include the imprinting pressure and the drying method [119,131,136,137]. However, this method is not suitable to produce uniform PDMS nanomembranes over large areas due to increased pre-polymer viscosity, which leads to the difficulty of achieving the required pressure to produce the complete through-holes. Moreover, excessive pressure leads to higher production costs [34].
## (s40) Manual Punching
(p40.0) Heo et al. [37] used the method of manual punching to produce through-hole PDMS membranes. They prepared the casting prepolymer (Sylgard 184, Dow-Corning) at a 1:10 curing agent-to-base ratio. The prepolymer was then poured on the positive side of SU-8 (MicroChem) using the backside diffused-light photolithography method to produce the required features. Subsequently, the membrane was cured at 60 • C for 60 min, and the holes were punched in by a sharpened 14-gauge blunt needle.

(p40.1) A manual punching process is merely suitable for low yield patterning PDMS through-hole nanomembranes over small footprints. One reason is the process of punching a needle through a continuous PDMS membrane is time consuming. Another reason is the rather difficult membrane handling at the nanoscale for the punching process [34].
## (s41) D Printing Technique
(p41.0) Femmer et al. [38] developed a new sacrificial lithography technique to produce three-dimensional membrane geometries using rapid prototyping ( Figure 21). The approach is to print an acrylate-based sacrificial negative mold and use it as a template for the membrane fabrication. Based on "triply periodic minimal surfaces" (TPMS) structures, the molds were designed as Schwarz-D, Schoen-G, and Schoen-P. The molds were then immersed in a PDMS prepolymer formulation (Sylgard 184, silicone/crosslinker 7:1), degassed in vacuum, and subsequently cured at 65 • C for 30 min. Later, the molds were treated with 1 M NaOH at 70 • C. Finally, 1 mm thick micro-structured TPMS-PDMS membranes were obtained, which were thick enough to withstand pressure differences of 2 bar. It was shown that these membranes had 30-60% higher CO 2 diffusion coefficients than common hollow-fiber membranes with similar dimensions. 
## (s42) D Printing Technique
(p42.0) Femmer et al. [38] developed a new sacrificial lithography technique to produce three-dimensional membrane geometries using rapid prototyping ( Figure 21). The approach is to print an acrylate-based sacrificial negative mold and use it as a template for the membrane fabrication. Based on "triply periodic minimal surfaces" (TPMS) structures, the molds were designed as Schwarz-D, Schoen-G, and Schoen-P. The molds were then immersed in a PDMS prepolymer formulation (Sylgard 184, silicone/crosslinker 7:1), degassed in vacuum, and subsequently cured at 65 °C for 30 min. Later, the molds were treated with 1 M NaOH at 70 °C. Finally, 1 mm thick micro-structured TPMS-PDMS membranes were obtained, which were thick enough to withstand pressure differences of 2 bar. It was shown that these membranes had 30-60% higher CO2 diffusion coefficients than common hollow-fiber membranes with similar dimensions.
## (s45) Properties and Applications of PP, PI, and PTFE
(p45.0) Besides PE, PDMS, PSU, and PVDF membranes, numerous studies reported the developments and the applications of other commonly used microporous polymeric membranes such as PP, PI, and PTFE. Table 7 lists the composition and the properties of these polymers. Step-by-step fabrication of a tricontinuous PDMS membrane based on Schwarz-P geometry, adapted from [38].

(p45.1) An alternative approach was proposed by printing a PDMS membrane using a direct light processing (DLP) printer to print silicone structures. For optimum compatibilization, the silicone and the photoinitiator were mixed in tetrahydrofuran and then removed in vacuum. The results showed that the printed PDMS membranes had similar selectivity performance as standard PDMS membranes. Conversely, 15% lower permeability than common membranes was related to their larger thickness (840 µm) [39].

(p45.2) Gernally, because of the high cost and the limited hardware available for printing, limited studies have been published on obtaining nanometer resolution in 3D builds to produce perforated PDMS membranes. However, the 3D printing technique could allow an unprecedented control over membrane morphology by allowing both the micro-and the macro-structure of the membrane to be designed and produced in one step, even allowing membrane module fabrication to be controlled in a single machine/process from membrane material to membrane module. Thus, the use of 3D printing in membrane fabrication is a promising method for the near future [138].
