# Efficacy of melanoma patients treated with PD-1 inhibitors Protocol for an overview, and a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials

CorpusID: 195812117 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64765d281e82403aec7c57736e8694ea674d6ebd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64765d281e82403aec7c57736e8694ea674d6ebd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Study methods and analysis
(p2.0) This protocol will be performed in accordance with recommendations of "Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols" (PRISMA-P) statement guidelines. A study [10] has shown that prospective registration can effectively improve the overall methodological quality of SRs, so current study has been registered on the International prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO), the registration number is CRD42019120017, Available from http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/ PROSPERO/display_record.php?ID=CRD42019120017 This is an overview and a NMA based on published studies; therefore, ethical approval is not required.
## (s4) Methodological quality assessment of included SRs
(p4.0) Recently more and more researchers use SRs to synthesize research evidence to address health issues at the global and national levels. However, due to the complexity and diversity of research in this field, the methodology of SRs has also been facing challenges. [11] So, Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR2), [12] which is commonly used to assess the methodological quality of SRs will be utilized by two independent reviewers to reflect risk of bias or validity of included SRs process and results. [13] The AMSTAR2 checklist has a total of 16 evaluation items. If the item is answered correctly and the basis is sufficient, the judgment is "Yes"; if the item is answered correctly but the basis is not sufficient, the judgment is "partially"; if the item has no relevant evaluation content or improper evaluation, the judgment is "No". For each item, the answer is "yes" for 1 point, "partial" for 0.5 points, and the rest of the evaluation results for 0 points for a total of 16 points. The final AMSTAR2 checklist score of 0 to 3 is considered to be low quality, 4 to 7 points are considered to be low quality, 8 to 11 points are considered to be medium quality, and 12 to 16 points are considered to be of high quality. If there is any difference, the 2 reviewers will discuss together and solve it. If there is still no consensus reached, the third party should be invited to make a decision.

(p4.1) Recently more and more researchers use SRs to synthesize research evidence to address health issues at the global and national levels. However, due to the complexity and diversity of research in this field, the methodology of SRs has also been facing challenges. [11] So, Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR2), [12] which is commonly used to assess the methodological quality of SRs will be utilized by two independent reviewers to reflect risk of bias or validity of included SRs process and results. [13] The AMSTAR2 checklist has a total of 16 evaluation items. If the item is answered correctly and the basis is sufficient, the judgment is "Yes"; if the item is answered correctly but the basis is not sufficient, the judgment is "partially"; if the item has no relevant evaluation content or improper evaluation, the judgment is "No". For each item, the answer is "yes" for 1 point, "partial" for 0.5 points, and the rest of the evaluation results for 0 points for a total of 16 points. The final AMSTAR2 checklist score of 0 to 3 is considered to be low quality, 4 to 7 points are considered to be low quality, 8 to 11 points are considered to be medium quality, and 12 to 16 points are considered to be of high quality. If there is any difference, the 2 reviewers will discuss together and solve it. If there is still no consensus reached, the third party should be invited to make a decision.
## (s5) Evidence quality of outcome measures
(p5.0) Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) [14] approach will be used to evaluate the evidence quality of outcome measures. The level of evidence contains 4 grades as follows: very low (We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect), low (Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect), moderate (We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different), and high (We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect). At the very beginning, the quality of evidence of all outcomes was classified as "high" by default, and after rating, each outcome could receive a quality grade of high, moderate, low, or very low. [15] 

(p5.1) Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) [14] approach will be used to evaluate the evidence quality of outcome measures. The level of evidence contains 4 grades as follows: very low (We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect), low (Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect), moderate (We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different), and high (We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect). At the very beginning, the quality of evidence of all outcomes was classified as "high" by default, and after rating, each outcome could receive a quality grade of high, moderate, low, or very low. [15] 
## (s12) Discussions
(p12.0) Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers caused by malignant transformation of melanocytes, the United States had an estimated 73,870 new cases and nearly 10,000 melanoma deaths, accounting for nearly 75 percent of all skin cancer deaths in 2015. [20,21] Melanocytic neoplasms are both common lesions in clinical practice and a frequent source of diagnostic difficulty for the general surgical pathologist. [22] For most newly diagnosed melanoma patients, surgical resection is effective in most cases. [23] But about 10% of melanoma cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage and cannot be removed or metastasized. In stage IV tumors, approximately one-third of patients have visceral and cerebral involvement at diagnosis, with a poor prognosis and a low likelihood of sustained response to treatment. [24] The FDA approved 10 new treatments for metastatic melanoma between 2011 and 2015, which is unprecedented and exciting. Melanoma patients and their doctors now have many treatment options available. [25] Although currently there are more options for the treatment of melanoma. However, in order to further optimize the treatment regimen and improve the quality of life of patients, more research in related fields is still needed.

(p12.1) Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers caused by malignant transformation of melanocytes, the United States had an estimated 73,870 new cases and nearly 10,000 melanoma deaths, accounting for nearly 75 percent of all skin cancer deaths in 2015. [20,21] Melanocytic neoplasms are both common lesions in clinical practice and a frequent source of diagnostic difficulty for the general surgical pathologist. [22] For most newly diagnosed melanoma patients, surgical resection is effective in most cases. [23] But about 10% of melanoma cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage and cannot be removed or metastasized. In stage IV tumors, approximately one-third of patients have visceral and cerebral involvement at diagnosis, with a poor prognosis and a low likelihood of sustained response to treatment. [24] The FDA approved 10 new treatments for metastatic melanoma between 2011 and 2015, which is unprecedented and exciting. Melanoma patients and their doctors now have many treatment options available. [25] Although currently there are more options for the treatment of melanoma. However, in order to further optimize the treatment regimen and improve the quality of life of patients, more research in related fields is still needed.
## (s17) Study methods and analysis
(p17.0) This protocol will be performed in accordance with recommendations of "Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols" (PRISMA-P) statement guidelines. A study [10] has shown that prospective registration can effectively improve the overall methodological quality of SRs, so current study has been registered on the International prospective register of systematic reviews (PROSPERO), the registration number is CRD42019120017, Available from http://www.crd.york.ac.uk/ PROSPERO/display_record.php?ID=CRD42019120017 This is an overview and a NMA based on published studies; therefore, ethical approval is not required.
## (s19) Methodological quality assessment of included SRs
(p19.0) Recently more and more researchers use SRs to synthesize research evidence to address health issues at the global and national levels. However, due to the complexity and diversity of research in this field, the methodology of SRs has also been facing challenges. [11] So, Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR2), [12] which is commonly used to assess the methodological quality of SRs will be utilized by two independent reviewers to reflect risk of bias or validity of included SRs process and results. [13] The AMSTAR2 checklist has a total of 16 evaluation items. If the item is answered correctly and the basis is sufficient, the judgment is "Yes"; if the item is answered correctly but the basis is not sufficient, the judgment is "partially"; if the item has no relevant evaluation content or improper evaluation, the judgment is "No". For each item, the answer is "yes" for 1 point, "partial" for 0.5 points, and the rest of the evaluation results for 0 points for a total of 16 points. The final AMSTAR2 checklist score of 0 to 3 is considered to be low quality, 4 to 7 points are considered to be low quality, 8 to 11 points are considered to be medium quality, and 12 to 16 points are considered to be of high quality. If there is any difference, the 2 reviewers will discuss together and solve it. If there is still no consensus reached, the third party should be invited to make a decision.

(p19.1) Recently more and more researchers use SRs to synthesize research evidence to address health issues at the global and national levels. However, due to the complexity and diversity of research in this field, the methodology of SRs has also been facing challenges. [11] So, Assessing the Methodological Quality of Systematic Reviews (AMSTAR2), [12] which is commonly used to assess the methodological quality of SRs will be utilized by two independent reviewers to reflect risk of bias or validity of included SRs process and results. [13] The AMSTAR2 checklist has a total of 16 evaluation items. If the item is answered correctly and the basis is sufficient, the judgment is "Yes"; if the item is answered correctly but the basis is not sufficient, the judgment is "partially"; if the item has no relevant evaluation content or improper evaluation, the judgment is "No". For each item, the answer is "yes" for 1 point, "partial" for 0.5 points, and the rest of the evaluation results for 0 points for a total of 16 points. The final AMSTAR2 checklist score of 0 to 3 is considered to be low quality, 4 to 7 points are considered to be low quality, 8 to 11 points are considered to be medium quality, and 12 to 16 points are considered to be of high quality. If there is any difference, the 2 reviewers will discuss together and solve it. If there is still no consensus reached, the third party should be invited to make a decision.
## (s20) Evidence quality of outcome measures
(p20.0) Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) [14] approach will be used to evaluate the evidence quality of outcome measures. The level of evidence contains 4 grades as follows: very low (We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect), low (Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect), moderate (We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different), and high (We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect). At the very beginning, the quality of evidence of all outcomes was classified as "high" by default, and after rating, each outcome could receive a quality grade of high, moderate, low, or very low. [15] 

(p20.1) Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) [14] approach will be used to evaluate the evidence quality of outcome measures. The level of evidence contains 4 grades as follows: very low (We have very little confidence in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be substantially different from the estimate of effect), low (Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited: The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect), moderate (We are moderately confident in the effect estimate: The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility that it is substantially different), and high (We are very confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect). At the very beginning, the quality of evidence of all outcomes was classified as "high" by default, and after rating, each outcome could receive a quality grade of high, moderate, low, or very low. [15] 
## (s27) Discussions
(p27.0) Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers caused by malignant transformation of melanocytes, the United States had an estimated 73,870 new cases and nearly 10,000 melanoma deaths, accounting for nearly 75 percent of all skin cancer deaths in 2015. [20,21] Melanocytic neoplasms are both common lesions in clinical practice and a frequent source of diagnostic difficulty for the general surgical pathologist. [22] For most newly diagnosed melanoma patients, surgical resection is effective in most cases. [23] But about 10% of melanoma cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage and cannot be removed or metastasized. In stage IV tumors, approximately one-third of patients have visceral and cerebral involvement at diagnosis, with a poor prognosis and a low likelihood of sustained response to treatment. [24] The FDA approved 10 new treatments for metastatic melanoma between 2011 and 2015, which is unprecedented and exciting. Melanoma patients and their doctors now have many treatment options available. [25] Although currently there are more options for the treatment of melanoma. However, in order to further optimize the treatment regimen and improve the quality of life of patients, more research in related fields is still needed.

(p27.1) Melanoma is one of the most aggressive cancers caused by malignant transformation of melanocytes, the United States had an estimated 73,870 new cases and nearly 10,000 melanoma deaths, accounting for nearly 75 percent of all skin cancer deaths in 2015. [20,21] Melanocytic neoplasms are both common lesions in clinical practice and a frequent source of diagnostic difficulty for the general surgical pathologist. [22] For most newly diagnosed melanoma patients, surgical resection is effective in most cases. [23] But about 10% of melanoma cases are diagnosed at an advanced stage and cannot be removed or metastasized. In stage IV tumors, approximately one-third of patients have visceral and cerebral involvement at diagnosis, with a poor prognosis and a low likelihood of sustained response to treatment. [24] The FDA approved 10 new treatments for metastatic melanoma between 2011 and 2015, which is unprecedented and exciting. Melanoma patients and their doctors now have many treatment options available. [25] Although currently there are more options for the treatment of melanoma. However, in order to further optimize the treatment regimen and improve the quality of life of patients, more research in related fields is still needed.
