# Systematic Literature Review of Food-Intake Monitoring in an Aging Population †

CorpusID: 198912172 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2b9d8149b5e848e5e2bc72166a48a742ce759b5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d2b9d8149b5e848e5e2bc72166a48a742ce759b5)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) At present, the world is experiencing population-aging, a trend that is both pronounced and historically unprecedented. Over the past six decades, countries had experienced only a slight increase in the share of people aged 65 years and older, from 8% to 10%. However, in the next four decades, this group is expected to rise to 22% of the total population, a jump from 800 million to 2 billion people [1].

(p0.1) This trend is even more worrying in rural regions, for example, Extremadura in Spain or Alentejo in Portugal. This kind of region has lower population density than the average, and they keep losing their young population to more socioeconomically developed regions. Therefore, they have a higher-than-average aged population while being economically disadvantaged with a fragile cultural and socioeconomic context. Additionally, due to low population density and youth migration to richer regions, elders frequently live alone [2].

(p0.2) Aging in these regions is not a problem by itself, at least not directly. However, as people become older, they are more prone to diseases such as cognitive impairment, diabetes, hypertension and cardiovascular problems. Different studies indicate that a significant number of these diseases related to aging have their origin in deficient nutrition [3].

(p0.3) Elders are a particularly disadvantaged group with respect to nutrition, especially if compared with the rest of the population in developed countries [3]. Frequently, the elderly suffer changes in their nutritional patterns that, in some cases, can cause significant damages to their physical condition. For instance, some older people change their dietary habits, increasing their intake of greasy and salty food, or decreasing the total ingested food. This change of patterns usually leads to important-nutrient losses that directly influence the health of older people [4]. Deficient eating habits can cause serious problems in the function and cognitive status of elders, in addition to a higher rate of mortality, such as due to cardiovascular problems or anorexia episodes [5].

(p0.4) During the last few years, important research efforts have been devoted to various aspects related to feeding, not only for aging populations but also for the general population, addressing different nutritional disorders. One of the main objectives of the scientific community is to precisely monitor and identify nutritional patterns and ingested by elderly people. Different studies have shown that elders' nutritional patterns are a valid parameter for predicting their quality of life [6][7][8]. Specifically, there are approaches in this area to propose new algorithms, techniques or systems for improving food-intake monitoring.
## (s3) Methodology
(p3.0) As indicated above, the limitations of analysis were due to a rural environment with elderly people and with low population density, limitations such as the nonexistence of health centers and intermediaries or the difficulty in the use of infrastructures.

(p3.1) In addition, there are other limitations in this research such as database-searching restrictions, possible limitations in the keywords selected in this study or limitations in excluding articles in different languages.

(p3.2) With the aim of evaluating existing technological proposals for food-intake monitoring, we conducted an SLR [29][30][31] where we identified the main technologies that could be used for elderly living in rural environments.

(p3.3) In addition to achieving the above objectives, the SLR wants to classify the research papers in the field. In this way, we also sought to identify whether the scientific community has raised similar concerns to those identified in this work.

(p3.4) An SLR is a type of scientific research that aims to objectively and systematically integrate the results of empirical studies on a given research problem. Kitchenham et al. [30] and Petersen et al. [31] suggested a five-step procedure. The steps that were performed for this SLR are described below: a) Define research questions. The main goal of this SLR is to provide an overview of the research proposals on food-intake monitoring in an aging population, identifying the quantity and type of research and the results available within it. From specific research questions, we wanted to identity those proposals that best matched the requirements of elderly people living in a rural environment and the different issues in which higher effort should be devoted in increasing the user acceptance of these systems. b) Carry out literature search. Primary studies are identified by using search strings on scientific databases or by manually browsing through relevant conference proceedings or journal publications. A good way to create a search string is to structure it in terms of collection, intervention, comparison, and outcome [32]. The structures are driven by the research questions. c) Select studies. Inclusion and exclusion criteria are used to exclude studies that are not relevant to answering the research questions. For instance, although we wanted to analyze food-monitoring systems, those focused on animal monitoring could be excluded because their objectives and structure were completely different. d) Classify articles. We followed a systematic process composed of three phases: (1) only the title, abstract and keywords of each paper were analyzed in order to discard them or not, according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria; (2) the same elements of every paper were assessed in order to classify them according to issues defined in this work (Section 4); and (3), all papers were minutely analyzed in order to further refine the assessment. e) Extract and analyze data. Once the classification scheme was defined, the relevant papers were ordered by that scheme. In this step, we used an Excel sheet to document the data-extraction process. The table contains each category of the classification scheme. During analysis, after reviewing each paper, we provided a short rationale about why the paper should be in a certain category or in several categories. From the final table, the suitable technologies for being applied for monitoring elder people, the requirements that they met and the open issues that should be addressed to increase user acceptance were identified.
## (s8) d) Paper Classification
(p8.0) The issues identified in Motivation were used for organizing the papers. These problems define the main dimensions that should be considered to implement and deploy a valid solution in the environment described above.

(p8.1) To facilitate the understanding of the paper analysis and because of the high number of proposals, classification was carried out in three phases: (1) only the title, abstract and keywords of each paper were analyzed to discard them or not according to inclusion and exclusion criteria (detailed in the previous section); (2) the same elements of every paper were assessed in order to classify them according to the defined issues; and (3) full papers were analyzed in order to further refine the selected papers to thoroughly answer the defined research questions.
## (s9) e) Data Extraction and Synthesis
(p9.0) For an SLR, Kitchenham et al. [30] and Petersen et al. [31] defined guides suggesting that other parts of the analyzed papers should only be evaluated in those cases in which they are not well-structured or are imprecise. For this research, we decided to completely analyze each full paper in order to better answer all the raised questions. Some important proposals could be left aside by only analyzing titles, abstracts and keywords.

(p9.1) Each defined step was carried out by the researchers signing this paper. In order to improve readability and to facilitate understanding the obtained results, we decided to focus only on explaining the paper classification (Step d) and analysis (Step e) in the sections below.
## (s16) Image-Based Techniques
(p16.0) Image-based techniques that do not use smartphones, for example, the online system known as FoodLog [50], rely on users taking pictures of their food dishes using a camera and sending them to the system by email. FoodLog uses image-analysis methods for food identification from which nutrients can then be calculated.

(p16.1) Similarly, PlateMate [51] allows users to upload food pictures and receive nutrition estimations within a few hours. These estimations consist of a list of foods in the photograph, with measures about serving size, calories, fat, carbohydrates and protein for each food item. Again, in this system, the user sends the images directly to the server and waits for the response. Therefore, it requires intermediaries, increasing its cost.

(p16.2) Along this line, Reference [52] proposed a first-person food-monitoring system to make food nutritional information available. In this work, researchers used human computation to identify eating moments in a first-person point of view by images taken by wearable cameras and recognizing eating moments by using image-based techniques. However, as in the previous case, this requires intermediaries. In addition, this work cannot detect intake moments.

(p16.3) On the other hand, there are studies such as Reference [53] that propose algorithms to automatically estimate food attributes (such as ingredients and nutritional values) by classifying the input image (sent via a mobile application). Researchers used different deep-learning models for accurate food identification. In addition to image analysis, attributes and ingredients are estimated by extracting semantically related words from a huge corpus of text collected over the Internet. In the same line, making use of deep-learning techniques and short-range depth camera, H. C. Liao et al. [54] proposed a system for estimating food-intake directly from the food tray. This simplifies food-intake measuring. Both cases, however, could not detect the moment of intake, nor could they identify the person who is eating.

(p16.4) We would also like to point out that there are approaches, such as Reference [55], complementing image-based techniques with context information. These researchers developed a context-based image-analysis system for dietary assessment to automatically segment, identify and quantify food items from images. In this work, the authors describe image-segmentation and object-classification methods used in their system to detect and identify food items and use the context information to refine the classification results. This contextual dietary information is provided by the user, either explicitly or implicitly, to correct potential classification errors. This means that the system must be supervised.
## (s19) IoT
(p19.0) From an IoT perspective, projects are being developed for measuring food-nutrition facts through a pocket-sized nonintrusive near-infrared (NIR) scanner [73]. This device records NIR spectra reflected from foods and uses them as features to predict nutrients, for example, energy and carbohydrates. The researchers used partial least-squares (PLS) regression and support-vector regression (SVR) for prediction. This device can only infer percentages of food-nutrient contents. Therefore, to better monitor food-intake, it is crucial to provide food weight in order to calculate the exact nutritional content [74].

(p19.1) Making use of other technologies, there are cutlery IoT devices with different integrated sensors for food-intake monitoring, such as References [75,76]. In the specific case of Reference [75], the presented work is a spoon that can recognize meal composition during the intake process without user intervention or on-body instruments. This utensil makes use of the fact that light spectra reflected by foods are dependent on the food ingredients. By analyzing the reflected light spectra, the spoon can recognize which type of food is on top of the utensil. The proposal describes the prototype design and the food-recognition algorithm for 20 types of foods. On the other hand, Reference [76] presented another utensil, in this case, a knife device that can identify food. In this case, a small microphone is attached to the knife that records the cutting sound of the food. The system extracts spectrograms from cutting sounds and uses them as feature vectors to train a classifier, making use of the k-Nearest Neighbor method (k-NN), a support vector machine (SVM) and a convolutional neural network (CNN) to verify differences of the classification methods. Neither case specifies how to identify the specific person and the cost of these projects is unknown.

(p19.2) Other implementations, such as Reference [77], propose a hybrid model that relies on both data collected from sensors and participatory data collected from a social-network community. The model encompasses some key smart features including tracking food-intake, lifestyle and exercise activities, generating warnings and recommendations and triggering interventions whenever needed. The model also mines the collected data for statistical analysis that can be used by health authorities to have a clear picture of the health status of the population and might help in making rational and informed decisions. This type of project requires supervision and intermediaries.
## (s20) Single Board Computers
(p20.0) Systems based on Single Board Computers have existed for a long time. They have the general operating features and nutrient databases needed for food-intake analysis. Eight of these single board computers were exhaustively analyzed in [78]. The different systems vary in cost, the number of foods, nutrients in the database and ease of food entry. The main difference with the projects analyzed above, however, is the low speed of analyzing food-intake and the complexity in learning and using single board computers for elderly people. They also require the supervision and management of an assistant for the elderly. Other examples of this type of single board computers are References [79] or [80].
## (s31) •
(p31.0) In the Smart Home category, Reference [71] is very interesting due to the use of an everyday appliance such as a fridge. This device monitors the purchases and the food taken out, but can detect neither the intake moment nor identify the person. This solution is also not portable, which complicates its deployment in rural regions.
## (s32) •
(p32.0) The best options are found in the Smartphone category. The works of Reference [47] or Reference [48] developed a mobile application that send photos taken with smartphones to external web services and receives the extracted data from such photos. These solutions detect intake and food without supervision but they cannot identify the person who is eating. On the other hand, a project [46] presented another app, but on this occasion, online processing was not used. Instead, data insertion was carried out by remote dieticians and other healthcare professionals (supervised manner and with intermediaries).

(p32.1) Looking at the analyzed studies in the different fields in this SLR, we can say that a complete solution does not exist for monitoring food-intake in an aging population in rural environments with low-density population. Therefore, additional efforts are needed in the area.

(p32.2) Because of what we learned in this SLR, work should start by focusing on mobile technologies, as it is one that most older people already know, it is easy to deploy in rural environments and would not incur high costs for its implementation. Nevertheless, in order to meet the requirements, some open issues still need to be resolved:
## (s33) •
(p33.0) Most proposals using this technology cannot identify the user. New proposals, using a technique such as image recognition or analyzing the behavioral patterns stored in the mobile phone [84] to identify the user, are required.
## (s34) •
(p34.0) Mobile technologies usually rely on a cloud environment to process and store data. New food-intake monitoring techniques reducing the cloud-infrastructure requirements are needed, instead processing and storing the data in the mobile device itself. This, in some cases, also leads to a reduction of operating costs [85].
