# Positive and Negative Predictive Value of PET-CT in Skull Base Lesions: Case Series and Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 20651986 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0b807a4a1fa2c987f73594ef1a29fb36994a0f0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0b807a4a1fa2c987f73594ef1a29fb36994a0f0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Case Series
(p2.0) Thirty-one FDG PET-CT scans from 16 patients (11 males, 5 females) with lesions primarily of the skull base were identified (►Table 1). Of these, 10 scans were performed for initial staging and metastatic workup of biopsy-positive malignancy prior to treatment and 21 for posttreatment surveillance. All 16 patients had a tissue biopsy performed at some point in their care. The median age of patients was 68.5 (range 50-91 years). Indications for PET-CT imaging were sinonasal undifferentiated carcinoma (n ¼ 5), cutaneous/sinonasal melanoma (n ¼ 3), nasopharyngeal carcinoma (n ¼ 2), metastatic renal cell carcinoma (n ¼ 2), sinonasal lymphoma of the anterior skull base (n ¼ 1), sinonasal adenocarcinoma of the anterior skull base (n ¼ 1), IgG4 disease of the clivus (n ¼ 1), and sinonasal squamous cell carcinoma of the anterior skull base (n ¼ 1). After the 31 PET-CT scans, 11 "negative" results were followed clinically without a biopsy and 20 PET-CT results reported to be "positive" by the reading radiologist and were subsequently biopsied except in one patient who was undergoing radiation therapy and had a cerebrovascular accident. Median length of followup was 10 months (0.5-33) with a mean length of 11.9 months (1-33) for negative results and 9.28 months (0.5-22) for positive results.

(p2.1) Of the 31 PET-CT exams performed, the initial radiologist interpretation was "positive" in 20 cases and "negative" in 11 cases. All patients interpreted as "positive" results had an SUV of at least 2.5. Of the 20 PET-CTs interpreted as "negative," 3 had an SUV greater than or equal to 2.5. However, they were interpreted "negative" as the SUV value had decreased relative to prior exams. Of the 20 "positive" PET-CT results, there were only 4 false positives based on correlation with tissue histopathology. The reading radiologist interpretation had PPV of 80% and NPV of 100%, with sensitivity and specificity of 100 and 73.3%, respectively (►Table 2). Eleven "negative" surveillance PET-CT results were confirmed to be true negatives by biopsy or a favorable evolution of the lesion on clinical followup. The mean SUV of truly positive PET-CT lesions was 9.36 (1.01-27). The mean SUV of falsely positive PET-CT lesions was 5.83 (3.1-9.3). The mean SUV of truly negative PET-CT lesions was 2.66 (1)(2)(3)(4)(5). False positive results in the skull base were secondary to posttreatment inflammation (n ¼ 7), osteoradionecrosis (n ¼ 2), and IgG4 disease (n ¼ 1), corresponding to mean SUV max of 3.24, 5.8, and 9.3, respectively.

(p2.2) Next, SUV cutoff values of 2.5 and 3 were compared with determine PPV of the presence of a malignancy. Utilizing cutoff value of 2.5 SUV as "positive," the PET-CT had a PPV of 60% and NPV of 83.3% with sensitivity and specificity of 93.8 and 33.3%, respectively. When the "positive" SUV cutoff criterion was increased to 3, the PPV for malignancy increased to 68.4%, and the NPV decreased to 75%. Sensitivity decreased to 81.3% while specificity increased to 60%.
