# A review of forest economics research in Bolivia

CorpusID: 2029240 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed548e1837833c738be53b24b1277b1236f0741b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ed548e1837833c738be53b24b1277b1236f0741b)

Fields: Economics, Geography, Environmental Science

## (s26) Existence value
(p26.0) Existence values cannot be marketed, and is it difficult to imagine the creation of artificial markets like for the CO 2 sequestration. But in order to estimate their size, valuation studies can be performed. Here willingness to pay for (or accept for not having) a certain good, e.g. preservation of a certain forest or species, is estimated. Revealed preference methods analyse actual behaviour and since this is often related to the use of a good, e.g. a national park, it will not cover the existence value.

(p26.1) Existence values are much studied in the USA, and more recently also in other developed countries. Some studies exist of the economic value of non-marketed goods in South America, especially in Costa Rica (e.g. Barton 2002, Hearne & Salinas 2003, but often studies only describe and quantify the benefits.
## (s61) Existence value
(p61.0) Existence values cannot be marketed, and is it difficult to imagine the creation of artificial markets like for the CO 2 sequestration. But in order to estimate their size, valuation studies can be performed. Here willingness to pay for (or accept for not having) a certain good, e.g. preservation of a certain forest or species, is estimated. Revealed preference methods analyse actual behaviour and since this is often related to the use of a good, e.g. a national park, it will not cover the existence value.

(p61.1) Existence values are much studied in the USA, and more recently also in other developed countries. Some studies exist of the economic value of non-marketed goods in South America, especially in Costa Rica (e.g. Barton 2002, Hearne & Salinas 2003, but often studies only describe and quantify the benefits.
## (s96) Existence value
(p96.0) Existence values cannot be marketed, and is it difficult to imagine the creation of artificial markets like for the CO 2 sequestration. But in order to estimate their size, valuation studies can be performed. Here willingness to pay for (or accept for not having) a certain good, e.g. preservation of a certain forest or species, is estimated. Revealed preference methods analyse actual behaviour and since this is often related to the use of a good, e.g. a national park, it will not cover the existence value.

(p96.1) Existence values are much studied in the USA, and more recently also in other developed countries. Some studies exist of the economic value of non-marketed goods in South America, especially in Costa Rica (e.g. Barton 2002, Hearne & Salinas 2003, but often studies only describe and quantify the benefits.
