# The Needs of Women Who Have Experienced "Maternal Near Miss": A Systematic Review of Literature Review Article

CorpusID: 207933412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a35a8f147e806b4649b1405527755be6567e5805](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a35a8f147e806b4649b1405527755be6567e5805)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Maternal Near Miss (MNM) refers to a condition when a woman nearly dies but survives from a complication occurring during pregnancy, childbirth, or within 42 days of termination of pregnancy. [1,2] Near-miss cases have similar characteristics with maternal deaths and can tell us the root causes of acute complication. Accordingly, they provide valuable information on obstetric care allowing for reformative action to be taken on identified delays to reduce the related mortality and morbidity. [3] The prevalence of near-miss mothers in Brazil and India is 12.8 and 15.1 per 1,000 live births, [4,5] respectively. In addition, in a meta-analysis study in Iran, it was reported as 2.5 per 1,000 live births. [6] MNM has received less attention and often failed to access standard support as mothers' experiences are very extreme or different to the norm. [7] This is an open access journal, and articles are distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 License, which allows others to remix, tweak, and build upon the work non-commercially, as long as appropriate credit is given and the new creations are licensed under the identical terms.

(p0.1) For reprints contact: reprints@medknow.com Nevertheless, recent research and reviews have sought to address this. [8] The reason is that although the absolute number of annual maternal deaths is approximately 500,000, a further 9 million women are estimated to suffer from maternal mortality or near miss. Of these, a lot of them will experience long-term physical and psychological effects, thereby contributing to the maternal complications; [9] all the mothers and their partners experience some unpleasant long-term consequences of their near-miss event. [7] The health of women and their empowerment in the community are a central concept in the Sustainable Development Goals [10] and there have been calls for "rethinking maternal health" throughout the life cycle. [11] For many mothers, hospitalization in the intensive care unit and separation from the infant is hard. [8] Mothers who experience near miss have progressed to death, such 
## (s1) www.SID.ir
(p1.0) Archive of SID that they may have organ failure or discharged from hospital having had a major emergency treatment or spent time in the intensive care. Some of them may even have lost their baby as a result of their complications; Babies delivered premature may need to be admitted to the Neonatal Department. [12] Their experiences are very different from a normal delivery. Meanwhile, additional studies are required to enhance the knowledge about the overall burden of severe maternal morbidity, its relationship with the motherhood role, and pathological conditions such as traumatic childbirth [13] as well as occurrence of posttraumatic stress and anxiety, panic attacks, flashbacks, [14] fear of repregnancy in the future, lack of support and social isolation, [12] and developing postpartum depression. [15] Therefore, by gaining a deeper understanding of the MNM and adverse consequences of pregnancy-related events, opportunities may be found for preventive intervention. [16] Furthermore, available data should be collected to understand mother's needs and to manage the burden resulting from this event which affects millions of women in the world. [17] Hence, determining the needs of mothers with these experiences is the key to programming and integrated postpartum care. Indeed, it is important to recognize the mothers' needs for evaluating the physical, psychological, and social burden of maternal near-miss conditions. Because no study has been conducted that is consistent with the purpose of the present study, this study was conducted to identify the needs of mothers who have experienced MNM.
## (s2) Materials and Methods
(p2.0) This study was designed based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist. [18] This literature review was conducted in March 2019. In this study, to achieve the intended information, systematically published articles in PubMed and Web of Science databases were searched, where 498 and 617 of the published articles before March 2019 were found in each, respectively. We reviewed the list of reference of the relevant articles. Furthermore, to cover more articles, the Google Scholar database was searched, whereby 1022 articles were extracted. All articles were searched in English. The search strategy focused on three keywords or phrases: "maternal morbidity" OR "maternal near miss" AND "needs." We used broad inclusion criteria to provide a detailed systematic review of the topic. It must be noted that article search was conducted by two independent reviewers and all the studies reviewed eligible articles by reviewing the title and abstract. Any disagreement between these two was resolved through discussion and by considering the goals of the study, and the opinion of a third person was requested, if necessary. The full texts of the selected abstracts were, subsequently, screened. After the primary search of different databases, 2140 articles were found. The extracted articles were evaluated according to the inclusion criteria in two steps. During the first step, 2052 articles out of 2140 were eliminated because of being a duplicate or qualifying the exclusion criteria. During the second step, nine articles were eliminated for having different (irrelevant) titles and goals as well as due to lack of a full text. Eventually, 77 articles including 20 qualitative and 57 quantitative studies were enrolled for final evaluation [ Figure 1].

(p2.1) The articles presented in conferences and seminars, case reports, and letters to editor were excluded. Furthermore, lack of access to the full texts of the articles was considered as an exclusion criterion. Eventually, the selected articles were studied to determine the needs of mothers who have experienced MNM.
## (s17) www.SID.ir
(p17.0) Archive of SID programs should deal with both averting the loss of life and with ameliorating care of severe maternal morbidities at all levels including primary care. [32] Need to develop a physical, psychological, and social of care packages
## (s18) Discussion
(p18.0) This study determined the needs of mothers who have experienced MNM which has been described in six sections. The most important demands and needs of many mothers who survive near-miss complications include the support and attention of healthcare providers during and after hospitalization. Most mothers express emotional and psychological reactions to MNM including anxiety, sorrow, and anger, [52] constituting "maternal near-miss syndrome." [42] The consequences of these events include loss of life, loss of fertility, loss of body image, loss of quality of life, and dissatisfaction of marital relationships. [41] On the other hand, Hinton et al.'s study highlighted the importance of communication between primary and secondary care and showed that proper support from service providers completely changed the lives of these mothers. [7] Mothers who received support from healthcare providers had a [Downloaded free from http://www.ijnmrjournal.net on Friday, November 8, 2019, IP: 188.158.189.72] 
## (s20) Archive of SID
(p20.0) shorter physical and mental recovery, and the received support was very valuable to them. [12] Talking through events with midwives at follow-up visits can also be valuable in helping mothers understand what has happened to them. [12,15] In addition, health problems in partners after a near-miss experience may have a big impact financially, practically, and emotionally. [12,38] Consultation with spouses should be done, because fear of reoccurrence of events in the future pregnancy will reduce the desire for childbearing. [12] Counseling can make a real difference to how mothers and their partners cope with the emergency and recovery, because many mothers who develop MNM fail to access the required critical care due to failure to recognize danger signs. [41] Pregnancy and childbirth care packages require adaptation if they are to meet the identified health needs of mothers. Also, to defeat this persistent problem and to decrease the burden of MNM, we need to educate the general public to opt for immediate postnatal care. [25,31,42] One of the limitations of this study was that due to the large number of articles and the wide range of MNM needs, few electronic databases were selected.
