# materials An Overview of the Recent Developments in Metal Matrix Nanocomposites Reinforced by Graphene

CorpusID: 201829941 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4289e7000064a68a0f9593686bf7555c1494f97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4289e7000064a68a0f9593686bf7555c1494f97)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Mechanical Properties of Carbonaceous Nanomaterials
(p2.0) According to the latest findings in the literature, to forecast and evaluate the mechanical performance of graphene, both experimental approaches and theoretical simulations have been used; e.g., numerical simulation tools, such as equivalent-continuum, quantum mechanical and atomistic modelling [96]. The Young's modulus (E) of a single-layered graphite sheet is predicted by Sakhaee Pour around 1 TPa through utilizing the equivalent-continuum concept [97]. Molecular dynamics (MD) are usually employed to model the motion of atoms numerically according to their relevant potential energies. During simulations, for a while, atoms are allowed to interact, which leads to increasing motion and force fields among them. For these purposes, different interatomic potential models, such as the Lennard-Jones, Morse and Tersoff-Brenner models, have been proposed [98]. MD simulations were employed for mechanical performance prediction of single layer of graphite by Tsai and Tu [99], and as a result, an elastic modulus of 0.912 TPa was achieved. Zheng et al. [100] have reported the Young's modulus of graphene in the forms of armchair and zigzag being equal to 1.086 and 1.05 TPa, respectively.

(p2.1) Experimentally, Lee et al. have determined the Young's modulus (1.02 TPa) and intrinsic tensile strength (σ, 130 GPa) of single-layer graphene by employing the nanoindentation of the atomic force microscope (AFM) [101]. Furthermore, by applying a similar method, they reported the values of E and σ for a graphene bilayer and trilayer: 1.04 TPa, 126 GPa and 0.98 TPa, 101 GPa, respectively [102]. It should be mentioned that epoxide and hydroxyl groups in GO significantly deteriorate the Young's modulus of GO. In recent years, large GO sheets with an average area of 272.2 mm 2 were prepared by Lin et al. through the centrifugation technique, and achieved the best elastic modulus, of~13.5 GPa [103].
## (s3) Thermal Properties of Carbonaceous Nanomaterials
(p3.0) In carbonaceous nanomaterials, thermal energy is transported by phonons' conduction. The thermal conductivity (k) of single-layer graphene (SLG) was measured by Baladin et al. through confocal micro-Raman spectroscopic measurements. They reported extremely high thermal conductivity (4840-5300 W·m −1 ·K −1 ) for SLG, which was prepared by mechanical cleavage at ambient temperature [113,114]. With respect to the high thermal conductivity of graphene, it was considered a proper material for use in electronic packaging industries. Ruoff et al. obtained the k value of SLG coated on an amorphous silica substrate equal to 600 W·m −1 ·K −1 at ambient temperature [115]. That decrease in the thermal conductivity was due to the increase of scattering points as a consequence of defects and the inclusions increment.

(p3.1) In nanotubes, the conduction of a phonon is influenced by some important parameters, including the number of active phonon modes, the average length of the mean free path for the phonons and inelastic umklapp scattering. For this reason, the presence of impurities, and the geometry of the tubes, influence the thermal conductivity of nanotubes [116]. Despite these factors, a fabulous high thermal conductivity of 6600 W·m −1 ·K −1 was predicted for SWNTs by theoretical MD simulations at room temperature [117]. Some practical outcomes have been presented in the previous works for the thermal conductivity values of CNTs. Pop et al. measured the thermal conductivity of a suspended SWNT through electrical analysis at 300-800 K to be about 3500 W·m −1 ·K −1 [118]. In other research, Honet et al. found the thermal conductivity of 1750-5800 W·m −1 ·K −1 for the SWNT ropes at a room temperature by the conventional thermocouple method [119]. As reported by Fuji et al. thermal conductivity of a single MWNT decreases at ambient temperature with increasing tube diameter, based on a suspended sample-attached T-type nano-sensor experiment [120]. For instance, the thermal conductivities of MWNTs with 9.8 and 28.2 nm diameters are 2069 and 500 W·m −1 ·K −1 , respectively. As reported by Kim et al., the k value of MWNT is more than 3000 W·m −1 ·K −1 at room temperature via suspended microdevice measurements [121]. Experimental mechanical and thermal characteristics of traditional CFs and carbonaceous nanomaterials are summarized in Table 5. Table 5. Reported characteristics of carbon fibre, carbon nanotube, carbon nanofiber and graphene [107,[109][110][111][113][114][115]. 
## (s5) Fabrication of MMNCs Reinforced by Graphene
(p5.0) Over the last decade, several technologies, such as casting, additive manufacturing (AM), thermomechanical processing and powder metallurgy (PM) have been employed to produce metallic monolithic alloys and/or composite materials [122][123][124][125]. Among them, PM is a suitable technique for producing MMNCs with carbonaceous nanofiller owning to its compliance and simplicity. The basic route in this process is a mechanical blending of powders in a rotary mill, so that all materials remain in the solid state, followed by compacting, sintering, cold isostatic pressing (CIP), hot pressing/hot isostatic pressing (HIP) or spark plasma sintering (SPS) to obtain the minimum porosities and the highest density. The main limitation of PM techniques is related to the price of raw material powders, which are expensive [125]. However, it should be noticed that the AM techniques, such as laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) and directed energy deposition (DED) processes, that are layer-wise manufacturing processes, are rapidly growing in the fabrication of MMNCs [126][127][128][129].
## (s6) Strengthening Mechanisms
(p6.0) In general, it is proven that in MMNCs, the strenghening effect can be obtained via different strengthening mechanisms, such as load transfer, Orowan looping, thermal expansion coefficient mismatching and Hall-Petch strengthening (grain refinement) [23,[151][152][153].

(p6.1) The load transfer strengthenig effect is the first possible mechanism for strengthening in MMNCs. In this mechanism, load transfer is from the soft matrix to a high strength reinforcement, and this mechanism depends on the interface between the matrix and reinforcing particles. In principle, stronger interfacial bonding could result in high load transfer, and accordingly increase the final strength of the nanocomposite. However, it was reported that in the MMNs consisting of low reinforcement content, the load transfer effect does not contribute significantly in the strengthening of MMNCs [152].
## (s9) Magnesium Matrix Nanocomposites Reinforced by Graphene
(p9.0) Chen et al. [61] reported the first outcomes on GNPs-reinforced Mg matrix nanocomposites. They employed liquid state ultrasonic processing and solid-state friction stirring to synthesize the nanocomposite. SEM and TEM images of this nanocomposite are shown in Figures 10 and 11, respectively. As is shown in Figure 10a, the GNPs are well embedded in the magnesium matrix. Nevertheless, due to the existence of micrometre-sized agglomerates in the Mg matrix (Figure 10a,b), the dispersion of the GNPs needs to be improved. Uniformly distribution (Figure 10c In addition, as can be observed in the TEM image ( Figure 11), for GNPs with an interplanar distance of 0.34 nm incorporated in the magnesium matrix, porosities and reaction products were not detected. Consequently, very good bonding should exist between the GNPs and the Mg matrix. Furthermore, a TEM image shows the same orientation of the Mg-matrix around the GNPs, which demonstrated the GNPs were embedded inside a magnesium grain. Under the same conditions, the microhardness of the (1.2 vol.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite improved by about 78% compared that to the pure Mg which had values of 66 and 37 kg/mm 2 . They have also reported that graphene nanoplatelets have a significant strengthening effect on the Mg-matrix nanocomposite [61]. Rashad et al. [58,59,63,181,182] have fabricated an Mg-(10Ti + 0.18 wt.% GNPs) nanocomposite, a (0.3 wt.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite and a 0.18 wt.% GNPs-Mg-1%Al-1%Sn nanocomposite  In addition, as can be observed in the TEM image ( Figure 11), for GNPs with an interplanar distance of 0.34 nm incorporated in the magnesium matrix, porosities and reaction products were not detected. Consequently, very good bonding should exist between the GNPs and the Mg matrix. Furthermore, a TEM image shows the same orientation of the Mg-matrix around the GNPs, which demonstrated the GNPs were embedded inside a magnesium grain. Under the same conditions, the microhardness of the (1.2 vol.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite improved by about 78% compared that to the pure Mg which had values of 66 and 37 kg/mm 2 . They have also reported that graphene nanoplatelets have a significant strengthening effect on the Mg-matrix nanocomposite [61]. Rashad et al. [58,59,63,181,182] have fabricated an Mg-(10Ti + 0.18 wt.% GNPs) nanocomposite, a (0.3 wt.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite and a 0.18 wt.% GNPs-Mg-1%Al-1%Sn nanocomposite In addition, as can be observed in the TEM image (Figure 11), for GNPs with an interplanar distance of 0.34 nm incorporated in the magnesium matrix, porosities and reaction products were not detected. Consequently, very good bonding should exist between the GNPs and the Mg matrix. Furthermore, a TEM image shows the same orientation of the Mg-matrix around the GNPs, which demonstrated the GNPs were embedded inside a magnesium grain. Under the same conditions, the microhardness of the (1.2 vol.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite improved by about 78% compared that to the pure Mg which had values of 66 and 37 kg/mm 2 . They have also reported that graphene nanoplatelets have a significant strengthening effect on the Mg-matrix nanocomposite [61].

(p9.1) Rashad et al. [58,59,63,181,182] have fabricated an Mg-(10Ti + 0.18 wt.% GNPs) nanocomposite, a (0.3 wt.%) GNPs-Mg nanocomposite and a 0.18 wt.% GNPs-Mg-1%Al-1%Sn nanocomposite through semi-powder metallurgy followed by hot extrusion. In the case of Mg-(10Ti + 0.18 wt.% GNPs) nanocomposite, the incorporation of graphene nanoplates causes the enhancement of ultimate tensile strength, ductility and yield strength ( Figure 12). through semi-powder metallurgy followed by hot extrusion. In the case of Mg-(10Ti + 0.18 wt.% GNPs) nanocomposite, the incorporation of graphene nanoplates causes the enhancement of ultimate tensile strength, ductility and yield strength ( Figure 12). This improvement of ductility in that work was explained by the level of porosity in the fabricated pure Mg and nanocomposites [181]. It is also found that the brittle characteristic of pure Mg is because of its limited number of slip systems in Mg crystals [59]. The hardness, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of 0.3 wt.% GNPs-Mg nanocomposite were 68.5 HV, 197 and 238 MPa, respectively, which presented a slight increase in the mechanical characteristics in comparison with the pure magnesium. In addition, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of 0.18 wt.% GNPs-Mg-1%Al-1%Sn nanocomposite increased by 29.2% and 14% with respect to the pure Mg. Based on their report, graphene acts as a reinforcement for Mg matrix nanocomposites and this claim was confirmed by the improvements in their mechanical properties.

(p9.2) The effect of carbon nanotubes and graphene on the mechanical characteristic of pure Mg have been studied by Rashad et al. [63]. They revealed that, in the presence of CNTs or graphene or (CNTs + graphene) with the same ratio, the best strengthening effect was presented by CNTs. However, CNTs + graphene nanocomposites showed the best ductility and a good strengthening impact, as can be observed in Figure 13. Moreover, in other research [59], they have synthesized GNPs-reinforced Mg matrix nanocomposites through powder metallurgy processing. They found that, with the increasing of the content of graphene, the hardness, yield strength and fracture strain of the nanocomposite all improved (Figure 14). This improvement of ductility in that work was explained by the level of porosity in the fabricated pure Mg and nanocomposites [181]. It is also found that the brittle characteristic of pure Mg is because of its limited number of slip systems in Mg crystals [59]. The hardness, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of 0.3 wt.% GNPs-Mg nanocomposite were 68.5 HV, 197 and 238 MPa, respectively, which presented a slight increase in the mechanical characteristics in comparison with the pure magnesium. In addition, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of 0.18 wt.% GNPs-Mg-1%Al-1%Sn nanocomposite increased by 29.2% and 14% with respect to the pure Mg. Based on their report, graphene acts as a reinforcement for Mg matrix nanocomposites and this claim was confirmed by the improvements in their mechanical properties.

(p9.3) The effect of carbon nanotubes and graphene on the mechanical characteristic of pure Mg have been studied by Rashad et al. [63]. They revealed that, in the presence of CNTs or graphene or (CNTs + graphene) with the same ratio, the best strengthening effect was presented by CNTs. However, CNTs + graphene nanocomposites showed the best ductility and a good strengthening impact, as can be observed in Figure 13. Moreover, in other research [59], they have synthesized GNPs-reinforced Mg matrix nanocomposites through powder metallurgy processing. They found that, with the increasing of the content of graphene, the hardness, yield strength and fracture strain of the nanocomposite all improved (Figure 14).  In another work [183], AZ61 magnesium alloy reinforced by GNPs has fabricated by an integrated melt deposition method. In this investigation, because of the uniform distribution of GNPs within the matrix, they exhibit a significant influence on the grain refinement and changing in basal textures, which resulted in a marked improvement in the mechanical performance of nanocomposites at room temperature ( Figure 15). As can be observed in Figure 15a, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of nanocomposite exhibited 26% and 11.7% increases in comparison with monolithic alloy. Based on Figure 15b, the ultimate compressive strength and compressive yield strength of nanocomposite were enhanced up to 4.12% and 32.9%, respectively, with inconsiderable decreases in compressive fracture strain values. Furthermore, nanocomposite with 3 wt.% GNPs showed a 15.5% increase in Vickers hardness, compared to the pure AZ61 alloy. During those experiments, the tensile strength of as-extruded GNPs-AZ61 nanocomposite was demonstrated, in the range of 75 °C to 225 °C. Experimental results revealed that, by increasing the testing temperature, total fracture strain increased, and tensile yield strength decreased. The increase of fracture strain (at high temperature) can be explained with the remarkable grain refinement and uniform distribution of particles.   In another work [183], AZ61 magnesium alloy reinforced by GNPs has fabricated by an integrated melt deposition method. In this investigation, because of the uniform distribution of GNPs within the matrix, they exhibit a significant influence on the grain refinement and changing in basal textures, which resulted in a marked improvement in the mechanical performance of nanocomposites at room temperature ( Figure 15). As can be observed in Figure 15a, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of nanocomposite exhibited 26% and 11.7% increases in comparison with monolithic alloy. Based on Figure 15b, the ultimate compressive strength and compressive yield strength of nanocomposite were enhanced up to 4.12% and 32.9%, respectively, with inconsiderable decreases in compressive fracture strain values. Furthermore, nanocomposite with 3 wt.% GNPs showed a 15.5% increase in Vickers hardness, compared to the pure AZ61 alloy. During those experiments, the tensile strength of as-extruded GNPs-AZ61 nanocomposite was demonstrated, in the range of 75 °C to 225 °C. Experimental results revealed that, by increasing the testing temperature, total fracture strain increased, and tensile yield strength decreased. The increase of fracture strain (at high temperature) can be explained with the remarkable grain refinement and uniform distribution of particles. In another work [183], AZ61 magnesium alloy reinforced by GNPs has fabricated by an integrated melt deposition method. In this investigation, because of the uniform distribution of GNPs within the matrix, they exhibit a significant influence on the grain refinement and changing in basal textures, which resulted in a marked improvement in the mechanical performance of nanocomposites at room temperature ( Figure 15). As can be observed in Figure 15a, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength of nanocomposite exhibited 26% and 11.7% increases in comparison with monolithic alloy. Based on Figure 15b, the ultimate compressive strength and compressive yield strength of nanocomposite were enhanced up to 4.12% and 32.9%, respectively, with inconsiderable decreases in compressive fracture strain values. Furthermore, nanocomposite with 3 wt.% GNPs showed a 15.5% increase in Vickers hardness, compared to the pure AZ61 alloy. During those experiments, the tensile strength of as-extruded GNPs-AZ61 nanocomposite was demonstrated, in the range of 75 • C to 225 • C. Experimental results revealed that, by increasing the testing temperature, total fracture strain increased, and tensile yield strength decreased. The increase of fracture strain (at high temperature) can be explained with the remarkable grain refinement and uniform distribution of particles.  Figure 16 demonstrates the fracture surface of fabricated AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposite after tensile and compressive tests. The tensile fracture surface image of AZ61 alloy (Figure 16a) shows a mixed mode fracture with cleavage steps, which is evidence of ductile material. Likewise, the tensile fracture surface of nanocomposite ( Figure 16b) demonstrates a significant deformation, along with several microcracks and cavities that could be responsible for the reduction of fracture strain values in comparison with AZ61alloy. Moreover, the existence of microcracks in the fracture surface of the nanocomposite can be explained by high dislocation densities at the interface of GNP/matrix. According to compressive fracture analysis, there were shear bands in pure AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposites, as illustrated in Figure 16c,d. The presence of these shear bands can be related to work hardening behaviour and heterogeneous deformation, because the rate of work hardening is higher for samples failed by shear bands. Regarding the compressive loading, all fractures occurred at a 45° angle.   Figure 16 demonstrates the fracture surface of fabricated AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposite after tensile and compressive tests. The tensile fracture surface image of AZ61 alloy (Figure 16a) shows a mixed mode fracture with cleavage steps, which is evidence of ductile material. Likewise, the tensile fracture surface of nanocomposite ( Figure 16b) demonstrates a significant deformation, along with several microcracks and cavities that could be responsible for the reduction of fracture strain values in comparison with AZ61alloy. Moreover, the existence of microcracks in the fracture surface of the nanocomposite can be explained by high dislocation densities at the interface of GNP/matrix. According to compressive fracture analysis, there were shear bands in pure AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposites, as illustrated in Figure 16c,d. The presence of these shear bands can be related to work hardening behaviour and heterogeneous deformation, because the rate of work hardening is higher for samples failed by shear bands. Regarding the compressive loading, all fractures occurred at a 45 • angle.  Figure 16 demonstrates the fracture surface of fabricated AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposite after tensile and compressive tests. The tensile fracture surface image of AZ61 alloy (Figure 16a) shows a mixed mode fracture with cleavage steps, which is evidence of ductile material. Likewise, the tensile fracture surface of nanocomposite ( Figure 16b) demonstrates a significant deformation, along with several microcracks and cavities that could be responsible for the reduction of fracture strain values in comparison with AZ61alloy. Moreover, the existence of microcracks in the fracture surface of the nanocomposite can be explained by high dislocation densities at the interface of GNP/matrix. According to compressive fracture analysis, there were shear bands in pure AZ61 alloy and its nanocomposites, as illustrated in Figure 16c,d. The presence of these shear bands can be related to work hardening behaviour and heterogeneous deformation, because the rate of work hardening is higher for samples failed by shear bands. Regarding the compressive loading, all fractures occurred at a 45° angle.  Recently, Meng et al. [62] produced GNPs-Mg laminated nanocomposites. They showed that by increasing GNPs from 0.25 vol.% to 0.75 vol.%, the tensile strength of the nanocomposite increases to 160 and 179, respectively, compared to pure Mg (136 MPa). The load transfer capacity improved due to the uniform distribution of graphene and constrained the transformation of Mg foils to monolithic materials. The motion of dislocation was prevented, as a consequence of the induced laminated structure, and so strengthened the nanocomposites. In other work, Du et al. [65] fabricated GNPs-magnesium alloy (ZK60) nanocomposites using the melt stirring and hot extrusion processes. For this purpose, graphene was mixed with magnesium powder and extruded into the rods. Thereafter, the extruded rods were used as a precursor for melting, and that combination of processes effectively guaranteed the dispersion of GNPs. In comparison with ZK60 alloy, in the presence of only 0.05 wt.% GNPs, the yield strength of the nanocomposite increased by 62%.

(p9.4) As reported in the literature, Mg-Al-GNPs nanocomposites showed better mechanical characteristics in comparison with the Mg-Al-CNT nanocomposites. These improved mechanical characteristics were explained by the high specific surface area, better nanofiller matrix adhesion ascending from the crumpled surface and the 2D structure of graphene nanoplatelets [184]. Moreover, the 1D structure of CNTs results in the poor dispersion of CNTs in the metallic matrix and agglomeration that results in the lower mechanical performances [185].
## (s13) Other Metal Matrix Nanocomposites Reinforced by Graphene
(p13.0) A noticeable amount of research has been aimed to investigate the effect of embedding graphene into the MMCs. The main applications of those nanocomposites, including their use as photo-catalysts, and in transformation materials, biosensors, energy storage, and so on. Those metal matrix nanocomposites consist of Ag-doped graphene-silver matrix nanocomposites [194], graphene (3D-GNs)-Ni nanocomposites [195], graphene (MLG)-Ti nanocomposites [196], graphene (GNPs)-Inconel 718 [197], graphene (MLG)-Ni 3 Al alloy [198], graphene-Fe [184], GNNs-Ag-Cu-Ti nanocomposites [199] and others. Some characteristics of those graphene-metal matrix nanocomposites are summarized in Table 9.   [203] Three-dimensional graphene networks (3D GNs); graphene nanoplates (GNPs); multilayer graphene (MLG); graphene oxide (GO); graphene nanoflakes (GNFs); graphene nanosheets (GNSs); hot-rolling (HR); spark plasma sintering (SPS); mechanical alloying (MA); conventional powder metallurgy (CPM), ball milling (BM); chemical vapor deposition (CVD).
## (s14) Potential Applications of Graphene-reinforced MMNCs
(p14.0) In recent years, MMNCs have been considered potential materials to be employed in different sophisticated industrial applications. Therefore, more research and learning has been carried out to explore the advances in their structures and possible applications. Indeed, over the last decade, a growing body of literature on MMNCs has shown that these materials, in particular reinforced by graphene, show great potential to be used in a range of engineering applications and lightweight alloys. Indeed, owing to their unique properties, such as high strength and toughness at high temperatures and low density, MMNCs are recognized as favourable materials to be employed in applications where conventional engineering materials, such as steel, are used. Although MMNCs often have low ductility and interior fracture toughness, they present remarkably higher stiffness and mechanical strength compared to matrix alloys. Therefore, selecting suitable reinforcement, characteristics and production techniques play vital roles in the resulting MMNCs [204].
## (s15) MMNCs
(p15.0) Properties and Applications Ref. Super capacitor-fuel cell [209] Despite all the efforts that have been undertaken to develop new nanocomposite materials reinforced by graphene, still the production of these new materials in the industrial scale is faced by several challenges, like the uniform dispersion of graphene within the metallic matrix and interfacial bonding between graphene/metallic matrix.
