# Burnout of residents: Overview from various medical institutions -A suggested model for improvement

CorpusID: 209234748 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce2e47c671ccab5315d99f94f0b8811e64d36e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ce2e47c671ccab5315d99f94f0b8811e64d36e7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) North and South America
(p1.0) A national survey on 665 general surgery residents from different Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) centers in the US showed that 44% indicated attrition and that they would not choose general surgery if offered the option again. [6] The MBI-HSS showed that 65% of males reported burnout versus 73% females (P = 0.02) and 57% scored the did not address burnout, risk factors and consequences of burnout, and prevention or intervention for residents dealing with burnout. Case studies, case reports, comments, or editorials were also excluded. Cross-referencing of article citations in identified articles was done to make sure that appropriate articles were included.

(p1.1) We tried to group studies according to the number of participants, but this was not possible since some countries did not have many studies conducted and/or had a small number of participants or were written in local language without any translation to English (especially in the South American region). A summary table of all the discussed studies is presented in Table 1. The Maslach.

(p1.2) Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey (MBI-HSS) was the most commonly used tool to measure burnout. [2] It Hutter et al. [19] 2006 58 surgical residents (details of sex and age unreported) Significant decrease in emotional exhaustion (0.02), depersonalization (0.09), and personal achievement (0.09) Shanafelt et al. [22] 2009 7905 surgeons (6815 males and 1043 females and 47 unreported, mean age=51 years) 32% had high emotional exhaustion, 26% demonstrated high depersonalization, and 13% had a low sense of personal accomplishment Eckleberry-Hunt et al. [7] 2009 151 residents from different specialties (77 males and 68 females, 6 unreported, mean age unreported) 27 out of 32 burnout factors were significantly associated with at least one burnout scale Prins et al. [9] 2010 2110 residents from different specialties (820 males and 1290 females, mean age=31 years)
## (s3) 58% considered attrition
(p3.0) Zis et al. [13] 2014 263 residents (details of sex not specified, mean age=33 years) 51.0% high levels of burnout in at least one dimension, 18.3% in at least two dimensions, and 4.9% in all three dimensions Agha et al. [14] 2015 96 residents and doctors (64 males and 32 females; mean age unreported)
## (s6) Suggestions
(p6.0) Before introducing wellness programs, it is important to take into account several elements. The process is multidimensional and requires commitment from different levels ranging from the institution as a whole, down to the level of the residents. Burnout symptoms are associated with depression; thus, any program should tackle the stigma surrounding this mental health issue. Moreover, the characteristics of residents should be captured along with the nature of their training institutions. [6] Lebanon is a developing country, and our institution is a tertiary care center located in the capital. [17] Residents in developing countries are subject to different challenges such as suboptimal working conditions, lower income, political instability, exposure to war, and inadequate health-care infrastructure. [17] Any program should acknowledge that some medical students might already suffer from mental health issues prior to starting residency. The importance of burnout may be addressed in the resident agreement document and/or distribute educational pamphlets regarding burnout, wherein they can find any needed information.
## (s8) CONCLUSION
(p8.0) Burnout among residents is a crucial issue that has gained attention in the last decade. It is important to acknowledge that the health of residents' is a profession by itself [18] and that special and dedicated care should be given to their well-being in addition to teaching. Providing professional support in the form of wellness programs addressed to residents may attenuate the consequences of burnout through emotional control, time management, and team building. [7] Although there is no clear definition of wellness in the literature, [7] it is essential to generate such interventions, and this represents an important area for future research. [6] Research should determine the prevalence of burnout and identify the elements associated with it before introducing any academic program.
