# cancers Involvement of the Anterior Commissure in Early Glottic Cancer (Tis-T2): A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 201756375 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ac730c34e313c20820f9e3c7db322e35e926d01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4ac730c34e313c20820f9e3c7db322e35e926d01)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Although it is widely acknowledged that the involvement of the anterior commissure (AC) in early glottic cancer (Tis-T2) can have negative impacts on outcomes, the extent of the impact remains a topic of discussion with inconsistent results reported in the literature. Some studies show a significant association between the AC and a higher recurrence rate, whereas others do not.

(p0.1) The AC is a complex anatomical subsite of the larynx, which encompasses different structures such as Broyles ligament, membranes, muscles, perichondrium, and the thyroid cartilage, and has a close relationship with the visceral structures surrounding it. Therefore, the AC has to be considered as a 3D structure and not as a point location (Figure 1). Rucci et al. defined the AC-on the basis of embryonic development-as the area of the glottis situated anteriorly between the vocal folds that extends in a vertical direction, both upwards and downwards [1]. It is rarely the site of origin of glottic cancer [1], but it is often involved in anterior lesions spreading from left to right, and from inferior to superior. Furthermore, due to its close proximity to the visceral spaces of the larynx (pre-epiglottic space, paraglottic space, and cricothyroid membrane), it has been argued that microscopic spread to these spaces may affect local control [2][3][4]. 
## (s10) Study Characteristics
(p10.0) All 58 studies included in this review were published in peer-reviewed journals. Only one prospective randomized study, which was on radiation therapy, was identified [5]. All other publications had a level of evidence classified as B [6]. Most of the studies reported outcomes for early glottic cancer, grouping Tis-T2 tumors together, with only a few studies focusing on T1 or T2 tumors separately. The 34 radiotherapy studies included 9656 patients, of which 3930 patients (40.7%) had involvement of the AC. The 24 TLM studies included 3958 patients, of which 1169 patients (29.5%) had involvement of the AC.
## (s11) Study Characteristics
(p11.0) All 58 studies included in this review were published in peer-reviewed journals. Only one prospective randomized study, which was on radiation therapy, was identified [5]. All other publications had a level of evidence classified as B [6]. Most of the studies reported outcomes for early glottic cancer, grouping Tis-T2 tumors together, with only a few studies focusing on T1 or T2 tumors separately. The 34 radiotherapy studies included 9656 patients, of which 3930 patients (40.7%) had involvement of the AC. The 24 TLM studies included 3958 patients, of which 1169 patients (29.5%) had involvement of the AC.
## (s15) 5-Year Laryngeal Preservation (%)
(p15.0) Ansarin 2017 [53] 1999  Abbreviations: AC+ = anterior commissure involvement, AC− = no anterior commissure involvement, AC0 = no involvement of the anterior commissure, AC1 = involvement of the anterior commissure subsite on only one side of the midline, AC2 = involvement of the anterior commissure subsite that crosses the midline on only part of the longitudinal extension of this subsite, AC3 = involvement of the whole anterior commissure subsite on both sides across the midline, ELS = European Laryngology Society, HZ = hazard ratio, MVA = multivariate analysis, nfs = not further specified, NS = not significant, OR = odds ratio, TLM = transoral laser microsurgery, UVA = univariate analysis.
## (s17) Overall Survival, Disease Specific Survival, and Larynx Preservation
(p17.0) Four of the radiotherapy studies (11.8%) presented the 5-year OS [8,20,42,43]. The involvement of the AC did not have a statistically significant impact on any of these studies. Seven studies (20.6%) presented the 5-year DSS [8][9][10]16,20,35,38]. In two of these, the involvement of the AC had a statistically significant impact [10,38]. None of the radiotherapy studies presented the 5-year LP rates.

(p17.1) Ten of the TLM studies (41.7%) presented the 5-year OS [23,24,26,28,32,54,58,59,61,65]. The involvement of the AC had a statistically significant impact for one of these for patients with T1b and T2 tumors, but not for T1a tumors [23]. In seven studies, no significant impact was found [24,26,28,32,58,59,61], and in two studies, the impact on OS was not reported [23,54]. Six studies (25.0%) presented the 5-year DSS. Two of these studies showed a statistically significant impact of AC involvement on DSS [53,58], and three studies did not [3,26,59]. In one study, the impact of the AC was not reported [54]. Ten studies (41.7%) presented the 5-year LP rate. Six studies did not show a statistically significant impact of AC involvement on laryngeal preservation [3,26,53,56,59,64], whereas one study did [58]. In two studies, the impact of AC involvement on LP was not reported [23,28]. One study presented a binary approach (yes/no) as well as a more detailed classification. The first showed no significant impact on the AC, whereas the latest identified a significant impact on the involvement of the AC related to the amount of involvement of the AC [54].
