# Edge Computing Enabled Smart Cities: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 202676686 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d26c7bc3aa6b9a801841c4309ab38351feaef547)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s1) Motivational Scenarios
(p1.0) We provide two motivational scenarios to demonstrate the immense importance of edge computing in developing smart cities. The first scenario deals with reporting of autonomous car accidents, and the second scenario describes the usage of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) with edge computing for smart forest surveillance.

(p1.1) A gigantic increase in the number of autonomous cars is expected in the future. There are six different levels of autonomy in autonomous cars ranging from level 0 to level 5 [28]. The level 0 represents no automation and level 5 represents full automation, such as operating without driver assistance.Moreover, autonomous cars can handle lane changing, warning signals, collision avoidance, and in-car infotainment, to name a few. To enable real-time analytics for autonomous cars, the use of edge computing enabled Road Side Units (RSUs) is a viable solution. For instance, consider autonomous car accidents, where timely reporting of accidents is required for instant first aid. The key stakeholders of the emergency response system are medical services, smart police, road operators, and edge enabled public safety answering points [29]. When an autonomous car crash occurs, time is the most critical parameter. The emergency response time must be short to minimize any damage. Reporting such accidents can be performed either by a person or by the edge enabled public answer safety points. Those involved in the crash might suffer from severe injuries and cannot inform authorities about the accident. Therefore, the edge enabled public answer safety points must perform accident evaluation which requires the execution of complex algorithms. To execute such resource intensive and latency sensitive tasks, edge computing is required.

(p1.2) On the other hand, smart forest fire detection can substantially reduce damage caused by fires. UAV enabled edge computing offers a method of timely reporting of the forest fire. We can use UAVs assisted by edge computing for surveillance. The UAVs use cameras to continually take images of the forest and requires further processing of these images to determine the presence of fire. One way to determine the presence of fire is to use the remote cloud to perform video images analytics. However, this approach suffers from high latency which is not desirable for immediate action against fires. Processing images at the edge computing enabled UAVs alleviates this latency issue and allows for quick decision making for emergency services. Furthermore, we can also leverage UAVs assisted by edge computing to enable on-demand telecommunication and computing infrastructure to assist in rescue activities [30].
## (s2) Existing Surveys and Tutorials
(p2.0) In the literature, numerous surveys and tutorials have been presented to provide considerable insights into edge computing and smart cities [24], [31]- [45]. A summary of recently published surveys along with their primary contribution areas is given in table 1.
## (s4) Smart Cities Surveys
(p4.0) In the past, several surveys have been conducted on smart cities [42]- [45]. Gharaibeh et al. in [42] surveyed data management techniques used for ensuring reuse-ability, granularity, interoperability, and consistency of smart IoT device data. Additionally, the authors identified techniques used for security and privacy in smart cities. Other than that, emerging technologies enabling smart cities are also discussed. In [43], the authors discussed the use of big data along with different projects that enable the development of smart cities. The authors have classified the use of urban big data into four kind of reference models. Furthermore, the challenges of transforming smart city data into information are also presented. The study [44] discussed IoT based smart city applications. The authors provided an overview of current IoT based projects. Additionally, a prototype for a real-time monitoring system using IoT for smart cities has been presented. An overview of smart cities characteristics, architecture, developments, and challenges has been presented in [45].
## (s5) Our Survey
(p5.0) To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to jointly consider (as can be seen in table 1) smart cities, IoT, and edge computing. Previously published surveys and tutorials reviewed smart cities with IoT [43]- [45], whereas [42] considered smart city only. However, [24], [31]- [38], [41] reviewed either edge computing alone or edge computing with IoT. Unlike the existing surveys, we comprehensively present premier smart city environments enabled by edge computing, the evolution of edge computing, taxonomy, core requirements, and open research challenges.
## (s7) EVOLUTION OR ORIGIN OF EDGE COMPUTING
(p7.0) In this section, we consider the chronological development and attributes of different computing paradigms, namely, mainframe computing, mini computing, client server computing, desktop cloud computing, Mobile cloud Computing (MCC), and edge computing. Similar to [46], two paradigms, functionalism and structuralism are considered in this paper to extend our findings. Structuralism enables identification of the building blocks and their relationships to provide a clearer understanding of the phenomenon, whereas functionalism provides insights into the behavior and features of a phenomenon through analysis of its role in present and future with functionalities.
## (s12) Mobile Cloud Computing
(p12.0) MCC was introduced to enable mobile computing with the ability to leverage cloud computing. Mobile devices have inherent limitations of frequent disconnections, resource scarcity, and energy constraints. Therefore, to execute high complexity tasks, it is preferable to execute a resourceintensive task on a remote cloud. MCC has been defined in three ways in [49]:
## (s13) Edge Computing
(p13.0) Edge computing refers to practices that move computing and storage resources to the network edge. In the literature, three different practices, such as cloudlets, fog computing, and mobile edge computing have been used, that extend cloud computing to the network edge. All of these three terms used in the literature refer to edge computing [24], [33], [51]. Edge computing is distributed architecture that enables real-time data processing and acceleration of datastreams with low latency. Along with this, edge computing also minimizes the Internet bandwidth usage, which further reduces network congestion and delay.
## (s14) RECENT ADVANCES
(p14.0) This section critically analyzes the dominant trends toward the edge computing enabled smart cities. Apart from providing insight into the architectural and algorithmic aspects, we perform a rigorous evaluation of the literature using various assessment parameters. These assessment parameters are primarily derived from the literature of recent advances in edge computing enabled smart cities [60]- [79]. We consider five different assessment parameters, namely, context-awareness, scalability, sustainability, caching, and security for evaluation of the recent advances:

(p14.1) • Context-awareness: An ability of the system to obtain information pertaining to the nodes locations and surrounding environment. Context-awareness offers several advantages including the addition of more meaning to smart IoT device data, M2M communication facilitation, emergency management as- sistance, and automatic execution of smart city services, to name a few.

(p14.2) • Sustainability: This deals with energy efficient design and use of renewable energy sources. In addition, sustainability refers to energy harvesting, which takes energy from environmental sources and radio frequency sources and stores it for further use. The primary objective of sustainability is to reduce the carbon footprint. A significant portion (more than 80%) of energy is generated using brown sources [80]. Therefore, sustainability is an important aspect that must be considered in the design of edge computing enabled infrastructure. Additionally, this metric offers an increase in profit, reduction in carbon footprint, and hardware reliability [81].
## (s16) Smart Transportation Applications
(p16.0) Giang et al. in [60] discussed the development of smart transportation applications leveraging fog computing. They have discussed the requirements, state-of-the-art, and research challenges regarding implementation of the fog computing enabled smart transportation applications. Although the authors discussed the requirements of scalability and context-awareness in fog computing assisted vehicular networks they did not consider service migration [64] and security [82], which have significant importance in vehicular networks. The vehicle might change connectivity from one roadside unit to another during video streaming. Therefore, service migration must be considered in the design of fog assisted application for vehicles. Similarly, the security aspect must be addressed to avoid any accidents and physical damage. For example, if a hacker accesses the vehicle and alters the lane change information, this might result in accidents, specifically in autonomous cars.
## (s17) 5G-enabled Software Defined Vehicular Networks
(p17.0) In [61], the authors proposed a 5G-enabled software defined vehicular network (5G-SDVN) architecture, that consists of three planes, such as data plane for the transmission of data, social plane for Vehicular Neighbor Groups (VNGs) networking, and control plane with mobile edge computing.

(p17.1) The key contributions of the authors include the discovery of VNGs using real data set and the integration of softwaredefined networking (SDN) with mobile edge computing to enable flexible architecture. In addition, the proposed architecture provides the benefits of efficient data sharing, ubiquitous mobile interaction, and reliable resource cooperation. Apart from these benefits, SDN offers separation of the control logic from the underlying infrastructure, which provides more freedom for adding functionality (i.e.intelligence) to a network regardless of change in hardware. Although, the proposed architecture offers significant advantages, but it does not consider the case of active service migration as in [60].
## (s18) Cost Optimized Edge Enabled Transportation
(p18.0) The study [62] considered a smart city scenario where vehicles ran applications that take data from the environment and send them to edge computing servers through roadside units (RSUs) to enable further processing and analysis. The edge computing servers are co-located with the RSUs, which are further connected to the cloud through the Internet. In a vehicular network, maintaining seamless connectivity between the vehicles and RSUs is difficult. On the other hand, the computational capacities of the edge servers also have limitations. Therefore, it is imperative to deploy the RSUs to enable effective resource management and seamless connectivity. The objective of the paper is to minimize the network deployment cost while fulfilling the minimum required QoS for vehicular applications. The problem is formulated as a mixed integer linear programming problem, whose goal is to jointly minimize the total cost associated with the deployment of RSUs, the cost associated with assigned power levels to each RSU, and the cost associated of the distances of RSUs from the cells it serves (the target area is divided into cells). A single RSU can serve more than one cell. Therefore, only the cells adjacent to an RSU cell must be considered as opposed to distant cells, which increase the cost.
## (s20) Smart Industrial Augmented Reality
(p20.0) The authors in [63] proposed an industrial ARarchitecture based on fog computing, named, Navantia's indus-trial AR(IAR). The use of IAR in smart industries leads to enhancing productivity. The proposed IAR architecture consists of three layers, such as IAR layer, edge layer, and cloud layer. The IAR layer includes ARdevices that use WiFi along with other wireless technologies for connectivity with the edge layer. The IAR layer devices interact with the edge layer through local edge layer gateways that provide lowlatency services, such as data caching and sensor fusion. The authors considered both scalability and caching in their architecture. However, they did not consider security which is required for safe operation. For example, an unauthorized user can access the system and interrupt proper operation of the system, which can lead to serious consequences.
## (s21) Smart Tourism
(p21.0) In [64], Taleb et al. envisioned mobile edge computing enabled architecture for high definition video streaming and considered two use cases of smart tourism. One case is interactive glasses to obtain information about the visited site, whereas the other case involves tourists taking videos, commenting on these videos, and sending them to the edge computing server. Although migration of such a service from one edge server to another is considered in their • Studied a fog assisted smart transportation applications requirements.
## (s25) Smart Remote Live Support
(p25.0) Edge computing enabled AR has been considered in [65] to enable smart management of industrial tasks. The authors considered a scenario of remote live support that uses guidance from the remote expert through AR and video transmission to tackle complex faults in a machine. The main parts of the proposed architecture include a client device, edge server, and a remote device. The job of the client device with an integrated camera and running an operating system is to grab video frames for further transport to the edge server. The edge server process all the computationally expensive operations. Additionally, the edge server forwards the video stream to a remote expert. The remote expert has the privilege of pausing the video for addition of hints in it. The video contents are sent back to the edge server, which are further sent back to the client after rendering annotations into the camera feed. The author considered compression of the video data prior to transmission. This adds further delay in addition to transmission delay, which is not desirable. Apart from that delay, the processing delay must not exceed the maximum delay limit. The better option is to use communication technologies with higher data rates instead of compression.
## (s26) Smart Web-based Augmented Reality
(p26.0) In [66], Qiao et al. considered web-based AR enabled by edge computing. The latency sensitive and resourceintensive applications of the web-based AR are hampered by the weak computational efficiency of web browsers. To enable resource intensive and latency sensitive web-based AR applications, web-based AR assisted by edge computing is proposed by the authors. Different from edge computing, cloud computing can be leveraged to assist computation intensive web-based AR applications. However, this approach causes an increase in latency due to the remote location of the cloud. The key contributions of the authors include a proposal of edge computing assisted web-based augmented reality, design details, and deployment challenges.
## (s28) Smart Voice Disorder Treatment Framework
(p28.0) A voice disorder assessment and treatment framework enabled by edge computing and deep learning is proposed in [67]. Initially, smart sensors are used to collect samples of users voice, which are then processed on edge nodes and finally, sent to core cloud. Decision of automatic assessment is then sent by cloud manager to specialists for issuing a prescription to patients. A database used for training, testing and validation is the Saarbruken Voice Disorder (SVD) database. Prime limitation of their work lies in the usage of few disorders, such as vocal fold polyp, vocal fold paralysis, laryngitis, Kontakt pachydermia, hyper-functional dysphonia, functional dysphonia, and cordectomy, whose samples have sufficient amount in the database.
## (s29) Smart Hospitals
(p29.0) A three-layered fog based health-care architecture for homes/ smart hospitals was proposed in [68]. The proposed architecture comprises of smart devices layer, edge layer, and cloud layer. The devices layer has medical sensors that captures the biomedical signals from the human body. These biomedical signals are further sent to the gateways through wireless technologies, such as ZigBee, Wi-Fi or Bluetooth. The cloud layer consists of cloud computing that performs data analytics. The edge layer consists of smart e-health gateways, that are distributed geographically and capable of supporting protocols for wireless communication and inter-device communication. In addition, the edge layer also performs local data processing, data filtering, data compression, data fusion, data analysis, local storage, and interoperability functions.
## (s30) Remote Electrocardiography Monitoring
(p30.0) In [69], a smart health-care monitoring system is proposed, that enable continuous remote monitoring of Electrocardiography (ECG) signals. The monitoring system consists of a cloud, fog assisted gateways, and sensor nodes. Purpose of sensor nodes is to acquire bio-signals (such as human temperature, respiration, and ECG) and contextual information (such as room temperature and humidity). Fog assisted gateway receives the signals from sensor nodes and processes it for further sending it to cloud. For example, preprocessing of the bio-signals are necessary for removal of noise and extraction of useful information from it. Furthermore, the fog assisted gateways have two storage databases, such as local and external user database. A local database is used to store the information that can be updated or edited by the administrators only. On the other hand, an external database is used for storage of bio-signals along with contextual information, such as room temperature and humidity. Data stored within the external database has synchronization with cloud servers. Additionally, the fog assisted gate-ways also provides security to restricts the unauthorized access.
## (s36) Cloud-Fog-Based Smart Grid Model
(p36.0) In [72], a three-layered framework named cloud-fog-based smart grid is proposed. The first layer is the end users layer, followed by the second fog layer, and the third cloud layer. The end layer comprises of buildings which have homes. Energy storage systems with renewable energy generation units are installed at every home. The information related to energy generation and consumption is sent to the fog layer. The fog layer that physically exists close to the consumers region, performs effective management of the network resource with low latency. Furthermore, the authors proposed hybrid artificial bee ant colony optimization (HABACO) algorithm for optimal allocation of virtual machines in the cloud-fog-based smart grid model. The authors considered two scenarios for performance evaluation of their cloud-fogbased smart grid model but did not consider the commercial scenario that has a significantly different nature than residential areas. A reference model for integration of fog computing and smart grids is introduced in [71]. The three-tier model consists of smart grid tier, fog tier, and cloud tier. The smart grid tier has the responsibility of enabling communication between different smart devices, such as smart meters, mobile devices, electrical vehicles, and smart appliances. The fog tier acts as an intermediate layer between the cloud and smart grid tier. Every fog server communicates with smart meters for the collection of data of their associated users. Additionally, the fog layer servers take the private data from the smart grid layer in encrypted form to ensure the privacy of the users. The fog server does not have the capability to decrypt the data and the key is only shared among the cloud and the users. The main purpose of the fog servers is to provide temporary storage and computation capability for the smart grids data. The prime limitation of their work lies in non-consideration of the challenge of interoperability, which is one of a most important issue among different power domain areas due to the usage of multiple semantic data models in a smart grid environment [83].
## (s38) Smart Precision Agriculture
(p38.0) In [73], a distributed IoT-based smart framing infrastructure assisted by edge nodes is proposed to experience farmer with enhanced benefits. The proposed architecture consists of four levels, i.e., things layer, edge layer, fog layer, and communication layer. In things layer, a thing can be either actuators, controller or sensors, which are designed to meet production facility. The function of edge computing is to provide interoperability, storage, smart analysis, and prediction near the edge. Reason for using edge computing is due to the low latency requirements of control, analysis response, and monitoring sensors. Although authors considered interoperability but did not consider caching in the proposed framework. Caching can be utilized to further improve the performance of the smart framing [85]. In [85], a joint latency and energy optimized communication were achieved through data caching algorithm in Precision Agriculture (PA) system. The data caching algorithm was based on the optimization of sleep-up/wake-up time of wireless sensor network nodes. Data requests of sensor nodes are analyzed in a cache prior to transmission. This prolongs the life of the sensor nodes and thus, improves the energy efficiency of the PA system.

(p38.1) In [75], the authors integrated PA with edge computing to enable real-time actions for better productivity. They proposed three planar architecture, such as the local plane, edge plane, and cloud plane. In a local plane, cyber-physical systems perform a collection of data through interaction with crop devices to enable real-time control actions. The second edge plane is responsible for performing tasks of the PA near the network edge to enhance reliability. The third cloud tier exists remotely to enable data analytics and smart management. The cyber-physical systems are connected to sensors and actuators, which are installed at the crop premises for the collection of temperature, humidity, electrical conductivity, and pH meter. All the cyberphysical systems have inter-connectivity with the Internet using multiple access networks technologies, such as digital subscriber line, optical fiber, and microwave radio links. In the edge plane, the tasks including energy and alarm management, greenhouse control, and nutrition control are performed. In the proposed architecture, the authors did not consider security which must be given proper consideration. Some malicious user might access the system and perform wrong activities, such as unnecessary alarms and windows opening.
## (s39) Smart Animal Welfare Monitoring System
(p39.0) In [74], a smart farm assisted by edge computing for the welfare of animals is proposed. The proposed architecture consists of an animal-centric system, environmental system, and farm controller. The farm controller can be implemented either in a centralized fashion or in a distributed fashion. A Raspberry Pi (R-Pi) which is a small sized micro-computer is used in the implementation of the environmental subsystem and animal-centric system. In system implementation, the environment R-Pi monitors the environment, whereas wearable R-Pi monitors the health of animals. A workstation that implements the farm controller performs the central tasks of the system. One of the most prominent advantages of the proposed architecture is its ability to send alarms to mobile. These alarms are use full to detect whether animals are ill or not, especially when the cow is pregnant which can be detected from its body temperature [86]. The authors did not consider the robustness of the sensors network used for the collection of data which might suffer from the data loss due to battery depletion or other sources as observed in the [87].
## (s41) IoT based Smart Homes
(p41.0) A smart home architecture is presented in [76], that leverages edge computing and Long-Term Evolution (LTE) network. Different alternatives for placement of edge computing servers are considered that include:(a) placement of edge computing server at Evolved Node B (eNB), (b) placing the edge computing server at femtocells BS in a home, and (c) placing the edge computing server at User Equipment (UE). The positioning of edge computing server at eNB needs to cover a large number of far users and thus, require high computational power. On the other hand, placement of edge computing server near the UEs require less capacity due to its small coverage area. Simulation for two different scenarios, such as device-to-infrastructure (D2I) and D2D communication in IoT was performed using SimuLTE tool [88].
## (s42) Sustainable Smart Homes
(p42.0) A three-tier framework for smart homes based on IoT and edge computing is proposed in [77]. Three tiers of the framework are a smart homes tier, a nanogrid tier, and a microgrid tier. The smart home tier consists of household items with interfaces to enable wireless communication.

(p42.1) All of data at smart homes is collected at the sink, which has ability of local processing and storage. In the nanogrid tier, sinks of different smart homes communicate with each other. To enable communication between sinks, different typologies, such as mesh, cluster or star can be used. In the microgrid tier, sinks of different smart homes communicate with utility through gateways. IoT devices have limited energy, therefore edge computing enabled gateways can be used to provide the computation services to smart homes. Major limitation of the framework lies in lack of considering security which poses significant challenges to smart homes operation. A malicious might access the IoT-based smart home objects and operates it in an irregular way [89].
## (s43) Smart Mobile Gaming
(p43.0) Smart mobile gaming leverages AR/VR, the Internet, edge computing, smart devices, among others, to provide immersive gaming experiences. In [78], Premsankar et al. discussed different edge computing platforms and architectures. The key applications of IoT that leverage edge computing are also discussed. Along with this, the authors also carried out an experimental evaluation of edge computing enabled mobile gaming. Such mobile gaming relies on high reliability and low latency communication along with mobile devices sensors data [90]. For example, Pokemon Go [91] is a game that leverages sensor information (i.e., location of the user) and AR [92]. The authors selected a resource-intensive and open-source 3-D arcade game, Neverball, for evaluating the performance of edge computing in mobile gaming. The authors considered scenario where an input from the mobile device is sent to the gaming server. The server, in turn, streams the video and provided the content to the mobile device. In such a scenario, edge computing is necessary to enable the users with AR assisted mobile gaming [93], [94].
## (s44) Smart Management
(p44.0) In the smart city era, information and communication technologies are incorporated to enable smarter urban infrastructure management for improving overall user QoE. In [79], an Intelligent Manhole Cover Management System (IMCS) that leverages edge computing is proposed for avoiding accidents due to the manhole cover. The proposed IMCS comprise of three parts: perceived recognition technology, network transmission technology, and information processing technology. In perceived recognition technology, a Radio-Frequency Identification (RFID) tags and sensors are attached with manhole to facilitate active communication. In the second part, narrow band-IoT and the Internet are used for communication between the manholes and end users. The third part consists of an edge computing enabled intelligent management system that allows immediate decision making. The authors considered context-awareness, scalability, and sustainability in the design of IMCS, but did not consider security.
## (s49) Resources
(p49.0) Edge computing converges information technology and telecommunication services to enable computation of resource-intensive tasks at the network edge. To carry out the above process, we need three types of resources, such as computation resources, communication resources, and storage resource [24]. Computation resource can be either a local device or server. A user offloads either all components of an application (binary offloading) [96]- [98] or some components of an application to the edge server (partial offloading) [99], [100]. A complication might arise in partial offloading when the task components are dependent on each other, and making it difficult to separate the task components for local execution and execution at server. Apart from computation resource there are two types of communication resources, that are required to enable edge computing in smart cities. One is the access network, which allows connectivity of the end-user devices to the edge servers, and the other is a core network communication resource, which allows transmission of data from the edge server to cloud server at the time of insufficient computation resources at the edge server. Different from computation and communication resources, storage resources can be either at a local device or at an edge.
## (s50) Resource Management Strategies
(p50.0) In smart cities enabled by edge computing, the key resources are the massive number of smart devices, edge servers, and communication infrastructure. To enable edge computing-based smart environments, it is necessary to effectively manage the available resources. The main aspects of resource management include resource discovery, resource management tools, and resource management criteria. Fairness [101], [102], QoS [103], [104], throughput [105], energy [106]- [109], among others, can be utilized as criteria to design resource management schemes. Other than resource management criteria, we can use optimization-based schemes [110], game theory-based schemes [111], heuristic [112], graph theory-based schemes [58], and hybrid schemes (which jointly utilize optimization and game theory) [113], for resource allocation. An optimization-based technique can be either dynamic programming, linear programming, convex optimization, or integer programming. On the other hand, game theory-based schemes can be based on either cooperative games or non-cooperative games.
## (s53) Sustainability
(p53.0) Sustainability refers to the use of energy efficient designs and renewable energy resources to reduce the overall carbon footprint. In future smart cities, densification of devices and servers is expected, which in turn will result in energy limitations. Therefore, sustainable developments are required. Sustainability in edge computing can be achieved by using renewable energy sources [124], energy harvesting [125]- [127], and energy-efficient design [128]. Renewable energy sources include biomass, geothermal, and wind energy. Energy efficient design has three important aspects, such as energy efficient software, energy-efficient hardware, and energy efficient resource management. Other than energy efficient design and renewable energy sources, energy harvesting deals with the extraction of energy from external sources for further use in the operation of small devices, such as sensors and wearable devices. Energy can also be harvested either from the environmental sources, such as wind, solar, and thermal, or from radio frequency sources. There are significant variations in the harvested energy from both natural sources and radio frequency sources [125]. Therefore, it is imperative to design hybrid systems that utilize both harvested energy and energy from the grid. A hybrid system initially must entirely use harvested energy, and then later use energy from the grid in instances when the harvested energy level becomes lower than the required energy for operation.
## (s68) Lessons Learned: Summary and Insights
(p68.0) In this section, we discussed a few imperative requirements for realizing edge computing enabled smart cities. These requirements are scalability and reliability, sustainability, resource management, business models, context-awareness, elasticity, security, and interoperability. The lessons learned from this section are:

(p68.1) • The open research challenge of collaborative edge computing is derived from the requirements of scalability and reliability. References [170] and [171] considered collaborative edge computing to offer scalability and reliability. Edge computing servers are characterized by a low computing capacity that must be utilized efficiently. Additionally, there are significant variations in smart device traffic. To cope with variations in the massive amount of smart devices traffic along with scalability and reliability constraints, the use of collaborative edge computing is a viable solution.

(p68.2) • The development of novel business models for edge computing enabled smart cities is also derived from this section. The already developed business models for cloud computing are insufficient for edge computing enabled smart cities due to their distributed architecture.
## (s76) Intelligent Caching
(p76.0) In smart cities, connectivity of billions of smart IoT devices is expected. According to CISCO, 507.9 ZB data will be generated by smart IoT devices in 2019 [177]. This rapid rise in data has resulted in a major bottleneck that requires higher back-haul data rates. To tackle the dilemma of back-haul congestion, caching can be used which deals with the storage of popular contents at different locations in a network to avoid repeated transmissions [178]. Additionally, caching enable different real-time IoT-based smart city applications by reducing latency and energy consumption [179]. On the other hand, caching has two main aspects: network type and caching strategy. Network type deals with cache positioning, such as cache enabled macro cellular networks [120], cache enabled heterogeneous networks [180], cache enabled D2D networks [181], and cache enabled cloud radio access networks [182]. The caching strategy has two main phases, such as cache decision phase and content delivery phase.

(p76.1) The main challenges that exist in intelligent caching at the edge include the cold-start user problem [183] and security and privacy [184]. Intelligent caching based on machine learning uses information and data from all users within its range. However, the mobility of the users poses many challenges and it is very difficult to satisfy this requirement for intelligent caching. To cope with user mobility, mobilityaware hierarchical caching was proposed in [117]. Furthermore, we can leverage reinforcement learning for effective scheduling in mobility-aware caching [185]. Additionally, intelligent cache decisions are based on the future content popularity, whose computation is considerably challenging. The prediction of content popularity using deep learning has been considered to enable intelligent cache decision making [183], [186]- [188].
## (s79) Intelligent Edge Computing
(p79.0) A massive amount of data will be generated by smart devices and sensors for real-time smart city applications that require instant processing. Most of these data contain noise and only a small portion of it is useful. The challenge is how to separate large useful data sets (such as big data) from noisy data. A viable solution to this challenge is the use of AI in the edge. Intelligent edge computing can perform data filtering to yield only useful data before sending to a remote cloud. Moreover, it can also offer real-time processing of data. Intelligent edge computing offers real-time analytics that enable us to answer questions, such as Why are some things happening and What should be done. Additionally, it enables process analysis and prediction of future trends. More specifically, the use of instant analytics at the edge is necessary to enable big data analytics. On the other hand, semantic interoperability between different edge computing enabled systems is one of the major bottlenecks regarding the exchange of information to enable effective training of the machine learning algorithms [198]. Intelligent edge computing is a way of providing interoperability among non-interoperable systems. Additionally, intelligent edge computing offers security enhancement by enabling smart applications to avoid sending data to remote clouds for predictive analytics.

(p79.1) The challenges relevant to developing intelligent edge computing based on AI include its high computational power, complex data acquisition and storage, user privacy, and interoperability. The execution of traditional AI algorithms requires high computational power. However, the computational power at the edge is lower than that of the remote cloud. Therefore, it is necessary to devise low-complexity learning algorithms. Apart from its high computational power, data acquisition and storage of smart devices and sensors in various smart environments is also challenging. The humongous data sets used for AI algorithm validation require high storage capacity. In addition, the data set might contain noisy or missing data, which must be handled properly. Another challenge in training AI algorithms is the integration of large data sets. Integrating and synthesizing large data sets from the different players in a smart environment for effective AI algorithm training has a very high computational complexity. To cope with this issue, an inter-operable system is a solution that enables systems to interact with each other and share data. In [198], an edge computing-based semantic gateway has been proposed to enable inter-operability in health-care systems. To enable semantic interoperability machine learning-based interoperable interfaces can be used. On the other hand, maintaining user privacy while utilizing data sets for training AI algorithm pose challenges. For instance, consider an edge computing enabled smart health-care system with patient personal data. The privacy of users must be maintained via effective security mechanisms. Moreover, effective privacy regulation must be devised to ensure the user privacy.
## (s80) Network Slicing
(p80.0) In smart cities, a wide range of players including cloud server providers, edge computing service providers, telecommunication services providers, and IoT service providers, will interplay with one another. The goals of these service providers are to increase profit, whereas, users want to improve their QoS. To enable easier and efficient resource management among users and service providers, the concept of network slicing was introduced [199]- [202]. Network slicing exploits software-defined networking (SDN) and NFV to separate the control plane from the data plane [200]. The concept of network slicing is based on the creation of logical networks on top of a physical network infrastructure.

(p80.1) To enable network slicing in smart cities, it is imperative to tackle the challenges, such as end-to-end slice management and orchestration, slices security, and adaptive service function chaining. A network slicing architecture consists of different layers: a service layer, resource layer, and network slice instance layer [203]. End-to-end slice management and orchestration spans all three layers and handles the creation and management of slices. Moreover, it deals with translation of all the smart city use cases into slices with its associated network functions. To enable effective network slicing, game theoretic, deep reinforcement learning, and auction theory-based schemes can be used [204]- [206]. Apart from management and orchestration of slices, slice security is another key challenge in realization of network slicing in smart cities. The presence of numerous authorities and multiple stakeholders in network slicing pose several novel security challenges. Network slicing security involves challenges of multiple operator resource sharing security and SDN-based orchestrator security. The slices defined for different use cases have unique security requirements. For instance, a smart health-care slice has stronger security concerns than the infotainment slice. Therefore, we must consider different security mechanisms for individual slices. Overall, security must be ensured during resource sharing of the infrastructure. However, network wide-security has different nature than of individual slices security. Therefore, the development of novel and effective security policies for network resource sharing and individual slices is necessary.
## (s84) Future Prospects
(p84.0) In the future, we expect virtualization to widely be adopted in developing smart cities. Currently, there are millions of devices that are deployed in cities. Further, the addition of billions of smart devices and sensors is expected. All of these devices generate data traffic that require instant analytic services. Edge computing will enable such instant analytics. Apart from edge computing, novel communication technologies with high throughput are required for data transmission. Additionally, the development of the smart cities must be sustainable and reliable. To enable smart cities through novel developments, different players such as telecommunication network operators, edge computing service providers, cloud service providers, and IoT service providers will interplay with each other. One issue is how to effectively enable such interplay to maximize profit and improve QoS? Virtualization-based network slicing is an answer, which can be leveraged to improve the QoS and increase profit. This allows to create multiple logical networks (called slices) on top of a physical infrastructure of different service providers [214]- [217]. SDN and NFV are key enablers of slicing-based smart cities. SDN offers separation of the control plane from the data plane, and NFV allows use of a generic hardware for implementation of different network functions. Network slicing-based smart cities will offer a wide variety of slices for different smart services. Different references, such as [218]- [221] have considered network slicingbased smart city advancements. These slices have diverse requirements and must share the same physical infrastructure resulting in a cost-efficient operation. Allocation of an end-to-end network for a typical slice would be expensive. Therefore, it is necessary for multiple slices to coexist simultaneously. However, resource management of resources between co-existing slices is challenging, thus requiring novel resource management schemes. Different organizations are also attempting to enable smart applications via network slicing. For instance, consider reference [218], which introduces a network slicing-based testbed using edge computing at Hamburg port. Additionally, many organizations are working on the AutoAir project in the UK to produce a testbed based on edge computing and network slicing for testing connected and autonomous vehicles. To sum up, edge computing and network slicing will be the dominant solution for enabling future smart cities. See table 7. 
