# Sus-tainable practices in logistics systems: An overview of companies in Brazil

CorpusID: 201338856 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/74a03fce2ab14423b6b1b117fdac124bd85c2b2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/74a03fce2ab14423b6b1b117fdac124bd85c2b2e)

Fields: Business, Economics, Environmental Science

## (s3) Sustainability in Logistics Systems
(p3.0) This section aims to present the most up to date research related to sustainability in logistics activities. Through the synthesis of the studies presented, it is possible to note the importance of social, environmental and economic guidelines in these activities.

(p3.1) Aiming to highlight the importance of sustainability in logistics systems for business competitiveness, Eroglu et al. [25] conducted a study to evaluate the reaction of the stock market to the achievements of sustainability awards in logistics by some companies. The findings indicated that the stock market reacts positively to the presentation of these types of awards. Additionally, it was identified that this positive reaction was more significant than the reaction to other similar situations. This demonstrates that even shareholders recognize the importance of sustainability as a strategic factor for companies' survival.

(p3.2) Lu et al. [47] analyzed the insertion of sustainability in logistics operations of container terminals. The effects of internal practices (related to communication) and the collaboration of external practices (regarding suppliers, customers and subcontractors) on sustainable performance of operations was analyzed empirically. The findings demonstrated that both internal practices and external collaboration positively affects the sustainable performance of operations. In addition, Lu et al. [48] analyzed the effects of sustainable management in logistics operations in the port context. The results reinforced the fact that external collaboration is positively associated with internal management, and that this positively influences the sustainable performance of port operations.

(p3.3) Rai et al. [49] proposed an extensive list of indicators relating to the transportation of cargo with an operational goal (in support of urban policies and planning) to improve the service of sustainability. In the same theme, Andersson et al. [50] also developed a framework of indicators. However, the focus was to measure sustainable logistics innovation in retail operations.
## (s4) Methodology
(p4.0) For the development of this research, the following steps were carried out: (1) review of the literature on logistics systems and sustainability in logistics activities, to create a theoretical basis; (2) collection of sustainability reports published by companies that perform logistic operations and that are recognized in Brazil; (3) content analysis of the reports collected following the recommendations presented by Elo and Kyngäs [58]; and (4) discussion of results with the literature and establishment of conclusions. Figure 1 summarizes the steps of research. The literature review was conducted in the following scientific bases: Science Direct, Taylor and Francis, Springer, Emerald Insight and Wiley. Initially, to understand the concepts associated with logistics systems, the following terms were used: "logistics operations", "logistics systems", "warehouse management", "purchasing management" and "supplier management". Subsequently, in order to hone the search, the following terms were used: "sustainability in logistics systems" and "sustainability in logistics operations". Several articles were analyzed in detail. The synthesis of the articles most related to this research was presented in Section 2.
## (s7) Macro Area 3: Practices Related to Suppliers and Purchasing Processes
(p7.0) (1) Selection of suppliers considering their environmental practices, compliance with labor rules, code of conduct, anticorruption program and sustainable certifications. (2) Programs for the development of suppliers with sustainable aspects.

(p7.1) Inclusion of social criteria and human rights in purchases processes. (4) Prioritization of purchase of inputs available in the local community. (1) Reuse, recycling and reverse logistics of packaging. (2) Reduction of the use of supplies in production of packaging.
## (s8) Macro Area 4: Practices Related to Packaging Management
(p8.0) Use of recycled material in the production of packaging. (4) Development of campaigns to encourage the use of more sustainable packaging. (5) Packaging design focused on the optimization of handling. Macro Area 5: Expansive Management Practices and Social Programs (1) Free transport for social projects. (2) Management actions focused on transparency and anticorruption.
## (s9) Conclusions
(p9.0) Based on the results presented, it is concluded that the main objective proposed for this research was achieved, as it was possible to develop an overview of sustainable practices performed by Brazilian companies in logistics operations. It was possible to identify a variety of sustainable practices developed within the five macro areas, but with a low degree of use by most of the companies analyzed. The practice that stood out was "supplier selection considering its environmental practices, compliance with labor standards, code of conduct, anti-corruption program and sustainable certifications". This practice is developed by 57% of companies of the sample.

(p9.1) It is important to emphasize the role of the logistic system in the pursuit of sustainable development goal number 12, proposed by the UN. The mentioned goal consists of ensuring responsible production and consumption, with a focus on supply chain operations; adequate logistics management can contribute to the improvement of every supply chain agent, from producer to final consumer.

(p9.2) Regarding the limitations of this study, it should be noted that the results and conclusions obtained were drawn by the information provided by 30 Brazilian companies in their sustainability reports. Other samples composed by different companies can provide other results and conclusions. Also, the analyses were performed using information from these reports, therefore the conclusions were based exclusively on them. Another limitation of this study is related to the content analysis. Remembering Elo and Kyngäs [58], this kind of analysis can be very flexible and the definition of the free categories and groups depends on the researchers.

(p9.3) Regarding the theoretical and practical contributions, the findings presented in this article have implications for theory and practice. The results provide an overview of the application of sustainable practices performed by companies in Brazil regarding their logistic activities, and highlight areas with improvement opportunities. Academics and professionals that work with logistic systems can use the results presented here. Academics can use the results in classes or future research and professionals, in turn, can use the findings to enhance the sustainability in their companies.

(p9.4) Finally, we present some future research opportunities: (a) development of sustainable practices and tools to improve the insertion of sustainability in logistics activities; (b) developing roadmaps to help companies in Brazil with the transition to sustainable logistics; (c) proposal of models to assess the maturity of logistics systems in terms of sustainability; and (d) conducting sector studies, to present specific characteristics.
