# Biomechanical Factors in Psoriatic Disease: Defective Repair Exertion as a Potential Cause. Hypothesis Presentation and Literature Review

CorpusID: 201990655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8394b8c0f21237feacc663dfcf515520afad300](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8394b8c0f21237feacc663dfcf515520afad300)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Biomechanical factors and nail involvement
(p1.0) The average prevalence of nail lesions in patients with psoriasis can estimated to be more than 50%. The prevalence is much higher among patients with PsA. To date, it has been debated whether trauma is an actual cause of psoriatic nail lesions. Together with the consideration of the physical disuse of nail apparatus in modern humans, applied forces may contribute to the development of specific nail lesions. Pitting, onycholysis, and splinter hemorrhages are the most frequently detected changes in fingernails, whereas onycholysis, crumbling, and subungual hyperkeratosis are the most frequently detected nail changes in toenails (16). It is known that matrix trauma that is due to manicure induces leukonychia (5). Furthermore, injury to the nail matrix in the transverse plane that occurs during nail cutting or nail filing may result in leukonychia, depending on the extent of shearing or the targeted site of applied pressure (17).

(p1.1) While working with hands, friction between the nail plate and nail bed may cause chronic mechanical trauma, leading to onycholysis and thickness. Parts of the nail, including the matrix, can also be repetitively exposed to compressive forces. As a specific injury mechanism of the proximal matrix, impacts between the harder dorsal nail plate layer and solid objects might theoretically lead to development of pitting that is due to Koebnerization by the high-rated mechanical energy transmission (18). However, the density and Young's modulus values of each nail plate layer may not be significantly different, and typewriting typifies this injury mechanism in desk workers, leading to chronic damage of the whole matrix and thereby resulting in the development of crumbling (19,20).
## (s2) Further evidence
(p2.0) It has been revealed by imaging techniques that the main event in PsA may be enthesitis (35). In psoriasis patients without musculoskeletal symptoms, ultrasonographic enthesitis is quite frequent regardless of physical examination (36,37). It has been demonstrated in cadaveric studies that the changes associated with microdamage and inflammation are observed in SpA patients even in their normal joints and entheses (38). As the connections of the skeleton, enthesis-related structures bear excessive tensile load, especially during movement. Overweight is more common in psoriatic patients than in the healthy population, causing higher mechanical stress in both lower limb joints and entheses. This condition is supported by the evidence that species with large body mass have increased incidence of axial SpA (39).
## (s3) The defective repair exertion as a potential cause
(p3.0) Cumulative tissue damage that is particularly due to biomechanical factors that may trigger psoriatic lesion development might result from person-specific tissue dysregulation. If this alternative concept of psoriatic disease is true, it is plau-sible to consider that a defective wound healing process in the dysregulated psoriatic tissue may lead to a vulnerability to chronic damage (13). Psoriatic plaques resemble the wound healing response with regard to many cellular and molecular mediators (41). Furthermore, the wound healing rate may be accelerated in both involved and uninvolved skin (49). Many genes activated during the wound healing process may be differentially involved either similarly or inversely in the molecular pathophysiology of psoriasis. Expressions of late cornified envelope (LCE)-3 genes are upregulated in psoriatic skin which undertake an important role in the epidermal barrier repair following superficial injury of healthy skin (50). Other known psoriasis susceptibility genes consist of upregulated myeloid related protein (MRP) 8 (S100A8), MRP14 (S100A9), MRP8/ MRP14 heterodimer, and nuclear factor-ƙ-B-inhibitor α (NFK-BIA/IƙBα) as well as downregulated jun B proto-oncogene and all were demonstrated to be significantly upregulated during a short-termed incisional wound model of neonatal mice (51)(52)(53)(54)(55). Based on this model, the early growth factor (Egr)-1, c-myc, FOS-like antigen-1 (Fra-1), the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAP4K4), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) pathway, retinol binding protein-1, keratins (KRT6), plexins, osteopontin (deep dermal), cathepsin S, ephrin receptor B1 (ephA2 in psoriasis), C-X-C motif chemokines (CXCL10), C-C motif chemokine ligand family (CCL2/MCP-1, CCL7), and C-C motif chemokine receptors (CCR1) can additionally be listed as expressed genes of wound healing related similarly with psoriasis. However, the notch signaling, C-fos, and mitogenactivated protein kinase phosphatase (MKP)-1 may be downregulated in psoriatic lesions, contrary to what happens with wounds (56)(57)(58)(59)(60)(61)(62)(63)(64)(65)(66)(67)(68)(69)(70)(71)(72)(73). It is worth noting that MRP8, MRP14, and MRP8/MRP14 expression was reported to be higher in the synovial sublining layer of PsA patients compared with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and SpA (74).
## (s5) Activated Wnt5a signaling in plaques and syndesmophytes
(p5.0) The Wnt signaling molecules are involved in crucial functions, including cellular proliferation and regeneration, tissue regulation, and immune development. The Wnt5a is differentially expressed in psoriatic plaques and is known as a suppressor of notch-1 signaling (82,83). In cultured keratinocytes, Wnt5a can be induced by proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1α, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α, interferon (IFN)-γ, as well as TGF-α (84). Induction of Wnt5a in mesenchymal cells was supposed to adjust the accurate localization and timing of the TGF-β signalization during injury repair (85). TGF-β and nerve growth factor may be the key regulatory molecules of the Koebner phenomenon (42,86). In psoriasis, homeostatic inhibition of Wnt signaling is impaired, and a shift away from canonical Wnt signaling toward noncanonical system driven mainly by interactions of increased Wnt5a may exist. Moreover, circulating Wnt5a was reported to be significantly higher in psoriasis patients than in controls, especially in the obese patients (84,87). Theoretically, chronic injury may cause inappropriately prolonged Wnt signaling (88).
## (s6) Offering clues of Wnt5a
(p6.0) High circulating levels of Dkk-1 were detected in the patients with axial SpA. Thus, Dkk-1 measurement was suggested to be a good indicator of the presence and severity of osteoproliferative radiologic changes of spondylitis in PsA (93). However, capacity of Dkk-1-mediated inhibition of active β-catenin was demonstrated to decrease in AS; this dysfunctionality could be related to the strong activity of Wnt5a, as resembled in psoriatic plaques (82,84,(94)(95)(96). Wnt5a signaling suppresses keratinocyte proliferation in normal skin, whereas it is required in perichondrium for regulating longitudinal skeletal outgrowth of developing long bones (84,97). However, as similar functions, while Wnt5a likely stimulates the anabolic new bone formation along with the canonical Wnts in axial SpA, it seems to partially suppress canonical Wnts in psoriatic plaques and stimulates keratinocyte proliferation in conjunction with the absence of increased expression of Dkk-1 in psoriatic plaques contrary to the increased expression in the nonlesional psoriatic skin of unknown importance (98,99). However, it was reported that increased expression of Wnt5a alone does not have a psoriasiform effect in transgenic mice, although biologic systems in rodent dermal tissue may differ from humans (100). In contrast with canonical Wnts, activation of Wnt5a signaling also fails to induce cartilage lesions in experimental osteoarthritis induced by collagenase and destabilization of the medial meniscus (101). Therefore, induction of Wnt5a might be related to a compensatory repair process in the aforementioned conditions rather than primary damage. Prolonged activation of noncanonical pathway via Wnt5a signaling was demonstrated to form regenerative changes evidently in cutaneous wound healing (102). Interestingly, despite the absence of frizzled-4 (FZD4) receptor, overexpressed Wnt5a triggering the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway may also play an important role in the keloid pathogenesis, which is an aberrant wound healing process that responds to deep skin trauma (103).
## (s10) Biomechanical factors in AS
(p10.0) We think that assessment of AS in terms of biomechanical factors should also be briefly mentioned. The bamboo spine characteristics may not be a frequently encountered feature of axial SpA in nonhuman primates (134,135). The thoracolumbar spinal musculature usually functions in humans with isometric contractions both consciously and unconsciously for balance control and trunk stabilization, rather than intentional motion requiring motor planning. The spinal insertions are exposed to constant stretching in AS, a consequence of axial myofascial hypertonicity that might also point to a subclinical neural disorder (136). Interestingly, the neuropathic pain component was detected in patients with AS and accompanied with cortical thinning in specific areas, including primary somatosensory cortex (perception of proprioception), insula (visceral sensation processing and autonomic regulation, vestibular function), supplementary motor area (learning and planning self-initiated complex movements), and gray matter abnormalities in the putamen (motor learning) and thalamus (sensory signal processing, preparation of voluntary movement, alertness) (137). Available evidence in the literature might not suggest a decrease in postural control of neural origin or a proprioceptive deficit because this impairment is largely attributed to the mechanic changes secondary to the spondylitis process such as kyphosis, pelvic tilt, and flexion contracture of the hip (138,139). As a recent observation, eyes-closed rehabilitation programs were reported to improve more marked balance impairment in AS and therefore might be admissible as a clue for the favorable effect of rehabilitation on proprioceptive acuity (140). Besides, potential significance of the reported vestibular dysfunction in AS patients should additionally be taken into consideration (141,142).
