# sustainability The Economics of Arundo donax-A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 201319858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d850d033793efaccb675ce99221dc5622bfc327](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d850d033793efaccb675ce99221dc5622bfc327)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science

## (s9) Biomass Production-Country and Crop Specific Studies
(p9.0) Biomass potential of giant reed is a key aspect of related research (see Table 2). An early study of Alderucci, et al. [11] has identified giant reed as one of the most promising biomass plant for Sicily, Italy. The estimation expected to contribute 20% of the island's total energy requirement which giant reed could be a part of, together with other candidates, also including nitrogen-fixing trees. The Sicilian biomass potential was also analysed by Chinnici, et al. [12] and they found that after livestock sewage, dedicated bioenergy crops represent the second highest amount of biomass potential. Among the perennials giant reed can offer a valid alternative to arable farming, especially on marginal lands. However, the low processing capacities make bioenergy potential underexploited.
## (s11) Food vs. Fuel
(p11.0) It should be also noted that first-generation biofuel production (e.g., converting sugar or starch into bioethanol) is often criticized in the food versus fuel debate. However, producing energy crops instead of food crops using marginal lands have increased the rationale of lignocellulosic biomass (for a summary, see Table 4). The dilemma of producing energy crops for biofuel or for food was in the focus of the Greek study of Paschalidou, et al. [36]. Using a SWOT analysis methodology for evaluation of bioenergy production they also considered giant reed as a candidate for perennial feedstock of biomass production. They found that giant reed is one of the non-edible energy crops that are most suitable for Mediterranean circumstances.

(p11.1) Biofuels and their co-products as livestock feed was the topic of the comprehensives study of Popp, Harangi-Rakos, Gabnai, Balogh, Antal and Bai [1]. They compared conventional and advanced biofuels in terms of their bioenergy potential and contribution to the animal feed supply. The global biofuel industry (both bioethanol and biodiesel) contributes with more than 50 million metric tonnes to the feed market, buffering the negative effects of biomass production on global food security. Giant reed, as a dedicated lignocelluloses energy crop which can be produced on marginalized lands, seems to offer a viable solution, but the high biomass potential is also accompanied by an invasiveness hazard that should be treated properly.

(p11.2) A remarkable study of Testa, et al. [37] provides a comparison of giant reed and traditional crop production in Southern Europe. They found that the per hectare annual gross margin was the highest for A. donax for biomass production (647 EUR), exceeding A. donax for silage purposes (617 EUR), and all the conventional crops like wine grape, melon and tomato (478, 310 and 280 EUR, respectively). This highlights the potential threat of producing energy crops instead of the conventional varieties.
## (s12) Agronomy
(p12.0) Our sample contains 18 studies written on the agronomy of giant reed. The first part of these studies analysed yields of giant reed compared to other biomass in a multi-location long-term environment (see Table 5). Alexopoulou, et al. [38], for instance, investigated the long-term yields (11-22 years) of giant reed, switchgrass and Miscanthus grown in northern and southern Greece and Italy. Their results suggested that giant reed yields outperformed switchgrass in a northern Italian environment, and the yield variability of giant reed was also lower. Moreover, switchgrass yields turned out to be 30% higher in northern regions compared to the south, while Miscanthus showed intermediate production compared to the other two types.

(p12.1) Bonfante, et al. [39] also analysed the yields of giant reed in marginal areas of Italy under climate change as an opportunity to improve farmer's incomes. They found woodchip production to be the most profitable option for farmers, though this option had a gross margin 50% lower than ordinary high input maize cultivation. Cappelli, et al. [40] also investigated replacement opportunities of corn with giant reed in Italy by running a simulation model. They found giant reed a suitable option for this conversion as biomass production was expected to increase by 20% in 2020 and 30% in 2050. Caffrey, et al. [41] also ran a profitability analysis in their model analysing cropland conversion potentials to biomass feedstocks. Their results show that switchgrass was found to be the most profitable ecotype compared to giant reed, Miscanthus and sorghum.

(p12.2) Monti, Zegada-Lizarazu, Zanetti, Casler and Sparks [5] also analysed the yields problem from another angle-they searched for the optimal nitrogen supply of Miscanthus, giant reed and switchgrass, and concluded that the current literature did not provide a sufficiently well-defined picture about the real needs of N fertilization of these plants. They did, however, find maximized yields were reached with about 100-120 kg N/ha −1 in giant reed and switchgrass.

(p12.3) Another part of the studies in the agronomy field concentrated on harvesting of giant reed (see Table 6). Bentini and Martelli [42], for instance, economically and technologically evaluated a giant reed harvesting system, called the biotriturator, in northern Italy. Results showed that the system represented an effective harvesting solution for not very large areas and was therefore suitable for the Italian environment where average farm sizes were slightly over seven hectares. The same conclusion was drawn by Bentini and Martelli [43], suggesting that this system could also be used effectively for harvesting two other ecotypes, switchgrass and sorghum. Martelli, et al. [44] also analysed harvesting and handling characteristics of giant reed and switchgrass, based on the biotriturator, and found that costs of harvesting, handling, in-field storage and delivery to the conversion plant were lower for giant reed for square bales but not for round bales. However, it is also evident that energy crops need special treatment and techniques in terms of storage and harvesting due to their special characteristics outlined in the introduction section. All in all, the authors have assumed the costs of harvesting, handling, in-field storage and delivery to the conversion plant amounted to €43-46 Mg −1 dry for round bales and €35-43 Mg −1 for square bales of switchgrass and giant reed for delivery distances of less than 20 km. Romero-Munar, et al. [45] also dealt with a similar topic and analysed how nursery preconditioning of giant reed determined harvest in the first two years. The authors found that small cell preconditioning resulted in smaller sizes in field compared to large cells. As a conclusion, the authors found that better nursery conditions resulted in healthier giant reed plants that produced more biomass during the first and second years of cultivation.  Several studies were dedicated to the economic and environmental assessment of giant reed inside agronomy literature (see Table 7). Fazio and Barbanti [46] investigated the energy and economic potentials in fifteen annual and perennial species, including giant reed, produced under temperate and tropical areas. In general, they found that the complementary use of crop residues enhanced net energy and energy efficiency, but net profit decreased because of higher costs. Giant reed was found to be the best lignocellulosic crop in the standard scenario. The authors call for a precise evaluation of different species in terms of economic and energy trade-offs.

(p12.4) Hou, et al. [47] did similar research by assessing the economic and ecologic characteristics of four lignocellulosic herbaceous plants (switchgrass, silver reed, giant reed and hybrid Pennisetum) produced in contaminated lands in China. Although all ecotypes were found to have enormous ecological values, hybrid Pennisetum was treated as optimal in ecological value on contaminated lands, while giant reed in economic value.
## (s13) Invasiveness
(p13.0) Our sample contains eight studies written on the invasiveness of giant reed (see Table 8). Albers, et al. [53] analysed the role of restoration and key ecological invasion mechanisms in optimal spatial-dynamic management of invasive species, including giant reed. By using a bioeconomic modelling approach, their results suggest that more aggressive invasive species and more invasion-susceptible ecosystems require greater investment in habitat restoration despite its relative expense. Barney and DiTomaso [54] analysed the invasive characteristics of switchgrass, giant reed and Miscanthus in the United States. Switchgrass was found to be highly invasive in California, giant reed in Florida, while Miscanthus was not found to be invasive. The authors propose a screening procedure to provide reasonable assurance that bioenergy crops, including giant reed, pose a minimal risk of damaging the local environment.

(p13.1) Goolsby, et al. [55] also analysed the invasiveness of giant reed in the USA and searched for the impact of a biological control agent on giant reed in Texas. Their results suggest that by using biological control, yields of giant reed decreased on average by 22%, though this control also resulted in the saving of 4.4 million dollars of per year in agricultural water. Seawright, et al. [56] also analysed the invasive potentials of giant reed in the Rio Grande Basin and showed $4.38 of benefits for every dollar of public investment for a biological control project for giant reed. For the economic impact analyses, economic output is $22,000, value-added is $11,000, and no employment is supported by the water savings from giant reed. Additionally, the per-unit cost of water saved was estimated to $44.08.

(p13.2) Gordon, et al. [57] were also assessing the invasive potential of twelve species, including giant reed, in Florida. Their results suggest that giant reed has a high probability to become invasive and its cultivation should be avoided.
