# Feature Topic on Rigorous and Impactful Literature Reviews Best-Practice Recommendations for Producers, Evaluators, and Users of Methodological Literature Reviews

CorpusID: 201561379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ce5399e4c65566e3f38e133449c1345b2758c9b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ce5399e4c65566e3f38e133449c1345b2758c9b7)

Fields: Business, Psychology

## (s0) Purpose and Approach
(p0.0) We categorized and content analyzed 168 methodological literature reviews published in 42 management and applied psychology journals. This process involved categorizing reviews into one or more of seven types: critical review, descriptive review, meta-analytic review, narrative review, qualitative systematic review, scoping review, and umbrella review. The content analysis involved uncovering implicit judgment calls and choices across the reviews. In other words, we uncovered the implicit choices authors of published methodological literature reviews have made-choices that led to a positive outcome, which is the publication of their articles in rigorous peer-reviewed journals. By focusing on reviews that received a "stamp of approval" from editors and reviewers after successfully navigating the peer-review process, we derived 10 latent factors and their 40 observable indicators that are associated with what are considered successful and rigorous (because they were published) reviews.

(p0.1) Our categorization and content analysis of published methodological literature reviews makes the following contributions. First, we uncovered that the majority of published reviews (85.10%) belong to three categories: critical, narrative, and descriptive reviews. This result shows that methodological literature reviews are fulfilling their role in helping develop a collective understanding of knowledge regarding an issue, highlighting inconsistencies, and outlining possible future research directions (Kunisch et al., 2018;Paré et al., 2015). But, we also found that few methodological literature reviews utilized data-integration approaches such as meta-analytic or umbrella reviews. As we describe in detail in the Discussion section, both of these review types provide unique and as of yet underutilized opportunities for future methodological and substantive advancements.

(p0.2) Second, as a result of our content analysis and identification of implicit features of published reviews, we provide a checklist of actionable recommendations on what components to include in a methodological literature review to enhance its thoroughness, clarity, and ultimately, usefulness. Our checklist also identifies particular features (e.g., scope of review, source of recommendations, software guidelines) that are unique to methodological literature reviews rather than literature reviews in general, and includes exemplars of published research that illustrate these features.
## (s1) A Literature Review of Methodological Literature Reviews
(p1.0) We followed a systematic and transparent six-step process as described by Aguinis et al. (2018) to identify literature reviews focused on methodological issues. As explained in more detail below, our process began with 100 journals, and the final list includes 168 methodological literature reviews published in 42 management and applied psychology journals. We then used an inductive and iterative process to identify the components included in methodological literature reviews. In the terminology of factor analysis, we derived 40 observable indicators and 10 latent factors that make explicit the implicit features underlying methodological literature reviews.
## (s3) Discussion of Categorization of Methodological Literature Reviews
(p3.0) We draw two implications from our results on the categorization of methodological literature reviews summarized in Table 1. First, the majority of reviews (85.10%) 9 belong in three categories: critical, narrative, and descriptive reviews. Given the nature and goals of these three review types, this shows that methodological literature reviews are fulfilling their role in helping develop a collective understanding of knowledge regarding an issue, highlighting inconsistencies, and outlining possible future research directions (Kunisch et al., 2018;Paré et al., 2015).
## (s4) Discussion of Features of Methodological Literature Reviews Based on Content Analysis
(p4.0) The summary included in Table 2 reveals the "anatomy" of published methodological literature reviews, that is, the structure and internal workings of methodological literature reviews. We note that although some of the factors and indicators we identified may be known, others may be less familiar and obvious, particularly for researchers who have not previously produced or evaluated a methodological literature review (i.e., junior scholars in particular). Also, we view the use of different factors and their associated indicators across published reviews as a positive sign and indicative of equifinality (Gresov & Drazin, 1997). Stated differently, there are different ways to craft a methodological literature review.
## (s7) latent factors 1-3): (1) need for review, (2) criticality of issue, and (3) implications of methodological issue(s) reviewed.
(p7.0) We note that in general, combining multiple indicators and/or factors (e.g., need for review and criticality of issue) constitutes a more effective motivation than using fewer of them because it makes it easier for researchers to gain an understanding of current debates or practices regarding a methodological issue. Furthermore, using phrasing that makes it easier to identify the indicators or factors employed is also more effective in motivating the need for and importance of the review than using vague phrasing that is not transparent about the use of the indicators or factors.

(p7.1) 1. Need for Review. The need for a review can be communicated by outlining potential contributions of the methodological issue for substantive research, providing evidence of prior confusion about the methodological issue, and demonstrating that researchers are incorrectly applying the methodology. An exemplar of communicating the motivation for the study is Simmering et al. (2015), which cited articles and reviews published over a number of years to provide evidence of the confusion regarding how to identify and select marker variables. An alternative approach is demonstrated in the review by Antonakis et al. (2010), who justified the need for a review on establishing evidence of causality using the indicators of incorrect application of techniques along with outlining implications for substantive research. Antonakis et al. began by stating that the methodological issue had been incorrectly addressed in the past and highlighted the implications of these incorrect applications for substantive research. They then provided further evidence of the need for the review by citing prior reviews from different fields in which researchers raised concerns about the issue.
## (s12) Transparency and Replicability
(p12.0) Our third broad issue addresses matters pertaining to the procedures used to conduct the review. In other words, it is targeted at enhancing the transparency of the process used to conduct the literature review and consequently, the trustworthiness of a review's recommendations Aguinis & Solarino, 2019). Based on our content analysis, we identified two latent factors (Table 3, latent factors 5 and 6, respectively) to address this issue: (5) process of literature review, and (6) source of recommendations.

(p12.1) Our results summarized in Table 2 regarding the anatomy of published methodological literature reviews show that some authors described conducting a formal literature review, clearly reported the method used to select journals and article inclusion and exclusion criteria, and offered a thorough explanation of the coding process. In contrast, others provided minimal reporting on how they reviewed papers by, for example, noting they reviewed a certain time period in certain journals but falling short of providing information on inclusion criteria and coding procedures.
## (s15) Readability and Usability
(p15.0) Methodological literature reviews synthesize voluminous and sometimes complex and technical material and are usually targeted at audiences who may not be experts on the particular issue. Therefore, our fourth broad issue focuses on features that make it easier for substantive researchers to access the declarative and procedural knowledge included in the review, improve the usability of the review's recommendations, and identify QRPs to avoid when addressing a particular methodological issue. Our content analysis uncovered the following four latent factors (Table 3, factors 7-10, respectively): (7) structure of recommendations, (8) layout of recommendations, (9) readability of review, and (10) software guidelines.

(p15.1) 7. Structure of Recommendations. Some reviews organize recommendations by stage of research process or as a step-by-step guideline. Others outline general best-practice recommendations when dealing with a methodological issue or discuss context-specific best-practice recommendations or decisions. Still others offer illustrations based on an empirical example or identify published research that exemplifies best-practice recommendations. Using the indicators associated with this factor is particularly important because-unlike substantive literature reviews (Parmigiani & King, 2019;Short, 2009)-a critical role of methodological literature reviews is to ameliorate QRPs and improve current practices regarding a specific methodological issue.

(p15.2) Presenting recommendations in a systematic manner that mirrors the sequential stages of a typical research study enhances the usability of the recommendations by allowing researchers to understand the methodological issue in the context of their own research. Also, presenting recommendations as a sequential series of decisions or actions allows researchers to consider them one at a time, thereby decreasing the complexity surrounding the recommendations and facilitating their use.
