# Hand sanitizers: A review of ingredients, mechanisms of action, modes of delivery, and efficacy against coronaviruses

CorpusID: 219799832 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22b146ece97908c2b5aaa7f2c8a965f7d1ac39c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a22b146ece97908c2b5aaa7f2c8a965f7d1ac39c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) ALCOHOL MECHANISM OF ACTION AGAINST BACTERIA
(p3.0) The compound, n-propanol, is the most commonly used alcohol compound in biocides. 7 It is not known with much confidence the exact mechanism of alcohol's antimicrobial activity, however, it may be related membrane damage, and inhibition or uncoupling of mRNA and protein synthesis through effects on ribosomes and RNA polymerase, 9 or associated with protein denaturation. 7 For activity against bacteria, its optimal bactericidal efficacy is achieved at concentrations between 60% and 90%. 10 In fact, absolute alcohol, or alcohol that is no more than one percent water, is less bactericidal than alcohol between the aforementioned range. 10 Water is thus critical in the protein denaturation process. No matter which process, if not multiple, are affected by alcohol, essential metabolic pathways, membrane damage and loss of cellular integrity ultimately occur. 7 It is important to note, however, that alcohols exhibit bactericidal activity against vegetative bacteria-those undergoing metabolism and binary fission-but not against spores. 11 
## (s4) ALCOHOL MECHANISM OF ACTION AGAINST VIRUSES
(p4.0) The viral targets of alcohol-based hand sanitizers are predominantly the viral envelope, if present, which is derived from host lipid envelopes, the protein capsid, which contains and protects the genetic material, and the genetic material itself. 7 Given that all these components are necessary for the viral life cycle (eg, attachment, penetration, biosynthesis, maturation, lysis), and thus critical for its ability to transmit to another host, it can be presumed that altering the structure or function of any of the aforementioned components will typically render the virus ineffective.

(p4.1) While less is known regarding the specific mechanism of action of alcohols agents against viruses compared to bacteria, it is understood that ethanols have a broader and stronger virucidal activity than propanols. In fact, high concentration of ethanol has shown to be highly effective against enveloped viruses 12 and thus is effective against the majority of clinically relevant viruses. 13 It is also interesting to note that adding acids to ethanol solutions can increase its efficacy against viruses that are more resistant to ethanol alone. 13,14 Despite the potential synergy of ethanol and acidity, it remains known that most hand sanitizers continue to be ineffective against nonenveloped viruses. 15
## (s5) BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE MECHANISM OF ACTION
(p5.0) Similar to alcohol-based hand sanitizers, benzalkonium chloride (BC), the primary ingredient of NABHS, is generally not effective against nonenveloped viruses, 16,17 though a study demonstrating its efficacy against the nonenveloped human coxsackie virus suggest exceptions exist. 18 Despite this exception, it appears that the lipid envelope of either bacteria or viruses are critical structures for BC's effectiveness.

(p5.1) The cationic "headgroup" of BC is progressively adsorbed to the negatively charged phosphate heads of phospholipids in the lipid bilayer, and as a result, increase in concentration. 19 The consistent increase of BC concentration results in reduced fluidity of the membrane and thus the creation of hydrophilic gaps in the membrane. 19 In addition, the alkyl chain "tail" component of BC further perturbs and disrupts the membrane bilayer by permeating the barrier and disrupting its physical and biochemical properties. 19 Protein function is subsequently disturbed and the combination of the aforementioned effects results in the solubilization of the bilayer constituents into BC/phospholipid micelles. 19 BC also interrupts intercellular targets and compromises the conformational behavior of DNA. 20 
## (s8) Viruses
(p8.0) Although viruses are more difficult to directly study in vivo compared to bacteria, numerous studies have attempted to validate the effectiveness of hand sanitizers on viruses. The World Health Organization recommends alcohol-based hand sanitizer formulations against bovine viral diarrhea virus, hepatitis C virus, Zika virus, murine norovirus, and coronaviruses as shown with effective inactivation in quantitative suspension tests. 32,33 Other formulations from Sterillium that contain isopropanol as the main ingredient also completely inactivated enveloped enteric and respiratory viruses, such as H1N1 influenza A virus, 34 but failed to inactivate nonenveloped viruses, except rotavirus. A number of in vivo studies have also been conducted where the virus is applied to fingertips and the efficacy of the hand sanitizers in reducing the numbers of viral particles recoverable from hands is determined. 35 Many of these finger pad tests show moderate efficacy against most nonenveloped viral strains, which are known to be more resistant to disinfectants than enveloped viruses. 36,37 It is crucial to keep note of the type of viral strains as high concentrations of ethanol has shown to be highly effective against enveloped viruses 12 and thus is effective against the majority of clinically relevant viruses. 13 That being said, although nonenveloped viruses such as Hepatitis A and enteroviruses require 70%-80% alcohol to be reliably inactivated, Sattar et al suggest that 60% ethanol was sufficient to reduce the titers of rotavirus, adenovirus, and rhinovirus by >3 log10 within a 10-second contact period. 36 Even with nonenveloped viruses, satisfactory activity can be achieved with higher alcohol concentrations and extended contact times. 3,38 As evidence on the novel SARS-CoV-2 continues to rapidly emerge, data from previous coronaviruses can be extrapolated in the context of the efficacy of hand disinfection given their structural similarity. A systematic review examining the 2002-04 SARS outbreak indicated that 9 out of 10 small case-control studies pointed towards the idea that hand washing decreases the likelihood of nosocomial and community transmission, although only three showed statistical significance, partly explained due to the small sample sizes of the studies. 39 A portion of the studies varied in the specific method of hand washing; some studies used hand sanitizers, while others did not specify whether it was achieved through soap and water or sanitizers. Although direct in vivo confirmation of virus inactivation after hand sanitizer use is infeasible to achieve in a standardized method, in vitro studies have confirmed that alcohol-based hand sanitizers can be effective in decreasing the viral load. Specifically, in vitro studies using sputum cultures of SARS-CoV infected patients with four different alcohol-based hand sanitizer formulations were all able to inactivate the virus below the limit of detection. 40 Transmissions of SARS-CoV-2 have been described with incubation times of up to 10 days, facilitating its spread via droplets, contaminated hands, or surfaces. 41 As such, it is important to note the efficacy of inactivating viruses on all modes of transmission. Alcohol-based disinfectants have also been shown to effectively inactivate SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV (Middle East respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus) on inanimate surfaces, such as metal, glass, and plastic. 42 One of the key limitations for analyzing the true efficacy of hand disinfection arises from the method of data collection via retrospective self-reporting, which can lack standardization and objectivity in frequency and method of handwashing. 39 There is also a myriad of confounding variables, especially in hospital settings, such as frequency and extent of contact with infected persons and the use of personal protective equipment. As hand hygiene is one aspect of a multicomponent intervention to reduce infection rates, it is difficult to truly assess the effectiveness of hand sanitizers independently.
## (s10) FOAM VERSUS GEL
(p10.0) Three common modes of delivering the active ingredient in hand sanitizers, whether alcohol or other disinfectants, are foams, gels, and sprays. There is limited research on comparing the efficacy of various sanitizer delivery systems on virucidal efficacy. One study with 30 human volunteers showed >3 log10 reductions of H1N1 viral counts on finger pads with foam, gel, and wipes with no differences in efficacy among delivery types. 50 Similar findings were seen by Grayson et al, comparing ethanol based gel and liquid forms on H1N1. 51 Both of these studies suggest that there could be some varying differences in efficacy due to the method of mechanical friction that could contribute to physical removal of pathogens, but there needs to be further research conducted to compare the efficacy between the various hand sanitizer delivery systems.

(p10.1) Aside from virucidal efficacy, the formulations of hand sanitizers were identified as one factor influencing compliance to hand hygiene, though conflicting results exist. A single pump from foam dispensers provides approximately 1.1 mL of hand sanitizer. 52 Manufacturers suggest different recommended volumes for application, but a recent study compared gel and foam hand sanitizers and found no statistically significant difference of complete hand coverage upon usage of equal volumes. 52 It did, however, conclude that volumes <2 mL resulted in high rates of poor coverage (67%-87%), whereas volumes ≥2 mL generated a lower rate of incomplete coverage (13%-53%). The World Health Organization does not have a specific volume of sanitizer they suggest but recommend to "cover all surfaces of the hand" (https://www.who.int/gpsc/5may/tools/who_guidelines-handhygie ne_summary.pdf). Contrary to the previous results, 52 a study comparing foam and gel with equal concentrations of ethanol determined that foam spreads more than gel and that the average log10 reduction of foam was superior against E. coli bacteria than gel. 53 To translate these experimental findings to clinical practice, however, the compliance of utilizing adequate amounts of foam sanitizer must be met. A study reviewing the potential compliance of various hand sanitizer varieties found that foams containing 62% ethanol have a long drying time, and given this, health care workers in clinical practice likely use inadequate volumes of the product in order to quicken the drying time, and consequently do not use a sufficient amounts of foam hand sanitizer for complete hand coverage. 54 Indeed, a focus group of nurses strongly rejected high volumes (3 mL) of hand sanitizers in gel, foam, or liquid form as "there is not enough time to apply such large doses whilst working on a busy ward." 55 Moreover, the gel and foam formats were considered more desirable than the liquid due to some key desirable properties, including fast absorption, soft/moisturized hand feel, clean nonsticky feel, and low smell. 55 Another study compared the tolerability of gel and liquid forms with varying ingredients (ethanol or propanol) among dental students and found that all types were tolerated. 56 Multiple studies suggest that there are other factors, such as sanitizer ingredients, addition of skin moisturizer, and accessibility in the workplace, that affect compliance and ultimately make it difficult to directly compare the different types of hand sanitizers. Further studies need to be conducted to determine the long-term compliance of the various sanitizer forms, which are more useful in settings where consistent hand hygiene is crucial.
