# Acupuncture therapy for Alzheimer's disease A protocol for an overview of systematic reviews of Multiple Systematic Reviews-2 (AMSTAR-2) tool, Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses Statement (PRISMA) checklist and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system, respectively

CorpusID: 219171683 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c95728e1aa4322458b64581dbf9c89fb91e1deb4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c95728e1aa4322458b64581dbf9c89fb91e1deb4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Dementia is a common global public health problem. There are approximately 47 million people suffered from dementia worldwide and this number is expected to increase to 131 million by 2050. [1] Alzheimer's disease (AD), a neurodegenerative disease, is the main cause of dementia, [2] which accounts for 50% to 75% [3] with extremely harm and characterized by gradual progress of loss of memory, inability to learn new information, cognitive deterioration, mental symptoms, behavioral abnormalities.
## (s2) Methods
(p2.0) This protocol of overview will be performed according to "preferred reporting items for overview of systematic reviews" (PRIO-harms). [25] This overview has been registered on the International Platform of Registered Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Protocols (INPLASY), registration number: INPLASY202040035, DOI number: 10.37766/inplasy2020. 4.0035 (https://inplasy.com/inplasy-2020-4-0035/).
## (s5) Types of outcomes.
(p5.0) (1) Mini-mental state examination (MMSE): MMSE was developed more than 4 decades ago. [1] MMSE is a simplified, scored form of the cognitive mental status examination. It is "mini", but the realm of cognitive is thorough. And it requires only a few minutes to administer, therefore it is practical to use routinely. [26] (2) Activities of daily living (ADL): ADL measurement method was proposed by Katz, which was developed to study results of treatment and prognosis in the elderly and chronically ill. It offers a means of making quantitative assessments. [27] The 6 basic activities in the ADL consist of eating, dressing, indoor mobility, bathing, using the toilet, and continence. [28] (3) Alzheimer's disease assessment scale-cognitive section (ADAS-cog): The ADAS is a rating instrument which was designed specifically to evaluate the severity of cognitive and noncognitive behavioral dysfunctions characteristic of persons with AD. [29] 3.1.5. Types of studies. We will include SR of randomized control trials (RCTs) which evaluate the effect and safety of acupuncture therapy for AD.

(p5.1) 3.2. Data collection 3.2.1. Search methods for identification of reviews. A comprehensive and exhaustive search strategy will be run. The following databases: PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Library, China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI), Chinese Biomedical Literature Database (CBM), WANFANG DATA, VIP will be searched using the keywords ("Alzheimer Disease" OR "Senile Dementia") AND ("Acupuncture * " OR "Electroacupuncture" OR "scalp needle") AND ("Meta analys * " OR "Systematic review * "). The Search strategy was given in Supplemental Digital Content (Appendix 1), http://links.lww.com/MD/E252.
## (s8) 3.2.4.
(p8.0) Critical appraisal of included reviews. The following evaluation processes were performed independently by 2 authors. If the opinions are inconsistent, all the researchers will discuss on the meeting until reach a consensus. We will calculate the rate of agreement between the 2 reviewers. Agreement will be measured using the Kappa statistic. [30] Wang et al. Medicine (2020) 99:21 Medicine
## (s11) 3.4.2.
(p11.0) Report quality of included reviews. We will also use Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta Analyses Statement (PRISMA) checklist [32] to assess the report quality of the included reviews by tabulating whether the following items have been adequately addressed. It is 1 point for the content of the item, 0.5 point for the part, and 0 point if the systematic review does not match the entry. The total score ≥22 is "high quality", 11 to 21 is classified as "moderate quality", and 10 is classified as "low quality" ( Table 2).
## (s12) 3.4.3.
(p12.0) Quality of evidence in included reviews. We will describe the quality of the evidence using the Grade of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) system. [33] The evidence for each of the selected clinical outcomes in the table which will be filled with the summary of estimated-risk and 95% confidence intervals ( Table 3). The quality of evidence of each outcome will be ranged from high, moderate to low, and very low. The evidence can be downgraded from "high quality" by 1 level for serious (or by 2 levels for very serious) limitations, depending on assessments for study limitations, inconsistency of results, indirectness of evidence, imprecision of effect estimates, and potential publication bias.
