# Machine Learning for Intelligent Optical Networks: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 212657759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5ff9ba22e1e500abb5b7ad3c84f7c2df9114920](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5ff9ba22e1e500abb5b7ad3c84f7c2df9114920)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) System Architecture and Application Paradigms
(p3.0) The system architecture of optical networks incorporating ML is depicted in Fig. 2 (a). To employ the MLbased methods in optical networks, an intelligent module that consists of Functional Elements (FEs) and ML agents should be deployed.

(p3.1) The FEs are responsible for information interaction between ML agent and physical optical networks. In FEs, Data Collection module collects raw data from the optical network, and Data Processing module preprocesses it to a certain data structure used by ML models. Network protocols and functions, should be modified to support FE on network data collection [17] and data processing.

(p3.2) The collected and preprocessed network data as well as network state information from FEs will be sent to ML agents for training. An ML agent may work in mainly three paradigms in optical networks: i) regression, ii) classification, and iii) decision-making. The workflows of these three paradigms are depicted in Fig. 2.
## (s6) Reduce the Online Computation Requirements
(p6.0) Facing 5G and the related services, there is a serious challenge: on one hand, the emerging services (such as uRLLC) usually require low latency; and on the other hand, the dynamic nature of the traffic ask the network to be re-configured in real time accordingly. The conventional approaches usually need a lot of computation, which is not suitable for online network adjustment or reconfiguration. However, some ML techniques involve two stages, For some optical network tasks, analytic methods have not been fully studied, and thus, only an approximate optical result will be given based on expert knowledge.

(p6.1) However, with the utilization of Deep Learning [19], which can automatically extract features from the origin data, feature-engineering step can be simplified. This can leave out requirements for professional domain knowledge and huge manual cost in feature engineering. Take OSNR monitoring with eye diagram as example, there is no explicit relationship between the pixels in eye diagrams and OSNR value, so that the ability of analytic method is limited. However, with DL [20], the raw data can be directly input into the neural network and the feature can be automatically extracted from the raw data. The accuracy of DL-based model can meet the requirements.
## (s11) Neural Networks (NNs)
(p11.0) NNs are effective tools when utilized in solving complex real-world problems. Its most beneficial properties include remarkable information processing ability, high parallelism, fault and noise tolerance, and strong generalization [33]. However, the disadvantages of NNs, such as sensitive to training hyper-parameters, overfitting and large computing resource requirement, should also be concerned. NNs can be divided into three types: ANNs, CNNs, and RNNs.
## (s20) Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL)
(p20.0) A practical decision scenario usually has a large state space and large action space. It is difficult for conventional RL to model such complex environment. Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) use the deep learning to better represent environment and actions. The architecture of DRL with Q-learning, which is a typical example of DRL, is shown in Fig. 7 (b). Deep Q-networks, such as CNN and RNN, are introduced to replace the Q-table in conventional RL to achieve better abstraction of the environment states, and learn the expectation values of each decision. The environment feeds the deep Q-network with observed state and corresponding action award for the network training [50].
## (s23) Routing in Optical Networks
(p23.0) Route planning is one of the fundamental tasks in optical networks. With the scale and the complexity of optical networks increase, the conventional Shortest Path First (SPF) routing algorithm may result in low network resource utilization and high blocking ratio. Heuristic-based route planning will suffer high computational complexity when facing large scale topology.

(p23.1) To overcome the drawbacks of simple SPF routing and heuristic-based routing, ML techniques have been employed. Some works model the routing allocation as classification and regression tasks, which use supervised learning to obtain the rules of routes generation from the historical route dataset [59] [60] [61]. Other works model the routing problem as decision-making tasks, in which the RL is employed to generate optimal routing assignment [62] [63]

(p23.2) [64] [65]. In this section, applications of ML for simple routing tasks are presented. Note that, a further discussion of the joint resource assignment, include the assignment of route, wavelength, spectrum, and modulation format, will be reviewed in section 4.3.
## (s25) Reinforcement Learning-based Routing
(p25.0) When employing RL in routing planning, the tasks are modeled as decision-making problems. In decision-making problems, the learning models interact with network environment to learn the optimal actions under specific network states. RL is usually used as optimal actions learning algorithm in decision making agents.  [63]. In such scenario, agents will upload their Q-tables to a central server, which will check whether the optimal route of each node shares some common links. If the number of optimal routes which share the same link exceeds a threshold, this link may suffer heavy traffic and congestion. At this time, the second optimal route with the second largest Q-value in each node is selected for burst transmission. This method maximizes the joint utility function of all the agents in the network. Experiments results show that, the MARL has a lower burst loss probability and a higher link utilization compared with the single agent method in entire network.
## (s26) Reinforcement Learning-based Deflection Routing in OBS
(p26.0) In OBS networks, the wavelength contention at intermediate nodes is the main cause of burst losses. There are mainly four methods for solving the wavelength contention problem: i) using Fiber Delay Lines (FDLs) to delay the blocked burst until there is an idle wavelength for transmission; ii) wavelength conversion when contention exists at the intermediate node [67]; iii) burst segmentation method which segments the burst into two part with one part being dropped or forwarded on an alternate path, while the other part forwarded on the primary path [68]; iv) deflection routing where only one burst is routed to its primary route while other bursts are switched to alternate routes. Due to the fact that the optical devices, such as FDLs and optical circuit, are not mature, which hinder the application of the first three methods, the deflection routing method is the hottest directions for solving wavelength contention in OBS networks [69] [70].
## (s27) RWA and RSA in Optical Networks
(p27.0) Besides routing resources assignment, allocation of other resources is also an important issue. Especially for the optical networks, there are multiple types of resources to be assigned, such as wavelength, spectrum, and modulation format, which makes the resource allocation more complicated. In WDM networks, several wavelengths are transmitted in a single link. RWA problems refer to assign a route and an optical wavelength for each IP service flow [72], while RSA aims to setup a lightpath with multiple spectrum slots for a flow transmission. Spectrum assignment refers to allocate suitable spectrum slots to the requested lightpath. RSA in EON is the equivalent problem to the RWA in WDM networks. The difference of RSA and RWA is due to the capability of the EON architecture to offer flexible spectrum allocation to meet the requested data rates [73].

(p27.1) Both of RWA and RSA are NP-complete [74]. The problems are usually formulated as constrained optimization problems, such as Integer Linear Programming (ILP). Heuristics approaches, such as genetic algorithm and simulated annealing, are used to solve the problems [75] [76]. Recently, many researches leverage ML techniques to solve RWA and RSA problems. These works are introduced in this subsection.
## (s28) Supervised Learning-based RWA
(p28.0) In [77], the RWA problem is modeled as a multi-class classification problem and solved with logistic regression and DNN. The optimal RWA configurations are computed in advance through ILP, and Net2Plan network optimization tool [66] is used to obtain training samples. When training the logistic regression and DNN models, network states include topology, capacity, available wavelengths and the set of traffic demands, are input to the model, and the target output is the optimal RWA configuration to these states. The supervised learning model learns the relationships between network states and optimal optical RWA. With these learned relationships, computing the optimal solution with ILP is not necessary, which avoids high computational complexity. The computing of optimal RWA configuration by the above approach is time efficient and thus enable real-time network configuration.
## (s29) Reinforcement Learning-based RWA
(p29.0) Kiran et al. present a RL-based path and wavelength selection method in OBS networks to minimize the burst loss probability by learning an optimal path to an egress node over time [78]. A RL agent is adopted at each ingress node. In path selection, since the learning function only installed in the edge nodes instead of intermediate nodes,

(p29.1) there is no deflection routing in this method. The SPF method is first exploited as the initial path algorithm at the beginning, and the learning agent will select a route with the largest Q-value in each time epoch. In wavelength selection, since the presence of wavelength converters are not assumed at the core nodes, the wavelength selection agents are also deployed at ingress nodes. The wavelength selection agent will select the wavelength with the largest Q-value. The Q-values in routing selection and wavelength selection agents are updated depending on rewards corresponding to whether a burst is transmitted successfully. Experimental results show that the RL-based RWA method outperform the SPF, hybrid path switching scheme DWNV [79] and Self-Learning (SL) scheme [80].

(p29.2) Pointurier et al. consider the physical impairments in RWA [81]. In this method, each traffic should obey two constraints to avoid being blocked: wavelength continuity constraint and lightpath QoT constraint. Wavelength continuity constraint is that, each traffic should occupy only one wavelength during its transmission and cannot be converted; lightpath QoT constraint is that, the QoT of a lightpath should reach a certain threshold to be used. In

(p29.3) QoT evaluation, four physical impairments are considered: Inter-Symbol Interference, amplifier noise, inter-channel crosstalk, and node crosstalk, and BER is considered as the metric of the QoT. When a node choosing a lightpath with RL methods, the QoT of this lightpath is first examined and added into the candidate lightpath list only if it meets the QoT requirement. The method achieves a lower network blocking probability than the shortest path and uniform path selection schemes.
## (s32) Optical Performance Monitoring
(p32.0) Optical networks are operated at ultra-high data rates, so that a short service interruption caused by impairment in fiber or devices may result in large-scale packet loss. Therefore, an accurate and real-time OPM is essential to ensure network performance robust [83].

(p32.1) The OPM techniques are used both in directly detected systems and digital coherent systems [84]. ML-based OPM are most used in directly detected systems where monitoring devices only use photodetectors to detect the intensity of the optical signal, or detect the electrical domain signal that transferred from the optical domain.

(p32.2) Most prevalent parameters that OPM concerns include Optical Signal-to-Noise Ratios (OSNR), Chromatic Dispersion (CD), Polarization Mode Dispersion (PMD), polarization-dependent loss, optical power, and fiber nonlinearity [84]. The performance degradation of these parameters will cause signal impairments.

(p32.3) In the following, a wide range of ML-based monitoring techniques for optical networks will be described. The work in [85] assumes the experiment systems are impairment-free in fibers itself, and do not consider the inherent impairments. Wu et al. extend the work in [85], considering the impairments that experiment systems inevitably contain [86]. In such a system with impairments, it is more practical for OPM to focus on the monitored parameters (e.g. optical power, OSNR, CD, and GDG) changes from a baseline, rather than the absolute values of these parameters. Furthermore, a method for estimating time misalignment in RZ-QPSK using ANN is provided in [86].
## (s34) PCAs-based OPM
(p34.0) To overcome the high computational complexity drawbacks when using images as inputs, Tan et al. employ PCA to reduce the dimensionality of asynchronous delay-tap diagrams for efficiently estimating OSNR, CD, and DGD [92]. The ADTPs images are transformed to several Principal Components (PCs) with Karhunen-Loeve Transform (KLT). To estimate the impairment values, the PCs were compared with all the available feature vectors in the reference database, and the parameters values of reference data with minimum Euclidean distance are assigned to the unknown parameters.
## (s36) Lightpath QoT Estimation
(p36.0) Barletta et al. predict whether the Bit-Error-Rate (BER) of a lightpath meet the QoT requirement. This problem is modeled as a classification tasks, and random forest is employed as classifier [93]. The input features of the random forest include i) the number of links of the lightpath; ii) the total length of the lightpath; iii) the length of longest link in the lightpath; iv) the traffic volume a lightpath serves; v)the modulation format. The predicted output is a binary variable which is True if a lightpath BER is lower than the system threshold. The authors evaluate several architectures of random forests and choose the classifier with 100 estimators, which provides the best trade-off between performance and computational time. The classification results can be used for reference when deploying a new lightpath in RSA.
## (s38) Failure Management
(p38.0) Failures in optical networks may cause network performance degradation and even huge data loss. There are mainly two kinds of failure management methods: reactive methods and proactive methods. In reactive methods, the network operators take actions when alarms occur. However, the data loss has already happened and the manual operation may not cope with massive alarms and invisible failures in aspects of flexibility and timeliness. Thus, the system should be designed in a proactive way, which can detect the potential failures and provide enough time for restoration actions [101]. Machine learning is a powerful tool for proactive failure detection, which learns the relationship between current network status and future network failures. In addition to failure prediction, it is also nontrivial to identify and localize the root-causes of failures for efficient and precise service maintenance and restoration [102]. In this subsection, the applications of ML techniques used in failures prediction, identification and localization will be reviewed. Vela et al. propose a data visualization method for failure localization with the aid of K-means [109]. To support human operation with monitored path BER data, the BER performance of paths and their change trends are visualized. Paths are clustered according to the max BER and BER trend with K-means approach, and different centroids are plotted in a 2D place. Different colors are assigned according to different BER performance for better representation to human operators.
## (s43) Algorithm Computational Complexity
(p43.0) In real optical network scenario, there may be strict requirement for the timeliness of tasks. Thus, it is important for ML algorithms to reduce their computational complexity. However, only a small set of works analyze the ML feasibilities based on time complexity.

(p43.1) Besides, most of the previous experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed methods without time restriction. These optimal results were obtained assuming there is enough time for computation. However, real environment is usually time-sensitive, and a better comparison principle is to compare the suboptimal solutions of different algorithms under a given time threshold.

(p43.2) Possible solutions: i) In monitoring tasks, although many ML algorithms, such as deep neural networks, have the capability of automated feature extraction, the original data still should be preprocessed and expert knowledge should be introduced into feature engineering to simplify the model training, e.g. pre-test the data, and only input the indicators of tests into neural networks for training [104]. ii) In decision-making tasks, suboptimal solutions should be allowed to balance the network performance and time consuming of action computation.
