# The Significance of Biobanking in the Sustainability of Biomedical Research: A Review

CorpusID: 216031727 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1081f09c72d142d57db1302f30859efe76065a3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Political Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Population-based biobanks
(p4.0) Longitudinal population-based biobank is the most common format. In such a population cohort, at the time of entry and at certain times in follow-up, blood or isolated DNA, along with data about lifestyle, family history, environmental exposure, etc., is collected from a general population who might or might not have a specific disease. Its main goal is achieving susceptibility biomarkers, environmental risk factors, and predisposing genetic variants in healthy individuals. A major issue arises from this category with this format is that investigation can only be initiated after follow-ups for about 10-15 years when they have access to the minimum amount of samples of a specific disease [10,18,19] .
## (s5) Disease-oriented general biobanks
(p5.0) This type of biobanks (i.e. tumor banks) focuses on discovering biomarkers of disease as well as predicting progression of the disease, mortality, and response to treatment, through prospective and/or retrospective collections of samples (tissue and isolated cells) and blood derivate (proteins/RNA/DNA) or other body fluids. Samples are usually associated with clinical data, the amount of which will determine the biological value of the sample [10,18] . Disease-oriented biobank provides an infrastructure for the collection and storage of samples from different types of diseases; therefore, the high number of represented diseases is their specific strength. A large number of samples lead to the identification of different pathways, which in turn leads to new target therapies that are key to the advancement of personalized medicine [20] . The two mentioned types of biobanks are connected as a result of prospective population-based biobanks complementing disease-oriented biobanks, in which they can find predictive biomarkers for the onset of diseases. An optimal scenario for the case-control studies would happen if we follow individuals in years and use their samples for both case and control after developing the desired disease [4] .
## (s6) Cancer biobanks
(p6.0) Cancer biobanks, as a subtype of disease-based biobanks, are essential for evolution in cancer treatment. Almost all aspects of cancers are affected by biobanking like pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis [21] . The oncology of the 20 th century focuses on generic therapeutic regimens based on phenotypic and morphologic tumor classification. Unfortunately, such therapy was not effective for all tumors with the same morphology or phenotype and also had unpredictable adverse effects. In contrast, today's oncology gives more attention to early detection and prevention, molecular classification of tumors, 208
## (s8) Challenges in Biobanking
(p8.0) The biobanking community, since its inception in early 2000, has had to overcome several challenges, including harmonized procedures, appropriate design, and sustainability, all in the framework of their legal, social, and ethical values [10,34] . In response to biobanking challenges, Chalmers et al. [34] have introduced four waves, which, in the following, we introduce the main concepts based on the original references used by Chalmers et al. [34] and clarify them based on the literature review.
## (s10) "Collaboration and standardization"
(p10.0) In a non-collaborative state, access to biospecimens is isolated to an investigator's own institution, and research questions are limited by the scope of the available samples. As a result, collaboration at national or international level is essential. Poor or unknown quality of biospecimens can lead to doubts regarding research findings. The disparity in research findings arises from the lack of standardized procedures for collecting, storing, processing, and annotating biospecimens [7] . One evidence is a report by Moore et al. [9] who showed that only 30 out of 660 commercial tests available for measuring gene alterations, and germline mutations can be used to predict response to a specific treatment. It is also apparent that standardization of practices, procedures, and policies is key to achieve optimal results. To overcome the aforementioned challenges, the International Society of Biological Environmental Repositories was established to take a leading international role in standardizing the preservation and storage of biobanked material. Also, BRN under the supervision of OBBR was established in 2005 to coordinate and support systematic investigation with regards to collection, processing, and storage of human biospecimens. However, standardization processes might be a threat to smaller biobanks, because they might not be able to meet the benchmarks [33,34] .
## (s15) Networking and , national and international biobanks
(p15.0) Until now, biobanking has enabled research studies and helped progress in the understanding of disease pathogenesis. However, the need for biobank networking to assist in novel discoveries is still unsatisfied. The idea of national and international biobank networking is one of the newest areas in this field and predicted to have an important effect on prevention and treatment of diseases, especially cancer. Such networking enables the investigation of rarer diseases, validating molecular signatures that have multiple parameters, helping pharmaceutical companies to work on data from different ethnicities and also discussing the role of environmental risk factors while focusing on genetic background [4,43] . Key publications related to biobank networking are the Cancer Incidence in Five Continents series and GLOBOCAN, which are coordinated by IARC [44] . At the national level, networks of biobanks began to emerge and proliferate during the 1990s. Up until now, countries with the most large-scale biobanks are the UK with 15 and the USA with 14 corporators [45] . Central Research Infrastructure for molecular Pathology located at the Institute for Biomedical Engineering in Germany is another example of transnational networking between different European tissue banks. Their archives contain about five million Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded and 50,000 frozen tissue samples [4,46] .
## (s16) Living biobanks
(p16.0) Recently, in the field of chronic disease treatment, especially cancer, the inefficiency of the "one-size-fitsall" approach has been proven. Today, with the development of human genetics, pharmacogenomics, and the success of human gene mapping, the "one dose-one patient" approach in the growing field of personalized medicine needs to be replaced. In this field, the major challenge is finding a link between functional genomics and pathological data while focusing on the patient's outcome. Many different personalized tumor models have been proposed to address this challenge. One of the newest models in a three-dimensional culture tumor model named organoid [47] . With the improvements in this field, many tumor organoids derived from tumor specimens from the intestine, stomach, liver, mammary glands, retina, brain, etc.has been developed, which emphasizes the need for living biobanks [47,48] . Sachs et al. [49] have recently built a living biobank with more than 100 primary and metastatic breast cancer organoid lines.
