# Organic Polymer Material Research Effect of Fiber Sizing on Mechanical Properties of Carbon Reinforced Composites: A Review

CorpusID: 216493054 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/042d82c4b770eae61aff71d5efc9bed6c0250697](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/042d82c4b770eae61aff71d5efc9bed6c0250697)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s3) Characterization of Carbon Fiber Reinforced Composites
(p3.0) It is very much needed to characterize the composites whenever there is a change in the morphology of fiber. Different techniques are employed to characterize the composites. Cho et al. [2] conducted dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) on unidirectional and bidirectional woven carbon/ nylon 6 composites. The results of DMA and short beam shear tests indicate an enhancement in interfacial and inter laminar strength of woven composites. The authors also found that glass transition temperature (T g ) increased as the fiber matrix adhesion increased. Dilsiz and Wightman [3] compared the unsized fibers with Ultem polyamide and PU sized fibers. In the study it was evident that the sizing reduces the surface energy and acid-base sites. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis showed that there is a decrease in hydroxyl groups on the carbon fiber surface. Single fiber fragmentation test showed the direct relation of surface energies to change the fiber matrix adhesion. Epoxy has also been used as a sizing agent. The effect of differ-DOI: https://doi.org/10.30564/opmr.v1i2.1683 ent molecular weight sizing on the performance of carbon fiber was studied by Zhang et al. [4] . The sizing agent were epoxy 601, epoxy 6101 and epoxy 618 which are different in molecular weights. As the diameter of carbon fibers is in few microns so it is not feasible to study the surface of fiber from optical microscope for this purpose scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a very important technique. Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis showed that the sizing agent affects the surface topography. Interfacial shear strength (IFSS) results indicated that epoxy 6101 gave better results in comparison of other two. Yao et al. [5] compared of sizing effect on T700 grade carbon fiber on interfacial properties of carbon/epoxy and carbon/ bismaleimide (BMI) composites. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) analysis showed that the coupling agents are chemically reactive. Sizing react with bismaleimide and epoxy resin matrix. Micro droplet test indicated that desized fiber shows lower interfacial strength in epoxy resin than that of sized fibers, however, the trends in the case of BMI were reversed. This is also indicated by the chemical reactions, as the reaction between epoxy and sizing was sufficient in case of epoxy but partial reaction took place in case of BMI. Modification in surface roughness as well as chemical properties can be seen from the results of AFM and XPS analysis.

(p3.1) Some of the other techniques are also employed to modify the surface characteristics. Downey and Drzal [6] used the impact of UV-ozone on the fiber surface treatment with aromatic and aliphatic epoxy sizing. These sizing is used to enhance toughness of diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA)/ meta-phenylene diamine (mPDA) based carbon-epoxy composites without compromising static mechanical properties and glass transition temperature. The results showed significant increase in mode I fracture toughness as well as improved transverse flexural strength. Yuan et al. [7] modified the interface between carbon fiber and epoxy matrix. A modified polyacrylate sizing agent was applied on the fibers. The sized carbon fiber increase the wettability and decreased the surface roughness due to smooth sizing layer. Inter laminar shear strength increased by 14.2%. Liu et al. [8] synthesized a modified epoxy emulsifier (MEE) for preparing an aqueous epoxy sizing agent, the carbon fiber surface is evenly wrapped with tiny particles to increase the surface roughness. SEM, AFM and XPS analysis also showed the increase in activated carbon atoms on the surface of carbon fiber. The results of single fiber fragmentation test suggested inter facial shear strength increased by 70-76%. Han et al. [9] used polydopamine (PDA) as sizing on the carbon fiber surface. The authors observed that by implementing PDA as the sizing the behaviour of the crack propagation becomes smooth whereas in the case of neat carbon fiber the curve is not uniform and it's like the teeth of a saw blade. They also reported that single fiber pull out test shows that the interface never failed in case of sized fiber the fracture took place in epoxy resin only. The SEM images of the neat and sized fiber also confirms that the surface of sized fiber is quite rough in comparison of neat fiber surface as shown in figure 1.
## (s5) Sizing on Recycled Fibers
(p5.0) The disposal of composites after the completion of life is a big issue in the application of composites. So composites can be collected after their lifetime and fibers can be extracted from these composites for recycling. Recycled fibers are available for free or at a very low cost. These fibers can be used in composites for secondary structural applications as the stiffness and the strength of composites decreases after the primary use. To again impart strength and stiffness to the fibers the coupling agents are applied on the fibers. The length of the recycled fibers is in millimeters so these fibers can be used a randomly oriented 2D mat or single direction aligned mat [19] .
