# sustainability Developing Students' Action Competence for a Sustainable Future: A Review of Educational Research

CorpusID: 214435034 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/60adbd6ec7de87a1f79818f7e0675b2d9c43de96](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/60adbd6ec7de87a1f79818f7e0675b2d9c43de96)

Fields: Education, Sociology, Environmental Science

## (s2) Inclusion Criteria
(p2.0) In the present study, SCOUPUS and Web of Science databases were selected to maintain the quality of our reviewed studies. The journal articles, citing the article of Jensen and Schnack [21], publishing from 1997 to 2017 were searched. To ensure the quality of this review effort, the selected articles must meet the following criteria: (1) published in peer-reviewed journals, (2) first-hand empirical studies, and (3) using action competence as the foundation for instructions in the educational context. Pertaining to the third criteria, first, the studies had to cite the publication of Jensen and Schnack [21] as the theoretical foundation of their research design. Second, the concept of action competence had to be delivered in the instructional content. In the initial search, a total of 324 studies from the two databases were found, of which 92 were duplicates. According to the PRISMA 2009 guideline [27], articles classified as conference paper, book chapter, editorial, and review were eliminated. Then, 170 articles fit the eligibility of this research endeavour and further evaluated twice to ensure they met the selection criteria of adopting action competence in their design of research. Two papers were not available. For not specific ones, participants in three studies were not clear while four papers did not elaborate the details of their instruction. Most of the papers belonged to the survey and the development of the model, theory, or tool. Although some of the papers were empirical studies, the research design did not target at the development of action competence. Finally, the selection of the systematic literature review included 34 articles in our data analysis. The inter-rater reliability was conducted by choosing one fifth of the articles for both authors to analyse individually. With constant comparisons, all discrepancies were discussed until agreements were achieved. Figure 1 showed the literature search and review process. overview of these articles. Then, the research design, pathway of intervention, instructional setting, and learning outcome were coded by authors independently as described above. The pathway of intervention comprised the subject matter domain and teaching topic. The instructional setting consisted of the educational level, duration of instruction, and learning context. Further, possible factors were inferred from political, social, and environmental aspects to explain the results we obtained [3]. 
## (s5) Analysis Framework
(p5.0) At the beginning, we categorized articles by the characteristics of the studies, including the field of the journal, year of publication, and geographic distribution of the studies conducted, to have an overview of these articles. Then, the research design, pathway of intervention, instructional setting, and learning outcome were coded by authors independently as described above. The pathway of intervention comprised the subject matter domain and teaching topic. The instructional setting consisted of the educational level, duration of instruction, and learning context. Further, possible factors were inferred from political, social, and environmental aspects to explain the results we obtained [3].
## (s14) Educational Level
(p14.0) The categories of educational level include pre-school (year 4-6), elementary school (year 7-12), middle school (year 13-15), high school (year 16-18), and higher education (undergraduate/graduate). Additionally, research on teachers is also considered because teachers often acted as designers of the environmental program and facilitators of students' learning [30,43]. Pre-service and in-service teachers were included in our analysis of the educational level. Figure 3 shows the range of the educational level presented in each study. Some studies were conducted with participants of more than one educational level. One example in the study of Simovska and Jensen [33] aimed to foster students to make a difference on the topic of alcohol use. Students of four different countries discussed about the causes and effects of alcohol on the e-forum. Teachers created a learning environment for genuine participation of students where they acted as facilitators and supporters in developing action competence for students. In the later phase, students along with their teachers attended the WHO conference and presented their voices about alcohol consumption and the related problems. Students had opportunities to interact with experts and delegates from different countries to broaden their views concerning the issue. In this case, teachers empowered students to be active learners who are responsible for the decision of the action.
## (s17) Learning Context
(p17.0) According to the categorization of learning context [55], formal, informal, and non-formal education were sorted out. The judgement of the learning context was based on the research context or intervention program described by the researchers [56]. The majority of the studies were related to the formal learning context (76%), followed by informal (65%) and non-formal (12%) learning contexts, while some studies combined the formal and informal learning context (35%). After 2010, the non-formal learning context started to appear in the design of research. Only one study implemented in the non-formal learning context was conducted recently [53]. They adopted information and communication technology tools to assist community members to learn sustainability in non-formal context. These community stakeholders, including teachers, environmental authorities, and tourism providers, explored sustainability issues in the interactive web-site. Most of the participants demonstrated positive learning outcomes and obtained new perspectives toward the issues. In addition, they also carried out actions toward the community issue while individual actions dominated. The results suggested that non-formal education in the local community providing a new path for cultivating participants' transformative understanding of local issues and competence of action.
## (s18) Learning Outcome
(p18.0) While action competence was featured by the holistic philosophy [10], the judgement of the learning outcome was based on the whole results of the article. According to the explanations interpreted by the researchers, if the results are aligned with their research assumptions, the outcome of the study is coded as positive [3,4], otherwise negative.

(p18.1) A total of 94% studies reported positive outcomes, which meant the majority of the studies exhibited that the participants developed their action competence in these educational proposals. In the study of Lynch et al. [40], primary school students and teachers collaborated with researchers and scientists from university to monitor the changes of the local coast. With the involvement of various stakeholders in the local area, the council supported the plan of coastal management and the catchment authority offered data for students to do investigation. After the field trip, students chose two locations, the river mouth and dune area, to put camera for monitoring the area. Local residents also provided old photos to extend "the project back in time" (p. 714). Data collected from the camera were transmitted to the online database, and students could download the photos to analyse the differences under the guidance of their science teachers. The project outcomes were then presented in the family science night that involved the participations of parents, schools, and project implementers in local community. After one-year implementation, the course participants expanded from one class to all of the five and six graders in order to equip students with adequate competence on acting toward the community affairs.

(p18.2) Only two (6%) of the studies showed negative outcomes, one is in science and the other in non-science domain [43,44]. These two studies were published before 2010. Barrett and Sutter [44] conducted a youth forum for high school students in the museum. The course, based on action-oriented approach, targeted on the topic of sustainable development and provided opportunities for students to deal with the complex issues of sustainability. Students had difficulty to engage in the course, which was revealed from the distraction of the students during the instruction. While the museum was accustomed to pre-school and primary school students, their course was not for secondary-level students. From the perspective of evaluation, the teachers thought that the course was beyond the formal science curriculum. From this study, it was recognized that stakeholders responsible for developing student action competence play key roles in influencing the success of the EE/ESD project.

(p18.3) Previous reviews also found that most of the studies had positive outcomes in EE [3,4,57]. Those learning outcomes were measured immediately after the course completed. Only 9% of the studies included delayed measurements on the environmental action and intention for future action [19,53,58]. However, the delayed measurements suggested negative outcomes mostly as they stated the impact of the educational proposals could not sustain students' actions or meet researchers' expectation. Take Riemer et al.'s study [19] as an example, they recruited students from six countries to attend the workshop series for leading environmental change. The workshop focused on the environmental justice and building action competence. They collected the data in three, six, and twelve months by interview as well as questionnaire in the beginning of the workshop, and on-line survey at the end. Students indicated cognitive and affective connection with the environmental issues. However, after one year, their environmental action perished back to the state before they joined the workshop. This result revealed that "personal transformations are not sufficient in creating long-term change" (p. 185). If educators were dedicated to engaging students in taking life-long action, continuing social support from relevant projects or existing institutions would be necessary to keep the fire burning.
## (s19) Conclusions
(p19.0) The purpose of this review is to provide scholar communities with the current state on the concept of action competence in educational fields. First, the results show that most of the articles were published after 2010, with significant growth of publications in America. Qualitative design is prevailing as action competence stresses the importance of learning condition and focuses on learning process. Second, inter-disciplinary project is dominant, followed by science courses as the kind of subject in recent years. At the same time, teaching topics are largely targeted on sustainable development, which reflect the concern of the international organizations and the realization of action competence to achieve sustainability. Third, children and adolescences are still the focus of the studies, but the researchers in recent studies become more interested in the roles of in-service teachers and community stakeholders. The competence of pre-school students is the target of future research. The instructional time reported in the articles shows a tendency of increasing. Formal and informal learning contexts are massively utilized by researchers, and non-formal learning context is not adopted until 2017. Finally, the learning outcomes are almost positive. The delayed measurements used in evaluating the outcomes are published after 2016, and it is necessary to consider the long-term effect of the instruction to meet the goal of EE/ESD as life-long participation. As the goal of education is action [62], to equip students as well as residents around world with action competence would be the aim of the educators for visioning a sustainable future of our planet. The results showed from the review would provide educators and teachers with the design and details of the curriculum development on action competence in the educational context.
## (s20) Limitations
(p20.0) A limitation of this review is the definition between behaviour and action. Some researchers still consider behaviour equalling to action [3,63]. Taking this confusion into account, we discard those who do not cite the article of Jensen and Schnack [21] as the starting point of EE/ESD. Therefore, some studies might have been excluded from this review, which could limit our interpretations about differences between behaviour change and action competence.

(p20.1) Typically, articles reviewed are constrained by a publication bias [64]. While peer-reviewed journals prefer to publish positive outcomes rather than negative ones [3], the articles selected in this review tend to report significant effects more than non-significant effects as research outcomes. Some negative outcomes are ignored by researchers without further exploration [65].
