# diagnostics Mucinous Cancer of the Ovary: Overview and Current Status

CorpusID: 210870359 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecological malignancy, but the most lethal [1]. Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most common histological type. EOC is classified, based on molecular and clinic-pathologic differences, into Type 1 tumors, which include low-grade serous carcinoma, endometrioid carcinoma, clear cell carcinoma, and mucinous ovarian carcinoma (MOC), and Type 2 tumors, which include high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) [2,3]. While HGSC is the most frequent histological subtype, mucinous carcinoma of the ovary is sporadic. MOC was believed to constitute around 12% of ovarian malignancies. However, recent estimations show the true incidence to be at around 3% [4,5]. The two main reasons for this drop in incidence are the identification criteria, which separate benign mucinous tumors from invasive mucinous carcinoma, and better recognition of clinical and pathological features to differentiate between primary mucinous carcinoma and metastatic carcinoma of the ovary [6].

(p0.1) It is clearly understood that MOC is a separate entity from all other EOCs. It has a distinct natural history, molecular profile, chemo-sensitivity, and prognosis in comparison to HGSC. A comprehensive report on the genomic profile of HGSC by the Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network in 2011 revealed a distinct mutation spectrum among high-grade serous tumors and opened the door for potential targeted therapies [7].

(p0.2) MOC is the most frequent histological subtype in women under the age of 40 [8]. The well-known risk factors for HGSC, such as nulliparity, early menarche, late menopause, lack of breastfeeding, BRCA (Breast Cancer Gene) mutation, are not associated with MOC. The only possible risk factor correlated with MOC is tobacco smoking [9]. Most HGSCs present at an advanced stage, while MOC is diagnosed as stage 1 in 80% of the cases [10]. Prognosis is better in early disease, but worse in the advanced stage, compared to HGSC, which is mainly due to inadequate response to platinum-based chemotherapy [11,12].
## (s5) Pathological Aspects
(p5.0) Around 80% of mucinous carcinomas of the ovary are metastatic, with approximately 80% of primary tumors being stage I. The most frequent primary sites that metastasize to the ovary are: 45% from the gastrointestinal tract, 20% from the pancreas, 18% from the cervix and endometrium, and 8% from the breast [17,18]. It is agreed that diagnosing primary MOC requires careful pathological assessment as it is histologically very similar to other mucinous carcinomas, especially colorectal carcinoma (CRC). Recognizing the microscopic features and understanding the immunohistochemistry (IHC) profile of MOC are essential to reach a definitive diagnosis, which results in delivering proper treatment and an accurate prognosis.
## (s6) Genomic Profile
(p6.0) Advancement in pathology and molecular data has allowed for consideration of MOC as a separate entity from other EOC subtypes. Cheasley et al. recently reported a comprehensive analysis of the MOC genetic profile in comparison to many histological types and proved that MOC is a genetically-unique entity [30]. Table 2 compares the frequency of molecular mutations in MOC, HGSC, and mucinous and non-mucinous CRC [6,11]. KRAS mutation is the most frequent molecular alteration in MOCs, with 46% having this mutation. While TP53 mutation is typically associated with HGSC, about 25% of MOCs harbor this alteration as well. The amplification of HER2 is also observed in 18% of MOCs. Moreover, high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) has been reported in MOCs [31]. Aberrant signaling in the wingless (WTN) pathway in the form of a mutation in CTNNB1 or APC gene has also been documented. It is believed that the KRAS mutation develops as a first event, as the mutation is detected in the surrounding borderline and benign lesions, and HER2 amplification or TP53 mutation occurs at a later stage during malignant transformation, as this is observed exclusively in carcinomas [6,11,12]. To explore the molecular alterations in MOC, Friedlander et al. extensively evaluated the molecular profile of 304 cases of MOCs to investigate potential therapeutic targets. Alterations in MAP kinase pathway were the most common (49% mutations in KRAS and 3.5% in BRAF). mTOR pathway alterations were less likely (PIK3CA in 12% and PTEN in 6%). cMET overexpression was observed in 33% of cases, but no cMET gene amplification was seen. p53 mutation was documented in 37% of cases and EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) gene amplification was seen in 50%. HER2 gene amplification was found in 11% of cases. PD-1 positivity was detected in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes in 43% of cases and PD-L1 was positive in 14% cases [32]. At the molecular level, MOC is a heterogeneous disease and its molecular landscape still poorly understood.
## (s9) Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI)
(p9.0) A computed tomography (CT) scan is an essential part of evaluating the possibility of carcinoma. It aids in identifying the primary carcinoma and in evaluating the extent of disease. An MRI may provide additional information to differentiate primary MOC from metastatic mucinous carcinoma [38]. In MRI, an MOC tumor appears as a multilocular cystic lesion containing a solid part of intermediate intensity on T2-weighted MR images, hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images, and, with a type-3 enhancement curve, earlier enhancement relative to the myometrial curve. Extra-ovarian spread indicates malignancy [39].

(p9.1) Metastatic mucinous carcinoma from a colorectal origin has a stained glass appearance of a multilocular lesion with loculi on T1-weighted MR images of variable intensity. The amount of solid component differs and necrotic components that are hyperintense with T2-weighted MR images are often seen. Injection of gadolinium displays enhancement of the septa and the solid part when present. This appearance can be similar to MOC; in this case, Seidman criteria are useful to distinguish between diseases [40].
## (s13) Surgical Management
(p13.0) The gold standard surgical management of all EOCs, including MOC, is a staging procedure for early disease and cytoreductive surgery for advanced disease [11,18,19,46]. Staging surgery includes peritoneal washing for cytology, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy, omentectomy, and multiple peritoneal biopsies. In apparent confined disease, the risk of positive cytology and microscopic involvement of the omentum are 5.7% and 1.7%, respectively [12]. Cytoreductive surgery involves removing all measurable disease aiming for microscopic residual disease.
## (s14) Routine Lymphadenectomy
(p14.0) Retroperitoneal lymph nodes assessment is part of the staging surgery in all EOCs [47]. It is understood that the chance of lymph node involvement in grossly confined non-mucinous epithelial carcinoma of the ovary is 20-30%. The role of routine systematic lymphadenectomy in early-stage MOC is, however, debatable.

(p14.1) Hoogendam et al. performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to investigate the role of routine lymphadenectomy for apparent stage I and II and the survival benefit of the procedure. They included 11 observational studies with 278 patients. The risk of lymph node involvement in apparent stage I and II disease when lymph node sampling or lymphadenectomy was performed was 0.8% and 1.2%, respectively. It therefore required 83 lymphadenectomies in apparent early-stage disease to detect one patient with a positive node. Furthermore, the authors could not prove any potential survival advantage. While keeping in mind that this meta-analysis involved small observational studies that were heterogeneous, the authors advised against performing lymphadenectomy for apparent early disease as the risks outweighs the benefits [48]. Schmeler et al. performed a retrospective study to assess the prevalence of lymph node involvement in early-stage MOC. The analysis included 107 patients, in which 51 underwent pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy. They did not find any case of lymph node metastasis [49]. A retrospective observational study by Matsou et al. assessed the impact of lymphadenectomy on survival in early-stage EOC, including 4066 patients with mucinous histology, of which 2210 underwent a lymphadenectomy. Adequate lymphadenectomy enhanced survival in all subtypes except mucinous carcinomas [50].
## (s15) Appendectomy
(p15.0) Appendectomy has been recommended in all mucinous ovarian tumors. Lin et al. performed a retrospective analysis to assess the role of appendectomy in the surgical management of mucinous ovarian tumors. They concluded that the appendix should not be removed unless it is grossly abnormal, as there was no abnormal pathology found in the normal-appearing appendix [52]. A retrospective chart review by A. Cheng et al. assessed 164 patients based on the necessity of an appendectomy in MOC. Among 44 patients with MOC who had an appendectomy, there were 5 unusual looking appendixes with abnormal pathology and one normal-appearing appendix with microscopic involvement by primary MOC. They therefore recommended that careful intraoperative inspection of the appendix is mandatory, but a normal-looking appendix should not be routinely removed [53].

(p15.1) Rosendahl and colleagues evaluated the importance of appendectomy in the surgical staging of MOC. From the Danish Gynecologic Cancer Database, they retrieved data on 269 patients with MOC, of which 172 had an appendectomy. Pathological evaluation exhibited 10 cases of malignant involvement of the appendix (4%), of which 2 had a normal-looking appendix. However, all patients with appendicular involvement had other metastases and this finding did not change the stage. They strongly advised for performing appendectomy for all suspected cases of MOC since a normal-appearing appendix does not exclude metastasis. Additionally, appendectomy was not associated with increased morbidity [54].

(p15.2) Some gynecologic oncologists are still advocating for routine appendectomy as part of surgery for MOC. It is challenging at times to distinguish a primary MOC from metastatic mucinous carcinoma and removal of the appendix might help with the deferential diagnosis and improve staging.
## (s16) Fertility Sparing Staging (FSS)
(p16.0) MOC is the most prevalent epithelial carcinoma among women of reproductive age [8] with 80% of all MOC presenting as stage I [10]. FSS is frequently addressed during the management of such pathology. Gouy et al. looked at the outcome of stage I MOC after FSS, according to histological subtype (expansile and infiltrative). They retrospectively evaluated 21 patients, 12 expansile and 9 infiltrative subtypes. The histological subtype did not influence the oncological outcome. They concluded that FSS is safe for stage I MOC with an excellent prognosis but should not be offered for stage IC3 and beyond [55]. However, Rodriguez et al. reported a worse survival with more relapses with the infiltrative subtype when they evaluated 26 patients with MOC [56]. Bentivegna et al. reported the long-term outcome of over 500 EOC patients treated with FFS. The most common subtype was MOC, with 280 patients. The recurrence rate was 6.8%. The majority recurred as extra-ovarian disease with it being lethal in 63% of patients [57]. It is debatable whether the recurrence was because of preserving the ovary or because of the nature of the disease. The role of FSS should therefore be adequately discussed in these patients.
## (s23) VEGF Inhibitor
(p23.0) The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitor, bevacizumab, has been shown to improve PFS in EOC in the primary setting and in the platinum-sensitive and platinum-resistant recurrence setting. Notably, subgroup analyses revealed that adjuvant bevacizumab improves OS in sub-optimally cytoreduced disease. All phase III bevacizumab EOC trials included a small number of MOCs [84][85][86][87]. It has also exhibited improvement in OS and PFS in metastatic colorectal carcinoma in multiple trials and meta-analyses [88,89].
## (s24) EGFR Monoclonal Antibodies
(p24.0) Cetuximab use results in enhanced response rate and duration of response in the first-line treatment of metastatic CRC in patients where there is EGFR expression and where the tumor is KRAS wild-type [90]. The results of cetuximab on ovarian cancer as a single therapy or in combination with the standard chemotherapy were disappointing [91,92]. However, these phase II trials included all EOC subtypes without specification of KRAS status. Sato et al., in a preclinical study, reported that cetuximab was only able to employ anti-proliferative activity in MOC cell lines, which did not have KRAS mutations [93]. Hence, the value of anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody therapy may be limited to KRAS wild-type cases. Further data is required on the effectiveness of cetuximab on KRAS wild-type MOC.
## (s25) Anti-HER2 Therapy
(p25.0) Anti-HER2 therapy has been proven to be successful in managing HER2-amplified breast cancer [94]. Trastuzumab, a HER2 monoclonal antibody, showed benefits to OS in HER2-positive gastric carcinoma [95]. McAlpine et al. reported the anecdotal efficacy of trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy in 2 out of 3 patients with MOC who had HER2 amplification [96]. Jain et al. published a single case of successful treatment of progressive HER2-positive MOC with trastuzumab and lapatinib [97]. Nevertheless, more data on anti-HER2 therapy in HER2-amplified MOC is needed.
## (s26) Conclusions and Future Direction
(p26.0) MOC is a distinct disease among the EOC subtypes and it is different from GI mucinous carcinoma. This is evident based on its clinical behavior, pathological features, molecular profile, prognosis, and response to the standard treatment. The true incidence of MOC is 3% of all EOCs and it is the most common subtype among young women. Up to 80% of MOCs present as early stage disease, which carries an excellent prognosis. Unfortunately, advanced stage disease is associated with a much poorer prognosis compared to HGSC because of the low response to platinum-based chemotherapy.

(p26.1) However, it is still challenging for pathologists to make a diagnosis of MOC, with up to 60% having metastatic mucinous carcinoma, after central pathology review [42]. Differentiation of primary MOC from metastatic mucinous carcinoma demands cautious microscopic examination. The clinical picture created with Seidman criteria and the IHC profile should help pathologists in reaching an accurate diagnosis. Additionally, the identification of invasive components in an otherwise borderline mucinous tumor requires vigilant assessment. These tumors are usually very large and require judicious sampling.

(p26.2) Some aspects of the surgical management of MOC are still uncertain. Based on the current data, routine pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy can be omitted in grossly confined expansile-type MOC but should be performed in infiltrative type. The necessity of performing an appendectomy is uncertain at present. FFS is an option in young, selected patients after proper counseling. In advanced disease, cytoreductive surgery and the amount of residual disease at the end of the surgery are the most critical factors in prognosis.

(p26.3) While it is known that MOC is chemotherapy-resistant or that it does not respond to the standard chemotherapy regimens, there are no better treatment options available at present. To date, there have been no successful prospective phase II or III randomized clinical trials directed specifically to MOC. Failure of GOG 241 to achieve the targeted accrual is a clear example of how challenging it is to obtain high-level data on rare tumors.

(p26.4) MOCs harbor a variety of molecular alterations that open the door for a potential benefit of a molecularly guided approach. KRAS mutation and HER2 amplification are frequent in MOC and are mutually exclusive. Early data of cetuximab and trastuzumab are promising, but other alterations could also be targeted. Platinum-based chemotherapy can be considered for MOC positive TP53 mutations. Kommoss et al. suggested three subdivisions of MOC based on molecular subtypes, namely: HER2 over amplification, KRAS mutations, and tumors with neither KRAS nor HER2 abnormalities [11]. This categorization may forge new prospects in influencing treatment decisions and novel targeted therapy advancement in this rare type of EOC. Lastly, a project similar to the Genomic Atlas project focusing on MOCs may well be helpful in the understanding and treatment of this disease.
