# plants In Vitro Propagation, Phytochemical and Neuropharmacological Profiles of Bacopa monnieri (L.) Wettst.: A Review

CorpusID: 214731185 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b470ffcac5132a3825a87d58f1ae67ef85bac55b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b470ffcac5132a3825a87d58f1ae67ef85bac55b)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Axillary Shoot Proliferation
(p1.0) The multiplication of shoots for the clonal propagation of B. monnieri have been reported using pre-existing meristems such as nodes and shoot tips derived from both ex vitro (~45% reports) and in vitro grown plants (~16% reports). Among the two types of explants used, nodes have been found to be the better choice of explants for in vitro shoot multiplication ( Table 1). The rate of propagation was found to depend on the type and concentration of cytokinins used in the culture medium. Although three different types of cytokinins such as BA, (N6-benzyladenine) Kn (Kinetin), and TDZ (Thidiazuron), have been used, maximum reports on in vitro propagation (~57%) involved the use of BA alone or in combination with other hormones, whereas the effect of Kn alone or in combination with other PGR was investigated in only 9% of published reports. Apart from hormones, other additives such as algal extract, organic supplements etc. have been used in~12% of published reports to improve the rate of shoot induction in B. monnieri.      100% of cultures showed axillary bud break; 41 shoots/explant after 4-w. 100% shoots formed roots with 24 roots/shoot within 3-4 w. Plantlets acclimatized in a mixture of sand, farmyard manure and soil (1:1:1) irrigated with 1 2 MS medium and finally shifted to shade house. [36] Leaf explants of ex vitro plants MS + 2.0 mg L −1 BA + 0.5 mg L −1 NAA + 3% sucrose (CIM, SIM). 1 2 MS + 2.0 mg L −1 IAA + 2% sucrose (RIM).
## (s2) Organogenesis
(p2.0) In B. monnieri various researchers have reported adventitious bud formation and shoot organogenesis in vitro. However, there are very few reports on callus induction and indirect shoot organogenesis in the species [37,47,53]. The morphogenic potential of plant cells leading to whole plant regeneration is known to depend on both endogenous and exogenous factors [69]. However, the expression of totipotency of cells of excised leaf and stem explants from in vitro B. monnieri plants in plant growth regulator (PGR) free medium makes this species a model system to study the causes of morphogenesis in vitro Figure 1 [65] The rate of shoot organogenesis in B. monnieri among other factors also depends on type and position of explants [65] while Joshi et al. [34] reported both direct and indirect shoot organogenesis depended on the orientation of explants on the shoot induction medium.

(p2.1) Researchers have used explants derived from ex vitro and in vitro grown plants for micropropagation of B. monnieri ( Table 1). The morphogenic potential of leaf and internode explants was found to enhance significantly in terms of both the frequency and rate of shoot organogenesis when cultured in the presence of exogenous hormones or growth regulators. Researchers have used explants derived from ex vitro and in vitro grown plants for micropropagation of B. monnieri ( Table 1). The morphogenic potential of leaf and internode explants was found to enhance significantly in terms of both the frequency and rate of shoot organogenesis when cultured in the presence of exogenous hormones or growth regulators.
## (s3) Organogenesis from In Vitro Derived Explants
(p3.0) Nearly 20% of the published reports on micropropagation of B. monnieri have used leaf and internode explants from in vitro grown plants for whole plant regeneration through direct shoot organogenesis. Tiwari et al. [21] reported direct adventitious shoot regeneration (~80 shoots/leaf explants) on MS [67] medium supplemented with BA (6-benzylamino purine). In a later publication, Tiwari et al. [24] reported the rate of adventitious shoot bud formation was enhanced (93 shoot buds/leaf explant in seven days) using TDZ instead of BA in shoot induction medium (SIM). After three subcultures on shoot multiplication medium (SMM) containing BA yielded a higher number (~130) of adventitious shoot buds/leaf explant.
## (s4) Organogenesis from In Vitro Derived Explants
(p4.0) Nearly 20% of the published reports on micropropagation of B. monnieri have used leaf and internode explants from in vitro grown plants for whole plant regeneration through direct shoot organogenesis. Tiwari et al. [21] reported direct adventitious shoot regeneration (~80 shoots/leaf explants) on MS [67] medium supplemented with BA (6-benzylamino purine). In a later publication, Tiwari et al. [24] reported the rate of adventitious shoot bud formation was enhanced (93 shoot buds/leaf explant in seven days) using TDZ instead of BA in shoot induction medium (SIM). After three subcultures on shoot multiplication medium (SMM) containing BA yielded a higher number (~130) of adventitious shoot buds/leaf explant.
## (s5) Organogenesis from Ex Vitro Derived Explants
(p5.0) Shoot regeneration using leaf and internode explants excised from ex vitro plants has been demonstrated in nearly 36% of the published reports. Optimum shoot regeneration (110 shoots/leaf explant) was reported by Binita et al. [26] within three weeks of culture on medium supplemented with BA and IAA (Indole-3-acetic acid). Using Kinetin (Kn) instead of BA, Praveen et al. [31] obtained shoot induction and proliferation to a maximum frequency of 155 shoots/leaf explant after 18 weeks. Kn has been used similarly to induce high frequency shoot regeneration in leaf explants by Umesh et al. [53], while shoot induction frequency was low with 2ip (N6-2-isopentenyl adenine) [72]. On the other hand, in internode explant, significantly higher shoot induction (324 shoots/internode explant) was obtained in a combination of BA and Kn after three subcultures [29]. It can be concluded that both internode and leaf explants derived from ex vitro plants show significantly higher potential for micropropagation (155-324 shoots/explant) than similar explants derived from in vitro plants.
## (s7) Clonal Fidelity and Phytochemical Analysis in In Vitro Propagated Plants
(p7.0) Somaclonal variations are known to occur in tissue culture raised plants particularly where whole plants regenerated via callus induction and dedifferentiation [73] using different explants [74]. Cytogenetic analysis and molecular markers are frequently used to determine the genetic fidelity of in vitro propagated plants in many species. Cytogenetic analysis of micropropagated plants of B. monnieri (2n = 64) have not been reported to date owing to perhaps small chromosome size and high number [75]. However, it is possible to avoid somaclonal variations often associated with tissue culture regeneration in vitro in B. monnieri as large scale propagation via direct organogenesis as well as axillary bud multiplications has been optimized by a large number of researchers.
## (s8) Culture in Bioreactors
(p8.0) Bioreactor based micropropagation was found to increase the multiplication rate of shoot cultures using nodal segments, for commercial propagation of B. monnieri plants [38,56]. Jain et al. [38] reported enhanced biomass production in Growtek ® bioreactor with 10% aeration using nodal explants. Maximum growth index (10.0) with~2000 shoots/L and 16.5 g/L DW was recorded when cultured on liquid MS medium fortified with 2.5 mg L −1 BA and 0.01 mg L −1 IAA. In another study, using airlift bioreactor, nearly 443 shoots proliferated from~48.33 excised shoots after four weeks of culture in liquid MS medium (1.5 l) supplemented with 1 mg L −1 BA (Sharma et al. [56]. Investigations on biosynthesis of bacosides (A 2 + A 3 ) in in vitro shoot cultures of B. monnieri grown in two bioreactor systems, i.e., Growtek ® (1 L) and modified bench top air lift bioreactor (5 L) revealed that the maximum content was obtained in shoot biomass using ALB system (10.15 mg g −1 DW) as compared to Growtek ® culture (6.08 mg g −1 DW) due to higher aeration facility for improved oxygen transfer during bacoside synthesis [56]. Thus, further studies using bioreactors can be explored for the commercial production of bacosides in mass propagated shoot cultures.
## (s11) Pharmacological Activities
(p11.0) B. monnieri is an excellent medicinal plant which offers numerous promising pharmacological activities that are useful in treating of many complex diseases/disorders. Some of the prominent bioactivities are anti-inflammatory, antiamneatic, nootropic, cardioprotective, neuroprotective/antioxidant, hepatoprotective, anti-Alzheimer's, anti-aging, memory enhancing, anti-tumor, anti-arthritic, cytotoxic, and chemo-preventive (Table 3). These bioactivities have been discussed in the following sections, with brief information presented about their mechanisms. Neuroprotective Rat brain exposed to cigarette smoke 10 mg/kg/day for 12 weeks [105] Anti-oxidant Rat brain exposed to cigarette smoke 10 mg/kg/day for 12 weeks [106] Anti-epileptic Pilocarpine-induced epileptic rats 150 mg/kg/day for 15 days [18] B. monnieri n-butanol extract Acquisition and expression of morphine tolerance Mice 15 mg/kg for 7 days [107] B. monnieri alcohol extract Cognitive function enhancer and neuroprotective Male Wister rats induced by ethylcholine aziridinium ion (AF64A) 40 mg/kg for two weeks [108] 
## (s12) Anti-Oxidant Properties
(p12.0) Antioxidants have been documented to prevent oxidative damage from free radicals responsible for a number of human disorders such as arthrosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, arthritis, Alzheimer's disease, ischemia gastritis and AIDS [80,109]. The antioxidant properties of Bacopa can offer protection against free radical damage in cardiovascular disease and certain types of cancer [110]. Reportedly, bacosides scavenge free radicals such as superoxides, peroxides and hydroxyl radicals.

(p12.1) Antioxidant effects of alcoholic and hexane extract of B. monnieri on lipid peroxidation by cumene hydroperoxide and ferrous sulphate is reported in rat homogenate liver [111]. Bacosides were found to have antioxidant activity in the hippocampus, frontal cortex and striatum on the basis of animal studies [112] and to modulate the expression of certain enzymes involved in generation and scavenging of reactive oxygen species in the brain and demonstrated that bacoside A3 had an inhibitory effect on superoxides released from polymorphonuclear cells in a nitroblue tetrazolium assay in the hydroalcoholic extract of the whole plant [113]. Sumathy et al. [114] reported the hepatoprotective activity of its orally administered alcoholic extract on the liver antioxidant status of morphine-treated rats. The defensive function of methanolic extract in rat astrocyte culture against the toxicity caused by the NO donor (S-nitroso-Nacetyl-penicillamine, SNAP), thus preventing DNA damage [2]. Janani et al. [104] reported the neuroprotective effect of the herb against aluminum triggered oxidative stress in the rat brain hippocampus. The free radical scavenging activity of the plant's methanolic extract provided protection against DNA damage in non-immortalized fibroblasts human [115].
## (s13) Anti-Cancer/Cytotoxic Properties
(p13.0) The ethanolic extract of B. monnieri contains bacoside A and B, betulinic acid, brahmine, and cucurbitacins, among which cucurbitacins have strong anti-tumorigenic and anti-proliferative activity by inducing cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase and formation of multiplied cells. Mallick et al. [116] reported the cytotoxic activity of ethanolic extract of dichloromethane (DCM) fraction of B. monnieri on two different cell lines such as MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 due to the presence of cucuebitacins and betulinic acid in DCM fraction. B. monnieri extracts induces cell death by apoptosis in murine sarcoma-180 cell culture [98]. Two new dammarane glycosides, the 20-deoxy derivatives of pseudojujubogenin along with eight novel compounds were isolated and tested them for cytotoxic, antileishmanial, anti-inflammatory, antimalarial activities. Some of these compounds demonstrated mild to moderate activity against non-cancerous kidney cell lines [117]. In addition, compared to bacoside B fraction, bacoside A fraction and its individual components were found to be more active [118]. B. monnieri shows curative and protective effects on gastric ulcers due to its improved mucosal activity in brine shrimp lethality assay (an assay that is predictive of potential anticancer activity) [119,120].
## (s14) Anti-Inflammatory Properties
(p14.0) B. monnieri effectively suppressed experimentally induced inflammatory reaction effect by inhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandin and partly by stabilizing lysosomal membranes and did not cause gastric irritation at anti-inflammatory doses [121,122]. Methanol extract of the whole plant produced significant writhing inhibition in acetic acid induced writhing in mice at the oral dose of 250 and 500 mg/kg (P < 0.001) comparable to 25 mg/kg diclofenac sodium [123]. The anti-inflammatory effects of the different extracts of B. monnieri on carrageenan induced edema in the hind paws of rats were investigated. The methanol extract and aqueous fractions (100 mg/kg) showed a significant decrease in the volume of edema paw, whereas hexane extracts and petroleum ether didn't reduce inflammation [124].
## (s15) Gastrointestinal Properties
(p15.0) The antidiarrheal effect on castor oil induced diarrhea in mice was shown in the ethanol extract of the whole plant of B. monnieri. It increased mean latent period and significantly decreased the frequency of defecation at the oral dose of 500 mg/kg comparable to 50 mg/kg loperamide [123]. It shows curative and protective effect on gastric ulcers due to its effect on mucosal defensive factors like enhanced mucin secretion, mucosal glycoprotein and decreased cell shedding rather than on offensive factors such as acid and pepsin [125]. The Bacopa extract standardized for bacoside-A was evaluated in five models of gastric ulcers in rats for its prophylactic and healing effects. Bacopa extract significantly healed an ulcer induced by acetic acid at a dosage of 20 mg/kg for 10 days, decreased mucosal exfoliation, and significantly strengthened the mucosal barrier [126].
## (s16) Anti-Alzheimer's Properties
(p16.0) Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder of the brain that is characterized by impairment of memory and eventually by disturbances in reasoning, planning, language, and perception [127]. Currently, there is no drug or therapy available as a definite solution for the treatment of AD except two main classes of drugs, namely acetyl cholin esterase inhibitors (AChEI) for the treatment of mild to moderate AD and glutamate modulators only for moderate to severe AD [128]. One of the most important approaches for the treatment of AD involves the enhancement of acetylcholine level in the brain using AchEI inhibitors. The ethanol extract of B. monnieri contain bacoside A, which has been used for memory and intellectual improvement. Clinical trial reported that when 300 mg of standardized B. monnieri extract was taken orally twice a day for six months results in improvement in cognitive functions of patients suffering from AD [129]. The in vivo study of ethanol extract of B. monnieri was done in male albino rat (225-250 g) in which the oral dose of (100 mg/kg body weight) ethanol extracts given over the 15 days and it inhibits the function of acetylcholinesterase differentially in various brain regions viz. cerebral cortex (51.6%) > CEREBELLUM (51%) > PONS (44%) > THALAMUS (41.6%) > HIPPOCAMPUS (38.1%) > BRAIN stem (34.3%) > STRIATUM (24.9%) [100].
