# The Role of Tachykinins in the Initiation and Progression of Gastrointestinal Cancers: A Review

CorpusID: 218919959 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec874fc2f2cb1f98df5ad8be6d7e5586d28fd2ef](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec874fc2f2cb1f98df5ad8be6d7e5586d28fd2ef)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Context
(p0.0) Tachykinins (TKs) are an evolutionarily conserved family of peptide hormones, which are widely distributed within the peripheral and central nervous systems. Various types of TKs are produced from more significant precursors, named preprotachykinins (1). The tachykinin peptide family shares the typical carboxyl-terminal sequence, -Phe-X-Gly-Leu-Met-NH2, where X is a variable amino acid residue (2,3). Several lines of evidence showed that the TAC1 gene produces substance P (SP) and neurokinin A (NKA), which are the most critical TKs family. Additionally, NKB and NKF are encoded by the TAC3 gene, and the TAC4 gene encodes two other important TKs named hemokinin-1 and different kinds of endokinins (EK-A to EK-D) in various tissues, including heart, liver, and placenta (4,5).
## (s7) TKs and Hepatocellular Carcinoma
(p7.0) Hepatocellular carcinoma is the most lethal and common primary malignant tumor of the liver in patients who already have signs of early or advanced chronic liver diseases (66,67). Several studies are supporting the significantly higher expression of the TACR1 gene in human hepatoblastoma patients compared to healthy control (68)(69)(70). For instance, Berger et al. (68) showed that tr-NK1R is highly 4 Int J Cancer Manag. 2020; 13(5):e100717.

(p7.1) overexpressed in all hepatoblastoma cell lines. Furthermore, Garnier et al. (69) reported that tr-NK1R overexpression has no significant correlation with the tumor characteristics. Taken together, these findings strongly suggest that tr-NK1R overexpression may be served as a useful marker to predict the prognosis of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, independent of tumor biology and clinical stage. Consistently, Ilmer et al. (70) showed that administration of aprepitant (40 µM for 24 hours), dose and time-dependently, suppressed the phosphorylation and activation of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, as well as liver stemness markers, which consequently enhanced liver fibrosis in hepatoblastoma cell lines. Liver transplantation (LT), which eliminates the hepatic carcinoma and treats the hepatic insufficiency, is the selective treatment of some patients with HCC. In line with this, Lorente et al. (71) found that a positive correlation between increased circulating levels of serum SP before LT and mortality during the first year of LT. Collectively, these results suggest that serum SP levels before LT can be used to estimate one-year survival prognosis.

(p7.2) Additionally, other recent studies have revealed that SP/NK1R system plays a vital role in the cellular senescence of hepatic stellate cells. Consistently, Wan et al. (72) showed that the administration of an NK1R antagonist (20 mg/kg) in a bile duct ligated mice induce hepatic stellate cell senescence, which is associated with reduced liver function, fibrosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.
