# A Comprehensive Survey on CAPTCHA and VRP

CorpusID: 21748353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5000bdde63b3be8a977e2ffdf2fc33e329214e13](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5000bdde63b3be8a977e2ffdf2fc33e329214e13)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) A basic aim of the security is to create cryptographic and highly non forgeable primitives based on hard mathematical formulations that are computationally intractable. For example, the integer factorization problem is basic to the RSA public-key cryptographic system. In the past decade, the use of online banking and online transactions i.e. in E-Commerce have rapidly increased and Using difficult (Artificial Intelligence) AI challenges for security using CAPTCHA, Graphical Passwords, initially proposed in [7], is an exciting new paradigm. Under this innovative style, the mostly used technique for security invented is Captcha, which distinguishes human users from computers by presenting a challenge, i.e., a puzzle. Many techniques fail to achieve immunity towards shoulder surfing attacks and therefor makes the system vulnerable to attacks and thus making the password styles insecure.

(p0.1) Beginning from around 1999 [3], various graphical password schemes evolved as alternatives or an option to simple and text-based password authentication. This paper provides a comprehensive and analytical overview of published research work in this domain, analyzing the both the features such as usability, security aspects, and along with that system evaluation. This survey first documents the existing or already prevailing approaches, enlightening new and innovative features of the particular styles and determining the key features of usability ease or security advantages. This survey the takes into account the usability parameters for knowledge-based authorization and authentication as being applied to pictorial secure passwords, detect the security issues getting addressed that these techniques must verify and analyze, discuss technical issues concerned with performance evaluation, and detect the research areas for further study and improvement. With textual passwords or credentials, users try out for unsafe coping strategies, like making use of same passwords for multiple transactional accounts to avoid forgetting the passwords and avoiding memorizing different passwords for different accounts, change in security level cannot be alone addressed by the underlying technical security of the system. Major issues that actually impact significantly in real life are about usability. GUI design approaches and strategies may intentionally or unintentionally sway users' tendency or behavior towards less secure transactional behaviors. Thus these powerful and most secure applications must constraint high GUI related constraints based on essential research work considering the capabilities and shortcomings of the targeted users. In pictorial passwords, human tendency for memorizing visual passwords or objects will facilitate the optimal selection and appropriate use of highly secure and passwords that have very less predictability, refraining users from unsafe practices.
## (s4) A. Recognition style Passwords:
(p4.0) In this category, during registering to the system, users have to select images, icons or symbols from a collection of images. At the time of authentication, the users need to recognize their images, symbols or icons which are selected at the time of registration among a set of images. Researches were done to find the memorability of these passwords and it shows that the users can remember their passwords even after 45 days [4].
## (s8) One Time Password Security Measure
(p8.0) A one-time password (OTP) [6] is a password as the name suggests that is valid for authentication of only one login session or transaction with the system. OTPs avoid a number of limitations or shortcomings that are related with alphanumeric traditional and commonly used (static) passwords. The major limitation or shortcoming that is noticed or overcome by OTPs is, in contrast to commonly used alphanumeric static passwords, they are not vulnerable or prone to replay attacks. That means even a potential intruder who can manage to record an OTP somehow if possible, that was already previously used to log into the Licensed Under Creative Commons Attribution CC BY system or a service or to conduct a transaction will not be able to forge it, since it will be no longer valid for transaction. On the other side, OTPs are also quite difficult for us to memorize for longer time. Therefore they require additional technology to work. How to generate OTP and distribute to the particular user? OTP generation and distribution algorithms generally make use of pseudo randomness or randomness. This is essential because if we don't do so, it would be very simple and easy to predict future generated OTPs by observing and analyzing the previous ones. Concrete and random OTP algorithms vary greatly in their workings.

(p8.1) There are also various mediums or ways to make the user aware of the next OTP to use. Some OTP generation systems [7] use special equipment or electronic security tokens which user carries and then these systems generate OTPs and show it using a small LCD display. Other OTP Generation systems consists of some kind of software that runs on the user's or client's mobile phone. But the most secure and lasting systems generate OTPs on the server-side and then send these OTPs to the user using some out-of-band communication channels such as SMS or emails. Finally, in some banking transaction and activation systems, OTPs are printed on secure barcoded paper which user has to carry.

(p8.2) Certain type cryptographic algorithms in the communication networks, by their mathematical properties cannot be forged by brute-force. The best example of this secure way is the one-time password algorithm (OTP) [7], where every plain text bit has a corresponding and equivalent key bit. One-time passwords or OTPs depend on the capability to generate the actual new and very unique random sequence of key bits. A brute force attack would gradually reveal the actual decoding, and also all the other possible combinations of bits, and would have no way of differentiating one from the another. A very small, i.e. 100-byte, one-time-password encoded string considered for a brute force attack would literally reveal every 100-byte string possible, including the actual OTP as an answer, but with least probability. Here the analysis of one-time password algorithm for a secure transactions over network available today based on mobile authentication or email authentication is completed and also the analysis of the possible attacks over the one-time password algorithms have studied.

(p8.3) In the existing (OTP) [7] one-time password algorithm, java Mobile midlet is a client application and we further assume that the client application runs in client's mobile phones/cellphones which will be able to receive one time passwords during login requests. A MIDlet is a java based application that makes use of the Mobile Information Device Profile (MIDP) of the technology called Connected Limited Device Configuration (CLDC) for the Java Mobile Environment (ME). Typical applications using MIDLets include games running on mobile devices or other handheld devices and cell phones which have small graphical displays, simple numeric or alphanumeric keypad interfaces and limited but allowable network access over HTTP. The whole design resembles the two prime protocols used by Java system. Initially, the user has to download the clients (Java MIDlet) to his mobile phone or other handheld devices. Then the client application can executes a request to register with both the server and the service provider utilizing server system for generating OTP and user authentication. Post successful execution of user activation request, the user can run the authentication request in future for an unlimited number of times.
## (s9) Pervasive Cued Click Points
(p9.0) Existing graphical systems have clearly showed that image hotspots are more prone to be guessed, which leads to very less secure image or graphical passwords and thereby increase the security breach using dictionary attacks [10].

(p9.1) The study determined if password choosing ability could be affected by making users to choose any random click-points but still managing the usability. The proposed system goal is to compel compliance by making the insecure task (i.e., choosing weak or poor strength passwords) more and more time-consuming and difficult. Thus, path of resistance for being secure became less. So using the predefined CCP as a base system, this system additionally introduced a persuasive feature to make the users to select more secure passwords, and to make it more difficult to select passwords which will avoid all five click points to be hotspots, especially when the person trying to login in created the password and the image was shaded for creating the viewport. The viewport, in actual, is placed randomly instead of particular sequence, so as to avoid the commonly used hotspots, as this kind of information can be widely utilized by the dictionary attackers which can also consequently create new hotspots.

(p9.2) [10]The actual viewports' size was intentionally kept so as to offer a different variety of click points but also cover only the acceptably small amount or a fraction of all the possible points to be clicked. Users were required to select a clickpoint within this highlighted viewport and could not click outside of this viewport. If they were unwilling or unable to select a click-point in this region, they could press the "shuffle" button to randomly reposition the viewport. While users were allowed to shuffle as often as they wanted, this significantly slowed the password creation process. The viewport and shuffle buttons only appeared during password creation. During password confirmation and login, the images were displayed normally, without shading or the viewport and users were allowed to click anywhere.
