# Cancer treatment-related bone loss: a review and synthesis of the literature

CorpusID: 2186762 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc00aba597e219405b50983ec4570162b1bbb0f5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cc00aba597e219405b50983ec4570162b1bbb0f5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Osteoporosis is characterized by a decline in bone mineral density (BMD) and an associated deterioration of bone microarchitecture, resulting in increased bone fragility and higher fracture risk 1 . Osteoporotic fractures result in increased morbidity and mortality, with men experiencing higher mortality rates following a hip fracture (close to 40% within the first year of the fracture). Oncology patients are at an increased risk of developing osteoporosis because of the effects of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Hormonal and non-hormonal treatment options can both also result in hypogonadism, which can further contribute to progressive bone loss.
## (s7) Antiresorptive Therapy
(p7.0) SERMs: The SERM class of agents demonstrates tissuespecific estrogen-agonistic or estrogen-antagonistic effects 30 . In the Multiple Outcomes of Raloxifene Evaluation trial, patients treated with either 60 mg or 120 mg raloxifene daily for 4 years demonstrated a 36% and 43% reduction in vertebral fracture risk respectively 31 . However, no significant effect on the risk of non-vertebral fractures was noted 31 . The latter finding may have been the result of multiple factors, including the very low incidence of non-vertebral fractures seen in the placebo arm of this trial, as compared with incidences seen in the randomized clinical trials for other antiresorptives.

(p7.1) In the Study of Tamoxifen and Raloxifene, involving 19,747 postmenopausal women with increased risk of breast cancer, 60 mg raloxifene daily demonstrated breast cancer risk reduction effects equivalent to 20 mg tamoxifen daily over 5 years 32 . (Both drugs reduce the risk of breast cancer by approximately 50%.) Raloxifene was associated with a better overall safety profile than tamoxifen was, with 36% fewer uterine cancers and 29% fewer deep vein thromboses 32 .

(p7.2) Bisphosphonates: Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates (alendronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid) demonstrate antiresorptive effects by binding to the calcium hydroxylapatite crystal at sites of bone resorption where the bone matrix is exposed 33 . The bisphosphonate is buried under the newly formed bone, where it lies inert and has no skeletal effects. During bone resorption, the drug is released from the bone matrix and is ingested by osteoclasts; it inhibits farnesyl diphosphate synthase (FDPS), a key enzyme in the cholesterol synthesis pathway involved in posttranslational modification of important signalling molecules (Ras, Rac, Rho, and Rab). The FDPS inhibition disrupts several pathways involved in cytoskeletal organization, cell survival, and cell proliferation, leading to osteoclast deactivation and apoptosis 34 . The result is reduced bone turnover and enhanced bone mineralization because of the extended time available for mineral accumulation. With the normalization of bone remodelling to premenopausal levels, overall bone strength is improved 34,35 .
## (s9) RANKL Inhibitors:
(p9.0) Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody to RANKL; it binds to human S36 RANKL, thus preventing osteoclast activation and subsequently reducing bone resorption. A phase II study reported by McClung et al. demonstrated that denosumab was well-tolerated and had an effect on bone turnover similar to that of alendronate 67 . As compared with patients who received placebo, patients treated with denosumab experienced significantly increased BMD. Subcutaneous administration of the drug in doses of either 30 mg every 3 months, or 60 mg every 6 months, resulted in sustained decreases in urinary N-telopeptide excretion 67 .

(p9.1) In addition, denosumab has been shown to effectively reduce bone turnover in patients with metastatic bone disease, with effects comparable to those of intravenous pamidronate 68 . This agent is currently being evaluated further in oncology patients with metastatic skeletal disease and in patients with postmenopausal osteoporosis. It is expected to become a valuable additional option in the management of those conditions.
## (s13) Available Guidelines
(p13.0) International guidelines have been published providing recommendations for skeletal protection in oncology patients, including guidelines from the American Society for Clinical Oncology. A 2007 consensus statement published by the Belgian Bone Club provides recommendations for the management of bone loss induced by cancer treatment in early breast and prostate cancer 87 . Their recommendations include assessment of fracture risk and bone density testing by dual X-ray absorptiometry for all women beginning medical castration therapy or aromatase therapy. All men beginning androgen deprivation therapy should similarly be evaluated for risk of osteoporosis. Monitoring of BMD every 1-2 years for osteoporotic and osteopenic patients is recommended. In individuals with a normal baseline BMD, that assessment is recommended be repeated every 2-5 years, depending on the presence of other risk factors. Lifestyle modification with appropriate calcium and vitamin D supplementation is also recommended. Further evaluation to exclude secondary causes of osteoporosis such as vitamin D deficiency, hyperparathyroidism, or hyperthyroidism is recommended to ensure that no other factors are contributing to bone loss apart from androgen deprivation therapy or induction of hypogonadism.

(p13.1) Bisphosphonate therapy is recommended for osteoporotic individuals with a T score of -2.5 or lower, or a history of a fragility fracture. Bisphosphonates are also recommended for individuals who have important risk factors for fracture and osteopenia with a T score between -1 and -2.5. In the latter case, the recommendations suggest zoledronic acid 4 mg every 6 months for patients receiving AIs and zoledronic acid 4 mg annually or alendronate weekly for patients receiving androgen deprivation therapy.
