# Imaging spectrum of meningiomas: a review of uncommon imaging appearances and their histopathological and prognostic significance

CorpusID: 211212834 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83758f0b33e48fb230a813284800c12c91666979](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83758f0b33e48fb230a813284800c12c91666979)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Meningiomas are the most common primary non-glial intracranial neoplasms, constituting about one-third of all central nervous system (CNS) tumours and about 16 to 20% of all intracranial neoplasms [1]. Meningiomas are easily detectable on imaging studies such as computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). They usually have characteristic imaging appearances and locations, enabling a straightforward radiological diagnosis. However, a myriad of unusual appearances potentially complicate the imaging picture and pose a diagnostic dilemma. Furthermore, subtle features on imaging give clues to predict the specific histopathological nature and World Health Organisation (WHO) grade of the meningio ma. This radiological information would be expected to help surgeons improve surgical planning prior to biopsy and thereby improve patient management.

(p0.1) According to recent data from worldwide registries, the annual incidence of meningiomas lies between 1.28 and 7.8 per 100,000 [2]. The prevalence of meningiomas ranges between 50.4 and 70.7 per 100,000 [3]. It shows a significant female preponderance and is predominantly a tumour of old age. Although most meningiomas are histologically benign, the five-year survival rate of meningiomas is less than 70% and further declines with increasing patient age [4]. The long latent period and asymptomatic nature of slow-growing tumours are responsible for significant delays in diagnosis and management of meningiomas.
## (s2) Imaging features of meningioma variants
(p2.0) Over 80% of meningiomas are of the meningothelial, fibrous, or transitional subtypes, with the meningothelial subtype comprising about 58% of cases [10]. These are the so-called 'typical' meningiomas. The remaining subtypes are the uncommon 'atypical' subtypes.
## (s7) Psammomatous variant
(p7.0) This variant is characterised by the presence of psammoma bodies on histology. On imaging, the characteristic feature of this variant is the prominent dense intratumoural calcification, present either diffusely or in the periphery of the meningioma. Spinal meningiomas, particularly those in the thoracic spine, show a propensity to psammomatous histology [13]. The calcification is easily visualised as prominent hyperdense areas on NECT and as prominent areas of signal loss (blooming) on gradient echo (GRE) or susceptibility weighted (SWI) sequences ( Figure 4). Strong post-contrast enhancement is seen in the non-calcified parts of the tumour.
## (s8) Angiomatous variant
(p8.0) This is a rare subtype of meningioma with a male preponderance characterised by a predominance of large blood vessels on histology. Prominent internal and peritumoral flow voids are visible on MRI. An extra-axial space-occupying lesion with large and prominent feeding vessels are appreciable on post-contrast scans. CT angiography (CTA) and MR angiography (MRA) can depict the extensive network of enlarged intratumoural and peritumoural feeding vessels of the tumour ( Figure 5). Vivid post-contrast enhancement and disproportionately large peritumoral oedema are other characteristic features of this subtype [14]. Despite the aggressive appearance of this variant, the prognosis is relatively good.
## (s9) Microcystic variant
(p9.0) This is the rarest histological subtype of meningioma and is characterised by intratumoural microcystic spaces on histology. It has a characteristic hypodense or isodense appearance on NECT, in contrast to the hyperdense appearance of other meningiomas. On MRI, distinctive prominent hypointensity on T1W has been identified as the only significant predictor of microcystic subtype [15]. Post-contrast reticular enhancement is also characteristic of this subtype ( Figure 6), although it is only seen in 30% of cases.
## (s10) Secretory variant
(p10.0) Pseudo-psammoma bodies (intracellular eosinophilic inclusions) characterise this subtype of meningioma on histology. It shows a predilection for skull base location. The distinguishing feature of the secretory variant on imaging is the characteristic intense hyperintensity on T2W, which is seen in up to 96% of cases [16]. In many cases, the intensity of the tumour on T2W nearly parallels that of CSF ( Figure 7).
## (s11) Lymphoplasmacyte-rich variant
(p11.0) This is a rare subtype presenting in relatively young patients with secondary hypergammaglobulinaemia and anaemia. Chronic inflammatory infiltrates characterise the histological picture. On imaging it forms a characteristic en-plaque pattern with irregular margins extending along the dura, which appears isodense to hyperdense on NECT and isointense to hypointense on T1WI. It has variable signal intensity on T2WI. Post-contrast scan shows intense homogeneous enhancement ( Figure 8). Another characteristic feature is the presence of diffusion restriction, in contrast to other WHO grade I meningiomas. Underlying brain parenchyma commonly shows oedema and cystic changes [17]. Although the appearance is characteristic in relation to other types of meningiomas, the en-plaque lesion itself potentially has a large spectrum of differentials such as hypertrophic pachymeningitis, histiocytic disorders, tubercular pachymeningitis, connective tissue disorders, neurosarcoidosis, and lymphoma, from which it may sometimes be indistinguishable on the basis of imaging alone.
## (s12) Metaplastic variants
(p12.0) Histologically, this variant is characterised by the presence of focal or diffuse mesenchymal components, which may be osseous, chondroid, myxoid, lipomatous, or xanthomatous in nature. Imaging features are variable and depend on the mesenchymal component present. Usually specific features of mesenchymal components are superimposed on a background of tumour tissue, with typical imaging characteristics of a meningioma. For instance, xanthomatous meningioma shows diffuse hypodensity on NECT with focal areas of fat attenuation and small fat components on MRI ( Figure 9). Lipomatous variant, a close differential on imaging, shows larger areas of intratumoural fat [18].
## (s15) Clear cell variant
(p15.0) This subtype is histologically comprised of polygonal cells with clear cytoplasm. It shows a predilection for younger patients and cerebellopontine (CP) angle location (Figure 11). Usually these tumours show a heterogeneous enhancement pattern. Peritumoral oedema and cyst formation in the underlying brain parenchyma is common. Being a WHO grade II tumour, osteolysis of the underlying bones is more common than hyperostosis [20], and hence this feature cannot be used to differentiate CP angle clear cell meningioma from the more common CP angle tumour, acoustic schwannoma. However, certain imaging clues do exist, which can be used to differentiate them (Table 1) [21].
## (s16) Atypical variant and WHO grade III meningiomas
(p16.0) Atypical subtype of grade II and all three subtypes of grade III meningiomas can essentially be differentiated only based on histopathology and cannot be definitively differentiated from each other on imaging. However, on the basis of imaging findings, a prediction of high-grade meningioma can be made by the radiologist [22]. They occur in relatively old patients and show a male predominance. Imaging features predicting a high-grade meningioma include an extra-axial mass showing irregular tumour margins with indistinct tumour-brain interfaces, lack of sharply defined enhancement margins, heterogeneous signal intensity and enhancement pattern, eccentric intratumoural necrosis, extensive peritumoral oedema, definite invasion of underlying brain parenchyma, and destruction of the overlying bone ( Figure 12).   In contrast to grade I and other grade II meningiomas, these show diffusion restriction [23]. On dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI, the volume transfer constant K trans shows higher values as compared to other meningiomas. MRS may be necessary for confirmation if conventional imaging findings are not sufficiently diagnostic of meningioma and it shows an alanine peak (specific) and glutamine/glutamate peak in the tumour. Important differentials of high-grade meningiomas include haemangiopericytoma (differentiated from meningioma by the presence of myoinositol peak on MRS) and metastases (usually differentiated from meningioma by the presence of multiple lesions). The main differentiating features on imaging of the various histopathological subtypes of meningiomas are shown in Table 2. 
## (s17) Uncommon locations of meningioma
(p17.0) Common locations of meningiomas include parasagittal region (Figure 13), cerebral convexity (Figure 1), and sphenoid wing (Figure 12), which account for about 70% of meningiomas. Meningiomas can also occur in several uncommon intracranial and extracranial locations and need to be distinguished from the more common tumours of these regions on imaging [11]: 
## (s18) Oedematous brain changes in meningioma
(p18.0) Oedema has been reported to be associated with meningiomas in as many as 60% of cases [24] and is usually vasogenic in nature. Oedema is most frequently associated with microcystic, angiomatous, and lymphoplas-macyte-rich variants. It is least common in the posterior fossa location of meningiomas. There are some imaging findings that predict occurrence of oedema [25]:
## (s19) Haemorrhagic changes in meningioma
(p19.0) Haemorrhage in meningioma is uncommon. It is more common in the fibrous variant of meningioma. Intraventricular and convexity location of meningiomas show a higher propensity to haemorrhage. It has no association with the angiomatous subtype or the grade of meningioma [26]. Diagnosis is usually straightforward on NECT or GRE/SWI sequences on MRI ( Figure 22).
