# Trends and applications of resilience analytics in supply chain modeling: systematic literature review in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic

CorpusID: 218988656 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57350288f90b899a5ce11a0c4815b6fb2efba610](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57350288f90b899a5ce11a0c4815b6fb2efba610)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s12) Integration of components of resilience in general
(p12.0) While much of the recent literature discusses resilience in terms similar to the four resilience characteristics defined by NAS (plan, absorb, recover, adapt), a number of authors focus on individual elements and do not offer a comprehensive understanding of supply chain resilience in their models and metrics. In order to advance resilience analytics, and  to accurately model the resilience of supply chains, especially to systemic disruptions, a comprehensive definition of resilience must be used across the literature. Figure 4a and b analyze the occurrence of the four characteristics of resilience as defined by NAS-plan, absorb, recover, adapt. Figure 4a shows the occurrence rate of each characteristic of supply chain resilience in the supply chain resilience publications. If each publication consistently defined and modeled resilience, each of the four bars would be at 100%. Figure 4b expresses the number of supply chain resilience characteristics referenced per publication reviewed (0 to 4).

(p12.1) As is evident in Fig. 4b, more than half of the papers reviewed neglected to include all four characteristics of resilience within the definition or understanding of the concept of supply chain resilience put forth versus about 30% just two years prior. One example is Kristianto (2017), who defined the goal of a resilient global manufacturing supply chain to be simply reaching a stable condition following internal or external changes affecting system performance.
## (s15) Representation of information networks and command and control structures
(p15.0) While many aspects of the supply chain are now managed according to advancements in technology, a central decision maker remains essential for supply chain function, and ultimately responsible for the application of resilience analytics to the supply chain. As Fig. 7 depicts, 20 of the 2017-2019 papers either ignored the command and control (C2) network completely or assumed that decisions about the supply chain movements would not change (Gabler et al. Optimization is a more robust decision control framework for its ability to combine multiple objectives into network design. However, completely removing the human decision-making element can also create risk. Sahu et al. (2017) address this by combining an optimization model with managerial oversight. In this model, the optimization model solves for the weakest performing area of the supply chain and the manager has to adapt and implement the changes.
## (s19) Geo-economic analysis
(p19.0) This literature review further analyzes the geographic differentiation among the publications reviewed that were published between 2017 and 2019. Supply chains, industry types, and disruption threat levels are subject to the location from which they originate and with which they operate. Certain countries or regions are hubs for certain industries, political threats, or climatic threats, and could affect the supply chain resilience models, especially during pandemics. For example, Tukamuhabwa et al. (2017) utilizes a single case study on 20 manufacturing firms in Uganda to identify critical challenges to supply chain resilience in developing, or emerging, economies. Some of these challenges include counterfeiting, dishonest employees, and corruption (Tukamuhabwa et al. 2017). To differentiate between possible geographic specificities, each of the 94 publications was categorized in terms of its geographic location (country/ region), type of economy (developed or emerging), industry, sub-industry, and supply chain scope (domestic or international). Table SI3 includes each of these categories, in addition to the type of data (quantitative, qualitative, or both) and whether or not the publication presents a metric, or proxy metric, for resilience.

(p19.1) Of the 94 publications reviewed, 58 identify specific geographic locations for the supply chains analyzed, coded based either on where the data were collected, or on the location of the case study used for disruption representation. The breakdown between developed and emerging economies was relatively balanced, with 30 publications focusing on developed economies, 27 publications focusing on emerging economies, and 1 publication combining developed and emerging economies. For the purposes of this review, an economy is considered "emerging" if it does not appear on the United Nations list of developed economies (United Nations 2019). The most frequently examined country was the United States (10 publications), followed by Iran (9 publications), India (5 publications), and China (6 publications). The remainder of the publications with specific countries/ regions of focus address supply chains based in Australia, Japan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Vietnam, South Korea, and a mix of European countries, primarily England, France, and Italy. The only supply chain examined quantitatively in Africa was in South Africa and the only supply chains examined quantitatively in Central and South America were in Mexico and Brazil. Figure 10 shows the data origination from publications that reference specific locations, with the colored dots representing the type of industry used for data collection or disruption modeling. Table 4 provides an overview of the primary industries analyzed in the reviewed publications and examples of sub-industries within each of the primary industries. 
