# Knowledge Sharing Facilitators and Barriers in the Context of Group Cohesion -A Literature Review

CorpusID: 212423089 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e329ef9f8b5ffeec4e2c54c1141cd02d07c9b65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e329ef9f8b5ffeec4e2c54c1141cd02d07c9b65)

Fields: Education, Business, Psychology

## (s3) IV. DETERMINANTS OF COHESION
(p3.0) Mutual attractiveness is a factor that meaningfully influences group cohesion: people liking each other usually spend more time together, what results in their closer relation. A physical proximity gives a tendency to stay in close contact with the others. Festinger and other researchers determined that students living in the same dormitory or on the same floor, make tighter relationships than students not living next to each other [30].
## (s5) VI. LINKS BETWEEN KNOWLEDGE SHARING AND GROUP COHESIVENESS
(p5.0) The literature review showed that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) possess the convenient structures to enable the easy knowledge transfer and knowledge sharing opportunities. Thanks to their small, compact size, usually single site location and closer social relationships of the employees, such organizations constitute the convenient place to develop the cohesive links between their members. When the organization grows, moves to multiple sites and creates new subgroups within the same departments, its ability to share knowledge significantly decreases. In smaller, less bureaucratic, less formal organizations with flatter organizational structure and innovative culture, the teams collaborate more efficiently and tend to form various communication flows that support knowledge sharing phenomenon [40].

(p5.1) On the other hand, SMEs sometimes do not have properly developed strategies concentrated on knowledge transfers. In smaller enterprises it happens, that employees are not aware of the value of their knowledge and they do not have well-organized planning or controlling systems [41]. Smaller organizations do not usually have technologically advanced tools to support their knowledge transfer succesfully, especially between departments. This issue could be examined considering various factors such as the correlation between financial outlays for technological tools and knowledge sharing efficiency in an organization. It may be also useful to determine the relation between the worktime spent using IT tools and the level of group cohesiveness.

(p5.2) Close relations between team members can conduce to creating the social networks and develop the sense of trust in people, what can result in effective knowledge sharing style. Also, interpersonal skills and outgoing posture can improve knowledge flow efficiency in an organization, especially when group structure is not associated with strong hierarchy or strictly formal.

(p5.3) Research conducted by Chiu, Hsu and Wang showed positive correlation between members' social interaction ties and the quantity of knowledge shared by people. It was noted that, the sense of social unity and group togetherness may significantly stimulate the members' intention to share knowledge and improve the amount of the transferred content. Equally, strong group identification forms proper conditions to share knowledge frequently among the coworkers [41]. Carmeli, Atwater and Levi came to a conclusion that efficient knowledge exchange between the leader and the employees improves the sense of group identification. They also emphasized the significant role of a leader in knowledge sharing process [42].
