# Pedodontist's Role in Managing Speech Impairments Due to Structural Imperfections and Oral Habits: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 218948888 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/650bb74063b6f7b601c5860395ec9dd0624e6746](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/650bb74063b6f7b601c5860395ec9dd0624e6746)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) EpIdEmIology
(p2.0) The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fourth edition (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) documented two forms of specific language impairment (SLI), an expressive form and a mixed expressive-receptive form. The prevalence rate for the expressive form was estimated to be between 3% and 5% and the mixed form was 3%. Thus, the prevalence rate for both forms of SLI should be between 6% and 8% even if enough data are not available. 11 There is a scarcity in prevalence data of SLI in the Indian population. Speech and language disorders are the most commonly   
## (s4) Cleft Lip and Palate
(p4.0) Speech development in cleft lip and palate patients is deviated, 14 which is definitely anatomical based resulting from intraoral structural insufficiency. Such speech is characterized by deviant and restricted sound development, lack of labial (/p/, /b/) and lingual (/t/, /d/, /k/, /g/) plosives, and dominance of glottal and pharyngeal articulations. 15 Voice is shaped in the mouth and oropharynx as the adequate velopharyngeal sphincter separates oral and nasal cavities. Hypernasality is mainly due to excessive resonance in nasal cavity which is due to velopharyngeal incompetency. The other conditions that result in hypernasality are fistulae and residual palatal cleft. 16 Hypernasality due to these conditions can be corrected by occluding palatal fistula which increases intraoral pressure causing improved velopharyngeal movement. 17 The consonants that depend on nasal resonances are /m/, /n/, /ng/ which are affected in conditions such as inadequate nasal airways, deviated nasal septum, and enlarged adenoids producing hyponasal tone.

(p4.1) Sometimes, the usual tongue position is placed slightly ahead of the alveolus. This causes "fronted" production of the alveolar consonants such as /t d s/. Few kids make two point contacts between tongue and palate instead of one point contact. This condition is called as double articulation.

(p4.2) The alveolar plosives /t/ and /k/ or /d/ and /g/ are double articulated as [tk] and [dg], respectively, due to simultaneous contact of both tip and the back of the tongue contacting the palate.
## (s5) Tongue-tie (Ankyloglossia)
(p5.0) It is an inherent defect of tongue which is characterized by hindered movement of the tip of the tongue 19 due to thick fibrous membrane (lingual frenum) which runs from the underside of the tongue to the floor of the mouth. 20 There is no evidence that tongue-tie causing prevention or delay in the onset of speech. 21 Pronunciation of "/t/,/d/,/n/" requires the use of the tonguetip contacting the palate but can be managed by the body of the tongue. "/l/,/s/,/z/" needs tip to be pointed upward but can also be pronounced pointing the tip downward. Commonly affected sounds are the one containing "/r/". 19 By adapting the oral movements, most of the children having the problem of tongue-tie successfully pronounce the above sounds.

(p5.1) The movements of the tongue, such as reaching out to the upper teeth and movement of the tongue forward horizontally are strenuous due to the pull of the lingual frenum.

(p5.2) So people with tongue-tie try to adopt alterations of movements due to limited tongue mobility but unsuccessful since they are often conspicuous or inefficient. A person with tongue-tie often finds it difficult to produce rapid speech with clarity. In such cases, surgical approach followed by speech therapy is needed.
## (s7) Tongue-thrusting Habit
(p7.0) It is the condition wherein the tip of the tongue progresses forward between the front teeth to meet the lower lip in the process of swallowing and during speech, so that the tongue becomes interdental. 30 This habit is related to infantile swallow pattern during childhood and adolescence, resulting in protrusion of anterior teeth and open bite. Patients often have problems while producing /s/, /z/,/t/,/d/,/n/,/l/or/sh. Myofunctional treatment is indicated if the tongue-thrust habit is associated with open bite.

(p7.1) This condition does not require any treatment if it is not associated with speech or dental problems or before puberty. Tongue therapy is advised if the habit continues after puberty along with malocclusion. Orthodontic treatment for reposition of teeth is combined with tongue therapy for effective results, rather than therapy alone followed by orthodontic treatment. Tongue thrusters are trained to effectively place the tongue posteriorly, with speech therapy modifying the speech errors. 31 A pediatric dentist may be the first person consulted for professional advice concerning children with speech problems. The study was undertaken to find whether any articulation disorders are associated with the habit of tongue-thrust swallowing, or is it the type of anterior bite that plays an important role in the normal or abnormal speech production in tongue-thrust swallowers. Tonguethrust swallowing is unlikely to produce defective consonant sounds. 32
## (s9) Early Childhood Caries
(p9.0) The stomatognathic system is affected by ECC which performs the functions such as breathing, sucking, chewing, and phonoarticulation. All these functions are related to the integrity of dental arch. The early loss of incisors due to ECC may lead to the development of harmful oral habits and altered speech development. 33 It also compromises the child's quality life, as the early loss of teeth affects Esthetics, nutrition, speech development, dental arch integrity, and development and eruption of permanent successor teeth and contributes to the establishment of deleterious oral habits. 34 The strategies of myofunctional therapy are isotonic exercises for mobility of the tongue and cheek, isometric exercises to tone cheek, and awareness of the correct chewing pattern.

(p9.1) Previous studies have shown that premature loss of incisor due to previous trauma is unlikely to cause alteration in speech such as lisping. In cases seen, it is usually temporary and disappears once the permanent teeth erupts. 35
## (s10) rolE o f pEdIAtrIc dEntIst I n IdEntIfyIng A n d mAnAgIng chIldrEn w I t h spEEch dIsordErs
(p10.0) The pediatric dentists are helped by awareness of speech delay and speech pathology in finding the right method to correct the child's problem that in turn helps in planning the treatment and management of his/her behavior. 3 The pediatric dentist having a thorough knowledge of linguistic maturity of child helps in determining the behavior of child in treatment setting can modify their treatment techniques which minimizes miscommunication leading to misbehavior. 5,36 In dental clinic, speech problems are screened by assessing child's speech-related neuromotor capabilities. It also involves assessment of child's capacity to alter false patterns into right pronunciation after stimulation.
