# Digital Commons@Georgia Southern A survey of mathematical models of Dengue fever A SURVEY OF MATHEMATICAL MODELS OF DENGUE FEVER

CorpusID: 21657275 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0db0b2b56ffdadc29f6be8e68107f2aaf2e4bd8a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0db0b2b56ffdadc29f6be8e68107f2aaf2e4bd8a)

Fields: Mathematics, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) CHAPTER 2 DEROUICH MODEL OF DENGUE FEVER
(p1.0) We first study the model of Dengue fever developed by Derouich et al in [3]. Their model is based on the compartmental diagram shown in Figure 2 For the human population, the model developed by Derouich et al., [3], takes the

(p1.1) The parameter values are described in Table 2.1. One of the key features of the model is the fraction, p, that represents a (random) fraction of the human population that can be permanently immunized against the four serotypes that cause Dengue fever.
## (s3) CHAPTER 3 FENG MODEL OF DENGUE FEVER
(p3.0) Next, we study the model developed by Feng at al., [4]. For the Feng model, the host has size  Table   3.1. The model constructed by Feng at al., [4], is
## (s4) CHAPTER 4 SYAFRUDDIN AND NOORANI MODELS OF DENGUE FEVER
(p4.0) The third and fourth models of Dengue fever studied were developed by Syafruddin and Noorani, [7] and [8] respectively. The parameter values they used in both models are the same and are defined in Table 4.1.
## (s9) General conclusions
(p9.0) This thesis reviewed several ODE mathematical models of dengue fever. Five models with different approximations to modeling and different assumptions were considered and for each of them several outbreak scenarios were reviewed.

(p9.1) It was observed that every model is different. The models by Derouich et al. [3] and by Syafruddin et al. [7] are among the simplest one. Both of them are S − I − R ODE models of one strain of the virus.

(p9.2) The model developed by Feng et al. [4] is a more complicated one. This one is also S − I − R ODE model, but of two different strains of dengue.

(p9.3) The most comprehensive model is developed by Nuraini et al. [6]. It not only describes the outbreak with two strains, but also takes into account the separate severe Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever state which is not taken into consideration in any of previous models. In addition, this model describes the endemic behavior of the disease, whereas the other models are modeling only epidemic outbreak.

(p9.4) The other interesting model was developed by Syafruddin et al. [8]. This is the only example of S − E − I − R model considered here, which divide the whole human population into four compartments: susceptible, exposed, infected and recovered (removed).

(p9.5) On the next step in the investigation several hypothetic scenarios for each of the outbreaks were conducted to investigate the behavior of the each model and try to answer the question, "which intervention can be the most efficient in terms of decreasing the number of infected population?" Two different types of interventions are available to reach those goals: vaccination and the direct decrease of the mosquitoes population. Some models show that vaccination can be useful. However, those models assume only one strain of the virus. If there are more strains in the environment vaccination becomes practically useless since currently available vaccines can only protect from one strain, leaving the whole population completely susceptible to others. So, the only feasible working strategy is to decrease the number of mosquitoes.

(p9.6) At the same time another interesting phenomenon was observed. Since the activity of mosquitoes is based on weather condition, mostly on the temperature, global warming, will increase the possibility of being infected and, consequently, the risk of outbreaks.

(p9.7) Finally, there are other problems to consider. One is to develop more models to catch observe important features during the progression of an epidemic. For example, the development of an S − E − I − R model of two different strains will be a step forward in this direction. The ultimate goal is to build a model that will describe the outbreak of four different strains at the same time. However, even a small increase in complexity of the initial model drastically increase the difficulty of its validation.
