# A Review on the efficiency and accuracy of localization of moisture distributions sensing in agricultural silos

CorpusID: 212850780 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b3c120e33b79793ec8b178d209a89af57ad9664](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b3c120e33b79793ec8b178d209a89af57ad9664)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Materials Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Moisture determination has been a major problem in many branches of store grain for many years particularly in the agricultural silos. Accurate moisture determination testing in silos is very important in managing and selling paddy and grain. This is because each grain has a completely different ideal moisture determination. Inaccurate Moisture determination measurements will lead to lower head grain. Once milled at wrong moisture content, it will endure additional drying cost and loss of quality especially when the paddy is dried too much. Furthermore, if the grain is just too wet in storage, harvested paddy will become wetter than necessary and this can contribute to the loss in profit when the paddy is sold. Therefore, it is important to develop moisture measurement systems to determine exact moisture content (MC).  2 Radio Frequency (RF) based volume tomography is considerably a quite new and challenging area, especially for non-invasive 3D imaging technologies which the primarily concept idea is adopted from Electrical Capacitance Volume Tomography [1]. In conventional electrical capacitance tomography, the measured capacitance will be placed between plates combinations. Then, it is used to reconstruct 2D images of moisture distribution. Similarly, RF based volume tomography are also constructed to have multiple layers of antenna measuring different attenuation of the transmitted signal. To reconstruct 2D images, the multi-path or diffraction of the signal from the silo walls is considered as a source of distortion to the final reconstructed images. Time of Arrival approaches may be able to mitigate the effect of distortion. However, it may not be true for all conditions. When grain samples have different layers of moisture, 2D image reconstruction can be quite complicated.

(p0.1) 3D tomography reconstruction can also be accomplished by stacking frames from a sequence of time intervals of measurements. However, the volumetric profile of the dielectric distribution (in this case will be based on the signal attenuation), may be incoherent due to difference of grain size, shape, and etc. Various challenges remain associated with such reconstruction and need to be handled intelligently. Baseline measurements need to be captured prior to the assessment or handled properly during the tomography imaging. However, when comes to the actual implementation, these baseline information may not be available or difficult to obtain. To counter these issues, the mapping process could incorporate or employ intelligent machine learning approaches.

(p0.2) This study aims to investigate suitable approaches that can measure efficiency and accuracy of localization of moisture distributions sensing in agricultural silo. This is done in three parts, where the first part reviews RF frequency operating at microwave band that gives the best response towards moisture content sensing at different temperature, humidity and grain type. Then, using tomography approach to assess the non-linear image reconstruction accuracy to examine moisture distribution in the silo. Finally, using intelligent machine learning techniques to measure and quantify the distribution of moisture level of rice grain in silo storage using the ANN models. This would benefit the agricultural sector in securing the food storage for the country and help to reduce damages of grain in the silos.
## (s1) Radio Frequency Signal
(p1.0) Radio-frequency (RF) technique is basically principles are described for mistreatment including high frequencies and microwaves insulator properties, or permittivity, of grain for sensing moisture, or permittivity, of grain for sensing moisture through their correlation with moisture content. As a result of high correlations that occur at any frequencies between insulator properties of grain and quantity of water gift within the grain, the radio frequencies are useful in fast and non-destructive sensing of moisture content. Most of those dielectric-type moisture meters use frequencies within the range between about 1-20 MHz. After which the attenuation and phase shift were perceived to be functions of moisture content, grian hulk density, and temperature, illustrated that the determinations of temperaturecompensated and density-independent moisture content were acquired with 15.2 GHz measurements on shelled corn [2].
