# future internet Modeling and Simulation Tools for Fog Computing-A Comprehensive Survey from a Cost Perspective

CorpusID: 219441455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b045522376072d4f1071dd09bcecba0f540a764f)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s3) Basic Concepts
(p3.0) Since 2009, Satyanarayanan et al. [21] have supported that cloud computing suffers from large scale and increasing latency, and have pointed out the need for new technologies. Among the newer developments, fog computing is a groundbreaking technology that bolsters and extends the cloud. The term "fog computing" was initially introduced by Cisco, in 2012, as a "cloud-to-thing continuum" [1]. It is defined in different ways, which encompass the cooperation of a huge number of distributed devices and the placement of storage, computational and networking services at the edges, the network or the cloud [2]. Fog computing is not a standalone paradigm, it is located between the cloud and the network edges, supporting virtualization and the cooperation of end devices. It arose as a result of the efforts of academia and industry in order to provide low latency, high scalability while reducing costs and energy. It is considered as a promising technology, capable of handling extraordinary amounts of data that are generated by IoT devices. The features of fog computing include heterogeneity support, geographical distribution, location awareness, ultra-low latency, support of real time and large-scale applications, and virtualization [4].
## (s4) Fog Computing Architecture
(p4.0) There is no standard architecture for fog computing, and research works often rely on different architectures. Figure 1 shows a high-level overview of the fog computing structure. In the most common scenario, it consists of three key layers: cloud, fog and end devices:

(p4.1) • End devices layer: This ground layer represents the end devices such as sensors, actuators or things, mobile smartphones and tables, smart meters, aircrafts and smart vehicles, desktops PCs, laptop computers accompanied with applications [2,22,23]. End devices may be considered as human-operated resources [23] and they provide a range of computing capabilities. All these elements form a communication network, and their data are transmitted to the cloud through the fog layer.
## (s6) Modeling and Simulation Challenges
(p6.0) Fog computing emerges as a modern and competitive environment in a number of different areas: smart cities, intelligent transportation systems, smart healthcare, public safety, smart grid, industry 4.0, smart home and smart building are only some of the domains where applications have been developed and supported by a variety of fog computing technologies [10]. Often, these technologies and applications have a significant impact on daily peoples lives. However, not all of them have reached a satisfactory level of maturity and require more consideration. Existing approaches try to answer emerging questions, to solve a problem or make a decision in a specific field [17] mainly using modeling and simulation. Today, there are several simulation tools for fog computing environments with different mechanisms and characteristics. Before we investigate how they fulfill their purpose, we discuss the current challenges in fog computing that lead to new specialized and novel techniques. These innovations can be evaluated, tested and have their cost estimated by employing proper simulation tools.

(p6.1) It is a non-trivial task to design fog computing simulators meeting the needs for generality, scalability, efficiency, mobility support and low-latency. One of the hardest problems in this process is to determine the constituent parts of the simulator. Every decision is related to the actual cost of implementation and operation of the fog computing scheme and its components-infrastructure, computing, and supported applications. Next, we identify several deployment challenges.
## (s8) Storage
(p8.0) One of the main functions of fog computing is the provision of storage resources which are closer to the end devices than cloud storage. The storage requirements come from a large number of end devices, which may be distributed in a vast geographical area, used by different users while running their applications. Many types of storage can be used in fog nodes in order to provide the reliability and data integrity required by the fog system [26]. The user needs, the application requirements or restrictions and the cost determine the type and capacity of storage, while a key issue is the placement of storage resources. In 5G wireless networks, proactive caching and distributed storage based on the integration of each user's personal storage space [6] have been proposed as storage technologies which can expand the service capabilities. Sharma et al. [27] propose a fog architecture that supports blockchain storage; blockchain technology introduces an efficient, scalable and secure way to manage resources.

(p8.1) According to Reference [16], the fog nodes may have limited storage capacity and, consequently, the cloud data centers can be used for compute and storage functions. In general, both of them could work in a complementary manner. In this scenario, a number of issues arise: where to place data (since data locality is an important factor for fast and efficient computing), how to deal with the huge amount of data transfer requests, how to manage storage resources or how to cope with the heterogeneity coming from the various devices and applications. Suitable modeling and simulation are necessary in order to test any conceived solutions, observing the degree to which their behavior satisfies the actual needs.
## (s9) Computation
(p9.0) Any device with computing capabilities could be used for compute. Generally speaking, any device in the fog layer which has computational power and any server on the cloud can act as a compute device. Based on them, fog computing systems provide new computational opportunities and more efficient services.

(p9.1) Compute devices provide services for storing, processing and analyzing data [28]. They could act as servers, coordinators or controllers depending on the given application and its requirements. They may also discover, monitor and manage other devices and their requests. In a real implementation compute devices need to be purchased, connected and configured, while in a simulation environment, they need to have specific features, such as management and mobility capabilities. It is desirable to deploy a fog system with various types of computing devices and predefined QoS levels, which enhances the performance metrics in a cost-effective manner. Here two different kinds of cost must be considered-the purchase cost and the operating cost. Notice that since compute can be placed on both fog and cloud nodes, the operating costs may also include latency, network congestion, and energy consumption, which are related to possible data transfers among compute nodes [29].
## (s11) Fog Computing Key Technologies
(p11.0) Fog nodes and end-devices make use of a wide variety of distributed computing technologies. These technologies are used to serve users' processing requests in an autonomous and independent manner, while virtualization technology is capable of providing scalable processing environments. Computing takes place on edge devices, intermediate nodes or in cloud data centers depending on the current needs and the the availability of the resources. This process gives rise to the challenging problem of resource management. Ghobaei-Arani et al. [16] classify resource management approaches in the following six categories:

(p11.1) The research community working on these issues and considering open perspectives and future research directions, set different evaluation factors and typically utilize simulators as evaluation tools. They try to improve resource management mechanisms and focus on minimizing key aspects of cost (e.g., execution cost, system cost, authentication cost) which are discussed in Section 3.4.
## (s13) Cost Considerations
(p13.0) Fog computing is a complex environment, where services are provided to users, and users execute their applications. The acquisition of services or resources depends on the participating nodes and their roles as providers or users and always involves the notion of cost. Various aspects of fog computing costs have been considered and cost-aware schemes have been proposed for resource allocation [33], simulations tools [34,35], or modeling tools [36,37]. Battula et al. [33] propose a cost model for fog computing environments which concerns both devices and applications. It is calculated per device or application and summarizes different types of cost and various cost parameters. It is expressed as a function of:
## (s17) •
(p17.0) Migration cost: it is the cost for migrating tasks from a fog node to another and is proportional to the total execution time of migrated tasks. This cost is paid by the fog node who was in charge of executing the tasks before the migration. The above cost model general enough, has many advantages and can fit in other fog computing settings with some modifications (for example, power cost may be also attributed to fog and/or cloud devices). Ideally, it could be embedded in simulations tools. Examples of cost metrics listed in Table 1. As Brogi et al. [38] state, the inclusion of cost models in simulators may give a significant boost to the deployment of eligible fog computing applications. 
## (s18) Modeling Fog Computing Systems
(p18.0) In this section, we present and compare typical proposed models for fog computing systems. The role of a model is two-fold; first to understand the real system under study and then to extract an applicable simulation model [52]. In the existing literature, several fog models have been used in lieu of real systems in order to evaluate or understand how those systems work. Models involve components that represent the different parts or states of the real system and the relationships between them which define the behavior of the fog system.

(p18.1) For fog computing systems the key components include the infrastructure (i.e., the devices and the network), the platform (encompassing resources, services and their management) and applications (which execute in the fog and have certain requirements) according to Reference [2]. Mahmud et al. [11] identify three essential dimensions involved in fog computing-system structural, services and security, while Svorobej et al. [8] distinguish four key factors relative to fog and edge computing modeling and simulation-infrastructure, resource management, mobility and scalability. Among the proposed approaches, only a few [33,38] focus on cost modeling. Both efforts seek to quantify the cost of developing IoT applications and the resource-allocation paradigm in fog computing environments. A fog model could be a static representation of the distributed system, or a dynamic one; it may include facilities for data-processing, resource management, networking, and storage services [53]. However, it is important for the research and industrial community to evaluate all those models in terms of costs.

(p18.2) Several types of models have been proposed to study fog system behavior or to evaluate its operation. We can classify them into two broad categories-mathematical and conceptual models. A mathematical model uses mathematical expressions, symbols and language to describe a system, while a conceptual model represents the system as a composition of components.
## (s19) Simulation Tools
(p19.0) Simulators shed light on existing or prototype systems by imitating their operation. Simulators are used to study the system behavior and understand the factors that affect system performance as it evolves over time. Before applying new technologies to real systems it is salutary to test them using simulation tools. Fog computing trends as the latest extension of cloud computing. Although there is a wide range of simulation tools for cloud computing, they cannot be used as-is for studies in the field of fog computing; they have thus been adapted to meet the new needs. At the same time, novel simulation tools have been proposed and developed, specifically for the fog. In this section, we survey all such tools that are used in the fog computing area.

(p19.1) The Edge-Fog cloud simulator [23] is implemented in Python. It is composed of two layers: (i) the outer layer which includes the edge devices and (ii) the inner layer which consist of fog devices. All those devices are connected and form a distributed system. The authors also implement the Least Processing Cost First (LPCF) algorithm, which is used to assign tasks to available nodes. The assignment aims to reduce the processing time and network costs.

(p19.2) Gupta et al. [35] extend the CloudSim simulator [62] by adding new functionalities and developing a simulation toolkit for fog computing, called iFogSim. iFogSim is one of the most popular tools that can be used to model and simulate IoT and fog environments. It is written in Java and employs the JSON file format to represent physical topologies. iFogSim supports the simulation of entities and services. The communication is based on message passing. It is an event-based simulator that can be used to simulate applications in IoT and fog environments. It provides an environment capable of evaluating resource management policies based on different metrics, such as energy consumption, operational costs, and network congestion. The architecture of iFogSim provides physical, logical and management components. Physical components included fog devices, actuators, and sensors. Logical components represent processing modules and their interaction as a directed graph. User can draw physical elements, define their characteristics and build their topology using a user-friendly GUI. Alternatively, the user can define topologies programmatically using Java APIs. A management component assists in application placement, scheduling and monitoring. Despite its popularity, iFogSim has a few shortcomings: (i) the Java-based implementation introduces version compatibility issues while not supporting basic network parameters [63], (ii) it focuses primarily on resource management, ignoring other important fog computing facets (e.g., mobility, infrastructure, cost) (iii) it supports only tree-like topologies (iv) it does not consider QoS requirements [64].

(p19.3) Brogi et al. [64] propose a model for fog computing which consists of QoS profiles, fog infrastructures, IoT applications and eligible deployments. This model is supported by a simulation tool named FogTorch. The simulator is written in Java and allows developers to customize the fog infrastructure (in terms of CPU cores, RAM and storage per node, to define QoS policies related to latency and bandwidth, and to specify the application requirements. FogTorch does not provide a cost model. FogTorchΠ [65] is an extension of FogTorch, capable of determining deployments of IoT applications over fog computing systems. FogTorchΠ inherits parameters related to hardware, software, QoS from FogTorch and provides facilities to define QoS for communication links. To simulate the behaviors of communication links, it exploits Monte-Carlo methods which are used to generate sampling probability distributions. FogTorchΠ provides metrics to estimate and compare resource consumption and QoS accuracy.

(p19.4) FogNetSim++ [63] is a simulation framework capable of handling fog networks and devices. It is based on OMNeT++ [66], an open source component-based C++ simulation library and framework, widely used in academia. FogNetSim++ is an event-driven simulator and its main objective is to provide a static or dynamic environment that supports sensors, fog nodes, distributed data centers, and a broker node. The role of the latter is to manage the other devices and their requests. FogNetSim++ supports the execution of resource scheduling algorithms while it also provides an energy model and different pricing models. The pricing model applies to network, storage and compute components for network, storage, compute and other tasks. The simulator provides users with detailed configuration options. It also provides modules for the creation of the network environment, and the users may incorporate their own extensions. The authors claim that FogNetSim++ is scalable in terms of average execution time, CPU and memory usage.

(p19.5) Tychalas and Karatza proposed Parallel Discrete Event Simulation (PDES) for fog computing, implemented in C [67]. In a predefined cloud/fog system, authors consider how to reduce costs for each incoming task by combining of all available computational resources and bringing all involved computing resources closer to users. The tool focuses on task scheduling algorithms.

(p19.6) The work in Reference [68] proposes Yet Another Fog Simulator (YAFS) that enables Cloud/fog simulations. Python was used for the development of YAFS is Python while is also supports the JSON format for input files that describe customized scenarios. The YAFS architecture consists of the following components: application, selection, placement, population, topology, and core. During simulation the selection, placement, and population processes have the responsibility of resource management and their interactions are dynamic. Topologies use graph-based representations and are imported from JSON files which can be generated from other tools (such as CAIDA and BRITE). Applications remain the same as in iFogSim, and consist of a set of modules, which provide services and exchange messages. Following a distributed data flow model, authors use a directed acyclic graph to represent them, where nodes are modules that act and edges are the exchanged data among modules.

(p19.7) FogDirMine [69] is a Python-based simulation tool that aims to model the beahavior of the CISCO FogDirector, which is a tool for managing IoT applications on fog systems. Although FogDirMine refers to the availability of resources and QoS, there is no reference to costs. FogDirSim [70] is deployed to support also the CISCO FogDirector. It is built in Python and composed of independent REST services. The objective of FogDirSim is to compare different management policies for applications and infrastructure, considering energy consumption, uptime, and resource usage.

(p19.8) FogBus [71] is a framework for building fog environments. It is developed using RESTful technologies and a combination of scripting and programming languages. FogBus supports a wide range of infrastructure devices, application execution and interactions among nodes. It provides authentication and encryption facilities implementing blockchain. The FogBus framework includes hardware components (fog nodes, IoT devices, fog gateway nodes, cloud data centers) software components (grouped in broker, repository, and computing services) and network components (topology, security, scalability, and fault tolerance). This simulator combines a large number of elements and services and evaluates their performance in terms of energy, latency, network and CPU usage.

(p19.9) ModFogSim [5] is an extension of iFogSim which requires significant effort to model user mobility and migration strategies. ModFogSim adds mobility and migration features as well as wireless connections to iFogSim. These additional features are implemented with the help of a Coordinate class (which maps devices to a Cartesian plane), an AppDevice class (acting as an access point, handling connections and disconnections), a number of Mobile classes (for devices, sensors and actuators) a number of Mirgation classes to support migration in the simulation. The authors used a lab-based testbed to evaluate their simulator. They conclude that the results demonstrate the usability of their tool. In terms of cost, it inherits the iFogSim metrics, improvements on the latency metric.

(p19.10) FogWorkFlowSim [72] presents a different approach to fog computing simulation. It is written in Java and provides a user-friendly GUI to evaluate resource and task management strategies. The simulation process is done in simple steps: (a) setup of the fog computing environment, where the user defines and parametrizes devices for each of the three layers, (b) setting a workflow application, where the user chooses from available workflows or creates her own, (c) configuration, which defines the computational strategies, the scheduling algorithms, and the performance metrics and (d) results, where simulation outcomes can be visualizes and exported. FogWorkFlowSim evaluates system performance with respect to three different quantities: time, energy and processing cost.
## (s21) •
(p21.0) Efficiency: An indicative measure for simulation efficiency is lacking; this could be the execution time, the CPU utilization, the memory consumption, and so forth, but there are only few and limited works witch study this issues. An experimental comparison [20] shows that iFogSim has some scalability issues and has higher memory demands than YAFS.
## (s22) •
(p22.0) Cost modeling: As mentioned previously the presence of a cost model is quite limited in simulators. The cost is a way to quantify how the various parameters affect the operation of a fog computing system and it can be an indispensable tool for operators, developers or users in this area. • Network infrastructure/configuration: In most cases, network models are limited and not suited for experiments aimed at evaluating the network entities and network connections. specifically, they do not usually provide the possibility to define the physical topology, the link characteristics, or the capabilities of networked devices. • Security consideration: Security and privacy protection are among the key technologies of fog computing systems [6]. A wide range of issues including identity management, resource access control, encryption, decryption, authentication and authorization and malicious attacks need to be dealt with. Simulation tools could be particularly helpful, but they currently lack such functionality. The only exception is FogBus which provides an authentication and encryption mechanism. • Applications integration: A key question for researchers and developers is related to the needs and requirements of an application to be executed in a fog computing environment. As already mentioned, current tools lack the functionality to simulate most aspects of an application and its activities. • Extendibility: Fog computing is a new paradigm and researchers strive to propose solutions (architectures, applications, models) that have to deal with heterogeneity, mobility, security, scalability, and other related issues. The ability to use a simulator that would allow them to easily integrate a new idea rather than build it from scratch would be very useful. Unfortunately, only a few of the existing simulators (namely FogNetSim++, iFogSim and YAFS) provide some hooks for such functionality.
## (s23) •
(p23.0) Learning curve: There is not a clear indication about the learning curve of each tool. For example YAFS seems to have a smaller learning curve than iFogSim [20]. While the learning curve also depends on the documentation quality/quantity, a systematic comparison among all tools is lacking. • Maintenance: Although the simulators have been developed relatively recently, some of them seem to be already inactive, as they have not been updated for a quite a few months. We summarize the above non-technical characteristics in Table 5, where we also note the availability of a Graphical User Interface (GUI). All simulation tools are free, open-source, and available through open repositories. In the column "Actively developed" we consider the simulator as active if there exist commits during the last 18 months. 
