# A review of the application of deep learning in medical image classification and segmentation

CorpusID: 214224742 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f217e5faf34498df5f90ceb081652c2d934cb0b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f217e5faf34498df5f90ceb081652c2d934cb0b)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Since 2006, deep learning has emerged as a branch of the machine learning field in people's field of vision. It is a method of data processing using multiple layers of complex structures or multiple processing layers composed of multiple nonlinear transformations (1). In recent years, deep learning has made breakthroughs in the fields of computer vision, speech recognition, natural language processing, audio recognition and bioinformatics (2). Deep learning has been praised as one of the top ten technological breakthroughs since 2013 due to its considerable application prospects in data analysis. The deep learning method simulates the human neural network. By combining multiple nonlinear processing layers, the original data is abstracted layer by layer, and different levels of abstract features are obtained from the data and used for target detection, classification or segmentation. The advantage of deep learning is to replace the manual acquisition feature with unsupervised or semi-supervised feature learning and hierarchical feature extraction efficient algorithms (3).

(p0.1) Medical care is about the health of people. At present, the amount of medical data is huge, but it is crucial to make good use of this huge medical data to contribute to the medical industry. Although the amount of medical data is huge, there are still many problems: medical data is diverse, including maps, texts, videos, magnets, etc.; due to different equipment used, the quality of data varies greatly; data presents fluctuating characteristics, over time and specific events change; due to differences in individuals, the law of the disease has no universal applicability (4). There are many factors that cannot be dealt with in the existence of these problems. Medical imaging is a very important part of medical data. This paper first introduces the application of deep learning algorithms in medical image analysis, expounds the techniques of deep learning classification and segmentation, and introduces the more classic and current mainstream network models. Then we detailed the application of deep learning in the classification and segmentation of medical images, including fundus, CT/MRI tomography, ultrasound and digital pathology based on different imaging techniques. Finally, it discusses the possible problems and predicts the development prospects of deep learning medical imaging analysis.
## (s17) Gastric cancer pathological
(p17.0) Pathological diagnosis is the "gold standard" of various cancer diagnosis methods, which plays an important role in the medical field (40). The contradiction between a large number of market demands and a shortage of talents in the field of pathology gives a great opportunity for deep learning in this field, and digital pathology technology also makes computer-assisted diagnosis possible (41). Nowadays, deep learning technology has been applied to the pathological diagnosis of lung cancer, breast cancer and gastric cancer. Its application mainly includes early tumor screening and benign and malignant diagnosis of tumor. In the field of lung cancer pathology, Zhang et al. established the "early computer diagnosis system for lung cancer" to detect lung cancer pathological sections, so that several major types of lung cancer can be detected (42). In the field of breast cancer pathology, Qaiser et al. established a CNN-based intelligent image diagnosis system with a judgment result of pathological sections (cancer and noncancer tissue) as high as 0.833, four cancer classifications (normal tissue, benign tumor, original The accuracy of the results of both cancer and invasive cancer is as high as 0.778, which can reach the level of pathologists (43). Hanna and others based on the deep learning artificial intelligence automatic human epidermal growth factor receptor scoring system to score human epidermal growth factor receptor, the results are better than pathologists (44 (46). In the field of gastric cancer pathology our research team has established a benign and malignant diagnostic system based on gastric cancer pathology based on deep learning, with a sensitivity of over 97% (47). However, the above methods include that the initial work of of the left ventricular contour image of GNNI U-net in six different scales of the two data sets. The green area is the correctly divided contour area, the blue area is the mis-segmented area, and the red area is the leak-divided area.
