# A Review of Resistance Mechanisms of Synthetic Insecticides and Botanicals, Phytochemicals, and Essential Oils as Alternative Larvicidal Agents Against Mosquitoes. A Review of Resistance Mechanisms of Synthetic Insecticides and Botanicals, Phytochemicals, and Essential Oils as Alternative Larvicidal Agents Against Mosquitoes

CorpusID: 211260367 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1169c60d60c51b7d837401cee49b9c2d9a6e578](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1169c60d60c51b7d837401cee49b9c2d9a6e578)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) IMPACT OF PHYTOCHEMICALS ON DETOXIFYING ENZYMES
(p2.0) The antioxidant and detoxification enzymes of mosquito vectors are vital in detoxification of reactive oxygen species (ROS) synthesized by the toxic chemicals (Rattan, 2010). Esterase and phosphatase of the mosquito vectors plays a key role in several physiological events (Koodalingam et al., 2014). Excessive usage of toxic chemicals on mosquito control caused insecticide resistance through sodium channel mutations, activation of detoxification enzymes, and upregulation of key genes and other regulatory components like MicroRNAs (miRNAs). The CYP450s, GSTs, SOD, and esterase gene families are recognized as the foremost four enzymes accountable for the metabolicresistance of the insects (Hemingway et al., 2004). Generally, detoxifying enzymes are involved in digestion, reproduction, juvenile hormone metabolism, neuronal conduction, moulting, and more importantly detoxification of toxic chemicals (Koodalingam et al., 2014). Phosphatases are involved in tissue development, cellular differentiation, carbohydrate metabolisms, and synthesis of ATP (Koodalingam et al., 2014). Mainly these two major classes of detoxifying enzymes are considered for evaluating the impact of toxic chemicals on physiological or biochemical events of arthropod vectors.
