# A Review on NSM-CFRP technique using in Shear Strengthening of RC Deep Beams

CorpusID: 213961122 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c01d9754edd42ef04d844c6b3b4d3c80fb38168d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c01d9754edd42ef04d844c6b3b4d3c80fb38168d)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s7) Theoretical Studies
(p7.0) A computational procedure has been done by 53 to evaluate the shear strength of the RC beams using FRP strips with NSM techniques. The method was done by some substantial simplifications as assuming the relationship for local bond stress-slip by considering the available average bond length of FRP strips with concrete prism. The study found out the relationship of local bond stress-slip as a function of chemical-mechanical properties of concrete-FRP.

(p7.1) (1) Analytical model developed by 54 to investigating the shear strength contribution with NSM FRP by fulfilling equilibrium, kinematic compatibility, and constitutive law bond of the adhered materials and the materials itself. The model used to identify and thoroughly describe some complex phenomena. The results showed that model can be used for finding out the relevant information to apply front-line technique. Furthermore; the study done by 55 to calculate shear strength contribution of NSM-FRP strips with the RC concrete beams. Due to lack of previous literature; the numerical model assumed features of concrete as reducer of the average available bond length resisting and equivalent average resisting of bond length evaluation. For evaluating the maximum effective capacity of the strip, bond length's bond-based constitutive strategy was used by neglecting the post-peak behavior. The results predicted difference in experimental results of the mean and standard deviation as 0.69 and 0.29 respectively.

(p7.2) (2) A study was done by 56 to present two different approaches to predict shear strengthening contribution by NSM-FRP material. The study obtained that both models were excellently accurate by comparing with experimental results and the data collected from literature.
