# A LITERATURE REVIEW: PARENTAL NEEDS IN THE NEONATAL INTENSIVE CARE ROOM

CorpusID: 216858829 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f2fc977ceb9f50f8985f234f54c55f9f6fbac3e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f2fc977ceb9f50f8985f234f54c55f9f6fbac3e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Various reasons were identified related to causes of neonates' hospitalization in NICU including prematurity, low birth weight, sepsis, difficulty in breathing, or respiratory failure. Newborn care in the NICU would spend several weeks to several months (Mundy, 2010). Infants would be exposed to various environments and stimulated by various procedures. These procedures would have a negative impact on babies and their parents.
## (s2) RESULTS
(p2.0) According to a literature search on five databases, researchers found 413 studies. The next step was screening the article by reading the title and abstract, 385 studies were excluded. Then, the authors reviewed the full text of 28 articles for more detail evaluation. Finally, 10 studies were found that identified the needs of parents with critically ill babies in the NICU. 1. Positive acceptance and caring from nurses for babies and parents Wigert et al. (2006) found that mothers felt useless and helpless in the intensive care room. They perceived that their babies belong to health workers. This was one cause of mother's negative feelings. As a result, nurses should encourage the mother to participate in caring for their babies. Nurses should have a positive perception that mothers are able to take care of their babies with nurses' supervision. Parents felt helpless when they were not involved in taking care of their babies (Cleveland, 2008).
## (s4) Feeling confident and trusting about the best care for their babies
(p4.0) Sikorova and Kucova (2012) and Musabirema et al. (2015) found that parents had experience of high stress, especially when they separated from their newborn baby, they felt unable to protect the baby from painful procedures and unable to take care the baby.
