# The impacts of faculty caring on nursing students' intent to graduate: A systematic literature review

CorpusID: 211473611 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81a364c24955f5b3f3a3a58165baeb618fcdb1b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81a364c24955f5b3f3a3a58165baeb618fcdb1b1)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) Study design
(p2.0) This is a systematic literature review. The search of the literature was guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA; [13]. The strategies of the search were developed by all the authors (DH, KS, HW), including a university research librarian (KS). The search was done by the librarian (KS) and confirmed by the third author (HW).
## (s6) Quality assessment
(p6.0) The quality assessment of the studies was conducted using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool [14]. Each article was assessed based on the relevance of the sampling strategy to address the research question, the representation of the sample on the target population, the appropriateness of the measurements, the risk of nonresponse bias, and the suitability of statistical analysis to answer the research question. Every "yes" to the criteria was assigned 20% for a total of 100%. We listed the assessment scores in Table 1.
## (s11) Building students' confidence
(p11.0) Based on the findings of this review, students' confidence was defined as the ability to be self-reliant in new situations. Instilling confidence and being respectful were the most personal caring behaviors. Differences occurred based on students' social demographics, such as different countries and ethnicities. In the studies which examined students in Greece, India, the Philippines, and Nigeria, the most important caring attribute for an instructor was "instills confidence through caring" [11,15]. In contrast, a research study in Iran found that the most important attribute among nursing students was that the instructors were respectful to students and had positive sharing behaviors [16]. Instilling confidence in students through caring ranked as the second most important attribute, according to the study [16].

(p11.1) Nursing students in the united states had similar perceptions of their instructors, with the highest-ranking attribute being "instills confidence through caring" [17]. This article [17] also found a correlation between increased age of students and increased perceptions of their professors caring. This could be due to students' life experiences and generational similarities between older students and their professors [17]. Fifer [17] also connected an increase in working hours of students to a decrease in the perception of their instructor caring, which could be attributed to the increased levels of stress on students both financially and mentally. In regard to race, Fifer [17] and Torregosa et al. [18] found that non-white students had an increased perception of their instructors caring overall. When students perceived caring in their faculties, who showed a personal level of care and helped students build their confidence, students were better apt to listen and learn.
## (s12) Creating a compassionate learning environment
(p12.0) A compassionate classroom environment was referred to as an environment in which students felt understood, challenged, and encouraged. Students least reported attribute in all studies was that instructors exhibited "control versus flexibility [11,15]. Control was defined as not allowing students to problem-solve and forcing students to follow instructions exactly as what faculties said. Flexibility, in contrast, allowed students to learn in a way that fit students the best while faculties provided support and guidance on safe practice [17]. Students reporting a lack of flexibility perceived  12 nursing students Structured interviews Empathy from instructors promoted a constructive learning experience and a caring learning environment while a lack of empathy obstructed students' learning.

(p12.1) Students said that when they received empathy from their instructors, they were motivated to learn more, continue their studies, study harder, achieve better learning outcomes, and become better in class. A caring learning environment was perceived to reduce stress, promote communication, and build a positive student-teacher relationship. Lack of motivation in learning included unreachable standards set by the instructor and lack of guidance in learning and unfairness in course evaluation.
## (s15) 100%
(p15.0) Mohammadipour et al. [12] 178 nursing students Incivility in Nursing Education-Revised (INE-R) Survey 61.8% of the participating students indicated that they had "sometimes" and "always" experienced "unfair assessment" during the last year. 14.6% had experienced "insincerity and coldness towards others." 14% had always experienced "inefficient or ineffective teaching methods" and "refusing to talk about re-examinations, test deadlines, or revising grades." 69.7% of the participants had never experienced "sending inappropriate or impolite emails to others." 44.9% of the students indicated never experienced and "mentioning discriminative ideas (racial, ethnic, gender and others)."
## (s22) 80%
(p22.0) Hoeve et al. [19] 17 nursing students Semi-structured interviews Reasons for attrition included: 1) training program e organization of the training program and lack of support from faculty/teaching staff, 2) clinical placement e poor clinical placement with lack of emotional and practical support from staff, 3) theory-practice gap, and 4) personal circumstances.
## (s23) 80%
(p23.0) their instructors as less caring, which had a negative impact on students' clinical learning experience. However, there was an argument that instructors must be controlling in clinical practice to protect patients, students, and their personal nursing license, and flexibility could be given to students with proper assignments and direction [19]. In a compassionate learning environment, students felt cared for because they thought that their voices were heard and that they were supported to learn.
## (s24) Being competent
(p24.0) Based on the literature reviewed, being competent was referred to as students' perceptions of their instructors' capacity to effective teaching and student learning. One study found that 61.8% of the students had either sometimes or always experienced "unfair assessment" from their instructors in the previous year [12]. The same study also found that almost 15% of the students had experienced "insincerity and coldness to others" from their instructors, and 14% had always experienced "inefficient or ineffective teaching methods" and "refusing to talk about re-examinations, test deadlines, or revising grades."

(p24.1) These findings were connected to a study that looked into why students chose nursing as a professional career. Students typically chose nursing because of the aspect of human contact and care [19]. For the students in the study who had considered dropping out, the main reasons included dissatisfaction about the training program, lack of support from faculties, being unprepared for clinical practice, and personal life circumstances [19]. When instructors did not exhibit competent teaching abilities and did not compromise with their students, a negative impact was made on their learning environment. Faculties' caring competence had an impact on students' drive to continue the nursing program, which was instrumental to the success of a nursing student.
## (s25) Respecting students
(p25.0) Respecting students was defined as approaching students in the same respectful way a colleague should be treated. A study which interviewed six ADN/BSN nursing students in the mid-western United States found that all of the students interviewed had at least one faculty "bully" [5]. Mott [5] also found that 83% of the students interviewed experienced "fear/intimidation," 67% felt "frustration/anger/sadness/depression," 67% were made to feel "demeaned or belittled," and 50% experienced "decreased selfconfidence." Though it was found in Mott's study that students became more resilient after experiencing a faculty bully, a negative impact was still made on their learning environment and experience.

(p25.1) Concerning the intimidation and fear, some instructors were also perceived as prejudice. A study on the perception of instructors on male nursing students found discriminatory behaviors that consistently favored female students [20]. The male students in the study reported the following experiences: gender bias, being singled out, doing manly stuff, limitations in clinical settings, and no male role models [20]. Thus, when students felt being biased, they did not feel that they belonged, and their learning environment was compromised. For male students to feel comfortable, Powers et al. [20] suggested faculties implementing gender-neutral terminology into nursing examples and lectures and treating all students as equals.
## (s28) Focusing on individual students' needs
(p28.0) Faculties need to be aware of students' learning environment and tailor their teaching in the most beneficial way possible to students' learning outcomes [18]. Students express positive and negative experiences with faculties when they are part of a larger group and express the desire and need for an individualized teaching plan [19]. Individual students need to be the primary concern of a nursing instructor [17]. Nursing instructors who are consciously aware of their teaching strategies and behaviors and adjust them to fit the needs of the students create a more responsive and comfortable learning environment.
## (s29) Providing continuing education and mentoring programs for instructors
(p29.0) Finding new ways to educate instructors on appropriate caring behaviors is beneficial to students. Mikkonen et al. [4] suggest providing continuing education for instructors, in which instructors can develop and increase their empathic skills and understand the importance of showing empathy on students' learning and professionalism. Other suggestions for continuing education of instructors come from Labrague et al. [11] who suggest nurse educators become certified, which can benefit both instructors and students. Continuing education on instructing faculty empathy skills may promote students' perceptions of what nursing means to them and keep students on the path to finish their nursing education.

(p29.1) Faculty mentoring programs are also valuable to develop junior faculties. Swanson, Larson, and Malone [28] find that successful mentoring programs foster junior faculties' academic success as scholars and educators. Effective mentoring programs help mentors and mentees build a productive relationship that is consisted of mutual respect, trust, and open communication. Effective mentoring programs can provide a win-win situation for both nursing schools and junior faculties [28]. Faculties can build their reputations and careers, and universities can benefit from the increasing contributions of the junior faculties.
## (s30) Developing students' empathetic and caring behaviors
(p30.0) Another aspect of the learning environment where professors have influence is to facilitate the development of students' caring behaviors. Teaching strategies should include simulations, games with educational value, and patient narratives, which could actively engage students in developing and using their empathy skills and caring behaviors [15,29]. These teaching strategies can promote students' perceptions of faculty 'control' versus 'flexibility,' which is ranked low by students in the studies reviewed. Simulation activities allow instructors to give full flexibility to students and explain to them what can be done differently without the risk of harm to patients or students [15,29].
