# Soil Acidity and its Management Options in Ethiopia: A Review

CorpusID: 210267783 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/880fa6c52e3715b82c96db1d08e5ee65ae97fa00](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/880fa6c52e3715b82c96db1d08e5ee65ae97fa00)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s4) a) Climate
(p4.0) It has been well known that in soils of dry region a large supply of bases is usually present, since little water passes through the soil. With an increase in rainfall, the contents of soluble salts are reduced to a low level, and any calcium carbonate and gypsum present are removed. With further increase in rainfall, a point is reached at which the rate of removal of bases exceeds the rate of their liberation from nonexchangeable forms. Wet climates have a greater potential for acidic soils (Tadesse, 2001). Over time, excessive rainfall leaches the soil profile's basic elements (Ca, Mg, Na, and K) that prevent soil acidity. High rainfall leaches soluble nutrients such as Ca and Mg which are specifically replaced by Al from the exchange sites (Brady and Weil, 2016).
## (s6) c) Application of ammonium fertilizers
(p6.0) Continuous application of inorganic fertilizer without soil test and amendment, in the end increase soil acidity. The use of N fertilizers in form of ammonia is a source of acidification (Fageria and Nascente, 2014; Guo et al., 2010). When ammonium fertilizers are applied to the soil, acidity is produced, but the form of N removed by the crop is similar to that found in fertilizer. Hydrogen is added in the form of ammonia-based fertilizers (NH 4 ), urea-based fertilizers [(CO (NH 2 ) 2 ], and as proteins (amino acid) in organic fertilizers. Transformation of such sources of N fertilizers into nitrate (NO 3 ) releases hydrogen ions (H + ) to create soil acidity. In reality, N fertilizer increases soil acidity by increasing crop yields, thereby increasing the amount of basic elements being removed by crop harvest without incorporation. Hence, application of fertilizers containing NH 4 or even adding large quantities of organic matter to a soil can ultimately increase soil acidity and lower pH (Guo et al., 2010).
