# A review of acrylates: Super glue, nail adhesives, and diabetic pump adhesives increasing sensitization risk in women and children

CorpusID: 219038684 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f492815c94e9e903247476a857674c11776394e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f492815c94e9e903247476a857674c11776394e2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) is a cutaneous type IV hypersensitivity immune reaction mounted against substances in contact with the skin to which the patient has been sensitized (Kostner et al., 2017). ACD is common, affecting approximately 72 million Americans per year, and is more common in women (Bickers et al., 2006). One common contact allergen group is acrylates, which are monomers that are polymerized into the making of glues, adhesives, and plastic materials. The monomers are sensitizing, whereas the final polymers are inert. Acrylates were the 2012 Contact Allergen of the Year with the specific acrylate isobornyl acrylate (IBOA) being the 2020 Contact Allergen of the Year (Aerts et al., 2020;Sasseville, 2012). This article reviews the history of acrylate use, epidemiology, and both known and emerging sources of acrylates resulting in ACD.
## (s2) Epidemiology
(p2.0) The exact epidemiology of acrylate-induced contact dermatitis is difficult to determine. Among patch-tested patients studied by the North American Contact Dermatitis Group from 2015 to 2016, rates of reactions to acrylates ranged from 3.4% for 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate to 1.7% for ethyl acrylate and 1.4% for methyl methacrylate, with 79% of these having at least possible relevance (DeKoven et al., 2018). Other studies of patchtested populations in Canada, Sweden, and Singapore found that overall incidence ranged from 1.0% to 1.4% (Drucker and Pratt, 2011;Goon et al., 2008). Similarly, a majority of patients (72%) had clinically relevant exposure to acrylates (Drucker and Pratt, 2011). In a retrospective review of patients with positive extended methacrylate and acrylate testing, 67.6% of cases were occupation related, most commonly nail beauticians (80%), followed by dental workers and industrial workers (Ramos et al., 2014).
## (s3) Types and sources of acrylates
(p3.0) Acrylates vary in their chemical structure, commercial use, and sensitization capacity (Conde-Salazar, et al., 2007;Sasseville, 2012). Acrylates are typically categorized based on their chemical structure, with mono(meth)acrylates, diacrylate/triacrylates, and cyanoacrylates being the common groupings.
## (s4) Mono(meth)acrylates
(p4.0) Monoacrylates are defined by a structure of only 1 vinyl group ( Fig. 1; Sasseville, 2012) and are used in the production of rubber, eyeglass frames, dentures, hearing aids, and artificial nails. Artificial nails are molded in a 2-part mixture of both liquid monomer and polymer powder that polymerizes in ambient light (Sasseville, 2012).
## (s5) Diacrylates and triacrylates
(p5.0) Diacrylates and triacrylates contain 2 or 3 reactive acrylic groups (Sasseville, 2012;Scheman et al., 2019) and are more commonly used in dental composite materials, artificial nails, and ultraviolet-cured inks (Sasseville, 2012).
## (s6) Cyanoacrylates
(p6.0) Cyanoacrylates are most commonly used in fast-acting glues (e.g., superglue), nail glues for press-on nails, continuous glucose monitors (Fig. 2), and medical adhesives (2-octyl cyanoacrylate or Dermabond; Aschenbeck and Hylwa, 2017;Chou et al., 2017;Durando et al., 2014;Muttardi et al., 2016).
## (s7) Acrylate cross polymers
(p7.0) The manufacturing of acrylates typically involves using a monomer of either acrylate or methacrylate that is then polymerized into the final product. It is these monomers that are acutely sensitizing and allergenic (Drucker and Pratt, 2011;Geukens and Goossens, 2001). Polymerization (hardening) of monomers renders them inert. Several methodologies can be used for polymerization: self-curing, catalyst-driven, ultraviolet light, or heat processes. Because these methodologies differ in the degree to which they result in a fully polymerized final product, some products can contain more residual monomers than others and thus be more or less sensitizing (Scheman et al., 2008).  
## (s8) Cross reactivity
(p8.0) The sensitizing potential of acrylates is a function of the chemical structure. Diacrylates have strong sensitization potential, but methacrylates are only moderately or weakly sensitizing (Conde-Salazar et al., 2007). Cyanoacrylates were initially deemed nonsensitizing because cyanoacrylate polymerization is quickly triggered by moisture on the bonded surface (e.g., metals, ceramic, glass, rubber, biologic tissue) and occurs within minutes (Sasseville, 2012). However, cyanoacrylates are now well documented sources of ACD (Chou et al., 2017). Despite significant cross reactivity between many acrylates, allergy to cyanoacrylates has not been shown to cross-react with other (meth)acrylates (Chou et al., 2017).

(p8.1) Exposure to incompletely polymerized acrylates will induce broad cross-reactivity or cosensitivity to acrylates and has been documented to result in systemic contact dermatitis in rare cases (Sauder and Pratt, 2015). The recent emergence of home nail applications with acrylate curing using ultraviolet light has extended the potential risk of sensitization because patients have more direct contact with the monomers without complete curing (DeKoven et al., 2018).
## (s9) Clinical features
(p9.0) In a review of 32 patients with ACD due to acrylate exposure, presentations varied widely. The most common pattern was chronic hand eczema with cracked pulpitis, paronychia, and nail dystrophy. Other sites of involvement included the thighs, wrists and forearms, face, oral mucosa, and eyelids (Ramos et al., 2014). Researchers have suggested that patients who present with periungual dermatitis and nail dystrophy concomitant with the use of artificial nails have ACD to acrylate in the differential (Bjorkner, 2006). Airborne sensitization to acrylates has also resulted in respiratory symptoms in rare cases (Muttardi et al., 2016;ramos et al., 2014).
## (s12) Ethyl cyanoacrylate
(p12.0) Ethyl cyanoacrylates have also been reported in diabetic devices (Aschenbeck and Hylwa, 2017). Notably, this allergen was not present in the adhesives used to adhere the device to the skin but rather within the device itself and exemplifies the ability of cyanoacrylates to penetrate perceived barriers (Aschenbeck and Hylwa, 2017).
## (s13) 2-octyl cyanoacrylate
(p13.0) Dermabond (2-octyl cyanoacrylate) is a topical wound-closure adhesive frequently used for its ease of use and overall patient satisfaction. Reports of ACD to this product are not uncommon, with the incidence of ACD to Dermabond reported at 2% (Davis and Stuart, 2016;Dunst et al., 2010;Durando et al., 2014;El-Dars et al., 2010;Hivnor and Hudkins, 2008). Importantly, 2-octyl cyanoacrylate does not cross react with other acrylates, such as ethyl cyanoacrylate, which is the standard cyanoacrylate on patch-test series. Thus, in cases where suspicion of ACD to 2-ocyl cyanoacrylate is high, Dermabond must be applied to the skin because there is no surrogate patch-testing hapten currently available. Fig. 3 shows a positive patch-test reaction to Dermabond.
## (s14) Butyl acrylate
(p14.0) ACD to butyl acrylate has been reported from Mepilex Border (Spencer et al., 2016). In one series of 354 patients with chronic leg ulcers who underwent patch testing, 1.4% were allergic to butyl acrylate (Spencer et al., 2016;Valois et al., 2015).
## (s15) Patch testing for acrylates
(p15.0) Patch testing remains the gold standard of evaluation of potential acrylate sensitivity. Three acrylates are included in the 2019-2020 North American Development Group Standard Allergens: 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate, ethyl acrylate, and methyl methacrylate. The ACDS Core Allergen Series includes four acrylates: hydroxyethyl methacrylate, methyl methacrylate, ethyl acrylate, and ethyl cyanoacrylate. Cyanoacrylates are tested at 10%, methacrylates at 2%, and acrylates at 0.1% to allow for allergic reaction without irritation (Sasseville, 2012). However, screening for cyanoacrylates will not pick up on ACD to Dermabond; it must be tested as is to confirm allergenicity.

(p15.1) Spontaneous polymerization of all acrylates is of concern because this can render the patch-test allergens inert and thus potentially yield false negative results. Spontaneous polymerization can be slowed by petrolatum and storing these allergens in a freezer (Sasseville, 2012).
## (s16) Less common reactions to acrylates
(p16.0) Acrylates most commonly result in ACD reactions at the site of allergen application. Less common reactions include chemical leukoderma and systemic contact dermatitis. Kwok et al. (2011) reported a unique case of leukoderma after patch testing with an acrylate series in a 53-year-old woman without a history of vitiligo or autoimmune disease in five locations (methyl methacrylate, 2hydroxyethyl methacrylate, 2-hydroxypropyl methacrylate, ethyleneglycol dimethacrylate, and ethyl methacrylate).

(p16.1) Another case of interest involved a 28-year-old woman who presented after having her teeth varnished with a product containing 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate. Initially she did not have any local reaction, but she subsequently developed genital dermatitis secondary to feminine hygiene pads. This subsequently resolved, but repeated teeth varnishing resulted in systemic contact der-matitis. The patient was patch tested with positive reactions to multiple acrylates (Sauder and Pratt, 2015).
