# A literature review on reducing carbon emission from supply chain system: drivers, barriers, performance indicators, and practices

CorpusID: 212801017 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/918addf36bdea6a2c1b2dd293d02a8223c98b69e)

Fields: Business, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Supply chain management is strategically positioned for sustainability, performance, and organizational sustainability [1]. Furthermore, the supply chain is an essential branch of operations management, and it has an essential impact on the environment, including emissions, pollutions, and the health hazard of the community. However, unconsciously, inefficient supply chain management activities from upstream to downstream can cause excessive carbon gas emissions.

(p0.1) The increase of global warming and changing biodiversity has brought the world's sustainability towards immediate danger. People from different areas, including researchers, academicians, practitioners, and scientists got all together to suggest ways to maintain the environmental sustainability.
## (s1) Literature Review
(p1.0) Tapia Granados and Spash [5] suggest that annual costs in emissions are highly correlated with economic growth. In California, the cap-and-trade scheme has been implemented since 2013, and it did not have a significant impact because the energy supply was minimal. When making decisions about cap-and-trade allowance allocations or carbon tax designs, policymakers should consider that industries may be concentrated and thus already limit output below socially optimal levels [6]. Carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions however carbon cap-and-trade regulation and green technology investment is an effective method of reducing carbon emissions Bai, et al. [7].
## (s2) Source of Drivers and Barriers to Reducing Carbon Emission from Supply Chain System
(p2.0) To reduce carbon emission from a supply chain system, there are various drivers and barriers in the process of implementation. Drivers in this study are factors that can encourage companies to reduce carbon emissions, for example, the target of company image or competitive pressure. While the barrier is factors that inhibit some process from reducing carbon emission. According to Tseng, et al. [35], drivers on reducing carbon emission can be classified into internal and external sources.
## (s7) Practice
(p7.0) In the literature, this review found a variety of practices that had been submitted by previous researchers. Various policies from the government have a good impact on reducing gas emissions. These policies include renewables energy, carbon-pricing, low carbon development, and incentive mechanism policy. To produce the best output, these policies must be supported by all stakeholders. According to Tapia Granados and Spash [5], policies that have been made will run smoothly if balanced with the availability of renewable material and energy supply. Thus, the policy to reduce gas emissions will not succeed if it is not balanced with the supply of renewable energy. Renewables energy policies were only eligible for high-income countries [11]. Supporting technology is very important for the success of policy [12].

(p7.1) Green supply chains will be challenging to achieve in the decentralized supply chain. According to Chen, et al. [17], the use of penalties in the decentralization supply chain is quite influential on lowcarbon policies. Coordination can be the best way to achieve common goals in a supply chain system. In the literature review, several media in the coordinated contract were found for coordinating the supply chain and achieve the goal of reducing gas emissions. The coordination media include quantity discount, energy consumption structure, optimal safety stock, optimal order quantity, optimal wholesale price, optimal carbon emission level, revenue-and-investment sharing, pricing, delay in payment, production strategy, deliveries, deliveries size, and profit-sharing.

(p7.2) Zissis, et al. [19] and Peng, et al. [20] use quantity discount as a medium in coordinating the supply chain to reduce carbon emission. Energy consumption structure successfully used by Peng, et al.

(p7.3) [10]. Darom, et al. [13] succeeded in using safety stock with consideration of emissions. According to past research optimal order quantity [29], optimal wholesale price [29]; [23], optimal carbon emission level [29] under a coordinated supply chain can reduce carbon emission effectively. In another side, revenue sharing is used by [22] [30] [28] and investment sharing used by [21] to coordinate the supply chain to reduce carbon emission. Other than that, Liu [22], Ding, et al. [24], and Zhang, et al. [31] utilize a pricing strategy to coordinated supply chain and reduce carbon emission. Moreover, coordination has also been carried out with other media, among others delay in payment [34], production strategy [16], deliveries [18], deliveries size [18], and profit sharing [32].

(p7.4) Based on the practices that have been carried out in previous studies, it can be concluded that coordinated supply chains can reduce gas emissions more effectively. Through proper coordination with any media, the common goal of becoming a green supply chain will be easier to achieve.
