# The prognostic role of steroid hormone receptor signaling pathways in urothelial carcinoma Review Articles on Urothelial Carcinoma

CorpusID: 214755285 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19913a0a859b183cdf9c0ac1061048fad2f425e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19913a0a859b183cdf9c0ac1061048fad2f425e7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) GR
(p3.0) It remains controversial whether glucocorticoids induce versus inhibit urothelial tumorigenesis. A case-control study demonstrated that prolonged use of glucocorticoids was associated with an elevated incidence of bladder cancer (50), presumably via immunosuppression. By contrast, our recent study has revealed that a synthetic glucocorticoid prednisone prevents the malignant transformation of GR-positive urothelial cells, but not that of GR-negative cells (51). Prednisone and other natural or synthetic glucocorticoids, such as corticosterone and dexamethasone, have also shown to strongly inhibit bladder cancer cell invasion and metastasis via, for instance, inactivating NF-κB (52-54). However, treatment with dexamethasone (and most of other glucocorticoids examined) in bladder cancer lines resulted in increases in cell viability and decreases in apoptosis particularly that induced by a widely used chemotherapeutic medication, cisplatin. Apart from glucocorticoid-induced immunosuppression, glucocorticoid-mediated GR signals appear to have dual roles (i.e., inhibition of tumor development and progression versus promotion of cell proliferation) in urothelial cancer. Further studies have indicated that the action of glucocorticoids may be dependent on a balance between transactivation and transrepression of GR (51,54,55) that involve their therapeutic effects and associated adverse effects, respectively. In particular, transrepression appears to correlate with the function of GR as a tumor suppressor.

(p3.1) Our immunohistochemical analyses in bladder (28) and UUT (15) tumors have demonstrated that GR is expressed in most of non-neoplastic urothelial tissues, which is down-regulated in urothelial neoplasms. The levels of GR expression were also significantly lower in high-grade or MI bladder tumors than in low-grade or NMI tumors (28). However, there were no significant differences in GR positivity between low-grade versus highgrade or NMI versus MI UUT tumors (15). In addition, loss of GR expression was associated with the recurrence of NMI bladder tumors and the progression of MI bladder tumors (28). Multivariate analysis further identified low GR expression as a predictor for the recurrence of NMI tumors (HR=2.252; P=0.034) and the progression of MI tumors (HR=3.690; P=0.077) (28). The levels of GR expression in UUT tumors were not strongly associated with patient outcomes in our study (15).
## (s4) PR
(p4.0) A case-control study demonstrated a significantly lowered risk of developing bladder cancer in multiparous women or those using oral contraceptives (56). Using a transgenic model for bladder cancer, multiparous female mice were also found to develop significantly smaller tumors than nulliparous females (57). These findings suggested that not only estrogens but also progestogens could prevent urothelial tumorigenesis.

(p4.1) Using hormone-binding assay, PR was shown to be positive in 1 of 3 non-invasive and 3 of 3 advanced urothelial tumors (58). An immunohistochemical study then detected immunoreactivity for PR in 18 of 20 bladder tissues from boys aged 1-12 years (59). However, subsequent larger immunohistochemical studies failed to detect PR signals in 198 (22) and 410 (23) cases of bladder cancer. Another study, using 120 cases of surgical specimens, showed PR expression in 2% of non-neoplastic bladders and 4% of bladder cancer tissues (12). More recently, we demonstrated that PR was positive in 13% of control urothelial tissues from the UUT and 16 (16%) of 99 UUT tumors (15). Although the levels of PR expression were not significantly altered in lowgrade versus high-grade or NMI versus MI UUT tumors in our study, PR positivity in pT3-4 tumors was associated with a significantly higher risk of disease-specific mortality. Moreover, patients with ERα-positive and/or PR-positive pT3-4 UUT tumor had a significantly higher risk of disease-specific mortality, and positivity of either ERα or PR, or both was an independent prognosticator (HR=2.434; P=0.037) in this subgroup of patients. In support of our data (15), the status of ERα and PR expression in MI bladder cancers was shown to help stratifying a subgroup of patients into those with significantly poorer outcomes (39).
## (s6) Molecules whose expression is modulated via steroid hormone receptor signals
(p6.0) An increasing amount of evidence suggests the involvement of upstream pathways and downstream effectors of steroid hormone receptor-mediated signals in urothelial cancer outgrowth. Table 1 summarizes such molecules directly or indirectly regulated via the AR and/or ER pathway(s). The following are key molecules, including several transcription factors, whose expression has been not only shown to be up-or down-regulated via androgen-mediated AR and/or estrogen-mediated ER pathways in bladder cancer cells but also assessed their prognostic role in surgical specimens. ATF2, a member of the leucine zipper family of DNA-binding proteins, is normally activated via its phosphorylation in response to phospho-ERK/MAPK signals. We have recently demonstrated that androgens activate ATF2 in both neoplastic and non-neoplastic urothelial cells expressing the AR and that ATF2 activation results in the promotion of urothelial tumorigenesis and tumor progression (35). In our immunohistochemistry in a set of bladder tissue microarray, the levels of ATF2/ phospho-ATF2/phospho-ERK expression were significantly higher in tumors than in non-neoplastic urothelial tissues. Moreover, ATF2 expression was significantly elevated in high-grade and MI tumors, compared with lower grade and NMI tumors, respectively. Univariate analysis showed that patients with phospho-ATF2-positive or phospho-ERK-positive MI tumor had significantly higher risks of disease progression. Multivariate analysis further showed that phospho-ATF2 positivity (HR=5.317; P=0.012) and phospho-ERK positivity (HR=2.727; P=0.066) were associated with a lower cancer-specific survival rate. In addition, moderate/strong expression of ATF2 was an independent predictor for the recurrence of low-grade tumors following transurethral surgery (HR=2.956, P=0.045).

(p6.1) β-catenin is an integral component of the Wnt signaling pathway which is known to activate target genes, including a proto-oncogene c-myc, a cell cycle regulator cyclin D1, and a receptor tyrosine kinase receptor epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). AR signals have been shown to activate the Wnt/β-catenin signaling in bladder cancer cells (84,85). Co-expression of AR and β-catenin in the nuclei of bladder cancer cells was also documented (84). However, conflicting data exist in regard to an association between the status of β-catenin expression in bladder cancer and tumor behavior. Nonetheless, various studies demonstrated loss or reduced membranous staining of β-catenin in bladder cancer, compared with normal urothelium, and in higher grade/ stage tumors, as well as nuclear β-catenin accumulation, as a hallmark of Wnt/β-catenin activation, in tumors, some of which were further associated with worse patient outcomes (17,84,(94)(95)(96)(97). In particular, aberrant expression of β-catenin in bladder cancer was found to be an independent factor of disease recurrence or progression (17). More specifically, nuclear β-catenin expression was an independent predictor of the recurrence (HR=5.851; P=0.002) or progression (HR=3.104; P=0.034) of NMI tumors (97).

(p6.2) CD24, a cell surface protein which functions as a cell adhesion molecule, has been shown to promote the development of urothelial tumor and its metastasis (87,98). Additionally, in bladder cancer cells, androgens activate CD24 via the AR pathway (87,98). Immunohistochemical studies have shown CD24 expression exclusively in bladder cancer cells, but not in adjacent stromal cells (98)(99)(100). Significantly elevated CD24 expression was also observed in higher grade/stage tumors, compared with lower grade/ stage tumors (99,100), as well as in metastatic tumors, compared with primary tumors (98). Moreover, univariate analysis revealed associations between CD24 overexpression and the recurrence of NMI tumors (100) or cancer-specific mortality in patients with MI tumor (99). However, CD24 was found to be not an independent prognosticator (99).

(p6.3) The ErbB family, consisting of ERBB1/EGFR, ERBB2/ HER2, ERBB3, and ERBB4, is a class of receptor tyrosine kinases that are well known to regulate survival signaling in urothelial cancer cells. Indeed, the efficacy of EGFRtargeted therapy has been assessed in bladder cancer (101). We have demonstrated that androgens induce the expression of EGFR and ERBB2, as well as phosphorylation of their downstream proteins Akt and ERK, in AR-positive bladder cancer cells (83), while EGF promotes their growth via modulating AR activity (102). Alterations of the ErbB family, including protein overexpression and gene amplification/ mutation, have also been investigated in bladder cancer tissues, providing mixed results as to their prognostic significance (101,(103)(104)(105)(106)(107). For example, some studies indicated ERBB2 overexpression as a poor prognosticator, while others failed to do. Meanwhile, EGFR or ERBB2 expression was shown to be up-regulated in MI bladder tumors in most of the studies. In a most recent metaanalysis of 9 studies involving 2,242 patients (104), ERBB2 expression was associated with poorer cancer-specific survival (HR=2.00; P=0.006).

(p6.4) ELK1, a member of the ETS-domain family of transcription factors, has been implicated in cell proliferation or cell cycle control, as well as apoptosis, via regulating the expression of various genes, including a protooncogene c-fos. Interestingly, the induction of urothelial tumorigenesis and tumor progression by ELK1 signals has been shown to be primarily AR-dependent (90,91,108). Androgens have also been found to activate ELK1 in both non-neoplastic (91) and urothelial cancer (90) cells. Our immunohistochemical analyses revealed considerable induction in the expression levels of ELK1, as well as its activated form, phospho-ELK1, in bladder tumors, compared with non-neoplastic urothelial tissues (90). As expected, the expression of ELK1 or phospho-ELK1 versus AR in bladder tumors was significantly correlated. Although no strong associations between the levels of ELK1/phospho-ELK1 expression and tumor grades or stages were observed, positivity of phospho-ELK1 expression in NMI or MI tumors precisely predicted their recurrence or progression, respectively. Multivariate analysis further showed an association between phospho-ELK1 expression and cancer-specific mortality (HR =2.693; P=0.021). Additionally, in accordance with preclinical data in bladder cancer cells showing enhancement of cisplatin-mediated cytotoxicity by ELK1 inactivation (108), phospho-ELK1 positivity in MI tumors from patients undergoing cisplatin-based neoadjuvant chemotherapy was strongly associated with chemoresistance in subsequent immunohistochemical analysis (91). More recently, we stained for phospho-ELK1 in UUT cancer specimens (109). As with bladder cancers, the expression of phospho-ELK1 in tumors was significantly up-regulated, compared with corresponding non-neoplastic urothelial tissues, and was associated with that of AR. Elevated phospho-ELK1 expression was also marginally (P=0.085) and significantly (P=0.014) associated with muscle-invasion (i.e., pT2) and lymphovascular invasion, respectively. Moreover, patients with phospho-ELK1(2+) tumor had a significantly higher risk of cancer-specific mortality (HR=3.179 and P=0.013 in univariate analysis; HR=1.131 and P=0.802 in multivariate analysis), compared to those with phospho-ELK1 (0/1+) tumor.

(p6.5) GATA3 is a member of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors, and its immunohistochemistry, as a marker of urothelial differentiation, has been widely used in diagnostic surgical pathology (110). Loss of GATA3 has been associated with the induction of the development (89) and progression (111) of urothelial cancer. While we demonstrated that androgens could down-regulate GATA3 expression in non-neoplastic urothelial cells, we failed to show comparable effects of estrogens in non-neoplastic urothelial cells or those of androgens in bladder cancer cells (89,111). In our immunohistochemistry in a set of tissue microarray, GATA3 expression was considerably downregulated in the entire group of bladder tumors examined or a subgroup of low-grade/NMI tumors, compared with non-neoplastic urothelial tissues or high-grade/MI tumors, respectively (112). Nonetheless, GATA3 positivity in MI bladder tumors was associated with a significantly higher risk for disease progression even in a multivariate setting (progression: HR=2.435 and P=0.052; cancer-specific survival: HR=3.673 and P=0.040). By contrast, a recent study showed a strong association between GATA3 negativity in MI bladder cancers, as an independent predictor, and worse overall survival (HR=4.54; P=0.02) (113). We also assessed GATA3 expression in UUT urothelial carcinomas and found that GATA3 positivity, as an independent predictor, was associated with higher rates of progressionfree survival in all 99 cases (HR=0.479; P=0.051) or 62 cases of MI tumors (HR=0.387; P=0.028) and those of cancerspecific survival in all cases (HR=0.354; P=0.034) or MI tumor cases (HR=0.402; P=0.072) (114). In bladder (112) and UUT (114) tumors included in our sets of tissue microarray, there were significant and marginal correlations, respectively, between GATA3 versus AR expression.

(p6.6) NF-κB, a protein complex of transcription factors consisting of RelA/p65 and others, is known to involve a wide variety of physiological and pathological processes. NF-κB inactivation is also referred to as GR transrepression. We have demonstrated functional interplay between AR and NF-κB signals in non-neoplastic urothelial and bladder cancer cells (34,37). Specifically, androgens could activate NF-κB, while NF-κB activators/inhibitors modulate AR expression. Preclinical data also indicated that NF-κB signals induced urothelial tumorigenesis and tumor progression in an ARdependent manner. Immunohistochemical studies have shown elevated nuclear expression of p65 in higher grade or stage bladder cancers (25,115,116). We confirmed these observations and further demonstrated significantly increased expression levels of p65 and its active form phospho-p65 in bladder tumors, compared with corresponding non-neoplastic urothelial tissues (34). Survival analyses in patients with MI bladder cancer in multivariate settings further revealed associations between p65 overexpression and worse overall survival (HR=1.107; P=0.0003) (115) as well as between phospho-p65 positivity and disease progression (HR=6.424; P=0.003) or cancer-specific mortality (HR=4.718; P=0.012) (34). In 90 cases of UUT tumors, p65 expression was also found to be an independent predictor of overall survival (HR=2.237; P=0.037) or cancer-specific survival (HR=2.870; P=0.025) (117). In addition, immunohistochemistry in MI bladder cancer specimens from those who underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to radical cystectomy showed a strong association of phospho-p65 expression with chemoresistance (37).

(p6.7) UGT1A is a key drug-metabolism enzyme especially involving detoxification of bladder carcinogens, including some industrial chemicals and cigarette smoke. It has been shown that androgen-mediated AR signaling and estrogen-mediated ERβ signaling are associated with reduction and induction, respectively, of the expression levels of UGT1A and its subtypes in SVHUC normal urothelial cells or normal mouse bladders (47,93). An initial immunohistochemical study demonstrated loss of UGT1A in 6 of 19 bladder tumors (118). Subsequent immunohistochemistry demonstrated reduced UGT1A expression in 145 bladder tumors, compared with nonneoplastic urothelial tissues, and inverse associations of UGT1A levels with tumor grade/stage (47). Decreased expression of UGT1A was also associated with the progression of high-grade NMI tumors (only in a univariate setting) or worse cancer-specific survival in patients with MI tumor [even in a multivariate setting (HR=3.413; P=0.010)]. In addition, UGT1A expression was positively and negatively correlated with the levels of ERα and ERβ, respectively, but not those of AR. In a recent immunohistochemical study in UUT urothelial carcinoma tissues, the expression of UGT1A was down-regulated in tumors, compared with non-neoplastic urothelial tissues, and in MI tumors, compared with NMI tumors (119). Furthermore, UGT1A positivity in M0 tumors was found to be an independent predictor for better cancer-specific survival (HR=0.28; P=0.018).
