# Molecular Sciences The Complex Network between MYC Oncogene and microRNAs in Gastric Cancer: An Overview

CorpusID: 212651201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8e2d1b7ec0036688adaba24333965bf85b6c2c8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d8e2d1b7ec0036688adaba24333965bf85b6c2c8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s2) The Complex Relationship between microRNAs and MYC Expression
(p2.0) The deregulation of the expression of several miRNAs can directly or indirectly lead to increased or decreased MYC, ( Table 2). As described above, MYC plays a key role in the normal and tumor development, and the MYC/miRNA network is likely to contribute to the oncogenic functions of MYC. In the present review, we highlight some miRNAs that are altered in GC and are associated with MYC activation. Up Up [114] Up, upregulated expression in gastric cancer in relation to control; Down, downregulated expression in gastric cancer in relation to control; ?: absence of studies on direct relationship between the respective microRNA and MYC in gastric cancer.
## (s4) MicroRNAs Regulate MYC Oncogenic Pathways
(p4.0) MYC is involved in several pathways in gastric tumor cells (Figure 2), and manifold miRNAs may interfere with them, such as miR-494, miR-429, miR-520d-3p, miR-363, miR-561 and the aforementioned miR-33b. In GC, miR-494 and miR-429 are downregulated, and negatively correlated with MYC expression. The overexpression of miR-494 decreased MYC expression, the number of viable cancer cells, tumor burden, and the percentage of proliferative cells [109], and cells transfected with miR-429 showed downregulation of MYC protein [108]. miR-520d-3p, which is also downregulated in GC tissue and cell lines, inhibited the expression of EphA2 (Ephrin Receptor A2), a gene involved in nervous system development. Additionally, cells transfected with mimic miR-520d-3p showed lower MYC and EphA2 expression and diminished cell proliferation, invasion, and migration [110,119]. miR-363 promotes GC progression through MBP-1 inhibition, leading to an upregulation of MYC protein expression [106]. miR-561 is also downregulated in human GC cell lines and tissues, and its expression was associated with tumor-node-metastasis (pTNM) staging system and suppressed MYC expression by directly binding to its 3 -untranslated region [111]. This research group demonstrated that miR-561 can act as a tumor suppressor miRNA in GC by targeting MYC and inhibiting cellular proliferation and invasion. All together these results suggest that these miRNAs can be used as targets for new treatment strategies against GC.

(p4.1) Several studies revealed that the miR-29 family (miR-29a-c) was inversely correlated with MYC expression and regulates cell growth and survival by targeting CDK6 (Cell division protein kinase 6), IGF1R (Insulin Like Growth Factor 1 Receptor), TCL1 (T-cell leukemia/lymphoma protein 1A), PI3K (Phosphoinositide 3-kinase) and MCL1 (Induced myeloid leukemia cell differentiation protein) [120][121][122]. However, Gong et al. found that miR-29 suppresses GC cell proliferation or invasiveness by targeting the cell cycle G1/S transition gene Cyclin D2 (CCND2) or MMP2 (matrix metallopeptidase 2), which encodes for an enzyme that degrades extracellular matrix [122]. The mechanism is unknown yet, but it is well established that MYC directly suppresses miR-29 [120,123]. As reported by Yan et al., miR-29b is recognized as an essential regulator of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and is directly involved in cancer metastasis and chemoresistance [124]. Moreover, Saito and colleagues have reported that miR-29c is activated by the selective COX2 (cyclooxygenase-2) inhibitors, as Celecoxib, inducing apoptosis, which suggests that miR-29c restoring may be a possible treatment for GC [125]. In contrast, Wang et al. found that in GC this miRNA acts as a metastatic suppressors by directly targeting catenin-δ (CTNND1), a gene involved in cell to cell adhesion and signal transduction [126]. These discoveries suggest the differential roles for miR-29, not only acting as tumor suppressor miRNA in GC, but also serving as predictors for GC prevention.

(p4.2) MYC can induce miR-9-3 expression that targets E-cadherin (CDH1), a cellular adhesion protein essential for the cell-cell contact of the gastric epithelium, and promoting tumor cell migration and invasion, leading to EMT in GC [83,127]. The MYC and N-MYC regulation of miR-9 seems to be one of the main pathways to metastasis [128,129]. In neuroblastoma patients, N-MYC amplification directly correlates with the miR-9 levels and metastatic spread [128]. On the contrary, let-7 has target genes [HMGA2 (High Mobility Group AT-Hook 2), IMP-1 (IGF2 mRNA-binding protein 1), LIN28B (Lin-28 homolog B), Ras, and MYC) important for cancer cell stemness [130]. Although let-7a expression was high in GC cell lines, it expression diminished progressively during the progression of gastric mucosa cancerization, confirming that the regulation of let-7a expression may be used as a novel biomarker and molecular mechanism of drug response to treatment [114]. Enhancer of zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a histone methyltransferase involved in the silencing of many genes related to cell proliferation and differentiation. EZH2 in turn enhances H3K27 trimethylation and DNA methylation in let-7 promoter, and, as a consequence, let-7a and let-7c expressions are downregulated, resulting in Ras-ERK pathway activation [77]. Additionally, a previous mentioned study showed that GKN1 inhibits EZH2 expression through miR-185 [118]. GKN1 is considered a tumor suppressor gene as it indirectly inhibits EZH2 and DNMT1, through miR-185 and directly inhibits the Histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1). The 8q24.21 PVT1 oncogene also regulates EZH2 activity. PVT1 recruits EZH2 to occupy the genomic sites of P15/INK4b and P16/INK4b genes, silencing these gene expressions and enforcing GC cell proliferation [34,131]. The alteration of DNMT1 and HDAC1 expression can lead to demethylation and histone deacetylation, respectively, of several genes important for the maintenance of cell homeostasis, for example, MYC, E-cadherin, CDKN1A, and CDKN2A [132][133][134][135].
## (s6) Conclusions
(p6.0) MYC and other 8q24.21 genes are associated with GC development and progression. We showed that miRNAs have an influence on the expression of MYC and vice versa. One of the major consequences of MYC activation is the extensive reprogramming of the expression pattern of miRNAs in tumor cells, which is closely linked to the modulation of critical pathways associated with cancer etiology, including MYC-MAX-MXD1 and Ras-ERK pathways. Therefore, the studies reviewed revealed that MYC and miRNAs have a very complex interaction in GC that can be affected by external factors, such as bacterial and virus infection. Despite being one of the best-known and studied oncogenes, there is a lack of understanding regarding the application of this information for therapeutic interventions against GC. This application should likely be studied in conjunction with miRNAs expression and action once they appear to be highly correlated. Thus, the investigation of the role of miRNAs helps in the elucidation of underlying mechanisms of gastric carcinogenesis and are potential biomarkers that monitor the alteration of critical genomic driver regions, targeting new treatment strategies against GC.

(p6.1) In fact, besides acting as tumor biomarkers, the miRNAs mentioned in this review may also be used as targets for cancer therapies. Furthermore, there are some examples of miRNA-based therapies currently on clinical trials. A quick search on clinicaltrials.org using the key words "miR" and "cancer" reveals that are 334 studies and many of them are active. For example, the biotechnology company miRagen has been developing therapies using miRNAs: MRG-110, MRG-106 and MRG-201. The first one, MRG-110, uses an LNA-modified antisense oligonucleotides to inhibit miR-92 and works by increasing the growth of new blood vessels to treat wound healing and heart failure. MRG-106 uses the same technology to silence miR-155 to treat T-cell lymphoma. MRG-201, in contrast, mimics miR-29 treat pathological fibrosis, such as keloids and scar tissue formation. Developed by Regulus Therapeutics, RGLS5579 and RG-012 are design to treat patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and Alport Syndrome, respectively. These drugs target miR-10b and miR-21 inhibiting their function. In addition, there are other less explored approaches, such as using CRISPRi (CRISPR interference) to silence the expression of upregulated miRNAs. In this strategy, a dead-Cas9 fused with transcriptional repressors is targeted to the promoter region of a miRNA, preventing its expression [144,145]. Although there are therapies showing promising results, one of the main challenges in these approaches is to find efficient delivery methods [146]. In this context, a few options are currently been tested, for instance intratumoral injections [147], viral vectors [148], lipid vectors [149], and inorganic nanoparticles [150].

(p6.2) To our knowledge, there are no clinical trials using miRNAs as therapeutic targets for GC to date. Therefore, the characterization of these molecules will be useful in the development of new prognosis, diagnosis, and treatment strategies for patients with GC. 
