# An Overview of Sustainable Green 5G Networks

CorpusID: 21418 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2b6aa90285d92809badbcaae589ca3ff142b90a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2b6aa90285d92809badbcaae589ca3ff142b90a)

Fields: Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s2) 1) Energy-aware hybrid transceiver architectures:
(p2.0) For mmWave frequencies, the conventional fully digital architecture employed for micro-wave frequencies, where each antenna is connected to a dedicated RF chain, is unsustainable. In particular, an excessive power consumption arises from the processing of massive parallel gigasamples per second data streams, leading to an energy inefficient and expensive system. Thus, a direct approach to reduce power consumption in practice is to adopt analog beamforming. Specifically, one RF chain is connected to multiple antennas and the signal phase of each antenna is controlled by a network of analog phase shifters (PSs). However, pure analog beamforming with a single beamformer only supports single user and single data stream transmission, which does not fully exploit the potential multiplexing gains provided by multiple antennas. As such, hybrid architectures have been proposed as energyefficient alternatives for mmWave communications [4]. Specifically, analog beamforming applies complex coefficients to manipulate the RF signals by means of controlling phase shifters and/or variable gain amplifiers and aims to compensate for the large path loss at mmWave bands, while digital beamforming is done in the form of digital precoding that multiplies a particular coefficient to the modulated baseband signal per RF chain to optimize capacity using various MIMO techniques. Basically, two hybrid structures have been developed:
## (s5) Harmonious Coexistence:
(p5.0) The fundamental challenge of LTE-U is the coexistence of the LTE system and the incumbent unlicensed systems, such as WiFi systems. LTE employs a scheduling-based channel access mechanism, where multiple users can be served simultaneously by assigning them different resource blocks. In contrast, WiFi adopts contention-based channel access with a random backoff mechanism, where users are allowed to only access channels that are sensed as idle. Multi-user transmission with centralized scheduling enables LTE to make better use of the unlicensed band and also to achieve a higher EE than WiFi since the channel sensing and backoff time in WiFi lead to a waste of spectrum resources. However, if left unconstrained, LTE-U transmission may generate continuous interference to WiFi systems such that the channel is detected busy most of the time [5]. This will lead to unceasing backoff times for the WiFi links and incur high energy consumption and low EE for the WiFi users even though no WiFi data is transmitted. Therefore, intelligent modifications to the resource management in the unlicensed band becomes critical to the harmonious coexistence. So far, two coexistence methods have been proposed in contributions to 3GPP:
## (s6) A. Ultra-Dense Networks
(p6.0) UDNs are obtained by extensively deploying diverse types of BSs in hot-spot areas and can be regarded as a massive version of heterogenous networks [6]. A general guideline for realizing green UDNS is that reducing the cell size is undoubtable the way towards high EE, but the positive effect of increasing the BS density saturates when the circuit power caused by larger amount of hardware infrastructure dominates over the transmission power. Energy-efficient UDNs involve the following aspects.
## (s7) 1) User-centric design:
(p7.0) One of the green networking design principles of UDNs in 5G is the user-centric concept where signaling and data as well as uplink and downlink transmissions are decoupled [7]. A well-known architecture for the decoupling of signaling and data is the hyper-cellular structure where macrocells provide an umbrella coverage and microcells utilizing e.g. mmWave BSs, aim at fulfilling the high capacity demands. Thereby, the significant signaling overheads caused by mobile device roaming in small size cells are reduced, which decreases the associated energy consumption at both transceivers substantially. Furthermore, the macrocell BSs that are only capable of providing reliable coverage, can be replaced by more energyefficient types of BSs rather than the conventional energy-consuming ones. In addition, the separation of signaling and data also eases the integration of other radio access technologies (RATs), such as WiFi and future mmWave RATs, which may help to realize further potential EE gains. Meanwhile, decoupling downlink and uplink enables more flexible user association schemes, which also leads to substantial energy savings for both BSs and UTs. For example, for two neighbor BSs where BS 1 and BS 2 are heavily loaded and with limited available spectrum left in the downlink and uplink, respectively, an UT can dynamically connect to BS 1 in the uplink and to BS 2 in the downlink. As such, both uplink and downlink transmit power consumption can be reduced, which is significant for 5G applications with ultra-high data rate requirements.

(p7.1) 2) BS on/off switching: Separating signaling and data also enables efficient discontinuous transmission/reception, i.e., BS sleeping, to save energy via exploiting the dynamics of the wireless traffic load across time and geographical locations [8]. It has been shown that today 80% of BSs are quite lightly loaded for 80% of the time but still consume almost their peak energy to account for elements such as cooling and power amplifying circuits. Therefore, BS sleeping is deemed to be an effective mechanism for substantial energy savings, especially for UDNs with highly densified BSs [9]. Specifically, the data BSs (DBSs) can be densely deployed in order to satisfy the capacity requirement during peak traffic times, while a portion of the DBSs can be switched off or put to the sleep mode if the traffic load is low in order to save energy.
## (s9) B. D2D Communications
(p9.0) D2D communications [10] enable densified local reuse of spectrum and can be regarded as a special case of ultra-dense networks with the smallest cell consisting of two devices as the transmitter and the receiver. In light of this, techniques that are used in UDNs may be applied to D2D scenarios.Energy-efficient D2D communications involve the following aspects.  With proper devices as relays, significant energy consumption can be saved and it can also be further extended into multi-hop, two-way, and multiple relay scenarios.
## (s11) 1) How many antennas are needed for green M-MIMO systems? For an M-MIMO system
(p11.0) with M antennas equipped at the BS and K single-antenna users, it has been shown in [12] that each user can scale down its uplink transmit power proportional to M and   
## (s13) 1) Distinctive energy-data causality and battery capacity constraints. A fundamental
(p13.0) feature that distinguishes energy harvesting communication systems from non-energy harvesting communication systems is the existence of an energy causality constraint [3]. This constraint imposes a restriction on the energy utilization, i.e., energy cannot be utilized before it is harvested, which is in essence attributed to intermittent availability of renewable resources. In order to fully embrace the potential benefits of energy harvesting, carefully incorporating this constraint into the design 5G networks and gaining deep understanding of its impacts on 5G networks are vital.

(p13.1) Two other relevant constraints are the data causality constraint and the battery capacity constraint, which depend on the data traffic variations and energy storage limitations. Specifically, the data causality constraint accounts for the fact that a data packet cannot be delivered before it has arrived at the transmitter. The battery capacity constraint models the limited capacity of the battery for storing harvested energy. Thus, the conventional research studies assuming infinitely backlogged data buffers and unlimited energy storages can be regarded as special cases of the above constraints. However, in upcoming 5G networks, these assumptions are no longer valid due to the extremely diverging traffic and device types. Thus, new QoS concerns on energy harvesting communication naturally arise in 5G systems.
## (s16) B. RF Energy Harvesting
(p16.0) RF energy harvesting, also known as wireless power transfer (WPT), allows receivers to harvest energy from received RF signals [14], [15]. 2) Improving the efficiency of WPT: Despite the advantages of WPT, the system performance is basically constrained by the low energy conversion efficiency and the severe path loss during WPT [16]. Generally, the 5G techniques that are able to improve the performance of a wireless communication link can also be exploited to improve the efficiency of WPT. For example, narrow beams can be realized by employing multiple antennas at the transmitter side with optimized beamforming vectors, which is known as energy beamforming [15] and this fits well the applications of M-MIMO and mmWave. In addition, short range communication based 5G techniques such as D2D communications and UDNs are capable of improving the efficiency of WPT by reducing the energy transfer distance. Besides improving the amount of harvested energy, the circuit power consumed by information decoding is also an important design issue since it reduces the net harvested energy that can be stored in the battery for future use. In particular, the active mixers used in conventional information receivers for RF to baseband conversion are substantially power-consuming. This motivates additional efforts on designing novel receiver architectures that consume less power by avoiding the use of active devices.
