# biomimetics Biomimetic Nanomembranes: An Overview

CorpusID: 219284372 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3fdc711b2c07ea752f7c07b54aff26b080ef0f54)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s2) Definitions and Terminology
(p2.0) Here we define the synthetic nanomembrane as an organic, inorganic or hybrid quasi-2D artificial freestanding or free-floating structure with a thickness below 100 nm, with the bottom limit being a monatomic/monomolecular thickness, and simultaneously having a large thickness-to-lateral size aspect ratio. "Large" here means at least 2 to 3 orders of magnitude, but much higher aspect ratios are readily achieved. If the obtained aspect ratio is one million or higher, such nanomembranes are denoted as "giant" [46]. One may notice that this definition excludes nanocomposite membranous structures with a thickness exceeding 100 nm, although there are some instances in the literature where the term "nanomembranes" is reserved for the above described structures with a thickness of up to 300 nm-400 nm. Additionally, the designation "nanomembranes" is sometimes used for much thicker structures with high aspect ratios, even those in excess of hundreds of micrometers, if they are nanostructured. A typical example would be nanoporous membranes for separation, which are also sometimes denoted in the literature as nanomembranes.

(p2.1) Biomimetic nanomembranes can be defined as a subclass of synthetic nanomembranes with some of their functionalities partially or fully mimicking those of natural biological membranes. This means Biomimetics 2020, 5, 24 4 of 45 that we can use any material or structure that in itself is not biomimetic for their production and functionalization, for instance metals or other inorganic materials and structures such as carbon nanotubes or metalorganic frameworks, as long as they perform a function within the nanomembrane that mimics a biological one. It is not the composition, but the function that makes something biomimetic. Our definition excludes the use of natural biological structures as parts or building blocks-the biomimetic membranes and their functional parts we consider here are purely synthetic.
## (s8) Diamond
(p8.0) Freestanding sub-micrometer diamond membranes were reported in [63]; however, their smallest achieved thickness was 210 nm. To produce these diamond membranes, the authors used a double-implant process, followed by annealing, and finally wet etching. For many years, the reported thickness was a de facto standard for ultrathin diamond membranes [64][65][66]. However, Yoshikawa et al. succeeded in producing nanocrystalline diamond freestanding nanomembranes with the thickness values between 10 nm and 50 nm [67]. Many freestanding diamond membranes were used to fabricate 3D self-assembled forms using the methods of rolled-up nanotechnology [65]. The obtained forms included, among many others, tubes, nested tubes, rings, nested rings, nanoribbons, jagged nanoribbons, and various helical structures. Diamond nanomembranes were used for helical biomimetic structures with controllable properties in [66].
## (s10) Diamond-Like Carbon
(p10.0) Diamond-like carbon (DLC) or hard carbon is an amorphous allotrope of carbon, containing mostly sp 3 -hybridized carbon atoms. It is characterized by high hardness akin to that of diamond. Out of seven different existing forms of DLC that differ in the types of crystal lattices of their crystallites, the hardest is tetrahedral amorphous carbon. Young's modulus of DLC may reach over 500 GPa, similar to that of natural diamond. The discovery of DLC was announced by Aisenberg and Chabot in 1971 [70]. The material has been since intensively used for hard coating protection of steel machine tools and has excellent tribological properties.

(p10.1) Freestanding DLC nanomembranes were used as ultrafast nanofilters of viscous liquids in [71]. They showed high hardness and at the same time resistance to organic solvents, similar to thin DLC films deposited on metal substrates.
## (s13) Freestanding Inorganic Monomolecular Sheets
(p13.0) The prototype monomolecular materials are MXenes [40], defined as compounds consisting of carbides, nitrides or carbonitrides of early transition metals (Ti, Cr, Sc, V, Nb, Zr, Hf, No or Ta). Their atoms form 2D monolayer sheets that are interconnected into laminar structures such that the manner of obtaining the sheets is to exfoliate them by chemical etching. They can be described as electrically conductive clays. There is a large number of 2D materials that belong to MXenes, with a wide range of different properties, with the most frequently encountered one among them being titanium carbide [77]. Other 2D compound materials include gallium arsenide, transition-metal dichalcogenides, sulfides, selenides and tellurides of tungsten, niobium, molybdenum or tantalum, aluminum carbide, cadmium selenide, and many more.
## (s15) Interpenetrated Structures
(p15.0) Usually this term denotes structures made of polymers and reinforced or otherwise functionalized by inorganic nanofillers. As an example, in 2006 Vendamme et al. produced hybrid organic/inorganic nanomembranes using spin-coating. They fabricated freestanding, 35-nm-thick membranes with lateral dimensions of several centimeters consisting of polyacrylate interpenetrated with zirconia (ZrO 2 ) [51]. In 2007 the same research team fabricated another type of large interpenetrated organic/inorganic membranes, this time a few tens of nanometers thick, of elastomeric polyacrylate networks interpenetrated with silicon dioxide [78]. Polymer membranes to which reinforcing nano-building blocks were added could also be classified to this group, a prime example being nanomembranes reinforced with single-or multiple-walled carbon nanotubes (CNT.)
## (s16) Metal-Organic Frameworks
(p16.0) Metal-organic frameworks (MOF) represent 1D, 2D or 3D nanocrystalline compounds, usually with a highly porous structure, which consist of metal ions or ion clusters and organic molecules [79,80]. Their tailorable porosity, combined with adsorbability, makes MOF nanomembranes convenient for different highly selective sensing applications, as well as for their use as efficient molecular sieves [81].
## (s17) Organic Nanomembranes
(p17.0) Completely organic freestanding nanomembranes that are in entirety composed of one or more organic materials represent a huge class of the existing freestanding nanomembranes. There is a vast number of organic compounds and their combinations that could be used.

(p17.1) Organic materials are defined as carbon compounds. That means that they do not include pure carbon in any of its allotropic forms. However, this classification also excludes the simplest compounds of carbon, like oxides of carbon, carbonates, carbides, and cyanides. All other carbon compounds belong to organic substances. This does not mean that any organic compound can be used to make nanomembranes-some of these compounds are gaseous or liquid, while others simply cannot be formed into membranous structures. It appears that the best suited organic compounds for production of freestanding nanomembranes are many of those with macromolecular/polymeric structure. They are characterized by large molecules, sometimes very large. These include polysaccharides [19], synthetic lipids [82], synthetic polymers [83], proteins [84], DNA [85] and RNA [86]-based membranes.
## (s20) Model Lipid Bilayers
(p20.0) Model lipid bilayers are actually synthetic lipid bilayer nanomembranes. Strictly speaking, they could be classified into the previously described wide group of organic nanomembranes. However, since they represent replicas (and in some cases even upgrades) of the living nanomembranes, we decided that they merit a class of their own, belonging more to synthetic biology than to general organic chemistry.

(p20.1) Historically, the first model lipid bilayers were synthesized in 1962 [102], and were at first known as the so-called "black lipid membranes" and also as "painted bilayers". They were intended as scaffolds to study the membrane processes in vitro, to facilitate the analysis of the transmembrane mechanisms and the function of ion channels.
## (s24) Fabrication on a Liquid-Air Interface
(p24.0) Among the generic methods for nanomembrane fabrication, an important position belongs to structures fabricated without a solid substrate. Most of the self-assembly (bottom-up) methods and generally chemical synthesis of ultrathin free-floating films may occur at liquid-air interfaces (the surface of liquids). Basically, the method consists of synthesizing or depositing a free-floating film on the surface of a liquid. Many ultrathin film deposition methods used with solid substrates (top-down) are applicable here as well. The difference is that here one does not have to produce a sacrificial layer, and instead finishes with the nanomembrane already floating on the surface of the solution. The approach is especially useful for soft organic membranes. The method has even proven itself convenient for high-quality nanocrystalline nanomembranes [104].
## (s28) Bottom-Up Approach: Self-Assembly Methods
(p28.0) Self-assembly is a natural process of structures organizing themselves on their own into larger units, as defined by the properties of their smallest constituents (their geometry, chemical and physical properties). It is an ubiquitous process, and its examples can be encountered in a vast range of dimensions and systems, from atoms and molecules through viruses to galaxies and metagalaxies [111]. Thus, it is truly omnipresent and not only multiscale, but rather an "all-scales" process.

(p28.1) Self-assembly can be defined as a process in which the constitutive parts of a system reach an ordered spatial distribution within the boundaries of the system through self-organization. A review of self-assembly methods and approaches used for freestanding nanomembranes can be found in [112].
## (s30) Layer-by-layer (LbL) Self-Assembly
(p30.0) Layer-by-layer deposition also belongs to self-assembly methods [13]. It uses adsorption of alternating macromolecular layers, each with an opposite electric charge with respect to the previous. It proceeds in the following manner: a dilute solution of a cationic (+ charge) material is brought to a substrate and is there adsorbed in a single monomolecular layer whose exact thickness will be determined by the particular molecules used for the monolayer adsorption, but as a rule of thumb it will be on the order of a nanometer. In the next step, after rinsing and drying, the substrate covered with cation is placed into a dilute solution of anions (− charge), and thus a new monolayer is adsorbed on the previous one, and the wafer is again rinsed and dried. Now the process may be repeated a desired number of times. When designing a multilayer, arbitrary chosen materials can be used under the condition that their charges are alternating. The method gives multilayers with a thickness from about 5 nm to over 500 nm. Due to its simplicity, the method has been called the "molecular beaker epitaxy". This is a popular method, often used to produce high-quality giant aspect ratio nanomembranes.
## (s31) Block Copolymer Self-Assembly
(p31.0) A copolymer is a polymer produced by simultaneous polymerization of two or more starting monomers. A block copolymer is a kind of copolymer in which there are two or more distinct kinds of blocks that consist of a single pure copolymer (homopolymer) produced from one monomer and are chemically different and even immiscible. These blocks are covalently bonded among themselves. Block copolymers in solution naturally tend to self-organize in various shapes. To date, more than 20 aggregate shapes have been recognized, including spherical micelles, lamellae, rods, tubules, onion-shaped forms, egg-shaped forms, tubules, etc. An excellent tutorial on block copolymer self-assembly has been published by Mai and Eisenberg [114]. Self-assembly of block copolymers has gained distinct popularity for fabricating complex dielectric nanostructures for optical, photonic crystal and metamaterial applications [29]. Its application in the fabrication of various types of freestanding nanomembrane has been extensive. One of the useful traits of block copolymer self-assembly is that it generates ordered patterns that can be useful for membrane functionalization, while at the same time producing the membrane and performing its functionalization. Examples include self-supported perforated polymer nanomembranes intended for protein separation [83] and UV-polymerized nanomembranes of phospholipid and copolymer fabricated by Langmuir-Blodgett method at the air-water interface [115].
## (s33) Dip-Coating
(p33.0) Dip-coating is a method of depositing thin films where an object to be coated is dipped (immersed) in the solution containing the material to be deposited or, alternatively, a suspension of its nanoparticles. The object is left for some time in the liquid and then it is withdrawn from it. During the emersion, a layer of liquid remains attached to its surface. The object is held for some time for the excess liquid to flow and drop from it. After drying or evaporation, the nanoparticles remain attached to the surface in the form of a film, whose thickness can be tailored by the amount of liquid and the filler material dissolved or suspended in it. Care must be taken that the liquid uniformly covers the surface. The procedure is convenient for sol-gel and hydrogel deposition, as well as for deposition of self-assembled monolayers (although self-assembly may be or may be not present, depending on the process materials and parameters). Dip-coating is convenient for large-scale industrial production, since the object may be continuously movable (e.g., a tape). Figure 2a illustrates the dip-coating process.

(p33.1) Biomimetics 2020, 5, 24 14 of 46 liquid and the filler material dissolved or suspended in it. Care must be taken that the liquid uniformly covers the surface. The procedure is convenient for sol-gel and hydrogel deposition, as well as for deposition of self-assembled monolayers (although self-assembly may be or may be not present, depending on the process materials and parameters). Dip-coating is convenient for large-scale industrial production, since the object may be continuously movable (e.g., a tape). Figure  2a illustrates the dip-coating process. 
## (s37) Functionalization
(p37.0) Similarly to their biological counterparts, the role of synthetic nanomembranes would be more or less purely mechanical and protective if there were no additional functionalities. Most of the roles performed by biological nanomembranes are due to built-in protein structures that ensure additional functions. A very similar situation is encountered in synthetic structures. The difference is that structures enabling biological functionalities are much more sophisticated than the artificial ones, but for the price that they resort to a much smaller toolbox, in the sense of chemical composition and the available choice of materials, operating temperature and humidity ranges and available functionalities. With artificial structures the methods are much more crude and imperfect, but the number of possible ways to perform functionalization is much larger, and the material choice is wider, as is the pure range of functionalities. The latter include many options and paths not encountered in nature. One is free to avoid the limitations of protein chemistry and reach for a much larger toolbox to incorporate in a biomimetic way many novel non-biological properties, including plasmonic, magnetic, electric and optical ones. In 2010, the authors published a review of possible approaches to multifunctionalization of nanomembranes [117]. Here we give just a brief overview of the methods and approaches, concentrating to the more recent findings published in the meantime and to the methods that were skipped in [117].
## (s40) Nanofillers
(p40.0) One method to functionalize a nanomembrane at the fabrication stage is to incorporate nanoparticles, nanofibers, etc., into its body (the host) [110,117]. One must take care during design not to compromise the existing desirable properties of the nanomembrane.

(p40.1) For instance, a nanomembrane structure may be mechanically reinforced by incorporating carbon nanotubes. One could incorporate one type of nanofillers only or several types simultaneously, each with its own functionality, thus obtaining multifunctionality. Examples include incorporation of nanofillers with biological or chemical functions, catalytic (including photocatalytic), magnetic, light-emitting, plasmonic, piezoelectric, etc. A nanotechnological "zoo" showing some possible nanofiller geometries is presented in Figure 3d. Naturally, the number, the kinds, types and materials of available nanofillers vastly surpasses what is shown in Figure 3d for illustrative purposes only.
## (s49) Artificial Water Channels
(p49.0) Aquaporins or water channels are integral channel proteins forming pores in cellular membranes. Their main role is to facilitate selective transmembrane transport of water, which proceeds in addition to the osmotic transport directly through the lipid bilayer. They also enable, in a smaller amount, the transport of some smaller neutral solutes (urea for instance), as well as gases (carbon dioxide, ammonia). They consist of six alpha helices having amino and carboxylic terminals within the cytoplasmic part, while the inner wall is padded by asparagine-proline-alanine complex. They have an hourglass structure with the diameter at the narrowest part of 0.3 nm. Water molecules in it form a "water wire", i.e., a single file molecule array. A cluster of amino acids called the aromatic/arginine filter selectively binds to water molecules and ensures their passage while blocking other molecules that do not bind to it. The efficiency of their transport is up to 10 9 molecules per second per a single aquaporin channel. There is several various types of aquaporins in both plant and animal cell membranes.

(p49.1) Peter Agre was awarded the 2003 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of aquaporins. Natural biological aquaporins are built into separating membranes and used in water separation at an industrial scale. However, they are expensive, have low stability and pose constraints for both fabrication of separators and the range of their operating conditions. This was the reason synthetic alternatives were sought for. The synthetic structures serving a function analogous to natural aquaporins are called artificial water channels [152,153].
## (s50) Artificial Nuclear Pore Complexes
(p50.0) Nuclear pores are protein-based pores built into the nanomembranous envelope of the nucleus of a biological cell [158]. A nuclear pore is a part of the cell's massive and highly complex nuclear pore complex (NPC), which serves as a scaffold for the translocation passageway. The role of an NPC is to mediate transport of macromolecules between the cell cytoplasm and the nucleus, but also to take part in genome organization and transcription processes. A nuclear pore complex consists of protein-based structures called nucleoporins (nups). There are 34 different nucleoporin proteins in each nuclear pore complex, containing about a thousand different proteins as their building blocks.

(p50.1) Biological nuclear pores are the largest pores in the cell. In vertebrate animals, the whole nuclear pore complex has a diameter of about 120 nm, while in other organisms it is smaller. The diameter of the nuclear pore channel is about 40 nm and its depth is about 45 nm.

(p50.2) The transport through the core of the NPC consists of export from the nucleus into the cytoplasm (this includes ribosomal proteins and RNA) and import from the cytoplasm to the nucleus (this includes proteins such as lamins and DNA polymerase, signaling molecules, lipids and carbohydrates) against the concentration gradient. Smaller molecules are transported through a nuclear pore by diffusion, while the larger ones are translocated only with the help of specific signal sequences based on karyopherin transport factors.

(p50.3) Jovanović-Talisman et al. succeeded in synthesizing artificial nuclear pores [159] in polycarbonate nanomembranes, consisting only of a passageway and its lining composed of scaffold-anchor phenylalanine-glycine nucleoporins (FG nups), which represent a binding structure for transport factors. Their artificial NPCs demonstrated nanoselective filtering and allowed passing of the transport factors and their cargo complexes that bind FG nups, while they simultaneously inhibited the transport of the proteins that did not bind these nucleoporins.

(p50.4) A large progress in understanding nuclear pore complexes has been achieved in recent times [160]. Still, many factors governing the behavior of biological NPCs and the role of several its sophisticated structural parts are yet to be understood, while the synthetic NPCs produced to date remain necessarily simplified.
## (s54) Antifouling Structures
(p54.0) The membranes of all biological cells are exposed to various kinds of external fouling based on different mechanisms. Fouling agents belong to one of the following three classes [169]: (1) passive, non-self-migratory particles and substances (for instance various external proteins, small particles of organic or inorganic matter, polysaccharides, etc.; also prions and viruses, which do not proliferate while outside the cell walls and become active and multiply only upon entering the cell); (2) passive spreadable substances (external liquids, for instance droplets of oil); and (3) active and proliferating foulants (bacteria, protozoans).
## (s55) Antifouling Structures
(p55.0) The membranes of all biological cells are exposed to various kinds of external fouling based on different mechanisms. Fouling agents belong to one of the following three classes [169]: (1) passive, non-self-migratory particles and substances (for instance various external proteins, small particles of organic or inorganic matter, polysaccharides, etc.; also prions and viruses, which do not proliferate while outside the cell walls and become active and multiply only upon entering the cell); (2) passive spreadable substances (external liquids, for instance droplets of oil); and (3) active and proliferating foulants (bacteria, protozoans).

(p55.1) Antifouling structures and layers are essential parts of all living cells. The biological antifouling mechanisms can be roughly divided into the following groups: (1) physical structures or chemicals repelling fouling agents; (2) self-cleaning physical structures or chemicals shedding (passively removing) already present fouling agents; and (3) aggressive chemicals that actively destroy fouling agents [169,170]. Biomimetic antifouling structures can and should follow these strategies, since biomimetic membranes, especially those intended for separation applications, will be exposed to similar kinds of fouling.
## (s64) Application Field Application Type
(p64.0) Environmental Protection One might argue that the speed of contemporary active nanofluidic devices is much lower than that of their electronic counterparts. On the other hand, a counterclaim may be found in the fact that all our neural processes are based on nanofluidic ion transport. Hence, we are talking about a process that brought to this development the most sophisticated micro-and nanostructured biological machines that ever existed, namely our brains. This proves the point that there is much room for further biomimetic development. In 2020, Bocquet proposed [175] the development of ionic machines inspired by the functioning of our neuronal systems, including building synthetic neuromorphic biomimetic computer elements.
## (s65) Two-Dimensional Nanofluidics
(p65.0) Koltonow and Huang proposed the idea of fluid flow confined to 2D space [182] as a parallel to 2D charge carrier transport in quasi-2D sheets (graphene, MXenes, generally nanomembranes). For this purpose, they proposed making sandwiches of nanomembranes/monolayers (e.g., graphene) at a distance smaller than the Debye lengths of the surrounding solid nanosheets. The interspace between the sheets is filled with fluid, and there are pores in the sheets that enable transport between different "levels". In a situation similar to semiconducting 2D systems, the confinement of fluid into 2D nanochannels should ensure novel physical effects in such 2D fluid sheets, mainly vastly increased conductivity of cations.
## (s70) Hydrogen Economy-Water Splitting
(p70.0) Water splitting to hydrogen and oxygen represents a crucial step towards a hydrogen-based clean economy. Nanomembranes can be used to make ultra-compact catalytic microreactor cells to perform water splitting using solar energy (photocatalysis) [191]. For this purpose, titanium dioxide, the well-known material for catalytic water splitting, was used. Another approach to solar-induced photocatalytic water splitting is to use composite organic-inorganic nanomembranes laminated with photocatalyst or, alternatively, filled with its nanoparticles.

(p70.1) Silicon diphosphide (SiP 2 ) and silicon diarsenide (SiAs 2 ) nanomembranes have also been proposed for highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting [192]. Both materials promise high carrier mobilities and good mechanical, thermal and dynamic stabilities. Another pair of alternative materials for the same purpose are beryllium nitride (BeN 2 ) and magnesium nitride (MgN 2 ). Monolayers of these materials as water-splitting photocatalysts were considered in [193]. Janus monolayers (i.e., with different front and back side, "two-faced") of metal chalcogenides Ga 2 XY and In 2 XY (X = S, Se, Te; Y = S, Se, Te) have also been described as promising materials for the same purpose [194].

(p70.2) Instead of using a photocatalytic structure, an alternative approach is to use electrocatalyst nanomembranes [195]. Wang et al. used nanomembranes with reduced graphene oxide combined with NiO/Ni. Alternatively, metallic Ni 3 S 2 ultrathin sheets fabricated by atomic layer deposition proved themselves efficient and stable electrocatalysts for this purpose [196].
## (s72) Remediation and Environmental Protection
(p72.0) Environmental uses of nanomembranes include waste water treatment, removal of inorganic and organic pollutants, especially the persistent ones (e.g., dioxin, radioactive nuclides, pesticides, etc.). Nanotechnological methods for water remediation include three approaches: the use of nanomembranes, nano-adsorbents and nanocatalysts. The application of functionalized nanomembranes for environmental protection and remediation was reported in [200]. It appears that the optimum results are obtained if nanomembranes are multifunctionalized by photocatalytic nanoparticles and thus perform a dual role of simultaneously filtering some pollutants while actively destroying others. An essential functionality of membranes for the use in remediation and wastewater treatment is imparting the antifouling properties at the "dirty" side.  batteries production removal of organic and inorganic contaminants, refinement (incorporation as an integral part)
## (s73) Food and Beverages
(p73.0) Nanomembranes in the food industry find applications in removal or photocatalytic/enzymatic destruction of viruses, bacteria, aflatoxin, cyanotoxins and other toxins, pesticides, bisphenol and other undesired contaminants, also for filtering inorganic substances including heavy metals, etc. Among examples are bioconversion and removal by separation of lactose in milk and dairy products, obtaining cheese and other fermented products from milk, filtering beer from mother solution, etc. [201]. Other uses of biomimetic nanomembranes in the food and beverage industry include nanomembrane-based sensors for in situ monitoring of various critical ingredients that contribute to the overall quality, also the detection of the above mentioned dangerous, cancerogenic and even potentially lethal contaminants.
## (s77) Neural Interfaces/Neural Cuffs
(p77.0) We considered the feasibility of using functionalized nanomembranes as a minimally invasive link connecting external optical signals and neural tissue, using long-range surface plasmon-polaritons (SPP) [218,219]. Neural activity was already recorded in vitro, using coupling of propagating free-space modes with neural impulses by way of long-range SPP, with excellent sensitivity.
## (s78) Wearable Artificial Kidneys
(p78.0) The development of wearable artificial kidneys [221,222] is of great interest for patients with kidney failure (chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal disease). The need to keep the patients connected to large systems for dialysis for prolonged periods of time is disabling, drastically altering their life, the procedure is slow and painful, and abrupt changes in blood composition may cause a shock to the patient (the so-called dialysis washout), requiring at least hours to recover. On the other hand, prolonged periods between dialysis sessions may leave the patient with increased levels of toxins in blood. A wearable device for dialysis would ideally allow for continuous detoxification and at the same time permit the patient to be mobile while under treatment, thus drastically improving his/her quality of life. Most contemporary portable devices weigh somewhere between 3 and 30 kg [223]. Because of this, one of the key targets of contemporary microfluidics and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology is the development of wearable or even implantable kidneys through a decrease of their dimensions and an increase in efficiency [224].

(p78.1) A simplified principle of operation of an artificial kidney (renal replacement device) is shown in Figure 7d. Its main component is a system of polymer or copolymer hollow microfibers with nano-sized pores. The patient's blood flows through the microfibers, which are surrounded by dialysate, is filtered through the system of pores, and waste components such as urea and creatinine are removed and washed into dialysate.

(p78.2) There are several experimental systems that mimic the toxin removal function of natural kidneys and have been scaled down for possible use in wearable systems. Such systems are based on the use of inorganic porous nanomembranes and have been reported by Hill et al. [225]. They used silicon nitride membranes with a thickness below 100 nm and with nanometer-sized pores. Such nanomembranes showed high filtration performance while at the same time exhibiting excellent robustness. They reduced the necessary membrane area for hemodialysis compared to conventional, floor-standing equipment by 100 times or even more. This may enable the production of miniaturized systems that could lead to hemodialysis at home, with longer duration and with improved removal of toxic components from blood. Thus, nanomembranes represent an important enabling step towards wearable artificial kidneys, potentially ensuring continuous blood purifying through ultrafiltration hemodialysis [226].
## (s80) Selective Drug Delivery and Therapy
(p80.0) The pharmacokinetic behaviors of drugs is closely related to cell membranes. A majority of therapeutic drugs target either receptors within membranes or organelles and their parts like chromosomes/DNA within cells, i.e., they interact with biological membranes either by acting upon their built-in blocks or passing through them using some of their existing pathways for matter exchange (for instance, membrane proteins that assume the role of transport pumps, or ion channels) to proceed to targets inside the cell or even inside organelles.

(p80.1) Nanoparticles can be used for medical treatment in several manners [229]. The oldest approach among them is their use as vehicles to carry drugs and therapeutic agents (diagnostic tools for marking the affected tissue, mediator agents for photodynamic therapy, chemotherapy, gene therapy, etc.) to their target [230], which is often cancerous tissue [231]. A variant of this approach is to "hide" therapeutic agents in freely movable cells, thus using them as carriers [232]. Another method is direct introduction of, e.g., metallic or titanium dioxide nanoparticles into the affected tissue as mediator agents for hyperthermia treatment. For this purpose, one causes heating of nanoparticles by remote tissue-penetrating electromagnetic radiation, e.g., laser [233] or microwaves [234], and the hot nanoparticles cause thermal death of the heat-sensitive cancer cells [235]. Plasmonic effects are used for this purpose too [232]. Finally, one of the approaches to drugs delivery (e.g., antidiabetic, antihypercholesterolemic, etc., drugs) is the direct injection of their nanoparticles, without a carrier [236].

(p80.2) Problems with all of the quoted approaches are the poor targeting of the affected tissue due to bodily fluid circulation in vivo, a short life of nanodrugs in the living tissue, and poor penetration depths. This is the reason why only a few carrier-based nanoparticle drugs have been approved by Food and Drugs Administration [232].

(p80.3) Biomimetic nanomembranes could be used as carriers for nanodrugs and other therapeutic agents [19]. Whether the drugs are in the form of nanoparticles or not, their uncontrolled release and spreading through the body could potentially be harmful and toxic. However, if they are embedded in a biomimetic nanomembrane functionalized to ensure biocompatibility, then the whole ensemble functions as a soft macroscopic carrier with nano-volume and with very good targeting. It is necessary to ensure the adherence of the unfurled biomimetic nanomembrane to the treated tissue in the position where the nanomembrane was injected. In this case, the drugs will be concentrated in exactly the position where the soft nanomembrane is located. In an ideal case no free nanoparticles will roam the organism. Furthermore, the active area of nanomembranes is close to the theoretical maximum ("the interface without volume"); thus, they offer high exposure of the tissue to embedded nanoparticles and maximized efficiency combined with localization ( Figure 8). The critical steps here represent possible decomposition and resorption of the nanomembrane under the influence of body fluids and biological processes and subsequent potential cytotoxicity [237].
## (s85) "Living" Plasmonics and Metamaterials
(p85.0) One promising direction of research is the integration of plasmonics with functionalized biomimetic membranes. The use of nanomembranes for plasmonics and metamaterials was considered in [27]. A further logical direction would be research into biomimetic plasmonics. Publications in this promising area are almost nonexistent. One of the rare papers in the field investigates sensors of tumor cells using surface plasmon resonance functionalized by artificial lipid bilayer membranes [238]. Even more scarce are publications on biomimetic metamaterials.

(p85.1) In this subsection we consider the possibility of researching nanomembranes with plasmonic and/or metasurface properties functionalized by some of the biomimetic structures previously considered in this text. Functionalization of nanomembranes made of metal or some other plasmonic material using synthetic ion channels, ion pumps, water channels or artificial nuclear pore complexes seem to be especially promising for the field of biological sensing. Additionally, all plasmonic nanomembrane-based sensors could benefit from antifouling functionalization which could improve their applicability in the real field conditions.
## (s86) Quantum Functionalities
(p86.0) Nanomembranes represent quasi-2D objects, which means that charge carrier transport in them will obey the rules of low-dimensional systems and thus will show marked quantum mechanical effects. This in itself is a large field of investigation, since each low-dimensional material will have its own set of properties and peculiarities, including effects rarely or never observed in nature. It may be said that the topic of combining biomimetic nanoobjects and quantum physics is in its very infancy, although the results to date are encouraging and have already brought us to a host of novel effects and even novel and improved electronic devices [48].
## (s88) Shape-Shifting Nanomembrane Bulges with Active External Control
(p88.0) The curvature and the overall profile of spatially sculpted nanomembranes could be externally controlled. It is known that several macroscopic properties of micro and nanosurfaces are influenced or even defined by their surface shapes-examples include self-cleaning and superhydrophobic behavior, actually a drop-repellent property (the lotus leaf effect) [239,240], and drop-pinning on hydrophobic surfaces (the rose petal effect) [241]. An active control of the surface microstructure could switch between these two modes of superhydrophobic behavior. Another property dictated by the shape of the surface details is adhesion, observed in some organisms ranging from simple bacteria to such sophisticated organisms as some frog species (e.g., Litoria caerulea), where the active control over the adhesive properties is obtained through the change of the surface shapes. A practical approach to control over the adhesion properties of membranes was considered in [242] for the case of thick elastic membranes. The actuation needed for the surface relief change was obtained through pneumatic mechanism.

(p88.1) In this work we extrapolate the active approach to shape shifting to the field of nanomembranes, which, being much thinner than the conventional membranes, could ensure a more energy-efficient and precise switching between different modes of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity, as well as dynamical control over adhesive properties. The actuation mechanisms that could be used for such shape shifting include applied electric field, single-sided pressure, mechanical change of the membrane support through stress/stretching or bending, the external optical field, etc.
