# Urbanization and Waterborne Pathogen Emergence in Low-Income Countries: Where and How to Conduct Surveys?

CorpusID: 210330772 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77e0602c01953be5670241add983ba03b66c7890](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/77e0602c01953be5670241add983ba03b66c7890)

Fields: Environmental Science, Geography, Medicine

## (s2) Uncontrolled Urbanization Creates Large Reservoirs of Environmental/Human Composite Microorganism Communities in Surface Water Favoring Pathogen Evolution
(p2.0) Enteropathogens, such as enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC), rotavirus, Vibrio cholerae, Campylobacter, and cryptosporidium, are major agents of diarrhea. They are good models for analyzing the propagation of pathogens in urban settings because their epidemiology is shaped by their ability to survive and to be transported from one household to another. Sustained by environmental factors, a single transient episode of contamination is often sufficient to start an epidemic, as seen during the 2011 cholera outbreak in Haiti [28]. Therefore, what are the major determinants of pathogen propagation in suburbs?
## (s9) How to Use Metagenomics?
(p9.0) Most environmental microorganisms are uncultivable, and culture-based methods cannot be used. Analysis of DNA is however always possible, allowing direct identification of microorganisms in sludge or in wastewater [121]. These studies are permitted by the drastic decrease in the price of next-generation sequencing (NGS), which is as low as 100 euros per bacterial whole genome. Metagenomic analysis consists of DNA sequencing, (i) without targeting specific DNA sequences (whole genome sequencing (WGS)), or (ii) targeting the 16S gene for bacteria and 18S gene for eukaryotes. Specific genes can also be targeted as those involved in drug resistance.

(p9.1) NGS generates a large number of small sequences (usually 100-200 base pairs), which must be compared to an international database. The quality and completeness of this database are thus key elements. For 16S RNA identification, the good quality of the international databases leads to reliable results. However, for environmental or new pathogen species, databases are still limited, impairing the identification. Similarly, whole-genome sequencing can be used to explore genetic diversity and to identify new enzymatic structures from the environment. However, this approach requires fully annotated genomes or, at least, previous identification of the specific genetic signatures of drug resistance "cassettes" [122]. Finally, the quantity and quality of the DNA available, as well as the deepness of sequencing (i.e., the number of times a single base will be sequenced) will also limit the sensitivity of this approach, especially for complex metagenomes mixed with DNA from contaminants issued from water treatment plants. The deeper the analysis, the more expensive it is.
## (s10) Technical Approaches and Pitfalls in Genomic Analysis
(p10.0) The first step of metagenomic approaches is to obtain good-quality DNA or cDNA, which needs (i) biomass collection, (ii) DNA/RNA preservation, (iii) total RNA extraction, and cDNA synthesis [119]. Preservation of RNA from environmental biotopes or extraction of high-molecular-weight DNA are not straightforward [142] and require quantitative approaches, to ensure the representativity of the material [129]. The high-molecular-weight DNA will be used as a template for sequencing libraries of different sizes (200/300 bp to 3/5 kb) to facilitate genome assembly. When the DNA quantity is not sufficient in the sample, new strategies of whole genome amplification can be used. However, the quality of the data obtained in this way is usually very low. Up to 90% of the sequences generated can be from the self-amplification of primers. At the same time, under-represented DNA cannot be fully sequenced according to the deepness of the sequencing step, and the choice of the polymerase used for amplification will impact the quality and representativity of data [143].

(p10.1) Using the WGS approach, reconstitution of whole genomes from rough data obtained from a mix of organisms such as biofilm is challenging, as a lot of contigs will contain sequences not matching the genome guides [144]. For this analysis step, several software needed to be applied, i.e., sequence trimmers, duplicate remover, and assemblers (such as SOAPdenovo) [145,146]. Protein-coding genes (open read frames, ORFs) are predicted using a gene-finding algorithm such as MetaGeneMark [147][148][149][150][151][152][153][154][155]. Functional annotation can be performed using a BLASTP search, first against the reference genome and then against the database of nr protein sequences.

(p10.2) In addition to this whole genome approach, PCR/sequencing techniques targeting 16S [156] or 18S tRNA can be used to simplify the analysis. Most publications used the V3-V4 region of the rRNA gene, which contains very-well-conserved sequences bordering hypervariable regions. The high-throughput sequencing of PCR products is performed, and the results are trimmed. Trimming of the reads also requires several steps: (i) paired-end reads are filtered for quality control (using QIIME v1.7, for example [157]), (ii) tags attached to the sequences are compared against the Gold reference database to detect chimera sequences and to remove them [158], (iii) sequences with effective tags are assigned to the same operational taxonomic units (OTU) at 97% similarity using software such as UPARSE [159], and (iv) representative sequences are annotated against the small ribosomal subunit rRNA SILVA database [160]. The relative abundance of a given taxon in a biofilm is calculated as the percentage of the number of sequences assigned to this taxon divided by the total number of sequences assigned to all the taxa in the community. For sequences absent from databases, the so-called de novo strategy can be used. It consists of comparing the sequences from a dataset and then grouping the sequences by similarity into clusters that elect a consensus sequence. The consensus sequence can, in turn, be annotated by a database, defining an unknown species. Once the taxonomic assignment has been completed, the metagenomic profiles of species present in each sample will be established.

(p10.3) Compared to WGS, this approach offers a higher selectivity and generates a small set of data, which is easier to handle to explore species. However, the capacity of PCR to amplify the 16S gene depends on the primers used. The diversity detected is thus more limited than with WGS and the identification of new or divergent microorganisms is difficult due to the lack of accurate databases and/or adapted primers. The coverage of sequencing (i.e., the number of times a specific base is determined) will also impact the detection of variants or rare microorganisms. Preliminary studies must be conducted to determine the coverage needed to reach a plateau in the genus or species diversity detected. Some nontranscribable sequences, such as ITS, can also be used for barcoding, especially for eukaryotes [161], but this approach underestimates the diversity of the species [162] to a few key species rather than the whole genus [163]. Specific analysis of antibiotic resistance genes (ARG) can be performed in the same line as 16S using NGS. The NCBI nonredundant database (NCBInr) is used to predict their phylogenetic origin. Putative mobile genetic elements (MGEs) are then searched for and screened on the PFAM and TIGRFAMS databases [148,149]. The abundance and diversity of ARG families in the metagenomic raw sequence data sets are then analyzed by screening with the resistance-gene-specific profile hidden Markov model (HMM) with packages such as the HMMER package [150] and/or with the same data-processing workflow as for soil microbiota [151]. Predicted protein sequences can be compared to CARD [152], ARDB [153], and ResFinder databases [154] using BLASTP to ARG.

(p10.4) Mobile genetic elements (e.g., ICEs or transposons) are also important to detect, which can be performed using BLASTp through the ICEberg database [155]. Inspection of microsynteny (small scale of synteny) can also be performed on regions surrounding resistance genes to detect mobile elements (e.g., transposase-encoding genes) or their traces. In addition, prophages and clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) can be identified using PHAST and CRISPRfinder, as previously described [139]. To further assess potential ARG mobility, the assembled metagenomic contigs are aligned to plasmid genome sequences (available in the NCBI RefSeq database). Antibiotic-resistant ORFs are considered colocalized with an MGE if they shared a contig with an MGE ORF.
## (s12) Conclusions
(p12.0) Rapid, inadequate, unplanned urbanization and high population densities are associated with poor environmental and sanitary contexts. In low-income countries, urban runoffs or open sewage channels are major sources of fecal contamination of the environment. Surface waters and urban aquatic ecosystems are thus collecting and concentrating pathogen populations, which secondarily mix with environmental microorganisms. For these pathogens, genetic drift, chemical pressure, and lateral genetic transfer facilitate acquisition of virulence, long-term survival, and multidrug resistance genes. This contributes to the emergence or re-emergence of waterborne pathogens. Virus emergence from rural (and forest) areas like Ebola or Lassa are well documented by the mass-media, whereas no attention is paid to bacteria evolving to be highly resistant in crowed suburbs of tropical cities. The use of urban surface water for bathing, farming, fishing, or as an unimproved drinking-water source means that pathogens and contaminants are discharged in water resources and mix with environmental aquatic microbiota, before coming back to humans. In the same time, between 2000 and 2010, the consumption of antibiotic drugs increased by 35% [22] with a huge increase in drug resistance and deaths. The emergency is to preserve the efficacy of existing drugs for future generations [170]. Modern analytical processes, i.e., metagenomic approaches, have to be implemented to comprehensively study this complex biotope as many of these microorganisms are not cultivable and escape classical microbiology approaches. In the same line, the places to carry out sampling to study bacteria drift cannot be simply water and sediments as classically done but must take into account new habitats associated with floating macroaggregates, especially plastics. The pervasiveness of plastics is said to be the ultimate geological proxy for characterizing our new Anthropocene era. The ubiquity of plastics reshapes aquatic habitats, deeply impacting microbial communities and their interactions. Resistance gene transfer pathways might thus be noticeably enhanced, with huge potential epidemiological consequences. 
