# A Review and Insights for Eleven Years of Urban Microclimate Research Towards a New Egyptian ERA of Low Carbon, Comfortable and Energy-Efficient Housing Typologies

CorpusID: 214528677 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edac0589339c95b52cb339654513dc9bde624446](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/edac0589339c95b52cb339654513dc9bde624446)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s25) The Need to Customize a Hot Arid Thermal Comfort Index
(p25.0) The Egyptian studies used the global thermal indices to assess the thermal performance whether for indoor or outdoor performance such as PET and PMV. Despite, these indices are well documented and include thermo-physiological and meteorological parameters; they limit values thought for special climatic conditions and might not express human comfort for other climatic regions especially with respect to hot arid region as Egypt. Therefore, it should be investigated in term of its applicability in the Egyptian climate context. Such investigations are important to identify regional particularities, and it can be considered an approach to have an adaptive thermal comfort index based on human sensation vote using questionnaire even for the eight climatic zones of the Egyptian map. The later approach has been investigated similarly in the project RUROS [142], where the psychological adaptation played an important role in the formulation of a thermal comfort index in some European cities and new concepts such as stimulating pedestrian to accept higher rates of thermal stresses has been introduced.
## (s26) Integrating Multidisciplinary Sustainabile Design Experts Towards the 5th Generation of Egyptian Cities
(p26.0) Gathering the research line that has been presented through sections 3, 4 and 5 of this article for the urban built environment elements in the Egyptian context; fabric, network and vegetation, this section presents a vision for a new ERA of Egyptian housing through the integration of both passive architecture and passive urban design scales that conserves energy, and the triple core mission of ERA can be completed by proposing a renewable system that might be applied both on building envelope and on-site land use. It worth mentioning that ERA is a two parts proposed research project collaboration between multidisciplinary experts and it has been designed in three steps for the sake of a new generation of Egyptian energy efficient housing and resilient cities; (1) It starts in the urban form were a geo-informatics drone assisted surveys and auditing will take place for thermal imagery and meteorological measurements to be used for energy retrofitting of existing housing. (2) It suggest the clustered urban form for medium population (medium and social class housing) which is built on prior findings illustrated in the previous sections of this article; it identified the neighborhood clustered urban form as an appropriate residential archetype. However, a parametric optimization should be used to generate the most suitable building-courtyard relation of cluster geometry according to each climatic zone configuration on the Egyptian map which is the core of the new ERA housing typologies of the project. (3) It focuses on the residential building and its passive cooling techniques according the Egyptian code for energy efficiency. A whole-building energy simulation will be conducted depending on the urban simulations' outcomes from the first step using coupled simulation methodology. (4) The fourth step incorporates the possible solutions for introducing PV systems into the building envelope as an integrated building active-passive design. ERA has a tripling evaluation methodology (TEM) that explores the impact of neighborhood configurations have on urban microclimate conditions, and in turn on urban housing energy efficiency, considering also the improvements of urban form that may affect the PV/envelope system. ERA suggests considering the climate change scenarios to adapt its generated housing for future. ERA project proposal is still under development and didn't have results yet. Figures 6, 7, and 8, and 9 summarize and show the connection between the methods reviewed in this article and how ERA can introduce what can be called the 5th generation of Egyptian sustainable cities knowing that the 1st generation of new cities developments started with the 15th of May and 10th of October cities five decades ago [143].    The connection between the aforementioned methods and the 5th generation can be explained as the original coupling urban-building simulation methodology ( Figure 6) has been modified by adding grasshopper optimization of the clustered urban form for different climate zones (Figure 7), then the urban-building dimensions has been extended to include the third pillar of ERA project, energy, (Figure 8). Finally, the dominant concerns of ERA pillars have to be evaluated through the tripling methodology (Figure 9).

(p26.1) It woth mentioning that in the 1970s, Cairo plans were drawn up with satellite cities around it. The construction of 10th of Ramadan city, an industrial city, was the first generation experimental new city to take place. 2nd generation examples include Sheikh Zayed City, whereas New Cairo represents the 3rd generation which moved away from the working-class cities to form new communities for the privileged high income class, [143]. The new cities housing strategy remained vehicular oriented urban development that applies typical repetitive designs in different Egyptian regions discarding the different climate conditions. Today the New Urban Communities Authority (NUCA) has promising plans for the 4 th generation but kept new cities such as New Mansoura and New Alamain without in-depth responsive design to climate despite the different climate zones on the map, Figure 10.
