# molecules Molecular Crystallization Inhibitors for Salt Damage Control in Porous Materials: An Overview

CorpusID: 216108980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb56f511333097a74d3b07c7a8623dd1a970887a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb56f511333097a74d3b07c7a8623dd1a970887a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Fundamental Mechanisms and Influencing Factors for Salt Crystallization Damage
(p1.0) Salt decay occurs by the concomitant presence of soluble salts and water in a porous material, at given environmental conditions and ensuing crystallization/dissolution cycles. The phenomenon originates from salt ions (vide infra) that migrate while dissolved in liquid water, which flows in the pore network of building materials, and then the subsequent evaporation of the water.

(p1.1) Liquid water may penetrate such materials by different processes, including hygroscopic moisture, penetration of rainwater through, e.g., infiltration through the porous material itself, construction joints, damaged roofs and cracks, dew-point condensation, and rising damp. The latter is probably the most frequent source of water (and salt) ingress, and perhaps one of the most difficult to eliminate, particularly when dealing with old buildings.

(p1.2) Common soluble salts in porous materials [4] are different types of chlorides, sulfates, nitrates, and carbonates, each with a different solubility, crystalline structure, and crystallization parameters. Chlorides, for instance, often arise from direct contact of building materials with seawater by marine fog, seawater spray, or contaminated groundwater or de-icing salts. Chlorides may also come from salt-infested items, once stored in the building. Nitrates may be introduced by animal excrements or by microbiological activity. Sulfates can originate from ceramic materials or pollution. The gypsum (Ca 2 SO 4 ·2H 2 O) contained in many plasters, or even repairs, may dissolve and migrate into other adjacent porous building materials. Carbonates typically originate from high alkali content materials, e.g., cement-based mortars. Indeed, the alkali hydroxides in these materials react with carbonic acid (which results from, e.g., dissolution of aerial CO 2 in the water in damp walls) and thereby form alkali carbonates; they are also the basic component of limestones, some sandstones, and lime-based mortars and plasters. These are the most common sources, although many other salt types and salt origins are possible in old buildings.

(p1.3) In brief, the mechanism of salt crystallization from a solution initiates via the aggregation of the initially dispersed (salt) solute ions; this nucleation eventually leads to the formation of clusters and finally crystals [31] depending on (1) the existing conditions in terms of temperature, relative humidity, type of ions in solution, and eventual impurities; and (2) on the type of intrinsic porous system, which affects water transport.
## (s6) Inhibition Chemicals for Porous Media Applications
(p6.0) In this section, we will focus on the different families of inhibition chemicals, which stand as the Additionally, a "planar" configuration of the inhibitor upon a crystal surface may promote an effective exploitation of its attraction as well as bonding abilities ("inhibitor configuration" factor in Figure 4). Note that a possible design strategy to achieve this goal is avoiding the introduction of hydrophobic structural features and/or non-functional tails [68][69][70]; in fact, these may both extend out from the crystal surface and cause [68][69][70] steric hindrance by, e.g., hampering the access of the inhibitor's functional groups to the crystal surface, which ultimately results in a low adsorption power. Finally, appropriate matching between the inhibitor functional groups and, e.g., the cations at the crystal surface may facilitate the adsorption process ("matching" factor in Figure 4) [74]. The matching process is dependent on interatomic distances as well as the orientation of structural units in the crystal surface layer and charge distribution.
## (s9) Phosphonates
(p9.0) In 2007, Lubelli and van Hees [97] reported a systematic investigation of the salt inhibition effects of both diethylenetriaminepentakis methylphosphonic acid (C 9 H 28 N 3 O 15 P 5 ; DTPMP) and sodium-ferrocyanide (NaFe(CN)) when applied in 0.001 M concentrations to 10 wt% sodium sulfate (Na 2 SO 4 ) and sodium chloride solution (NaCl) in three different materials, i.e., Granada limestone, a Czech sandstone, and a fired-clay brick. The results for the NaFe(CN) experiments will be discussed later in this review (see Section 3.3.).

(p9.1) On the basis of previous studies indicating that the maximum inhibition effect of the DTPMP was in slightly alkaline environments (vide supra) [51], the pH of the inhibitor solution was adjusted to 8. Interestingly, it was found that the effectiveness of DTPMP in enhancing salt solution transport strongly depends on the material to which it is applied. DTPMP promoted salt solution transport in sandstone, leading to a notable increase in the amount of salt transported to the surface; on the other hand, it delayed it in the fired-clay brick, leading to the precipitation of a greater amount of salt in depth, and had no effect in limestone. The authors speculated that the alkaline environment of the investigated limestone might have limited the effectiveness of this inhibitor. Besides, the phosphonates exhibited a strong tendency to adsorb onto a large variety of surfaces, e.g., calcite (CaCO 3 ) (main component of the limestone), and aluminum and iron oxides (present in large amounts in the fired-clay bricks). It was on this basis that they explained the limited effect of DTPMP in limestone and brick. Finally, it was demonstrated that DTPMP was not able to prevent or delay the decay in any of the selected substrates, except for a slightly positive effect on Na 2 SO 4 damage for the Granada limestone.

(p9.2) San Jeronimo monastery (Granada, Spain) [98] was selected as a case study for the on-site testing of a treatment using a DTPMP crystallization inhibitor. The monastery was chosen taking into account the extreme salt damage affecting the building stones, i.e., a biomicritic limestone, calcarenite, and wall paintings. An integrated approach combining multi-technique analysis, phenomenological observations, salt and moisture analysis, environmental monitoring, and simulation techniques was employed to study the salt damage problems affecting this building. Mostly, the salts were found to be magnesium sulfate in the form of either hexahydrite (MgSO 4 ·6H 2 O) or epsomite (MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O) depending on the climate conditions, together with minor amounts of gypsum (CaSO 4 ·2H 2 O), nitrates, and chlorides.

(p9.3) Thus, focusing on the inhibitor, within seven months from the application of DTPMP in the test areas, it was demonstrated that the amount of efflorescence developed in the control area was greater than that in the treated area. This correlated well with the laboratory results indicating that DTPMP acts as crystallization inhibitor when it is free in solution, because it is able to establish hydrogen bonds with epsomite water molecules, and exhibits a high stereochemical affinity with Mg atoms in their dominant surfaces, as shown by molecular modeling; however, in the stone, it seems to promote the growth of subflorescence but without increasing damage to the support [99,100]. This was attributed to the adsorption of phosphonates on calcite surfaces. In fact, adsorbed phosphonate molecules can act as a template for magnesium sulphate crystallization, and consequently, crystallization of epsomite takes place at lower supersaturation within the stone pore network.

(p9.4) Nevertheless, the authors stated that it is still premature to draw conclusions on the potential positive/negative effects of the DTPMP inhibitor on MgSO 4 crystallization damage based on a single case study.

(p9.5) Ruiz Agudo et al. [101] studied the template-assisted crystallization of sodium and magnesium sulfates (Na 2 SO 4 and MgSO 4 ) in the presence of Iceland Spar (calcite, CaCO 3 ) single crystals and within limestone "directed" by diethylenetriamine-pentakis (methylphosphonic acid) (DTPMP). In order to better understand the phosphonate-directed crystallization of the two inorganic salts onto calcite, the authors combined macroscale (X-ray diffraction, XRD, and nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR) and microscale (atomic force microscopy, AFM, and environmental scanning electron microscopy, ESEM) techniques for the in situ monitoring of such crystallization. It was demonstrated that DTPMP, in the presence of MgSO 4 in solution, strongly adsorbed onto the crystalline substrate but presented very weak interactive forces with MgSO 4 . On the other hand, in the presence of Na 2 SO 4 , an irreversible process involving the formation of a precipitate on the calcite surface, most probably crystalline Ca-phosphonate, could be observed. The authors explained this effect through the complexation effect that DTPMP has towards Mg 2+ ions. This may prevent or inhibit the precipitation of Ca-phosphonate; moreover, Mg 2+ -phosphonate complexes are generally more stable and soluble than Ca 2+ complexes. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) dynamic experiments confirmed this hypothesis and showed that the adsorption of DTPMP molecules halts the spreading of salt pits and prevents the formation of new ones, so that the DTPMP acts as a calcite dissolution inhibitor. The ESEM and XRD results combined with the morphology simulation showed that, in the presence of DTPMP, Na 2 SO 4 crystallizes as mirabilite (Na 2 SO 4 ·10H 2 O), with (001) faces aligned parallel to (1014) calcite planes. This could be due to the 2D-heterogeneous nucleation of mirabilite onto the substrate due to a thin layer of Ca-phosphonate on the {1014} calcite surfaces. Similar results were found for MgSO 4 , but in this case, the XRD pattern showed that apparently, the interaction between the additive and hydrated magnesium sulfates was not highly specific and must have taken place through the formation of hydrogen bridges between the functional groups of the additive adsorbed onto calcite and the structural water molecules in the magnesium sulfate crystals. Indeed, adsorbed DTPMP molecules were able to "direct" both hexahydrite (MgSO 4 ·6H 2 O)-and epsomite (MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O)-oriented crystallization. In the case of hexahydrite, (411) planes showed a high density of water molecules. This was also valid for (010) epsomite planes. This makes these planes ideal for additive-salt crystal interaction.

(p9.6) The same authors also studied the effect of DTPMP within limestone pores. In this case, a strong reduction in the salt-induced damage and salt pore filling (by mercury intrusion porosimetry; MIP) was observed both for Na 2 SO 4 and MgSO 4 in the presence of DTPMP. The results showed that the crystallization of sulfates was promoted, thus taking place in a compact and oriented manner (as observed by in situ ESEM and XRD experiments), at a lower supersaturation (as determined by NMR measurements). The calculation of the critical supersaturation and the actual maximum crystallization pressure, which was possible through the determination (NMR) of the maximum Na concentration values, showed that a significant reduction in crystallization pressure (4.23 vs. 1.68 MPa) took place in the presence of DTPMP in the case of mirabilite crystallization. The tensile strength of the tested limestone was close to the usual value for this limestone, so the observed reduction of damage was explained. The damage reduction experienced by the limestone blocks subjected to MgSO 4 macroscale crystallization in the presence of DTPMP was explained by a similar mechanism as that proposed for the case of Na 2 SO 4 . Unfortunately, the technical limitations of NMR prevented the evaluation of the Mg concentration at the onset of crystallization, so the authors could not calculate the critical supersaturation and associated crystallization pressure of magnesium sulfate salts formed in the pores of the limestone.
## (s10) Alkali Ferrocyanides
(p10.0) In 2002, Selwitz and Doehne [102] described the effect of potassium ferrocyanide (K 4 Fe(CN) 6 ·3H 2 O; KFe(CN)) on the capillary passage of dilute and concentrated solutions of sodium chloride (NaCl) and sodium sulfate (Na 2 SO 4 ) (5 and 20 wt%) through specimens of limestone, i.e., Monks Park limestone and Texas Creme limestone, at 43% relative humidity (RH). In the absence of inhibitors, aqueous NaCl flow through Monks Park limestone (18.6% porosity) gave predominantly subflorescence (~90%), and slight edge erosion, whereas Na 2 SO 4 mainly effloresced and severely damaged the stone samples. When the moderately high-porous Texas Creme limestone was used (21.3% porosity), essentially only efflorescence occurred in all cases, with nearly no stone damage. The addition of 0.1-1% potassium ferrocyanide to the NaCl experiments employing Monks Park limestone significantly changed the nature of the flow patterns and deterioration. At both the investigated salt concentrations, all the solution entered the stone at rates faster than trials without the additive. Most of the NaCl emerged as thin filament-like efflorescence. Importantly, all the samples, after brushing away the efflorescence, were found to be undamaged. When the KFe(CN) content was lowered at the 0.01% concentration, a result very similar to that without using the ferrocyanide was obtained. This indicated a critical concentration for this inhibitor between 100 and 1000 ppm.

(p10.1) Attempts to evaluate the effect of KFe(CN) on Texas limestone exposed to NaCl and Na 2 SO 4 solutions failed, since the latter caused no apparent salt damage under all the investigated experimental conditions. Shortly thereafter, Rodriguez-Navarro and coworkers reported a series of systematic investigations to assess the efficiency of Na and K ferrocyanides (Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 ·10H 2 O and K 4 Fe(CN) 6 ·3H 2 O; Fe(CN)s) in minimizing sodium chloride (NaCl) crystallization damage in porous materials [103]. Specifically, the effect of Fe[(CN) 6 ] 4− ions on the crystallization of NaCl in aqueous solution was studied, allowing the saline solution to percolate through and evaporate from a biomicritic limestone (calcarenite), typical of Granada (Spain) (Figure 7). Sodium and potassium ferrocyanide were added separately in concentrations ranging from 0.01% to 0.1% to the NaCl saturated solution. The crystallization tests were performed in a controlled environment (20 ± 1 • C, and 45 ± 5% relative humidity).  The authors first performed batch crystallization experiments. The addition of Fe(CN)s (from 0.01% to 0.1% w/w) did not change the NaCl solubility, nor did they modify the saline solution evaporation rate. However, significant increases up to ~7x for 0.1% Fe(CN)s were demonstrated for the critical supersaturation (i.e., maximum relative supersaturation reached before the onset of crystallization).

(p10.2) Conductivity measurements demonstrated a clear difference in the onset of NaCl crystallization in the absence and in the presence of additives; specifically, while in the former case, the NaCl crystallization onset corresponded to a significant drop in the conductivity, in the latter case, no relevant change was detected after the onset of NaCl crystallization, thereby suggesting that a significant concentration of additive was still available to prevent further NaCl nucleation, enabling a very high supersaturation. These results suggested that nucleation inhibition, which was also found to depend on the additive concentration, was the prevailing mechanism of additive-NaCl interaction. In addition, the evaporation rate of the solution, with additives moving by capillary rise through the stone specimens, was much higher than that of a pure NaCl solution. The authors attributed this to a reduction of the solution surface tension (vide supra).

(p10.3) Alternatively, a reduction in the solution-stone contact angle due to ferrocyanide adsorption onto the stone pore walls (CaCO3, calcite) could also have led to a faster capillary supply towards the evaporation front, thus promoting evaporation. The authors also stated that the rapid development of a dendritic efflorescence on the stone surface in the presence of ferrocyanide contributed to the increase of the evaporation rate by creating a porous medium with a high surface area.

(p10.4) A massive formation of efflorescence was explained by the demonstrated inhibiting role of ferrocyanide on NaCl nucleation, which prevented this salt from crystallizing within the pores of the stone. As to the stone damage, some NaCl crystals in the control run were found to crystallize as The authors first performed batch crystallization experiments. The addition of Fe(CN)s (from 0.01% to 0.1% w/w) did not change the NaCl solubility, nor did they modify the saline solution evaporation rate. However, significant increases up to~7x for 0.1% Fe(CN)s were demonstrated for the critical supersaturation (i.e., maximum relative supersaturation reached before the onset of crystallization).

(p10.5) Conductivity measurements demonstrated a clear difference in the onset of NaCl crystallization in the absence and in the presence of additives; specifically, while in the former case, the NaCl crystallization onset corresponded to a significant drop in the conductivity, in the latter case, no relevant change was detected after the onset of NaCl crystallization, thereby suggesting that a significant concentration of additive was still available to prevent further NaCl nucleation, enabling a very high supersaturation. These results suggested that nucleation inhibition, which was also found to depend on the additive concentration, was the prevailing mechanism of additive-NaCl interaction. In addition, the evaporation rate of the solution, with additives moving by capillary rise through the stone specimens, was much higher than that of a pure NaCl solution. The authors attributed this to a reduction of the solution surface tension (vide supra).

(p10.6) Alternatively, a reduction in the solution-stone contact angle due to ferrocyanide adsorption onto the stone pore walls (CaCO 3 , calcite) could also have led to a faster capillary supply towards the evaporation front, thus promoting evaporation. The authors also stated that the rapid development of a dendritic efflorescence on the stone surface in the presence of ferrocyanide contributed to the increase of the evaporation rate by creating a porous medium with a high surface area.

(p10.7) A massive formation of efflorescence was explained by the demonstrated inhibiting role of ferrocyanide on NaCl nucleation, which prevented this salt from crystallizing within the pores of the stone. As to the stone damage, some NaCl crystals in the control run were found to crystallize as subflorescence, inducing granular disintegration at the stone upper edges and corners (i.e., areas of faster evaporation). However, in the presence of ferrocyanide, negligible subflorescence occurred, with almost all crystallization taking place on the stone surface; no damage was therefore detected in this latter case, although the higher supersaturation reached in the presence of Fe(CN)s would, theoretically, result in higher crystallization pressure. It is worth pointing out that SEM (scanning electron microscopy) and XRD (X-ray diffraction) analysis demonstrated that both sodium and potassium ferrocyanides induced similar and significant NaCl crystal habit modifications in stone efflorescence, from the most common cubic halite to dendritic growth. The additives were therefore demonstrated to play a role in delaying the incorporation of the solute ions into any face of a growing crystal, thereby increasing the solution supersaturation, as well as changing the relative growth rate of the different faces following their adsorption.
## (s11) Molecules 2020, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 35
(p11.0) Based on the droplet drying experiments, the authors concluded that the inhibitor enhanced the rate of the drying process, thereby leading to an increase in efflorescence. Moreover, they observed a higher supersaturation and change in the crystal patterns. In the brick drying experiments, the inhibitor also determined a change in the NaCl crystal morphology. This led to a change in the drying conditions at the material-air interface. Indeed, we have already highlighted here that dendrite-like crystals provide a much higher surface area for evaporation, which ultimately make the advection a governing phenomenon during drying.

(p11.1) In a subsequent paper, the same group [108] reported an analogous study focusing on fired-clay bricks as porous media. The relative humidity was varied inside the NMR chamber at 0%, 55%, and 70%. At the end of each drying experiment, the efflorescence from the sample surface was collected and weighed. The authors demonstrated that the evaporation rate in the salt-loaded fired-clay brick was greater for the higher humidity; this was explained by considering that at low humidity, advection is the dominant process in the initial stage of the drying process, and therefore, under these conditions, ions crystallize fast and block the surface. The addition of ferrocyanide inhibitor was found to be useful at low humidity conditions, since salt (NaCl) crystallized as nondestructive efflorescences. At a high humidity, salt ions crystallized slowly outside the material as efflorescence, thereby preventing pore clogging. As a consequence, the addition of inhibitor did not show any significant effect on the material drying behavior, amount of efflorescence formed, moisture, or ion transport on the salt concentration levels inside the brick.

(p11.2) More recently, in 2015, Gupta et al. [109] extended their investigations to salt mixtures, such as sodium-potassium chloride (NaCl-KCl) and sodium-lithium chloride (NaCl-LiCl). In these cases, the authors carried out drying experiments only on solution droplets, with and without ferrocyanide as the crystallization modifier at different concentrations. This study demonstrated that the increase in supersaturation by inhibitor addition was smaller for salt mixtures compared to single salt (NaCl, vide supra). On the other hand, similarly to the single salt case, the morphology of NaCl crystals in salt mixtures changed dramatically, going from bigger and strongly adhered cubic crystals to smaller and loosely attached dendritic crystals that promoted efflorescence and led to negligible structural damage of the material. Briefly, in this diagram, it is possible to identify two limiting situations. First, in the case of very slow drying (i.e., Pe << 1), the ion profiles are uniform; at a given point, the average NaCl concentration slowly increases (line A) up to the saturation concentration (6.1 m; m = molal). From this point, any further drying will lead to crystallization (line B) and the concentration is constant at 6.1 m. When very fast drying occurs (i.e., Pe >> 1), ions are directly transported by advection with the moisture to the top of the sample, and a 6.1 m peak will build up with a negligible width; that is, the average concentration is almost not affected at all. If the crystallization rate is fast enough, i.e., if at the top of the sample there are sufficient nucleation sites, the average NaCl concentration in the solution in the sample itself will be constant and close to the initial concentration (line C). From any point within the lines A-C, the moisture removal only will lead to an NaCl concentration increase.

(p11.3) Based on the droplet drying experiments, the authors concluded that the inhibitor enhanced the rate of the drying process, thereby leading to an increase in efflorescence. Moreover, they observed a higher supersaturation and change in the crystal patterns. In the brick drying experiments, the inhibitor also determined a change in the NaCl crystal morphology.

(p11.4) This led to a change in the drying conditions at the material-air interface. Indeed, we have already highlighted here that dendrite-like crystals provide a much higher surface area for evaporation, which ultimately make the advection a governing phenomenon during drying.

(p11.5) In a subsequent paper, the same group [108] reported an analogous study focusing on fired-clay bricks as porous media. The relative humidity was varied inside the NMR chamber at 0%, 55%, and 70%. At the end of each drying experiment, the efflorescence from the sample surface was collected and weighed. The authors demonstrated that the evaporation rate in the salt-loaded fired-clay brick was greater for the higher humidity; this was explained by considering that at low humidity, advection is the dominant process in the initial stage of the drying process, and therefore, under these conditions, ions crystallize fast and block the surface. The addition of ferrocyanide inhibitor was found to be useful at low humidity conditions, since salt (NaCl) crystallized as nondestructive efflorescences. At a high humidity, salt ions crystallized slowly outside the material as efflorescence, thereby preventing pore clogging. As a consequence, the addition of inhibitor did not show any significant effect on the material drying behavior, amount of efflorescence formed, moisture, or ion transport on the salt concentration levels inside the brick.

(p11.6) More recently, in 2015, Gupta et al. [109] extended their investigations to salt mixtures, such as sodium-potassium chloride (NaCl-KCl) and sodium-lithium chloride (NaCl-LiCl). In these cases, the authors carried out drying experiments only on solution droplets, with and without ferrocyanide as the crystallization modifier at different concentrations. This study demonstrated that the increase in supersaturation by inhibitor addition was smaller for salt mixtures compared to single salt (NaCl, vide supra). On the other hand, similarly to the single salt case, the morphology of NaCl crystals in salt mixtures changed dramatically, going from bigger and strongly adhered cubic crystals to smaller and loosely attached dendritic crystals that promoted efflorescence and led to negligible structural damage of the material.
## (s12) Surfactants
(p12.0) Rodriguez-Navarro and coworkers [110] studied the effect of two types of ionic surfactants, i.e., anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate (C 12 H 25 NaO 4 S; SDS) and cationic cetyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (CH 3 (CH 2 ) 15 N(Cl)(CH 3 ) 2 CH 2 C 6 H 5 ; CDBAC), on the process of sodium sulfate (Na 2 SO 4 ) crystallization in a porous calcareous stone. A greater evaporation rate of sodium sulfate solution with SDS was observed compared both to the blank sample and, particularly, the solution with CDBAC, thus resulting in a faster transport towards the evaporation front, located a few millimeters below the limestone surface. Mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP) analysis revealed that both anionic and cationic surfactants induced salt crystallization within the stone pore network, the porosity reduction being more significant in the case of the cationic surfactant. No porosity changes were detected in the blank following salt crystallization, meaning that salts concentrated in the surface scales formed and fell off with the stone debris (vide infra), without clogging the pores of the rest of the stone samples. In situ ESEM (environmental scanning electron microscopy) observations of Na 2 SO 4 crystallization in the limestone showed that in the blank set-up, crystallization of mirabilite takes place as aggregates of hollow-faced or prismatic crystals, corresponding to crystallization at high supersaturation (i.e., crystal shapes are far from the equilibrium shape, vide supra).

(p12.1) On the other hand, in the presence of SDS, mirabilite (Na 2 SO 4 ·10H 2 O) growth occurred as rhombohedral or prismatic or isolated hopper crystals, also indicative of crystallization at high supersaturation ratios (i.e., high crystallization pressures), whereas in the presence of CDBAC, Na 2 SO 4 decahydrate crystallized as euhedral, bulky, and rhombohedral mirabilite crystals formed at low supersaturation ratios, i.e., featuring lower crystallization pressures, filling the pores of the stone. It is also to be noted that in the case of dehydration/hydration cycles, significant damage in the sample with salt and cationic surfactant was observed.

(p12.2) Consistently, crystallization of mirabilite in stone specimens resulted in scale formation and significant stone loss in the blank (30 wt% loss) as well as in the slab subjected to crystallization in the presence of SDS (32 wt% loss) whereas somewhat reduced damage occurred in the presence of CDBAC (28 wt% loss). The authors claimed that the cationic surfactant, being concentrated in the bulk of the saline solution, due to its demonstrated low adsorption onto calcite vs. Na + , formed a large amount of micelles, which might have induced the nucleation and growth of sodium sulfate at low supersaturation ratios by solubilizing the solutes and promoting their transport towards mirabilite nuclei growth sites. It is to be noted that the even distribution of mirabilite crystals throughout the stone pore system might eventually result in significant damage if dehydrated mirabilite re-hydrates.

(p12.3) On the other hand, the anionic surfactant was less concentrated in the saline solution because of its preferential adsorption onto calcite (CaCO 3 ), in addition to being precipitated as sparingly soluble calcium dodecylsulfate (Ca(DS) 2 ). Consequently, a higher supersaturation ratio was achieved.

(p12.4) Importantly, this study demonstrated that an impregnation with the above ionic surfactants was not an effective method for stone desalination when hydrated salts are present, since side effects can be serious (i.e., cationic surfactant). Table 1 presents, in summary form, the information presented so far in the above sections. rhombohedral or prismatic or isolated hopper crystals, also indicative of crystallization at high supersaturation ratios (i.e., high crystallization pressures), whereas in the presence of CDBAC, Na2SO4 decahydrate crystallized as euhedral, bulky, and rhombohedral mirabilite crystals formed at low supersaturation ratios, i.e., featuring lower crystallization pressures, filling the pores of the stone. It is also to be noted that in the case of dehydration/hydration cycles, significant damage in the sample with salt and cationic surfactant was observed. Consistently, crystallization of mirabilite in stone specimens resulted in scale formation and significant stone loss in the blank (30 wt% loss) as well as in the slab subjected to crystallization in the presence of SDS (32 wt% loss) whereas somewhat reduced damage occurred in the presence of CDBAC (28 wt% loss). The authors claimed that the cationic surfactant, being concentrated in the bulk of the saline solution, due to its demonstrated low adsorption onto calcite vs. Na + , formed a large amount of micelles, which might have induced the nucleation and growth of sodium sulfate at low supersaturation ratios by solubilizing the solutes and promoting their transport towards mirabilite nuclei growth sites. It is to be noted that the even distribution of mirabilite crystals throughout the stone pore system might eventually result in significant damage if dehydrated mirabilite re-hydrates. On the other hand, the anionic surfactant was less concentrated in the saline solution because of its preferential adsorption onto calcite (CaCO3), in addition to being precipitated as sparingly soluble calcium dodecylsulfate (Ca(DS)2). Consequently, a higher supersaturation ratio was achieved.

(p12.5) Importantly, this study demonstrated that an impregnation with the above ionic surfactants was not an effective method for stone desalination when hydrated salts are present, since side effects can be serious (i.e., cationic surfactant). Table 1 presents, in summary form, the information presented so far in the above sections. • enhanced solution flow rate through tuff; • no effect on brick.
## (s14) Experimental and Instrumental Techniques, Modelling
(p14.0) In the last two decades, capillary-rise and salt crystallization tests have been widely applied to evaluate the resistance of stones to the damaging action of salt crystallization. Other methods of investigation, such as pore-clogging and warping tests, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) [53], have been introduced over time to provide quantitative information on values of supersaturation for nucleation, kinetics of in-pore crystallization, pore clogging, crystallization pressure, and resulting material deformation [37].

(p14.1) Besides, several other analytical techniques have been used to understand the nature of the salts' phase changes in solution or in the porous materials, e.g., environmental scanning electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (ESEM and SEM) [3,46,61,111], X-ray diffraction (XRD) [g] cationic cetyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride (CH3(CH2)15N(Cl)(CH3)2CH2C6H5); *weight of the salt/weight of the specimen; †relative to water used.
## (s15) Experimental and Instrumental Techniques, Modelling
(p15.0) In the last two decades, capillary-rise and salt crystallization tests have been widely applied to evaluate the resistance of stones to the damaging action of salt crystallization. Other methods of investigation, such as pore-clogging and warping tests, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) [53], have been introduced over time to provide quantitative information on values of supersaturation for nucleation, kinetics of in-pore crystallization, pore clogging, crystallization pressure, and resulting material deformation [37]. • higher NaCl supersaturation that increases with increasing inhibitor concentration; • for salt mixtures lower supersaturation compared to single salts;
## (s16) Experimental and Instrumental Techniques, Modelling
(p16.0) In the last two decades, capillary-rise and salt crystallization tests have been widely applied to evaluate the resistance of stones to the damaging action of salt crystallization. Other methods of investigation, such as pore-clogging and warping tests, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) [53], have been introduced over time to provide quantitative information on values of supersaturation for nucleation, kinetics of in-pore crystallization, pore clogging, crystallization pressure, and resulting material deformation [37]. 
## (s17) Experimental and Instrumental Techniques, Modelling
(p17.0) In the last two decades, capillary-rise and salt crystallization tests have been widely applied to evaluate the resistance of stones to the damaging action of salt crystallization. Other methods of investigation, such as pore-clogging and warping tests, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA) [53], have been introduced over time to provide quantitative information on values of supersaturation for nucleation, kinetics of in-pore crystallization, pore clogging, crystallization pressure, and resulting material deformation [37].

(p17.1) Besides, several other analytical techniques have been used to understand the nature of the salts' phase changes in solution or in the porous materials, e.g., environmental scanning electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (ESEM and SEM) [3,46,61,111], X-ray diffraction (XRD) [112] and environmental X-ray diffraction (RH-XRD) [113,114], electronic speckle pattern interferometry (ESPI) [114], nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR [52,[115][116][117], and magnetic resonance imaging MRI [46,118]), and, more recently, synchrotron measurements [119][120][121] and atomic force microscopy (AFM) [42].
## (s20) Crystal Growth Experiments
(p20.0) Many authors have also carried out crystallization tests in solution, i.e., without the use of porous media. This was done to enable a better understanding of the inhibition mechanisms of the diverse crystallization modifiers, along with the influence of the diverse porous media on such a phenomenon. Typically, in these experiments, the salt solutions, with and without additive, were allowed to evaporate in open containers in an environmentally controlled atmosphere. The evaporation rate was determined by weight loss measurements. Conductivity measurements enabled determination of the induction time and critical relative supersaturation.

(p20.1) The induction time is defined as the interval between the start of the experiment and the onset of crystallization. The critical relative supersaturation, σ, is defined as the supersaturation reached at the onset of crystallization and is calculated as σ = 100(C − C 0 )/C 0 , where C and C 0 are the actual and the saturation concentrations [103]. To compare different additives, Ruiz-Agudo et al. [51] normalized the critical supersaturation data with respect to the critical supersaturation of the control by using the percentage of growth inhibition (GI), calculated from the following equation:

(p20.2) where σ additive and σ blank represent the critical relative supersaturations in the presence and in the absence of the additive, respectively, measured by conductivity. Moreover, changes in the viscosities, contact angles, and surface tension of the salt solution comprising the inhibitors were measured in order to establish if the additive had modified the salt solution properties. Indeed, a reduction of the solution surface tension could lead to a reduction of the capillary pressure P in a pore of radius r (Laplace's equation), inducing a faster evaporation. Conversely, a reduction in solution-stone contact angle due to additive adsorption onto the stone pore walls could lead to a faster capillary supply toward the evaporation front, thus promoting evaporation. The correlation between the rate of capillary rise, the viscosity, the contact angle, and the surface tension is described by the Washburn's equation [139]. At the end of the crystal growth experiments, the precipitates were collected and observed by means of ESEM and XRD to establish the crystal morphology and the crystallization form. On the other hand, FTIR, AAS, EDX, and CTL spectroscopy analysis were used to qualitatively assess whether irreversible adsorption of the additive onto the growing crystals occurred. More recently, Gupta et al. [106] and Ruiz-Agudo et al. [101], using a specially designed nuclear magnetic resonance set-up (NMR) [106], were able to non-destructively measure the moisture distribution and salt concentration during saline solution evaporation and crystallization both in solution droplets and within the material's pores during drying experiments. The set-up adopted by the authors is shown in Figure 9. solution droplets and within the material's pores during drying experiments. The set-up adopted by the authors is shown in Figure 9. Figure 9. A schematic diagram of the NMR setup used for droplet drying experiments (right) and for the brick drying experiments (left) [106]. Reproduced with permission from [106]. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.

(p20.3) Focusing on the solution droplet, a cylindrical polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) sample holder was used and time lapse microscopy of the crystallization was performed using a digital microscope with four light emitting diodes (LEDs) placed below the substrate as a lighting source for imaging within the NMR set-up. The photomicrographs together with the NMR measurements allowed visual detection of the drying of the droplet and, at the same time, the gathering of information on the salt concentration of the droplets. In the case of porous specimens, they were first saturated by capillary rise with salt solution both with and without inhibitor. These samples were then sealed on all sides, except for the top surface, and placed in the NMR sample chamber, where the sample position was moved vertically to allow measurement of the moisture and ion content throughout the sample length.

(p20.4) Because of experimental constraints, only the Na and H concentration in solution could be measured. Therefore, the evolution of the salt concentration within the pores in the presence/absence of additives could only be studied for sodium sulfate (Na2SO4) [101] and sodium chloride (NaCl) [106] crystallization. Maximum Na concentration values determined by NMR enabled the calculation of the critical supersaturation and the actual maximum crystallization pressure that can be exerted by salt crystallizing within the porous stones using the equation proposed by Steiger and that proposed by Steiger and Asmussen (vide supra) [48]. In addition, using measured moisture profiles, the fluid velocity can be calculated so that it is possible to determine what process, of advection or diffusivity, dominates the fluid transport.
## (s21) Microscale Experiments
(p21.0) The aim of the microscale experiments was to study and determine the microscopic characteristics of salt crystallization and growth in both non-porous and porous media. These tests allow the researchers to assess (a) crystallization from a solution droplet at different relative humidity Figure 9. A schematic diagram of the NMR setup used for droplet drying experiments (right) and for the brick drying experiments (left) [106]. Reproduced with permission from [106]. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.

(p21.1) Focusing on the solution droplet, a cylindrical polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA) sample holder was used and time lapse microscopy of the crystallization was performed using a digital microscope with four light emitting diodes (LEDs) placed below the substrate as a lighting source for imaging within the NMR set-up. The photomicrographs together with the NMR measurements allowed visual detection of the drying of the droplet and, at the same time, the gathering of information on the salt concentration of the droplets. In the case of porous specimens, they were first saturated by capillary rise with salt solution both with and without inhibitor. These samples were then sealed on all sides, except for the top surface, and placed in the NMR sample chamber, where the sample position was moved vertically to allow measurement of the moisture and ion content throughout the sample length.

(p21.2) Because of experimental constraints, only the Na and H concentration in solution could be measured. Therefore, the evolution of the salt concentration within the pores in the presence/absence of additives could only be studied for sodium sulfate (Na 2 SO 4 ) [101] and sodium chloride (NaCl) [106] crystallization. Maximum Na concentration values determined by NMR enabled the calculation of the critical supersaturation and the actual maximum crystallization pressure that can be exerted by salt crystallizing within the porous stones using the equation proposed by Steiger and that proposed by Steiger and Asmussen (vide supra) [48]. In addition, using measured moisture profiles, the fluid velocity can be calculated so that it is possible to determine what process, of advection or diffusivity, dominates the fluid transport.
## (s22) Microscale Experiments
(p22.0) The aim of the microscale experiments was to study and determine the microscopic characteristics of salt crystallization and growth in both non-porous and porous media. These tests allow the researchers to assess (a) crystallization from a solution droplet at different relative humidity (RH) conditions and on different substrates; and (b) crystallization of salts in a stone sample. To this end, the so-called in situ techniques, such as environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and atomic force microscopy (AFM), have been widely used (see Table 2). The ESEM is particularly advantageous vs. conventional SEM, since the samples can be studied in their natural state, even when they contain water. Furthermore, the possibility of controlling pressure (~2 -20 Torr) and temperature (using a Peltier stage) in the ESEM chamber, and, in particular, near to the sample, enable condensation/evaporation cycles to be studied. Thus, high-magnification dynamic dissolution/precipitation studies of saline systems can be performed in situ in porous supports. Time-lapse digital images can be recorded online, and textural and/or morphological differences of hydrated salt crystals formed in the presence of additives can be observed, as well as real-time changes during crystallization or hydration/dehydration phenomena.

(p22.1) Ruiz-Agudo et al. [100,101], on the other hand, used in situ nanoscale observations of the {110} optically clear epsomite (MgSO 4 ·7H 2 O) single crystals and of the {1014} calcite (CaCO 3 ) surfaces during contact with saline solutions in the presence/absence of the additives by using atomic force microscopy (AFM). By using AFM, it was possible to observe the monomolecular layers and steps of the crystal surface in real time. In the first study by these researchers [100], the aim of the investigation was to evaluate the effects of several organic additives on the crystallization of epsomite, to have an indication of the possibility of their being used as a conservation treatment for salt-damaged ornamental stone. On the other hand, the study on Iceland Spar (calcite, CaCO 3 ) single crystals [101] had the purpose of online monitoring of the crystallization of sodium and magnesium sulfates in the presence of DTPMP (diethylenetriaminepentakismethylphosphonic acid; C 9 H 28 N 3 O 15 P 5 ), in order to gain a better understanding of the phosphonate-directed crystallization of inorganic salts onto calcite.
## (s26) Numerical Modeling
(p26.0) As mentioned above, the numerical simulation of different crystal growth processes at the micro scale, without considering the influence of the salt modifiers has been successfully implemented in the past. However, practically no reports are available in the literature, which deals with modeling salt crystallization phenomena in the presence of crystallization modifiers. More specifically, Kelnar et al. [122] developed a diffusion-advection model for salt solution transport, which considered both water movement due to the moisture gradient and diffusion and dispersion effects within the liquid phase due to the concentration gradient. Salt crystallization in the porous medium was modeled using an equilibrium model, taking into account the effect of crystallization inhibition. The computational simulations of three parameters, i.e., moisture diffusivity, salt ions' diffusion coefficient, and moisture transfer coefficient, were realized using the so-called Galerkin finite element method. These three parameters were experimentally determined by carrying out a drying experiment of limestone samples saturated by sodium chloride (NaCl) solutions both with and without sodium ferrocyanide (Na 4 Fe(CN) 6 ·10H 2 O; NaFe(CN)) inhibitor (0.001M). The drying experiments were performed using a NMR set-up developed by Gupta et al. [106] (see Section 4.1). In this apparatus, moisture and free chloride concentration profiles were measured every two hours. Kelnar et al. [122] demonstrated that in the process of drying of limestone saturated with NaCl solution, both water and salt ion (chloride) transport was slowed down by the presence of the inhibitor. This was ascribed to an increase of the viscosity of the salt solution and/or decrease of the interface tension in the pore walls. Nevertheless, the authors stated that this hypothesis needed to be verified by further experimental work.

(p26.1) More recently, Bracciale et al. [81] proposed a new mathematical model describing the effect of phosphocitrate (C 6 H 9 O 10 P; PC) on sodium sulfate (Na 2 SO 4 ) crystallization inside a brick's porous matrix through modelling of salt and water transport, and crystal formation in a 1-D symmetry. To this aim, two model parameters that are crucial for the appropriate description of an inhibitor were introduced: (a) The crystallization rate coefficient (K s ), which depends on the nucleation rate, and (b) the specific volume of precipitated salt (γ), describing the crystal habit modification. These two parameters were determined by numerical fitting of the model for both the case of the brick treated with PC and untreated one. From the results of the fitting procedure of the mathematical model, the authors concluded that the presence of phosphocitrate (PC) increases the crystallization rate (K s = 4.1·10 −5 s −1 and 6 ·10 −5 s −1 for untreated and PC treated, respectively) and decreases the crystal-specific volume (γ = 0.6 cm 3 g −1 and 0.53 cm 3 g −1 for untreated and PC treated, respectively). This means that, in the presence of PC, an increase in the nucleation rate occurs, although the crystals occupy a smaller volume, thus lowering the development of tensile stresses on the pore walls and ensuring hydraulic continuity into the porous matrix.
