# Biochar from date palm waste, production, characteristics and use in the treatment of pollutants: A Review

CorpusID: 216243489 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0fbd957d3aac1d4dc26b01e0a37ff796cb39f54](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b0fbd957d3aac1d4dc26b01e0a37ff796cb39f54)

Fields: Materials Science, Chemistry, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s2) Date palm tree waste
(p2.0) The residue that used to be generated from date palm trees was utilized in different ways; dead leaves were used to make brooms, baskets, mats, etc. The trunk which is known for its great tensile strength was also used to make the jetty, pole, and light foot bridges. Some of the date palm residues were also used in making furniture [Barreveld, 1993]. The palm waste was useful and used then the date producing countries had a sharp economy change that leads to the replacement to the date palm waste products. The use of the residues became lesser along with the increase in the date palm cultivation. The handling and processing of date palm trees waste can affect the environment and cause some disposal problems. Incineration and composting are the typical processes used, but still, it is not proper to process these organic wastes, this is due to the nitrogen concentrations and a significant amount of solid grains and smoke that is released during the process (Tsai et al., 2007). Large quantities of date palm waste is generated. By now, it is one of the biggest types of lignocellulosic solid wastes in the world, exceeding To utilize this worthy substance, advanced practical methods for the conversion of biomass like thermal processes is a suitable option for these lignocellulosic residues. Some works have been published in recent years regarding the date palm waste.

(p2.1) The residue that used to be generated from date palm trees was utilized in different ways; dead leaves were used to make brooms, baskets, mats, etc. The trunk which is known for its great tensile strength was also used to make the jetty, pole, and light foot bridges. Some of the date palm residues were also used in making furniture [Barreveld, 1993]. The palm waste was useful and used then the date producing countries had a sharp economy change that leads to the replacement to the date palm waste products. The use of the residues became lesser along with the increase in the date palm cultivation. The handling and processing of date palm trees waste can affect the environment and cause some disposal problems. Incineration and composting are the typical processes used, but still, it is not proper to process these organic wastes, this is due to the nitrogen concentrations and a significant amount of solid grains and smoke that is released during the process (Tsai et al., 2007). Large quantities of date palm waste is generated. By now, it is one of the biggest types of lignocellulosic solid wastes in the world, exceeding To utilize this worthy substance, advanced practical methods for the conversion of biomass like thermal processes is a suitable option for these lignocellulosic residues. Some works have been published in recent years regarding the date palm waste.
## (s4) Biochar production
(p4.0) The conversion technologies for biomass can be separated into three categories: direct combustion, thermochemical processes and biochemical processes . Specific examples include anaerobic digestion, (bio) gasification, and blending with fossil fuel sources (cofiring). Energy content of raw and thermochemically processed (e.g., pyrolysis and torrefaction) biomass can be used for direct combustion, co-firing with coal, or gasification (Pimchuai et al., 2010).
## (s15) Date palm tree waste
(p15.0) The residue that used to be generated from date palm trees was utilized in different ways; dead leaves were used to make brooms, baskets, mats, etc. The trunk which is known for its great tensile strength was also used to make the jetty, pole, and light foot bridges. Some of the date palm residues were also used in making furniture [Barreveld, 1993]. The palm waste was useful and used then the date producing countries had a sharp economy change that leads to the replacement to the date palm waste products. The use of the residues became lesser along with the increase in the date palm cultivation. The handling and processing of date palm trees waste can affect the environment and cause some disposal problems. Incineration and composting are the typical processes used, but still, it is not proper to process these organic wastes, this is due to the nitrogen concentrations and a significant amount of solid grains and smoke that is released during the process (Tsai et al., 2007). Large quantities of date palm waste is generated. By now, it is one of the biggest types of lignocellulosic solid wastes in the world, exceeding To utilize this worthy substance, advanced practical methods for the conversion of biomass like thermal processes is a suitable option for these lignocellulosic residues. Some works have been published in recent years regarding the date palm waste.

(p15.1) The residue that used to be generated from date palm trees was utilized in different ways; dead leaves were used to make brooms, baskets, mats, etc. The trunk which is known for its great tensile strength was also used to make the jetty, pole, and light foot bridges. Some of the date palm residues were also used in making furniture [Barreveld, 1993]. The palm waste was useful and used then the date producing countries had a sharp economy change that leads to the replacement to the date palm waste products. The use of the residues became lesser along with the increase in the date palm cultivation. The handling and processing of date palm trees waste can affect the environment and cause some disposal problems. Incineration and composting are the typical processes used, but still, it is not proper to process these organic wastes, this is due to the nitrogen concentrations and a significant amount of solid grains and smoke that is released during the process (Tsai et al., 2007). Large quantities of date palm waste is generated. By now, it is one of the biggest types of lignocellulosic solid wastes in the world, exceeding To utilize this worthy substance, advanced practical methods for the conversion of biomass like thermal processes is a suitable option for these lignocellulosic residues. Some works have been published in recent years regarding the date palm waste.
## (s17) Biochar production
(p17.0) The conversion technologies for biomass can be separated into three categories: direct combustion, thermochemical processes and biochemical processes . Specific examples include anaerobic digestion, (bio) gasification, and blending with fossil fuel sources (cofiring). Energy content of raw and thermochemically processed (e.g., pyrolysis and torrefaction) biomass can be used for direct combustion, co-firing with coal, or gasification (Pimchuai et al., 2010).
