# An Overview of the Latest Progress and Core Challenge of Autonomous Vehicle Technologies

CorpusID: 213932272 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd8b18b76f9ee69d0ba5f4a1e15e7dbc70c93b2a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd8b18b76f9ee69d0ba5f4a1e15e7dbc70c93b2a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) Automotive radar
(p3.0) Radar is an electronic device that detects targets by electromagnetic wave. It can be divided into narrow band and wide band by bandwidth and the larger offers higher range resolution. 24 GHz and 77 GHz are two dominant bands: the former is for short and medium range detection of 5-70m and the latter is mainly for medium and long range detection of 100-250m. With the improvement of accuracy requirements of automotive radar system, 77 GHz with ultra-high frequency band will become the mainstream. Radar can also be divided into short-range radar (SRR), medium-range radar (MRR) and long-range radar (LRR) by covered area. SRR has higher range resolution and wider field of view (FoV ±65°~± 80°), which is used for collision avoidance and object detection, and its typical applications include blind spot surveillance, parking assist and ACC support. MRR (typical FoV ±40°~±50°) is used for LCA; LRR has high gain and narrow beam for long detection range and accurate direction measurement, with smaller FoV around ±10º and more range resolution tolerance, which is mainly used for ACC, FCW, and AEB [3][4]. Key radar sensor manufacturers in the world include Bosch, Delphi, Continental, Denso, Valeo, ZF-TRW, etc. Freescale, Infineon, ST, Texas Instruments and ADI are the key chip suppliers. Automotive radar has the following technology development trends in order to satisfy the autonomous driving requirements of high range resolution, high angular resolution, high distance /speed/angle accuracy, long detection range, wide opening angle, high ASIL, low power consumption, low cost and small size. (1) Moving to higher frequency (77~81 GHz): Highresolution millimeter-wave radar that operates in the 79 GHz band is expected to replace 24 GHz SRR completely in the future, with combination of high transmit power and high bandwidth allowing for simultaneous long range and high range resolution, smaller antenna size for a given bandwidth, better angular resolution, and smaller sensors reducing volume/weight related costs. (2) Chip technology roadmap: GaAs has high output power, high gain, very low noise, good linearity, but low integration level. SiGe has an adequate performance at mmWave bands, size and performance advantages, high temperature tolerance. CMOS is cheaper, allowing for higher levels of integration, lower power consumption. It is expected that chips will develop along the route from GaAs to SiGe and then to CMOS. (3) Bistatic over monostatic: Bistatic Radars have higher transmitter output power, better noise performance, and improved conversion gain of the receiver. (4) Multi-mode sensors: Multimode sensors usually support both MRR and LRR configurations in one sensor module, thus providing a significant cost reduction to automakers.
## (s6) ICTTE 2019
(p6.0) The development trends of automotive camera include range improvement, modularization, scalability and interconnection, side or surround view cameras to expand rear view scope and replace side mirrors, in-cabin ToF camera (or 3D Flash LiDAR) for presence detection & gesture recognition and all-weather sensing (timegated sensors). All-weather sensing needs night vision solution ， in which regard IR camera is an important solution to increase driver seeing distance in darkness/poor weather and make up for the fatal weakness of the camera that can not work properly under low illumination [8]. It ' s currently only offered in luxury brands due to the high cost. Autoliv is the key system supplier. IR cameras are mainly divided into two categories: far infrared (FIR, passive, e.g. BMW Night Vision System) and near infrared (NIR, active, e.g. Mercedes Night Vision System).
## (s10) Sensor fusion
(p10.0) Multi-sensor effective fusion for objects detection/classification/tracking, location and V2X communication, i.e. association, aggregation and integration of data, can achieve complementary multimodality-sensing, extended NLOS perception, redundancy/robustness for 360°situational awareness in all conditions, thus ensuring the speediness and correctness of decision-making, which is the inevitable trend of autonomous driving [14]. Sensor fusion is divided into two categories (homogeneous and heterogeneous) and includes four processing layers (signal level fusion, object level fusion, feature level fusion and decision level fusion), which can be realized by Kalman filter, fuzzy logic, Bayesian networks and CNN, etc.

(p10.1) The architectures of sensor fusion include fully distributed processing, centralized processing and hybrid processing. Fully distributed processing requires lower bandwidth and central processing power, but it is larger, requires more expensive sensor modules with application and has a higher functional security requirement. It is hard to synchronize signals across nodes and may lose context information as well. Today, distributed data processing is almost exclusively used to do feature-level and decision-level fusion, which is not enough for L4/5 autonomy due to its limited sense of environment and loss of contextual information. So centralized processing is needed to complete environmental information available, with sensor modules of small size, low cost and lower functional safety requirement, but the central processing power/speed and bandwidth requirements are high and the center is non-scalable. Thanks to the fast development of supercomputers, a centralized architecture is now entirely possible. However, it is difficult to manage multi-supplier coordination on one chip, and there are no common standards for languages, formats, protocols, and networking. Hybrid processing takes both advantages into account, by local processing with intelligent sensors, reducing bandwidth requirement and centralized processing for path-finding, maneuvering, and motion trajectory, which is flexible and scalable. Therefore, the development from distributed processing and centralized processing to hybrid processing has become the main trend of information fusion system for autonomous vehicle, with corresponding requirements for communication and computing power. 
## (s11) Planning, decision making and vehicle control
(p11.0) The process of planning and decision-making includes route planning, behavioral decision-making and motion planning. Path planning is to select a route from the current position to the destination through the road network. By representing road network as a weighted directed graph corresponding to the cost of traversing a road segment, path planning can be converted into the problem of finding a minimum-cost path on the road network graph. Behavioral decision-making is to select the appropriate driving behavior at a specific time point based on the perceived behavior of other traffic participants (brake lights, turning lights, etc.), road conditions and infrastructure signals. In this process, machine learning based techniques (such as Gaussian mixture models, Gaussian process regression, etc.) and probabilistic planning (such as MDPs and their generalizations) are required to predict intention and estimate future trajectories of other traffic participants and then dictate driving actions. Motion planning is to translate selected driving behavior into a path/trajectory, to ensure dynamic feasibility and efficiency for vehicle, to ensure safety and comfort for passengers, and to avoid collisions with detected obstacles. Numerical approximation methods such as non-linear optimization in function space, graph-search approaches for the shortest path and incremental tree-based approaches to select the best branch are widely used.

(p11.1) The core function of vehicle control is path tracking/trajectory control, which executes the path/trajectory specified by the motion planning system, by selecting appropriate actuator inputs to carry out the planned motion and using a feedback controller to correct tracking errors, and ensures the reference path or trajectory stability in the presence of modeling errors and other uncertainties [15].

(p11.2) In the aspect of E/E architecture, distributed architecture is widely used, under which a large number of ECU units work together to provide various functions for drivers. With the demand for higher level automation (demanding an unprecedented increase in sensor technology, data bandwidth, processing performance, safety and security, etc.) and vehicle connectivity, from distributed processing to centralized processing gradually has become the main development trend of vehicle control, as shown in Table 1. Centralized E/E architecture will achieve higher overall system efficiency, faster system response time, and reduced performance requirements for lower level ECUs, with extremely high performance requirement for the high-level ECU and development/evaluation difficulties. The migration path of this process is firstly to add partial domain controllers to deal with sensor fusion and decision-making, so that more core functional modules are concentrated in the domain controllers, to achieve functional integration and domain fusion, and ultimately to realize a high-level vehicle controller managing overall autonomous strategy, passing decision information to lower level systems. 
