# Interfacial phenomena of water striders on water surfaces: a review from biology to biomechanics

CorpusID: 214645054 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c2516c05581b590ddd153a1e8e0e75be2fd7840](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c2516c05581b590ddd153a1e8e0e75be2fd7840)

Fields: Environmental Science, Physics, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOMECHANICS IN WATER STRIDERS
(p1.0) Here, we introduce the basic theories and experimental techniques applied in biomechanical studies on water striders. From a biomechanical perspective, both leg morphology and overall locomotion of water striders are of considerable interest to researchers. In theoretical analysis, leg morphology is tightly related to wetting theory, whereas locomotion can be interpreted by force analysis. In experiments, microscale imaging of leg morphology and flow motion is wellsummarized in Bush et al. (2007), whereas recent progress in macroscopic force measurement techniques is presented.
## (s3) Force measurement techniques
(p3.0) To study various interactions between water strider legs and the water surface, researchers have developed numerous methods to measure the forces applied to the strider by water, as shown in Figure 3. Recent force measurement approaches for water striders have been developed based on both ex vivo and in vivo measurement. Early methods such as force transducers disturb the normal motion of water striders. In contrast, new approaches such as the dimple method have shown unprecedented accuracy and promising application in non-interference research. Force transducers: A general solution to force measurement is to use force sensors. Due to the small size of water striders, it is difficult to attach any kind of force transducer to their legs. The earliest approach fixed a single leg to a transducer while moving the water vessel toward or away from the leg. This ex vivo method can only be used to study the properties (e.g., load-bearing capacity and adhesion) of the leg Gao & Jiang, 2004;Shi et al., 2007;Uesugi et al., 2017;Watson et al., 2010;Wei et al., 2009aWei et al., , 2009bXu et al., 2012), but cannot disclose the force in water strider's normal activities.
## (s4) MORPHOLOGY AND FUNCTIONS: SUPERHYDROPHOBIC LEGS
(p4.0) Water striders have three pairs of legs: one pair of forelegs for grabbing and support, and two pairs of long appendages for locomotion. The distal segments of each leg are composed of a femur, tibia, and tarsus, as shown in Figure 5A. The leg is covered by uniformly tilted bristles ( Figure 5B), which contain grooves on each ( Figure 5C). There are two types of bristles distinguished by their size: i.e., thick and sparse bristles (thorns) used as grooming combs  and thin and dense bristles that render the legs superhydrophobic (Gao & Jiang, 2004), with their tips bent inward to avoid piercing the water surface. Both types are innervated bristles that can act as mechanoreceptors to sense fluctuations on the water surface .
## (s5) Morphological traits in maximizing propelling forces
(p5.0) For Aquarius remigis, the maximum vertical propelling force per leg without piercing the water surface is ~1.52 mN (15 times body weight), indicating an extraordinary load-bearing capacity Gao & Jiang, 2004). In locomotion, the lateral propelling force on one midleg is estimated to be ~0.18 mN (Uesugi et al., 2017). Early calculations treated the leg as an infinitely long rigid cylinder that horizontally resides on the water surface and gave a theoretical vertical propelling force slightly lower than the experimental result Vella et al., 2006), suggesting other unconsidered factors at play.

(p5.1) The effect of deformation was not considered until later. Water strider legs are mostly hollow, which results in great flexibility (Wei et al., 2009b). Zheng et al. (2009) andJi et al. (2012) discovered that the adaptive bending at three joints and elastic deformation of each segment play prominent roles in enhancing vertical propelling force. The flexibility can help the leg adjust to the inclined meniscus (Wei et al., 2009b), thus preventing the tip from piercing the surface (Ji et al., 2012;Koh et al., 2015).

(p5.2) The orientation of legs can be easily related to propelling forces. Feng et al. (2007) revealed that vertical propelling force decreases as the leg stepping angle increases to 28°b efore penetrating the water surface. Bristles can also  contribute to the propelling force in an unexpected way. As demonstrated in Figure 5B, bristles protrude toward the leg tip. This topography leads to a unidirectional adhesion property: i.e., droplets roll off the bristles more easily parallel to the leg than perpendicular to the leg (Prakash & Bush, 2011). Similarly, in regard to orientation of the grooves, liquid flowing perpendicular to the grooves will experience more drag (Choi et al., 2006). As a result, by posing the midleg perpendicular to the direction of motion, the midleg will experience larger drag force when stroking backward, thus in turn generating a larger thrust forward. The dimensions of the leg have intrigued researchers in terms of leg length. As surface tension is proportional to wetted length, one may expect that the tibia and tarsus should be as long as possible (Su et al., 2010). However, theoretical analysis shows that there is a critical leg aspect ratio l/r (l: wetted length; r: radius of leg) at which vertical propelling force reaches a plateau, whereby the leg will bend greatly to extend above the water surface, leaving the tip unattached to the water (Song et al., 2006;Vella, 2008). Vella (2008) examined several species from the genus Gerris and Aquarius and found that the aspect ratios of their midlegs are below but close to the critical value.

(p5.3) Similarly, calculation with a flat surface model reveals a critical value of bristle spacing when maximizing vertical propelling force, with bristle spacing of Aquarius remigis below but remarkably close to this critical value (Xue et al., 2014).
## (s6) Morphological traits in minimizing resistant forces
(p6.0) The first attempts to minimize resistant forces arose from the fact that superhydrophobicity may be unnecessary in generating propelling forces. Analyses conducted by Liu et al. (2007), Zheng et al. (2009), andSu et al. (2010) demonstrated that maximum force increases insignificantly with the increase in CA, given that CA is higher than 100°. Shi et al. (2007) used coated gold threads to confirm this finding. For dynamic processes, numerical analysis by Gao & Feng (2011) demonstrated that the propulsive force, as in the static case, is also insensitive to the CA if the surface is hydrophobic.

(p6.1) However, the focus here may not be propelling forces but rather resistant forces. The rigid cylinder model indicated that a larger CA is essential for reducing the vertical resistant force of a leg detaching from the water surface (Lee & Kim, 2009;Su et al., 2010). This was confirmed by Watson et al. (2010), who found that a bristle without grooves exhibits much greater adhesion and weaker resistance to water penetration. Shi et al. (2007) examined fluidic drag on a gold thread surrounded by a layer of oxygen gas and concluded that the air cushion formed by the hierarchical structure reduces fluidic drag on water strider legs. Under a quasi-static process, Wei et al. (2009aWei et al. ( , 2009b) measured the force to lift an Aquarius remigis leg from the water surface to be ~20 μN. The detachment force on the water surface is much smaller with a magnitude of ~0.1 μN and can be further reduced to ~0.01 μN with increased lift-up velocity (Sun et al., 2018).

(p6.2) The deformation of bristles plays a crucial part in maintaining the Cassie state, thus reducing resistant forces. Microscale droplets that migrate between bristles can be expelled due to the elastic deformation of bristles, thus preventing transition to the Wenzel state in a humid environment (Wang et al., 2015). Deformation of bristles during leg lift-up can also reduce the water contact area, thus decreasing the detachment force (Sun et al., 2018). The orientations of legs, bristles, and grooves play vital roles in minimizing resistant forces. For large droplets, the uniform tilt angle of bristles results in a unidirectional adhesion property: i.e., droplets advance more easily toward the leg tip than backward, as the deformation of bristles will resist the backward motion of droplets (Prakash & Bush, 2011;Xu et al., 2012). Similarly, liquid will flow more easily in the direction of grooves (Choi et al., 2006). Consequently, in locomotion, the hindlegs will experience less drag force as they extend along the direction of motion. Additionally, a peeling mode has been observed in water striders when they lift-up their legs, which is directly linked to this unidirectional adhesion property (Prakash & Bush, 2011).

(p6.3) One may assume that there is a critical bristle spacing to minimize resistant force, with small spacing making it easier to form a capillary bridge that sticks adjacent bristles together (Bush et al., 2007). Through sheer calculations, Su et al. (2010) stated that there should be an upper limit of bristle spacing so that a transition to the Cassie state does not occur under medium pressure, as well as a lower limit beyond which the bristles will easily bend so as to contact with adjacent bristles. They claimed that biological surfaces in nature fall into their predicted range.
## (s13) Latest findings
(p13.0) Several studies advancing this trend have been reported. In biomechanical research, multiple species of water striders were taken into consideration in Vella (2008) and Yang et al. (2016) to illustrate mutual traits shared among species. Pioneering research by Bush et al. (2007) and Hu & Bush (2010) included measurement and flow-visualization experiments on Aquarius remigis, Mesovelia, Hydrometra, Stagnorum, and two species of semi-aquatic bugs. They examined orientation, dimensions, and spacing of legs and bristles as well as dynamic parameters and proposed several dimensionless parameters for comparison. They were the first to introduce the Strouhal number St=fA/V (f: Stroke frequency;
## (s14) Future developments
(p14.0) Compared to solid ground, friction on the water surface is much smaller and mobility is much higher, thus suggesting a slippery and unstable interface. On this interface, it is more difficult to keep balance or generate thrust. Additionally, predators generally come from above or from the lateral side on land, but on the water surface, predators can also attack from underneath (Armisén et al., 2015), demanding much higher jumping ability. We thus propose two directions that could be of interest to researchers in the field of biology and biomechanics. Fluidity of water: The water environment on which water striders live may have different parameters such as temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, salinity, and fluidity. From a biomechanical perspective, the first four parameters can have a potential influence on surface tension, whereas the last one may affect locomotion traits. However, surface tension and CA vary little with the first four parameters in the natural environment. As a result, we could rule out the influence of the first four parameters and focus on the fluidity of water.
