# Compact Gearboxes for Modern Robotics: A Review

CorpusID: 221117393 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/311257a5e5fdafbb44accc2f40db79f33e52f500](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/311257a5e5fdafbb44accc2f40db79f33e52f500)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) Control
(p2.0) The control of robotic devices is a very broad and complex topic, and the subject of extensive research literature. In this section we restrict ourselves to introducing the basic principles of Linearity and Reflected Inertia, which are basic to understand the gearbox influence on control.

(p2.1) Although in general speed and precision are conflicting requirements, conventional robotic devices excel in achieving high positioning accuracy at high speed thanks to the use of stiff actuators with very linear behaviors (Cetinkunt, 1991). The incorporation of a robotic transmission influences control complexity mainly in two ways: introducing additional nonlinearities and strongly impacting the reflected inertias.
## (s3) Safety
(p3.0) Industrial robots are traditionally placed behind fences, in highly structured environments where they can take advantage of their fast and accurate robotic movements without endangering the integrity of human operators.

(p3.1) A safe pHRI incorporating the ability to move safely in an unstructured/unknown environment is necessarily strongly linked to controllability. The current strategy used by roboticists to achieve this objective consists of shaping the mechanical impedance (Calanca et al., 2015), that is, letting a compliancecontroller manage the complex dynamical relation between robot position/velocity and external forces (Hogan, 1984).

(p3.2) The principle is simple: to grant a good adaptation to an uncertain environment, as well as the integrity of the human operator/user during an interaction with a robotic device, the latter must move in a compliant, human-like manner (Karayiannidis et al., 2015). This underlines the importance of impedance and intrinsic compliance (De Santis et al., 2008) and explains the apparition of a new type of intrinsically flexible actuators for pHRI (Ham et al., 2009), where high compliance becomes desirable (Haddadin and Croft, 2016).

(p3.3) From a control perspective, the payload inertia reflected to the prime mover is reduced by a factor corresponding to the square of the gear ratio. In the same way, the typically small rotor inertia of the prime mover is amplified by this same factor when reflected to the payload side, which must be added to the inertia resulting from the movement of the robotic device and the load for safety considerations, further restricting the operating speeds.
## (s4) Weight and Compactness
(p4.0) A lightweight design is of paramount importance to make safety and good performance compatible in the new robotics' applications (Albu-Schäffer et al., 2008). The latest Collaborative Robots (cobots) like KUKA's Lightweight-Robot, developed in collaboration with the Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics at the German Aerospace Center (DLR), live upon this principle and hence look very different to the heavy and bulky traditional industrial robots. Thanks to lower inertias, lightweight cobots enable higher productivities-higher speeds-without compromising user safety.

(p4.1) This advantageous aspect of a lightweight design has further advantages. For mobile robotic systems, lower weight means larger autonomies. In wearable, assistive robotic devices including prosthesis and exoskeletons, a lightweight design is also a key aspect to improve comfort (Toxiri et al., 2019).
## (s5) Efficiency and Virtual Power
(p5.0) Efficiency In fields like automotive or wind turbines, gearbox efficiency has long been under strong focus. In robotics on the other hand, efficiency has not until very recently become a key decision parameter for the selection of a suitable gearbox (Arigoni et al., 2010;Dresscher et al., 2016).

(p5.1) Higher efficiencies-lower losses-enable lower energy consumptions and have a direct, positive contribution to both operation costs and to the environmental-footprint of a machine or device. For mobile and wearable robotic devices, better efficiencies help as well reduce the weight of the systemsmaller batteries are required-and ultimately result in larger autonomies and better usability (Kashiri et al., 2018).

(p5.2) In gearboxes, there is one additional gain in going for lower losses: most mechanical transmissions used in robotics are formclosed and use some kind of teeth contact to transfer torque and movement between the prime mover and the end-effector. Owing to that, the kinematic ratio between input ω In and output speeds ω Out is locked by the number of teeth and defines its transmission ratio i K . In a gearbox with no losses, the torque ratio i τ between output and input torques τ corresponds precisely to the inverse of kinematic transmission ratio, with opposed sign. But in a real gearbox, the presence of losses alters this equality, and because the kinematic transmission ratio is locked by the number of teeth, that the absolute value of the torque ratio must decrease proportionally with the losses:
## (s9) Speed and Payload
(p9.0) Industrial robots can handle large payloads at the cost of large inertias. For cobots on the other side, safety considerations imply that they are not expected to handle such large payloads, but thanks to lighter designs, they can actually achieve larger payload-to-weight ratios.

(p9.1) Safety considerations restrict also the extent to which this mass reduction can be exploited to increase the operational speeds (Haddadin et al., 2009). Yet, the lower torques promote the use of lighter and faster electrical motors, demanding in principle larger speed reduction ratios for these applications.

(p9.2) A criterion for characterizing a gearbox's contribution to speed and payload performance must reflect these aspects and motivates us to use in our framework (i) maximum  input speed, (ii) maximum repeatable output torque-termed acceleration torque-and nominal torque, (iii) transmission ratio, and (iv) torque-to-weight ratios for both the nominal-and the acceleration torques.
## (s10) Summary
(p10.0) Characterizing robotic gearboxes is a challenging task: the high versatility of these devices, and their complex interactions with the prime movers and control systems, make a direct comparison of their performance particularly complex.

(p10.1) The transmission ratio has a demonstrated strong influence on the performance of a robotic system. This explains its preferent role in the literature dedicated to robotic actuation optimization, and the growing interest of roboticists in the possibilities to use variable transmissions (Kim et al., 2002;Carbone et al., 2004;Stramigioli et al., 2008;Girard and Asada, 2017). Although we are convinced that variable transmissions are very promising and will certainly contribute to shape the future robotics landscape, we have restricted our analysis here to constant-ratio compact gearboxes. At this point we believe that we are best served with this limited scope, which can actually contribute also to identify potential areas of applications and suitable technologies for variable-ratio transmissions.
## (s14) Cycloid Drives: for High Robustness and Torsional Stiffness
(p14.0) Since their invention by Lorenz Braren in 1927 (Li, 2014), cycloid drives have found application mainly in boats, cranes, and some large equipment as steel strip rolling trains or CNC machines. In cycloid drives, an eccentric input motion creates a wobbly cycloidal motion of a single, large planet wheel, which is then converted back in a rotation of the output shaft and results in a high reduction capacity (Gorla et al., 2008), see Figure 5. Table 3 includes the market leader (NABTESCO RV) in this segment and the main challengers (SPINEA and SUMITOMO). The RV from NABTESCO and the Fine-Cyclo T-series of SUMITOMO include a pre-gearing, conventional PGT stage. The payload capability of these devices is larger than required for our benchmark and results in large weights. This provides already a valuable insight: more compact solutions are not available in the market and are-according to the information provided by some of the manufacturers-less interesting because they would need extreme manufacturing precision and ultimately result in high costs. Shapes are similar to those of strain wave gearboxes, while weights are larger and closer to those of the PGTs, for the aforementioned reasons. Torque-to-weight ratios are larger than those of PGTs but slightly lower than for strain wave gearboxes. The main advantage of cycloid drives lies precisely in their ability to withstand large loads and particularly impact loads, and in the little maintenance required.
