# Dolomitic filler in self-compacting concrete: a review

CorpusID: 229494295 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be18c10b4d2849bcb2716f27f335b4f618d5f64b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be18c10b4d2849bcb2716f27f335b4f618d5f64b)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Self-compacting concrete (SCC) is a special type of concrete which flows under its own weight without requiring external vibration for compaction. This is very useful in applications where normal vibrated concrete (VC) cannot be used such as narrow forms and reinforcement congested members. To attain the self-compacting property, it is required that the concrete have adequate viscosity, high deformability and high resistance to segregation. This is can be achieved by adding mineral admixtures (fillers) and/or viscosity modifying agents (VMAs). The former is the main practice in Europe and processed limestone powder is the most commonly used filler in the production of SCC. Moreover, the quarrying process of the production of mineral aggregate results in large amount of fine materials (quarry dust) as a by-product. These significant amounts of environmental wastes pose a real concern to manufacturers due to their impact on the environment, leading to economic consequences.

(p0.1) In fact, the constituents of VC and SCC are alike. Although fillers can be excluded in VC, they play a crucial role in SCC. The term filler could be defined differently according to the users and/or producers as wide variety of industries use fillers in their processes for economic, technical, and/or environmental reasons. The authors would define fillers in the context of SCC as:

(p0.2) Fine-grained inorganic materials other than cement, mostly less than 125 μm, that could be inert or nearly inert as well as pozzolanic or latent hydraulic and used in order to increase the powder content to improve the rheology of SCC and could affect the fresh and hardened properties of SCC by either physical, chemical and/or physiochemical mechanism.

(p0.3) The last definition implies that there is no limit on the raw materials, including wastes, that can be used to produce fillers for SCC application if they are free of deleterious minerals and have suitable fineness. However, the addition level is strongly dependent on the filler mineralogy and its particle size and shape [1].
## (s7) Fresh Properties
(p7.0) Sahmenko et al. [46] used a dolomitic quarry by-products having a maximum size of 8 mm and containing 26% of fines less than 63 μm to produce normal concrete (NC), highperformance self-compacting concrete (HPSCC) and Architectural concrete (AC) with various w/c ratios. The dolomite by-product represented 60%, 40% and 100% of the total aggregate in NC, HPSCC and AC, respectively. They reported that the HPSCC reached a slump flow of 590mm by adding 1% SP and therefore it can be classified as SF1 according ENFRAC 2005 [46]. They explained that the angular shape of the dolomite by-product may cause the limited flowability. However, the obtained workability is acceptable as a SCC.
