# Potential roles of medicinal plants for the treatment of viral diseases focusing on COVID-19: A review

CorpusID: 222256696 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a116bbd5e7e1b9fa5d3d7be96f69b8e17bc7e61f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a116bbd5e7e1b9fa5d3d7be96f69b8e17bc7e61f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) | SCREENING OF MEDICINAL PLANTS
(p2.0) There are various methods available for in vivo and in vitro screening of extracts of medicinal plants. Notably, this review focused on a little known method in the area of medicinal chemistry, which is mostly known as emulsion-based in vitro compartmentalization (IVC) technique (Gianella, Snapp, & Levy, 2016). For this purpose, a "water-inoil-in-water" emulsion is used in the compartmentalization of droplets for ultrahigh throughput screening (uHTS). Usually, IVC uses aqueous droplets that contain DNA and machinery for protein production within water-in-oil emulsions (Rothe, Surjadi, & Power, 2006).  (Bernath et al., 2004). Reprogramming of similar techniques could be explored to study the inhibition of viral protease. Different cell cultures assays, chips-based methods, animal models, and enzyme inhibition assays have been carried to find potent antiviral compounds from natural sources (Anani et al., 2000;Lloyd, Russell, Blanes, Doble, & Roux, 2013;Mukhtar et al., 2008;Ogbole, Segun, & Adeniji, 2017). Additionally, for a couple of decades, the analysis, process, and development of herbal ingredients have dramatically increased with innovation in laboratory techniques and instrumentation (Fitzgerald, Heinrich, & Booker, 2020). infected patients was investigated but clinical use has not commenced yet. Except earmarking on viral protease, replication, spike protein, and receptor, its protein kinase C and helicase have also been established as potential targets to inhibit SARS-CoV (Hoever et al., 2005;Jang et al., 2020). Glycyrrhizin has been revealed as a potential inhibitor of SARS CoV protein kinase C and similarly, myricetin and scutellarein as aptitude inhibitor of viral helicase (Xian et al., 2020). Herbal-based antiviral medicines have shown promising inhibitory effects, which range from anti-influenza to anti-dengue properties (Table 1). In the context of the global burden of COVID-19, where an absolute medicine is waiting for patients, promptly available plantbased medicines with studied safety and efficacy can be on the frontline to tackle the ongoing calamity caused by COVID-19. The problems encountered while using bioactive secondary metabolites like their solubility, stability, and bioavailability need to be addressed to use these metabolites as medicine (Coimbra et al., 2011). Moreover, the application of artificial intelligence tools like molecular docking studies, toxicity analysis, and pharmacological studies would further add significant information regarding potency of the aforementioned secondary metabolites. However, the mutation occurring in targets should be taken into account. Extensive studies and investments are demanding for new drug development strategies using herbal extracts to save sapiens lives on our planet from pandemics like COVID-19, today, and tomorrow.
## (s4) Plant sources Isolated molecules Active against virus References
(p4.0) Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi Isoscutellarein (76) Influenza virus (Nagai, Miyaichi, Tomimori, Suzuki, & Yamada, 1992) Kaempferia parviflora Wall. ex Baker 5,7-Dimethoxyflavone (77), Tetramethyllueteonin (78), Tri methyl apigenin (79), 5-Hydroxy-7-methoxyflavone (80), Avian influenza virus (H5N1) (Sornpet, Potha, Tragoolpua, & Pringproa, 2017) Curcuma longa L. Curcumin(diferuloylmethane) (9) H5N1 (Sornpet et al., 2017) Ginkgo biloba L., Cephalotaxus harringtonia K.
