# minerals Applications of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles in Mining from Exploration to Reclamation: A Review

CorpusID: 225462413 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65a9f2b4d413d8c02763720aa4b2f637a1666aa)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have been used for various purposes, such as safety inspection, construction site management, monitoring of infrastructure system elements, crop monitoring, invasive weed mapping, water status estimation, land-use classification, emergency response, humanitarian aid and disaster relief, conservation, disease control, healthcare, weather forecasting, telecommunications, advertising, and foodservice . The utilization of UAVs and related research is expanding across industries owing to the significant cost reduction in vehicles and sensors and significant advances in data processing software [18].
## (s1) UAV Applications in the Mineral Exploration Phase
(p1.0) During the exploration phase, the existing literature was reviewed after being divided into two categories according to the type of data that could be obtained by UAVs, namely, geological and structural analysis via remote sensing and aerial geophysical exploration.   1 Several mines and neighboring areas; 2 the entire mine; 3 some areas, such as slopes, tunnels, and blasting areas in the mine.
## (s4) Geological and Structural Analysis via Remote Sensing
(p4.0) In geological and structural analysis via remote sensing, UAVs are used mainly to first acquire visible, infrared, multispectral, and hyperspectral data and then process and analyze them to measure and image surface properties. Digital camera images and hyperspectral data are widely used in geology, mineral mapping, and exploration, and can be an important aspect of remote sensing.

(p4.1) Madjid et al. [39] presented a methodology of structure from motion (SfM) photogrammetry on aerial photographs captured by drones. They also considered the opportunities and limitations of using drones in carbonate geological studies. In addition, they conducted a case study applied to the dolomite geobodies located in Picos de Europa, northern Spain, to determine whether the proposed methodology facilitated accurate assessment of the spatial distribution and dimension of carboniferous limestone host rock. A high-resolution 3-D digital outcrop model was developed by capturing photographic images using a small drone and creating the digital surface model (DSM) with an assemblage of rectified aerial photographs. The analysis revealed that dolomite geobodies occur preferentially near strike-slip faults rather than thrust faults or specific types of limestone host rocks. The SfM photogrammetry using photographs taken by the drone presented in this study was effective in developing 3-D models of geometrically complex or important rock outcrops. It was observed to have significant capability of collecting data of outcrops located in inaccessible areas.
## (s7) Topographic Surveying at Open-Pit Mines
(p7.0) It is inconvenient to survey open-pit mines, which are progressing rapidly. This is because topographic surveying requires expensive surveying equipment (total station and terrestrial laser scanner) and professional technicians. However, if a UAV is used, it is possible to rapidly survey a wide area of the open pit within a reasonable budget. Most of the studies reviewed herein acquired aerial photographs using UAVs and used these photographs to generate DEM, DSM, and 3-D models of open-pit mines.

(p7.1) Wang et al. [56] investigated the usefulness of low-altitude UAVs for obtaining high-resolution images to reconstruct the geometry of an opencast mine. In addition, the relative error was evaluated via a comparison of the DSMs generated from the UAV point cloud and those generated from the terrestrial laser scanner (TLS) data. They developed UAV point clouds via image modeling techniques, such as SfM and a patch-based multi-view stereo (PMVS) algorithm, and then developed a DSM from the study area. While comparing these results with the DSM generated based on the TLS data, the discrepancy map of the 3-D distance based on the DSM showed that the most deviations were less than ± 4 m and that the relative error of the volume was 1.55% [56].

(p7.2) Cho et al. [57] verified the applicability of aerial triangulation by applying a small UAV to a mine site. To achieve this, they investigated a smectite mine located in Gyeongju-si, Gyeongsangbuk-do, Korea. They used six ground control positions to perform aerial triangulation for the study area. In addition, 448 aerial photographs were captured in the measurement area of dimensions 600 × 380 m. A 3-D terrain model was constructed using these. It was observed that the use of the ground control positions enabled an aerial triangulation with an accuracy of less than 1 cm.

(p7.3) Lee and Choi [58,59] performed topographic surveys of different open-pit mines using rotaryand fixed-wing UAVs. Aerial photographs were acquired of the study area, and orthomosaic images and digital surface models were generated using these. In addition, the position coordinates measured using a differential global positioning system (DGPS) with respect to the ground reference point were compared with those extracted via UAV photogrammetry. The root mean square errors (RMSEs) of the X, Y, and Z-coordinates were 10 (rotary wing) and 15 cm (fixed wing).

(p7.4) Fixed-wing and rotary-wing UAVs differ in the characteristics, such as flight altitude, speed, time, and performance, of the attached cameras. Lee and Choi [60] compared the results of aerial photogrammetry, which differed for each aircraft type, in the same study area. To achieve this, a construction site located in Yangsan-si, Gyeongsangnam-do was set as the research area. Orthomosaic images and DSM with a 4-cm/pixel spatial resolution were produced using the acquired aerial photographs. Furthermore, coordinates were measured on the ground using DGPS for seven ground control points (GCPs). From a comparison between the aerial survey and ground survey, the RMSE was analyzed to be approximately 10 cm. The fixed wing showed a relatively negligible error when the results of the two types of aerial surveying were compared. Figure 4 shows the orthographic images and DSMs of the study area for the two types of UAVs.

(p7.5) construction site located in Yangsan-si, Gyeongsangnam-do was set as the research area. Orthomosaic images and DSM with a 4-cm/pixel spatial resolution were produced using the acquired aerial photographs. Furthermore, coordinates were measured on the ground using DGPS for seven ground control points (GCPs). From a comparison between the aerial survey and ground survey, the RMSE was analyzed to be approximately 10 cm. The fixed wing showed a relatively negligible error when the results of the two types of aerial surveying were compared. Figure 4 shows the orthographic images and DSMs of the study area for the two types of UAVs.  Chen et al. [61] investigated the characteristics of iron open-pit mines located in Beijing district, China, using high-resolution topography and landscape metric. They calculated the orientation of the terrace wall in addition to the correlation length. Furthermore, they tested a simple empirical model to derive the percentage of artificial surfaces. First, the main topographic information (DSM) was derived using UAV and SfM photogrammetry techniques. Then, the terraced areas of open-cast and open-pit mines were expressed using the slope local length of autocorrelation (SLLAC) proposed by Sofia et al. [62], a new landscape metric for the identification of terraced sites.

(p7.6) Rossi et al. [63] proposed a method to reconstruct the quarry terrain by utilizing nadir and oblique aerial photographs captured using a UAV, and conducted a feasibility analysis thereafter. They set the quarry in Bari, southern Italy, as the research area. They first used nadir images, and then added images obtained from off-nadir angles. They also investigated the accurate set of GCPs for georeferencing and process validation. It was observed that the final position of the point clouds, which represent the main geometries of the quarry environment in the topography reconstruction of the quarry, can achieve an accuracy of a few centimeters. A comparison of the surveys performed Chen et al. [61] investigated the characteristics of iron open-pit mines located in Beijing district, China, using high-resolution topography and landscape metric. They calculated the orientation of the terrace wall in addition to the correlation length. Furthermore, they tested a simple empirical model to derive the percentage of artificial surfaces. First, the main topographic information (DSM) was derived using UAV and SfM photogrammetry techniques. Then, the terraced areas of open-cast and open-pit mines were expressed using the slope local length of autocorrelation (SLLAC) proposed by Sofia et al. [62], a new landscape metric for the identification of terraced sites.

(p7.7) Rossi et al. [63] proposed a method to reconstruct the quarry terrain by utilizing nadir and oblique aerial photographs captured using a UAV, and conducted a feasibility analysis thereafter. They set the quarry in Bari, southern Italy, as the research area. They first used nadir images, and then added images obtained from off-nadir angles. They also investigated the accurate set of GCPs for georeferencing and process validation. It was observed that the final position of the point clouds, which represent the main geometries of the quarry environment in the topography reconstruction of the quarry, can achieve an accuracy of a few centimeters. A comparison of the surveys performed using a nadir and oblique image with surveys performed using a total station revealed the advantage of a better description of the shape of the quarries, surface discontinuities, and sub-vertical walls.

(p7.8) Chirico and DeWitt [64] evaluated the effectiveness of high-resolution orthoimage and DSMs obtained from small low-cost UAS and SfM photogrammetry, in mapping and monitoring mining sites in west Africa. The main objective of the study was to develop two-dimensional and three-dimensional geospatial data that can be used to observe mining pits and to distinguish the features of mine sites. They collected high-resolution orthoimage and DSMs using the wide-angle and narrow-field features of a view camera system and compared these. It was observed that DSMs with high precision and accuracy can be obtained using UAS images and SfM photogrammetry technology.

(p7.9) Gil and Frąckiewicz [65] performed spatial analysis to optimize the location of the observation network points in an open-pit mine. They used UAVs for aerial photography and Quantum GIS open-source software for spatial analysis. First, an aerial photograph was captured using a UAV; based on this, a digital terrain model (DTM) was generated. The DTM includes heights, elevations, other geographical elements, and natural features, such as rivers and ridgelines. However, it does not represent the elevation of the reflective surfaces of trees, buildings, and other features elevated above the "Bare Earth" that is provided by the DSM. Subsequently, a spatial query and an analysis of the open-pit mine were performed using the Quantum GIS program and DEMs. The spatial analysis revealed that the use of the program substantially facilitates the initial selection of the location area for points.

(p7.10) In addition, various studies have been conducted to measure open-pit mines using UAV or to analyze the results. Tscharf et al. [66] proposed a workflow for automated image-based reconstruction that can generate detailed and accurate 3-D models from aerial images captured by UAVs and unordered multi-view datasets. They applied and demonstrated the proposed workflow in an open-pit mine. Xiang et al. [67] established the open-pit mine in Beijing, China, as the research area and took high-resolution aerial photographs twice using a UAV to evaluate geomorphic variations. DEMs were generated through SfM photogrammetry. The surface of the open-pit mine was analyzed by calculating the difference between two DEMs on a cell-by-cell basis and via the SLLAC method. Beretta et al. [68] evaluated the uncertainty that may appear in DSMs obtained through UAV photogrammetry. To achieve this, UAV aerial photogrammetry was performed in a small open-pit quarry located in southern Brazil. Then, it was compared with a survey method using a real-time kinetic (RTK) GNSS and laser scanning. Kršák et al. [69] carried out photogrammetry by applying a low-cost commercial UAV to open-pit mines and evaluated the accuracy of the DEM constructed through this. Ge et al. [70] presented the results of the work performed by applying UAVs in the Ulan open-cut mine and Tahmoor underground mines in New South Wales (NSW), Australia. They used a UAV to evaluate the volume of stockpile, monitor the safety of highwall slopes, and map the underground mine subsidence in these mines. Esposito et al. [71] used UAV photogrammetry to quantify the volume mined at the Sa Pigada open-pit mine in Sardinia, Italy, and to evaluate the alterations in the mine surface. Table 4 summarizes the reviewed literature on the application of UAVs to topographic surveying in the phase of mineral exploitation. Among the 15 reviewed studies, 8 applied rotary-wing UAVs, 4 used fixed-wing UAVs, and the rest used both rotary-and fixed-wing UAVs. All 15 studies acquired digital camera images to survey the topography. Twelve articles for the target area scale were analyzed on the mine scale and three on the zonal scale. Additionally, five articles applied an autonomous control type and two articles used a semi-autonomous control type. One paper used a manual mode to operate UAVs. For the remaining studies, the type is unknown.
## (s9) Analysis of Working Environments
(p9.0) In addition to taking aerial photographs, UAVs can perform various tasks when installed with thermal and dust sensors, communication modules, and lights. The papers reviewed below are related to the monitoring or analysis of the working environments and workers in mines, using various sensors.

(p9.1) Alvarado et al. [79] developed a methodology to address the need for a more accurate approach to characterizing blasting plumes in mining sites in near-real time. Because the existing air quality monitoring method relies on a limited number of sampling locations, it is difficult to monitor the point where blasting has occurred, in real time. Therefore, dust data can be collected during flight by attaching an opto-electrical dust sensor to a small fixed-wing and multi-rotor UAV. The dust monitoring system presented in this study showed a technical performance comparable to those of industrial quality dust-monitoring devices. However, an individual calibration equation was required for the sensor to characterize the dust plumes. In addition, the tests described in this paper measured the concentration of PM10 (particulate matter with aerodynamic diameter < 10 µm) with a precision of 1 mg/m 3 . However, it was observed that a more accurate measurement of the concentration requires the use of other optical sensors and reference calibration with more precise equipment. Bamford et al. [80] presented a concept for measuring rock fragmentation using UAVs and conducted laboratory-scale tests. The purpose of the study was to highlight the advantages of aerial rock fragmentation analysis using a UAV in terms of prediction accuracy and time effort. They explained the procedure for collecting data using the UAV system, and the UAV system configuration. Under the laboratory-scale tests, they first collected rock and pile distribution and information using a UAV system, and manually photographed the rocks and piles for comparative analysis. A comparison of the method using the UAV system and the existing method revealed that the UAV system can measure rock fragmentation within 6% of the accuracy of the existing method, which deviates by up to 14% from the actual distribution. In addition, the time required was within 20%. Based on these results, it is anticipated that rock fragmentation analysis using UAV can improve the reliability of measurement and reduce sampling errors without disturbing the mining process.

(p9.2) Bamford et al. [81] also investigated the application of a UAV using artificial lighting to measure rock fragmentation in poor lighting conditions, such as those during night work or underground mine work. They investigated the effect of lighting conditions on the analysis of aerial rock fragments through indoor and outdoor experiments. The experiment revealed that the lighting conditions substantially influence the accuracy of the image analysis technique for measuring rock fragmentation. Furthermore, it was verified that the prediction accuracy was improved when artificial lighting was installed on a rock pile or attached to a UAV system.
## (s10) Surveying at Underground Mines
(p10.0) There are few UAVs and instruments that are dedicated to underground environments. Similar environments typically have low-visibility conditions, confined openings, magnetic interference, and an absence of GPS coverage [85]. However, if UAV systems are equipped with high-resolution cameras, LED lights, and thermal sensors, useful information, such as image (thermal, spectral, etc.), distance, inertial measurement unit (IMU), and sound navigation and ranging (SONAR) data, can be obtained in areas that are difficult to be accessed by mine workers.

(p10.1) Kanellakis and Nikolakopoulos [86] used UAVs to enable vision-based mine inspections. Thereby, they presented an assessment of the current technology of visual localization systems for underground mining. In addition, they verified whether UAV-based localization technology can be applied in harsh and challenging environments, while using reliable and low-cost existing methods and technologies. To achieve this, an experiment was conducted on a visual localization system at an iron ore mine in Kiruna, Sweden, one of the largest mines in Europe. The experimental results showed that stereo cameras can be used for automated UAVs. However, drift errors accumulated in the results.
## (s12) Monitoring of Soil and Water Pollution
(p12.0) The existing literature related to soil and water pollution monitoring reveals that UAVs are used to mainly acquire hyperspectral images and investigate the concentration of hazardous minerals. In addition, it was observed that UAVs are being used for data acquisition via sensors installed on them as well as for tasks, such as water sampling.

(p12.1) Martin et al. [92] used a UAV to map gamma radiation from uranium veins located in Cornwall, England. Sourt Terras, one of the mines containing the vein, was a major source of uranium and radium ores between 1870 and 1930. Currently, these regions are characterized by localized radioactivity. Furthermore, the documentation of the region is outdated, hindering the application of traditional survey methods. Therefore, incident radiation was recorded by attaching a lightweight gamma-ray spectrometer to the UAV. The data was stored on the device and transmitted in real time to the user of the remote base station. Thereby, they were able to generate high-resolution radiation maps at significantly faster collection rates over large areas using UAV-based systems. In addition, it was shown that the attenuation effect of incident gamma rays by a person carrying a detector, which is observed in conventional ground-based surveys, can be eliminated.

(p12.2) Fang et al. [93] presented a method of using hyperspectral images obtained with UAV and regression analysis, to search and map the concentration of Fe accumulated in the soil. They set the Malan Fe mine in Hevei Province, China, as the experimental area to verify the proposed method. They first developed their own GPU-based Python script to preprocess UAV-based hue saturation intensity (HSI) images. They then integrated it into the PhotoScan platform. Subsequently, the model was evaluated in an unbiased manner through the cross-validation estimation method. A model was selected for optimal prediction accuracy. The regression models evaluated were partial least squares (PLSR), support-vector machine (SVM), and an artificial neural network (ANN). The evaluation revealed the PLSR model to be the most suitable for estimating Fe concentrations. Finally, feature extraction and selection were applied to improve the accuracy of estimation.

(p12.3) Jackisch et al. [94] investigated pyrite and its consecutive weathering products in mining waste, using a lightweight drone system. The area surveyed was a re-cultivated tailings area in the Sokolov lignite district in the Czech Republic. Four field and flight tests were conducted. PH, X-ray fluorescence (XRF), and reflectance analysis were performed in the field to verify the drone system, and accurate information was obtained for samples characterized under laboratory conditions. Hyperspectral data were processed and corrected for atmospheric, topographic, and illumination effects using an accurate DEM. However, the high-resolution point clouds and DEMs were constructed via drone-based RGB data and SfM multi-view-stereo photogrammetry. Through the classification of the hyperspectral image data, it was possible to verify the presence of jarosite and goethite in the experimental area. Figure 5 shows the combination of acid mine drainage detection results obtained in the study.

(p12.4) Aerial drones or UAVs have the following advantages in monitoring pit lakes: (1) Reduce the risks associated with sampling water, (2) reduce the costs associated with sampling, and (3) increase the frequency of data acquisition. Therefore, Castendyk et al. [95] used drones to select the sampling depth of the pit lake in a mine. That is, the optimal sampling depth is selected according to the temperature and specific conductance of the field, which are collected using a drone prior to water sampling. The parameters of the physical condition of the pit lake are transmitted to the investigator. They conducted research on two pit lakes located in northwest USA. Both are located in places difficult to access by humans. First, the drone was equipped with a conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) probe capable of measuring up to a depth of 100 m. A water sampling device capable of collecting 2 L of water samples from a depth of up to 120 m was attached. For the first pit lake, three water samples were collected at depths of 0, 28, and 56 m. Subsequent laboratory results showed that all the samples were homogeneous. However, the sampling results of the second pit lake showed various water chemistries and persistence of summer stratification depending on the depth. Based on the experimental results, it can be concluded that using UAVs to monitor pit lakes can provide important information on the behavior and water quality of pit lakes to managers. Table 8 summarizes the reviewed literature on the application of UAVs for monitoring soil and water pollution in the mine reclamation phase. Among the four reviewed studies, two applied rotary-wing UAVs, one used both rotary-and fixed-wing UASs, and one paper was unknown. For the acquisition data type, there were various data, such as gamma spectrum data, hyperspectral images, and water data. Three papers were analyzed on the zonal scale and one on the regional scale. Finally, two studies used an autonomous flight mode, and the rest of the studies were unknown. Aerial drones or UAVs have the following advantages in monitoring pit lakes: (1) Reduce the risks associated with sampling water, (2) reduce the costs associated with sampling, and (3) increase the frequency of data acquisition. Therefore, Castendyk et al. [95] used drones to select the sampling depth of the pit lake in a mine. That is, the optimal sampling depth is selected according to the temperature and specific conductance of the field, which are collected using a drone prior to water sampling. The parameters of the physical condition of the pit lake are transmitted to the investigator. They conducted research on two pit lakes located in northwest USA. Both are located in places difficult to access by humans. First, the drone was equipped with a conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) probe capable of measuring up to a depth of 100 m. A water sampling device capable of collecting 2 L of water samples from a depth of up to 120 m was attached. For the first pit lake, three water samples were collected at depths of 0, 28, and 56 m. Subsequent laboratory results showed that all the samples were homogeneous. However, the sampling results of the second pit lake showed various water chemistries and persistence of summer stratification depending on the depth. Based on the experimental results, it can be concluded that using UAVs to monitor pit lakes can provide important information on the behavior and water quality of pit lakes to managers. Table 8 summarizes the reviewed literature on the application of UAVs for monitoring soil and water pollution in the mine reclamation phase. Among the four reviewed studies, two applied rotarywing UAVs, one used both rotary-and fixed-wing UASs, and one paper was unknown. For the acquisition data type, there were various data, such as gamma spectrum data, hyperspectral images, and water data. Three papers were analyzed on the zonal scale and one on the regional scale. Finally, two studies used an autonomous flight mode, and the rest of the studies were unknown.  
## (s13) Monitoring of Ecological Restoration
(p13.0) In the restoration phase, the use of UAVs in ecological restoration monitoring appeared to be prominent. In the case of monitoring related to ecological restoration, it was observed that the UAV system was used to understand the distribution of vegetation via the acquisition of aerial photographs, multispectral images, or near infrared images.

(p13.1) Lee et al. [96] used UAS-based photogrammetry to analyze and monitor variations in the ecological restoration area of open-pit limestone mines located in Gangwon-do, Korea. They performed aerial laser surveying, photogrammetry using a fixed-wing drone, and photogrammetry using a rotary-wing drone, three times. Thereby, orthophotos were collected, DSM and point clouds were generated, and variations in the ecological restoration area were monitored through comparisons with orthophoto and DEMs. The vegetation distribution area extracted from the RGB orthophoto using the excessive green index and visible atmospherically resistant index revealed that the vegetation had increased by approximately 10-30% when compared to the area ratio. In addition, an analysis of the DEM generated using the drone-based photogrammetry verified that it is highly similar to the restoration plan line. This implies that the restoration process is complete.

(p13.2) Urban et al. [97] compared the data obtained for the spoil heap area during the leaf-off period using two UAVs and the results of aerial photogrammetry. In addition, to compare the accuracy of UAV-based point clouds, a new approach was proposed to perform statistical estimation without additional validation data (e.g., GNSS survey). They investigated the influence of the vegetation cover and selected typical vegetation areas, such as forest, grass, and bush, to determine random errors in the data obtained through the UAV system. A comparison of the individual data in grassy areas revealed that the accuracy of the difference was approximately 0.03 m and that the average shift was from 0.01 to 0.08 m. Meanwhile, the accuracy of the data in the forest terrain was approximately 0.04 m, which was lower than that in the lawn. The data on the terrain of the bush appeared to be more precise than those of the grassy and forested areas.

(p13.3) Moudrý et al. [98] used two fixed-wing UAV systems to generate a DTM in relation to the vegetation cover (steppes and forests) and evaluate the performance of the system. Their research was conducted as per the following steps: (1) THE eBee platform with a zoom lens camera and EasyStar II with a fixed focal length camera were compared; (2) the UAV image was used to generate a DTM of the vegetation cover under leaf-off conditions; (3) it was evaluated as to whether an increase in the number of images could improve a lower-quality image; and (4) the DTM generated from the UAV image was compared with that produced via the Czech Republic's airborne laser scanning (ALS). In terms of point density and accuracy, EasyStar was able to achieve better results than eBee. The accuracy was improved after ground filtering in the point cloud for the forest environment with an RMSE of 0.11 (Easystar) and 0.13 (eBee) for each platform. However, the accuracy in the steppe environment was reduced slightly. Despite differences between the acquired point clouds, both systems were able to accurately detect terrain in open steppes and under the forest canopy in under leaf-off conditions with higher accuracy than a nationwide LiDAR-derived DTM [55].

(p13.4) Moudrý et al. [99] also evaluated the value of point clouds derived from aerial photogrammetry and LiDAR, to characterize post-mining sites. They acquired aerial images under leaf-off and leaf-on conditions. As a result, the point density of the point cloud under the leaf-off condition (an average density of 288 points per m 2 ) was higher than under the leaf-on condition (an average density of 56 points per m 2 ). Furthermore, it was observed to cover the study area uniformly. In addition, the accuracy of the DTM generated from the aerial photographs obtained under leaf-off conditions was similar to that of the DTM generated using LiDAR.

(p13.5) Padró et al. [100] presented an inexpensive convenient application that can monitor opencast mine restorations using UAS images. They performed field spectroradiometer measurements using a small drone equipped with a multispectral sensor to radiologically correct the UAS sensor data. The multispectral sensor used in this study has four spectral bands (green (530-570 nm), red (640-680 nm), red-edge (730-740 nm), and near infrared (770-810 nm)). In addition, images were processed to generate spectral information, vegetation and soil indices, structural information, and land cover maps. The generated spectral data and land cover classification helped to detect and quantify mine waste dumping, exposed soil, and other land cover extensions. In addition, they enabled the evaluation of plant formation and vegetation development, which, in turn, enabled a visual and intuitive comparison with the surrounding reference system.

(p13.6) Strohbach et al. [101] investigated the extent of vegetation restoration achieved via these rehabilitation measures, using high-resolution near infra-red aerial images combined with ground-based observations. Table 9 summarizes the reviewed literature on UAV applications for the monitoring of ecological restoration. Among the six reviewed studies, four applied fixed-wing UAVs and two used rotary-wing UAVs. The articles reviewed acquired digital camera images (four articles) and multispectral images (two articles). In terms of the targeted area scale, three papers were analyzed on the mine scale, two on the regional scale, and one on the zonal scale. Additionally, four articles were applied an the autonomous control type and two articles were unknown. 
## (s24) Conclusions
(p24.0) This review provided an analysis of studies conducted in the past 10 years by academics, for using UAV technology in the mining process that proceeds through the exploration, exploitation, and reclamation phases. A total of 65 research papers published in academic journals and MSC/PHD theses were identified, and their detailed contents on the use of UAVs were analyzed for systematic reviews. These reviews found that current applications of UAVs in mining can be categorized into (1) geological and structural analysis via remote sensing, (2) aerial geophysical survey at the exploration phase, (3) topographic surveying in open-pit mines, (4) rock slope analysis, (5) working environment analysis, (6) surveying in underground mines at the exploitation phase, (7) soil and water pollution monitoring, (8) ecological restoration monitoring, and (9) ground subsidence monitoring at the reclamation phase. Among the current applications, topographic surveying in open-pit mines has been applied the most. The most common types of UAVs and data acquired by sensors for UAV applications in mining were the rotary wing and images or video captured by digital cameras, respectively. Regarding the scales of the target area for UAV applications, regional-scale studies were usually conducted at the exploration phase. However, mine and zonal scale studies were more prevalent at the exploitation phase. An autonomous style of flying control was commonly used for UAV applications at all phases of the mining process.

(p24.1) On considering the studies that applied UAVs in the mining field, it has been observed that UAVs present the advantages of being operable and manageable at a low cost, the ability to work in areas difficult to access by people and other equipment, and the ability to acquire data relatively quickly. Compared to a manned airborne survey, the UAV-based survey can acquire high-resolution data with high density because UAVs can fly at low altitudes. In addition, easily controlling and maneuvering UAVs with only minimal training is an advantage. Therefore, UAVs are actively used for mine development tasks, such as aerial surveying, airborne geophysical exploration, and environmental monitoring.

(p24.2) The UAVs also have disadvantages, such as a low payload capacity, low fuel, and energy efficiency, short flight times, and dependence on weather conditions. Because of the low payload capacity of the UAVs, there is a limit to the number of sensors that can be mounted on the UAVs. As with airborne survey, sudden weather changes in the field can incur additional costs for the investigation. In addition, since the amount of data acquired in the UAV-based survey was massive, maintaining sufficient hardware and software to process it is necessary. If these disadvantages are overcome, UAVs will be more widely applied in the mining industry.
