# Rare Ectopic Pregnancies -A Literature Review for the Period 2007-2019 on Locations Outside the Uterus and Fallopian Tubes Seltene extrauterine Schwangerschaften -eine Literaturübersicht 2007-2019 zu Lokalisationen außerhalb von Uterus und Tuben

CorpusID: 220526088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27ce92b8b678d45c5baccad80d0018ecefa53e3b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27ce92b8b678d45c5baccad80d0018ecefa53e3b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Results
(p4.0) After carrying out a systematic literature search, a total of 115 suitable case reports from 113 publications were included in the study and their full text was analyzed (▶ Fig. 1). Based on anatomical sites and pathophysiology, cases were divided into intraperitoneal and extraperitoneal EP locations. Intraperitoneal implantation sites included all locations on the uterine serosa, the uterine ligaments, the liver, spleen, and bowel including the mesentery and the peritoneum of the pelvic wall, the diaphragm and the inguinal canal. Reported extraperitoneal sites of EP implantation included sites on the large arteries, in the area of the pancreas and the kidneys, in rectovaginal and paravesical spaces and in the obturator foramen.

(p4.1) As regards the pathogenesis of intraperitoneal EP, it is important to distinguish between primary and secondary abdominal pregnancy. With primary abdominal pregnancy, it is assumed that fertilization and implantation of the ovum occurs in the peritoneal space as a result of the anatomical conditions at the open distal als mögliche Differenzialdiagnose bei Patientinnen im reproduktionsfähigen Alter mit abdominellen Beschwerden bedacht werden.

(p4.2) portion of the uterine tube. In the case of secondary abdominal pregnancies, it is assumed that a secondary implantation in the peritoneal cavity occurs after rupture of a primary tubal pregnancy [3]. The pathogenesis of retroperitoneal EP, however, has not been conclusively established. Peritoneal fistulas following surgery [9] and lymphatic pathways [10] have been postulated as possible routes.
## (s5) Conclusion
(p5.0) This literature review makes it clear that in the event of a positive pregnancy test, an "empty" uterus, and abdominal pain with or without vaginal bleeding in women of childbearing age, it is important not only to investigate for tubal pregnancy as the most common ectopic pregnancy site but also to consider the possibility of ectopic pregnancies in rarer ectopic sites. At the same time, the relatively high percentage of asymptomatic patients and the often very late diagnosis highlight the importance of obtaining a detailed abdominal vaginal ultrasound scan. Abdominal CT or MRI imaging may provide additional useful information. While this is available in highly developed industrialized countries, CT imaging and MRI can be a problem in countries with more limited healthcare resources [13]. MRI is the best method of obtaining a diagnosis and planning the treatment of an EP located in the intra-or extraperitoneal space [3,6,65,110]. The appropriate placental management strategy and the possibility of achieving a live birth must always be considered on case-by-case basis and weighed up after carefully assessing the maternal morbidity risk.

(p5.1) Future studies on rare EP locations should focus on previously unknown risk factors in this group of EP patients, using retrospective case-control studies. The pathogenesis of retroperitoneal implantation of ectopic pregnancy is still unknown and also merits further study.
