# materials Magnesia (MgO) Production and Characterization, and Its Influence on the Performance of Cementitious Materials: A Review

CorpusID: 226057109 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c4c33baa9c659b2715542fe542b25862976b1b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c4c33baa9c659b2715542fe542b25862976b1b4)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Calcination of Magnesium Hydroxide
(p2.0) Calcining magnesium hydroxide includes heating a filter cake containing 50-72% magnesium hydroxide solids ( Mg(OH) 2 + Heat → MgO + H 2 O ). This procedure is similar to that of MgO production in either a brine or seawater process (later discussed in Section 2.3). After placing the filter cake in a kiln, the decomposition reaction starts to take place at 350 • C and it quickly increases above this temperature. During this calcination, several inconsequential processes occur, including filter cake dehydration, dry magnesium hydroxide decomposition, and MgO sintering. The removal of chemically bound water from magnesium hydroxide is a difficult process without raising the temperature above 1000 • C [18].
## (s4) Extraction of Magnesia from Mg-Bearing Minerals
(p4.0) This method involves geological CO 2 sequestration, where rocks containing chemical groups capable of carbonation are decomposed to suitable precursors to react with CO 2 [22][23][24]. The magnesium silicates decomposition can be facilitated by various methods. The first one is through Mg silicate acid digestion ( Mg 3 Si 2 O 5 (OH) 4 (s) + 6HCl(aq) → 3MgCl 2 (aq) + 2SiO 2 (s) + 5H 2 O(l) ), followed by brucite precipitation ( MgCl 2 + 2NaOH → Mg(OH) 2 + 2NaCl ), and its calcination ( Mg(OH) 2 → MgO + H 2 O ) [22]. The second method is through Mg silicate carbonation with subsequent Mg carbonate calcination ( (Mg.Ca) x Si y O x+2y + xCO 2 → x(Mg.Ca)CO 3 + ySiO 2 ) [24]. The Mg carbonate type from this process depends on the CO 2 pressure and temperature. For example, formulation of magnesite occurs at 155 • C and 126 bar, and hydrated magnesium carbonates at lower temperature and pressure [24]. After that, the carbonates would be calcined to produce MgO, CO 2 and possibly H 2 O.
## (s5) MgO in Cementitious Materials
(p5.0) In general, two main methods are used to add MgO in cementitious materials. One is by increasing the periclase (magnesium oxide mineral) content in cement clinker to produce high magnesia cement. This method has been used in dam concrete for about 40 years in China [25]. The second method is by preparing MgO from magnesite (MgCO 3 ) calcination and then incorporating the material in concrete as an expansive additive [25]. When using the second method, it is important to homogenously disperse MgO in concrete by using an adequate mixing process to avoid heterogeneous expansion that could lead to concrete destruction.

(p5.1) The addition of MgO to conventional Portland cements results in the formation of Mg(OH) 2 ( MgO + H 2 O → Mg(OH) 2 ) and its subsequent carbonation ( Mg(OH) 2 + CO 2 + 2H 2 O → MgCO 3 .3H 2 O) , giving rise to hydrated magnesium carbonates. This type of cement was designed to replace Portland cement in large quantities, thereby deriving environmental benefits with respect to CO 2 emissions. However, due to the long-term dimensional instability seen in concrete with cements with high MgO content, existing standards strictly limit the MgO content that can be used in Portland cements [11].
## (s7) Physical Properties
(p7.0) MgO is commonly used as a raw material for Portland cement. This MgO is obtained by calcination at 1400-2000 • C of MgCO 3 , when clinker is produced. These high temperatures allow a large crystalline structure to be formed, with reduced reactivity and hydration rate. This behaviour causes a slow expansion, leading to extensive cracking of the cement paste [26]. Due to the referred behaviour, the standard EN 197 indicates that the MgO content in the cement should not exceed 5% (of cement mass). However, by varying the calcination temperature, MgO with completely different physical-chemical properties can be obtained.
## (s11) Durability Behaviour
(p11.0) The durability behaviour of cementitious materials with MgO, studied by different researchers, is summarized in Table 4. In general, the incorporation of MgO leads to lower water absorption [45,47,52], higher carbonation [41,48], higher chloride ion migration coefficient [41], higher initial expansion [37,39,42,43,46,47,57,58], and lower shrinkage [42,43,53].

(p11.1) Moradpour et al. [47] studied the water permeability of mortars produced with nano-MgO, at 28 days. The results showed that the permeability decreased in mortars containing nano-MgO particles. The researchers defined 1% of MgO as an optimal amount to obtain maximum improvements of the mechanical strength and water absorption of mortars. Dung and Unluer [51,52] also studied the water absorption of concrete mixes produced with MgO and found a decrement when compared to that of conventional mixes.

(p11.2) Mo and Panesar [56] studied the porosity of cement pastes produced with 10%, 20% and 40% reactive MgO (calcined at 800 • C), under carbonation and non-carbonation conditions. The researchers found that incorporating 20% of MgO could lead to 32% pore volume decrease at 28 days, when compared to that of reference cement paste, under accelerated carbonation. By contrast, a 6-10% pore volume increase was found in pastes with 10-40% MgO, under non-carbonation condition.         Liu et al. [39] investigated the expansion behaviour of cement pastes produced with 2%, 3%, 4%, 5% and 6% of MgO. The length variation was measured in small prisms (10 × 10 × 40 mm) up to 210 days, at two different temperatures (20 • C and 50 • C) in water. The expansion increment rapidly took place at early ages (1-30 days), it slowed down between 30 to 90 days and became even after 90 days. Cement pastes presented higher expansion values with the increment of MgO content and curing temperature.
## (s12) Hydration Degree
(p12.0) The hydration of cementitious materials produced with additional MgO was studied by Dung and Unluer [52] and Mo et al. [42] through isothermal calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis. In the study of Dung and Unluer [51], MgO-cement pastes were produced with and without HCI (hydration agent, HA) and NaHMP (dispersion agent, DA). The heat flow ( Figure 2a Liu et al. [39] investigated the expansion behaviour of cement pastes produced with 2%, 3%, 4%, 5% and 6% of MgO. The length variation was measured in small prisms (10 × 10 × 40 mm) up to 210 days, at two different temperatures (20 °C and 50 °C) in water. The expansion increment rapidly took place at early ages (1-30 days), it slowed down between 30 to 90 days and became even after 90 days. Cement pastes presented higher expansion values with the increment of MgO content and curing temperature.
## (s13) Hydration Degree
(p13.0) The hydration of cementitious materials produced with additional MgO was studied by Dung and Unluer [52] and Mo et al. [42] through isothermal calorimetry and thermogravimetric analysis. In the study of Dung and Unluer [51], MgO-cement pastes were produced with and without HCI (hydration agent, HA) and NaHMP (dispersion agent, DA). The heat flow ( Figure 2a (c) Thermogravimetric analysis (hydration degree) of MgO-cement pastes (adopted from [51]).
## (s14) Microscopic Analysis
(p14.0) The analysed observations based on scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of cementitious materials made with additional MgO, collected from different studies, are summarized in Table 5. Each study presented different aspects and phenomena, including the ability of MgO to create cracks in cementitious materials [37] and densify its microstructure [47,49].

(p14.1) Mo et al. [37] assessed the morphology of cement pastes produced with MgO having different neutralization times (46, 325, and 1966 s), water-cured for 270 days at 40 • C. Due to the influence of alkali on MgO hydration, the hydration products in Mg(OH) 2 were more irregular and smaller, when compared to reference paste without additional MgO. On the other hand, cracks were observed at the sintered MgO particle interface, associated with its expansion at the particle boundary. The same researchers [43] produced cement pastes with incorporation of two MgO types (reactivity values: 50 and 400 s), FA and slag, and cured them in 38 • C water. In mixes without FA and slag, the MgO particles were surrounded by hydration products of cement. Sheets with similar features of brucite were observed, with some empty inner pores. In mixes with FA and slag, rims of pozzolanic reaction were mainly formulated around coarser slag particles. The finer slag particles appeared to be fully hydrated.

(p14.2) Moradpour et al. [47] observed that mortars produced with 1%, 3% and 5% nano-MgO had denser microstructure than that of the reference mix. The authors attributed this fact to the expansion and filler effects of MgO. The backscattered electron mode of SEM showed modified C-S-H in mixes with MgO. The microscopy of a mortar produced with 5% MgO, 40% slag, and 20% FA showed that FA particles and their surroundings were covered with hydration products. The densified structure may have been useful for strength increase. Pozzolanic or hydraulic products were grown from outside to the unhydrated inside of slag particles. The densified slag-FA interface contributed to strength increase. Unlike finer slag particles, the larger ones were not fully hydrated. Legend: FA = Fly ash; P = Paste; M = Mortar; C = Concrete.
