# Ubiquitous Computing for Remote Cardiac Patient Monitoring: A Survey

CorpusID: 2220294 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7d362fabb1add17a17619aa652e2caa84158a36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7d362fabb1add17a17619aa652e2caa84158a36)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Ubiquitous cardiac monitoring can be defined as mobile computing, medical sensor, and communications technologies for monitoring cardiac patients. This represents the evolution of e-health systems from traditional desktop telemedicine platforms to wireless and mobile configurations. Ubiquitous cardiac monitoring is part of telemedicine research . Current and emerging developments in wireless communications integrated with developments in pervasive and wearable biomedical sensor technologies would have a radical impact on future health-care delivery systems. They would provide a solution to the problems such as access to care for large segments in the population, continuing healthcare cost inflation, and uneven geographic distribution of quality. Distribution of quality is improved by enhancing accessibility to care for underserved populations, containing cost inflation, and improving quality through the continuous care of patients.

(p0.1) On the other hand, we have the following requirements for the patient monitoring applications: (i) periodic transmission of routine vital signs and transmission of alerting signals when vital signs cross a threshold, patients cross a certain boundary, or device battery drops below a level, (ii) addressing many usability issues including user comfort and trust by monitoring wireless and mobile networks including the use of wearable, portable, or mobile devices, (iii) diversity of patients including those suffering from mental illnesses is likely to make patient monitoring by wireless networks a challenge because of possible paranoia related to hand-held or wearable wireless devices, (iv) comprehensive and high-speed access to wireless networks, reliable and scalable wireless infrastructure, secure and fast databases, and utilization of network intelligence and information, (v) amount and the frequency of information that needs to be transmitted is another challenge. Especially, for the cardiac monitoring systems, we have the following few requirements: (a) maintaining periodic transmissions of routine heartbeating signs and real-time transmission of alert/alarm, (b) creating wearable portable or mobile devices that provide a user with comfort, (c) accommodating the diversity amongst patients, (iv) providing comprehensive and highspeed access to wireless networks, reliable and scalable wireless infrastructure, secure and fast databases, (d) utilizing network intelligence and information for calculations, (e) varying the amount and the frequency of information that needs to be transmitted is another challenge. For example, some patients require that certain vital signs be transmitted 2 International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications every few minutes, while for others continuous monitoring every few seconds is necessary. For all patients, any major changes in the vital signs should be transmitted immediately.

(p0.2) Continuous cardiac monitoring, through wireless technology, can be used to follow up with patients that have survived cardiac arrest, ventricular tachycardia, or cardiac syncope as well as for diagnostic purposes in patients with diffuse arrhythmia. As PDA devices are reasonably priced and are becoming increasingly powerful, telemedicine systems using PDAs are a cost-effective solution in a range of medical applications and suitable for home care usage. Some currently used patient operated ambulatory ECG recording equipments, such as holters and transtelephonic devices, are time consuming to setup and suffer from poor patient compliance. Patients undergoing acute myocardial infarction and subsequent arrhythmia ending in ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac arrest will not be able to operate such equipment. For reliable monitoring, it is necessary to develop a completely automatic recording and analyzing unit, which can detect cardiac abnormalities and automatically send data and alarm(s) to a health provider or central alarm system. It has been clearly documented that time is a critical factor in order to perform early cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and early defibrillation, and if the time to start CPR after a cardiac arrest increases, the chance of survival is reduced [4].
## (s2) OVERVIEW OF EXISTING MOBILE TELECARDIOLOGY SYSTEMS
(p2.0) In this section, we provide an overview of technologies used for transmitting the vital physiological data from a cardiac patient to a remote monitoring station. The European EPI-MEDICS project [24] uses an intelligent personal ECG monitor (PEM) for the early detection of cardiac ischemia and arrhythmia. The PEM records a 3-lead ECG (DI, DII, and V2), derives the corresponding standard 12-lead ECG using a patient specific transform [25], and stores the information in patient's electronic health record (EHR) on a smart media card in the PEM device. The PEM generates different levels of alarms based on the ECG and the patient's clinical history, and forwards them with the recorded signals and the EHR to the health care providers by means of Bluetooth and GSM/GPRS in store and forward mode [26].

(p2.1) The fast development of mobile technologies, including increased communication bandwidth and miniaturization of mobile terminals, has accelerated developments in the field of mobile telecardiology [2]. Development of the efficient portable and body-worn devices and systems to measure physiological parameters of cardiac patients (e.g., ECG, heart rate, SpO2, and blood pressure) has been witnessing active research lately. A wireless PDA-based physiological monitoring system for patients inside the hospital was reported in [3] which transmits the acquired data to a central management unit by using the hospital WLAN.
## (s5) More recent advances in wearable medical sensors
(p5.0) A new system-on-a-chip radar sensor for next-generation wearable wireless interface applied to the human healthcare and safeguard is presented in [135]. The overall system consists of a radar sensor for detecting the heart and breath rates and a low-power IEEE 802.15.4 ZigBee radio interface, which provides a wireless data link with remote data acquisition and control units. Particularly, the pulse radar exploits 3.1-10.6 GHz ultrawide band signals, which allow a significant reduction of the transceiver complexity and, then, of its power consumption. Such a novel systemon-a-chip wireless wearable interface enables low-cost silicon technologies for contactless measuring of the primary vital signs and extends the capability in terms of applications for the emerging wireless body area networks.

(p5.1) Reference [136] presents a compact planar antenna designed for wireless sensors intended for healthcare applications. Antenna performance is investigated with regards to various parameters governing the overall sensor operation. The study illustrates the importance of including full sensor details in determining and analyzing the antenna performance. A globally optimized sensor antenna shows an increase in antenna gain by 2.8 dB and 29% higher radiation efficiency in comparison to a conventional printed strip antenna. The wearable sensor performance is demonstrated, and effects on antenna radiated power, efficiency, and front-to-back ratio of radiated energy are investigated both numerically and experimentally.

(p5.2) Although it is suggested to use wearable medical devices and sensors as the nodes of body sensor networks (BSN) could allow better long-term monitoring of health condition, the protocol and criteria for validating these nodes in clinical settings are often overlooked. By using the validation of blood pressure (BP) measurement devices as an example, [137] reveals the need for new standards for nodes of BSN and proposes essential considerations to it. It is observed from a previous clinical survey and their theoretical analysis that there are disagreements in existing standards on the validation of conventional BP devices. Moreover, an experiment carried out by their group on 85 subjects demonstrates the inappropriateness of using the existing protocols that are setup for validating cuff-based BP devices to evaluate new cuff-less measurement techniques. The results suggested that a third objective measure could be introduced to relate the variant standards. It is also proposed that different validation criteria should be used for nodes of BSN that are developed based on new measurement principles.

(p5.3) Reference [138] analyzes the main challenges associated with noninvasive, continuous, wearable, and long-term breathing monitoring. The characteristics of an acoustic breathing signal from a miniature sensor are studied in the presence of sources of noise and interference artifacts that affect the signal. Based on these results, an algorithm has been devised to detect breathing. It is possible to implement the algorithm on a single integrated circuit, making it suitable for a miniature sensor device. The algorithm is tested in the presence of noise sources on five subjects and shows an 6 International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications average success rate of 91.3% (combined true positives and true negatives).
## (s8) QOS REQUIREMENTS IN MOBILE TELECARDIOLOGY APPLICATIONS
(p8.0) A comprehensive overview of various mobile telemedicine technologies as used in different settings is given in [81]. Based on its delay tolerance, the telemedicine data can be classified as stream (e.g., ambient video and audio), conversational (videoconferencing), near real-time, and not real-time. In medical environment, different data traffics with different classes of QoS requirements have to be transmitted simultaneously. One of the critical issues to be investigated is how to optimize the network performance to provide medical services with other multimedia services simultaneously. The telehealth data from different patients, who may be widely scattered, will consist of various physiological parameters, text, voice as well as video for diverse chronic diseases. These data must coexist together as well as with other commercial data such as voice, video (streaming or real), multimedia, and Internet. QoS provisioning for the future advanced telehealth monitoring technologies and systems is therefore a difficult proposition as the communication infrastructure must satisfy QoS requirements of different classes of applications. In this section, we analyze the research carried out in QoS provisioning in past telehealth monitoring projects.

(p8.1) The wide development of multimedia clinical applications and the use of inter-and intrahospital communication networks require a specific analysis to increase healthcare services efficiency. A processing toolbox (QoSM3) for technical evaluation of quality-of-service (QoS) traffic requirements in new healthcare services based on telemedicine is proposed in [116]. This tool consists of the multimedia service definition and the measurement and modeling processes, which permit to analyze QoS requirements and to optimize application design regarding available network resources. The proposed methodology was tested to evaluate real-time and storeforward medical services.

(p8.2) With the advent of the "next-generation Internet" and various related technologies, important tradeoffs between emerging network capabilities and design-related application requirements for network-based distributed healthcare systems are observed in [117]. One of the aspects of these emerging network capabilities is quality of service (QoS). QoS guarantees are a necessary characteristic of "next-generation" networks which will have a profound impact on the deployment of advanced, network-sensitive medical applications. Some of the underlying aspects of QoS technologies and possible considerations in designing network-based medical systems are discussed in [117]. One such system that attempts to solve some QoS problems, as well as provides a system for telehealth, is called "Cardimon," and will be overviewed in Section 7.
## (s9) FOURTH GENERATION (4G) MOBILE TELECARDIOLOGY
(p9.0) In this section, we discuss the limitations of 3G wireless technology in meeting some of the demands of efficient real-time monitoring of cardiac patients. We analyze the 3G technology and also discuss the evolution and features of 4G technology that will give a magnanimous boost to telehealth monitoring applications. When the 3G systems scenario and capabilities evolved, a lot of research work was carried out to create next-generation telemedicine systems using this technology. One such effort was carried out by the authors in [94], who proposed a testbed based on a 3G cellular standard for the next-generation mobile telemedicine. The 3G-based testbed (12.2 Kbps ∼ 2 Mbps) had higher and wider transmission data rates than the 2G version (up to 9.6 Kbps). To demonstrate the usefulness of the testbed and the potential to improve the QoS for mobile medical applications, a simple cardiology system was designed. Because this testbed is based on 3GPP FDD mode standard, its data traffic channel has five rates 12.2, 64, 144, 384, and 2084 Kbps to be selected according to the required medical service.

(p9.1) There are multiple standards for 3G making it difficult to roam and interoperate across networks. Therefore, it cannot support the global mobility and service portability. 3G is based on primarily a wide-area concept. It does not support hybrid networks that utilize both wireless LAN (hot spot) concept and cell or base-station based wide area network design. 3G systems support a peak bandwidth of only a few Mbps. Researchers have recently developed spectrally more efficient modulation schemes that cannot be retrofitted into 3G infrastructure. We need all digital packet networks that utilize IP in its fullest form with converged voice and data capability.
