# NARRATIVE REVIEW CORONA EXPERIENCE Coping by the healthcare workers during COVID-19 pandemic in developing countries -A review

CorpusID: 225567889 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4fb011f83fe79b1f109df3d265f2cca5ae7aca46](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4fb011f83fe79b1f109df3d265f2cca5ae7aca46)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Towards the end of 2019, a novel organism called severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) was reported, which caused Corona Viral Disease-2019 . The outbreak originated from Wuhan of Hubei province in China before spreading throughout the country and thereafter the rest of the globe. .1,2 COVID-19 is highly contagious and primarily involves respiratory system having symptoms matching those of formerly called SARS epidemic in 2003. 3 At the time of writing globally 41 lakh confirmed cases and 2.8 lakh deaths have been reported.
## (s3) Impact of COVID-19 pandemic on medical workforce
(p3.0) The combination of witnessing physical suffering and death along with the immediate threat to one's own safety can induce anxiety, hyper-arousal, hypervigilance, sleep disturbances, intrusive recollections and thoughts, depression, and grief. 10 Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) is the most well-studied condition following disasters and has been found to occur at high rates (10-20%) in first-responders following the World Trade Center operation, 11  The Chinese study by Chen Q. et al. 6 reported that for healthcare workers getting infected was not an issue; although they were more concerned about their families worries about them, and were much worried about transporting the infection home to their loved ones. They found difficulty in dealing with patient who were not willing to be quarantined or did not cooperated in the hospital because of lack of understanding about the disease.

(p3.1) A cross-sectional study of 1257 frontline HCWs in COVID-19 affected sections of China 7 was focused on problems faced by healthcare personnel which chiefly included shortage of protective gears, fear of spreading disease to family members. Insomnia (34.0%) anxiety (44.6%) and depression (50.4%) were common among these HCWs. Majority of participants (71.5%) had some or the other symptoms pertaining to psychological stress.

(p3.2) The psychological distress, depression, anxiety and stress experienced by HCWs in Singapore in the midst of the outbreak of corona were compared between medically and non-medically trained hospital personnel. The prevalence of anxiety was higher among nonmedical healthcare workers than medical personnel. It could be because of no accessibility to psychological support, lack of definite information on the outbreak, less intensive training on personal protective equipment and infection control measures. Thus, early psychological interventions targeting this vulnerable group may be beneficial. 15 With an intention to evaluate understanding of pandemic and behavioral response during that period among HCWs, Holly Seale et al. conducted a study in 24 hospitals in Beijing, between January 16 and 29, 2009. 16 Their survey found that only few HCWs were able to correctly define pandemic, although most of them realized it to be serious. Majority of responding (74%) accepted the danger of getting infected as a part of their profession and 71% also felt that they had the necessary skills to provide patientcare during it. They also came up with issues which could seriously affect pandemic preparedness like less uncertainty about antiviral treatment and inappropriate working behaviors of staff.

(p3.3) Tam et al. 17 after the 2003 severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) outbreak in Hong Kong found that HCWs of younger age, female gender, nursing professionals, and those with poor physical condition were more psychologically labile and developed more stress as compared to other staff during outbreak. Compromise in health and safety of the HCWs were the most prevailing stressors.
## (s4) Moral injury
(p4.0) Moral injury, a term that originated basically in the war situation, and defined as an injury to an individual's moral conscience and causes psychological distress that results from actions, or the lack of them, which violate one's own moral beliefs, values or ethical codes of conduct. 24 Moral injury is dissimilar to other mental health conditions such as depression or post-traumatic stress disorder in being it's not a mental illness, but those who develop it may experience persistent selfcriticism, long lasting anger, negative thoughts about themselves or others as well as intense feelings of shame, guilt or disgust. In severe cases moral injury can lead to development of psychiatric disorders which include depression, PTSD or even suicidal thoughts. 25 One of the classical examples of moral injury is among medical professionals when they feel difficulty to work in emergency care departments. 26 Medical students are exposed to such ethical dilemmas when they feel that they are unprepared for it and this leads to moral injury. Moral injury may appear as a big challenge towards HCWs in current situation of pandemic.
## (s7) Interventions
(p7.0) Demoralizing effect of today's situation can be mitigated by several potential measures. Properly prepared staff for the anticipated challenges and moral dilemmas during the COVID-19 pandemic, will reduce the risk of mental health problems. 31 8.1. To decrease stress at work place • Primary care: Counselling staff and preparing them for their job and related challenges; educate them by giving clear picture of what they might face and avoid giving fake reassurances. Discuss emotional and social challenges in depth.
