# Lightning search algorithm: a comprehensive survey

CorpusID: 226254694 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f9ae448e49a495663516987d4a18e76fde76ca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f9ae448e49a495663516987d4a18e76fde76ca)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Lightning search algorithm (LSA)
(p1.0) The lightning search algorithm (LSA) is a meta-heuristic technique that inspiration the natural phenomenon of lightning [64]. The LSA depends on the techniques of step leader (SL) propagation that assumed the projectiles are those the faster particles. To simulate the transition projectiles, three types of projectile are developed, and this formulated by creating the population of step leader, the space projectiles, and the lead projectile. In LSA, the space projectiles are those projectiles aimed to represent the leader in the next generation. In contrast, lead projectile refers to the projectile fired from the first type. Also, from the opposition theory, the concurrent formation of two leader tips at fork points and the exponential random behavior of a second type (i.e., space projectile) are used to simulate the exploration ability of LSA.

(p1.1) The first step in LSA is to determine the projectile that refers to the population. In contrast, the solutions of the population represent the tip of the current step leader. There are variants of stages of the LSA, and the details of each of them are given in the following.
## (s2) Properties of the projectile
(p2.0) Followed [64], when the projectile travels under normal conditions through the atmosphere, its kinetic energy is decreased during the collisions with atoms and molecules in the air. The velocity of a projectile is formulated as:

(p2.1) Where v p and v 0 represent the initial velocity and current velocity of the projectile, respectively, c and F i are the speed of light and rate of ionization (it is constant). While m represents the mass of the projectile, and s indicates the length of the path. From (1) it is observed that the velocity depends on the mass of the projectile and the position of leader tip. So, the exploration and exploitation of LSA can be managed by using the relative energies of the SLS.

(p2.2) The SL has another property called forking that occurred when two symmetrical and simultaneous branches have emerged. Due to the nuclei collision, this phenomenon is rarely performed. The forking can be simulated using two strategies, 1) using the opposite number to represent the creation of symmetrical channels during the nuclei collision as in the following equation:

(p2.3) where p i and p i represents the projectiles and its opposite, respectively. While, UB and LB are the limits of search space. Meanwhile, 2) for forking a channel is considered to displayed at SL tip due to the unsuccessful leader are redistributed after several trials of the propagation. This performed by representing the channel time using the maximum allowable number of trials and the size of the population not increased in this case.
## (s4) Transition projectile
(p4.0) Followed [64], the leader tip is constructed at an early phase due to the ejected projectile is randomly created from thunder cell using the transition. Thus, it can be represented by generating a random number from a uniform distribution that defined in (3).
## (s8) Basic of lightning search algorithm
(p8.0) LSA is an abbreviation of the Lightning Search Algorithm, which is a recent population-based meta-heuristic algorithm developed by Shareef et al. [64]. LSA is based on a lightning step leader propagation structure. It regards the fast projectiles (particles) involvement in the binary tree structure formation of step leader. LSA algorithm mainly consists of 3 steps: projectile and propagation of the step leader, properties of the projectile, and projectile modeling and movement. A projectile loses its kinetic energy when traveling under reasonable conditions. This paper aims to propose an algorithm (LSA) to solve the problems of restrictions [64]. This depends on the phenomenon of lightning in nature and uses the concept of rapid particles called bombers, through which three types of planes were developed and produced. In the first stage, the leader of the population. The second stage, produced space projectiles that want to become a pilot, and the third is a lead shell that depends on the best missile from the commander. The exploration feature was designed using exponential and random fencing of the projectile, which coincides with the leader's advice at common points and relies on opposition theory. Where the proposed algorithm was evaluated by doing a test of (LSA) based on a set that has 24 functions of different characteristics.This study utilizes four different known methods, where the results were better than other methods.
## (s9) Binary of lightning search algorithm
(p9.0) The proposed algorithm in this paper [65] deals with binary optimization problems using several optimization algorithms. The proposed algorithm added some modifications to the basic LSA to make it binary algorithm, called binary lightning search algorithm (BLSA). BLSA is tested on special benchmark functions and compared to other binary optimization methods to confirm its efficiency. Experiment results exposed that the projected binary algorithm achieved better results in terms of search accuracy and convergence than within the multidimensional search space. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods.

(p9.1) A new optimization method, based on binary LSA, is proposed in [66] to solve environmental problems, called BLSA. These problems are released due to global warming, and some concerns such as battery charging, economical energy drainage from the battery, and identification of the best paths and speed pathways to reduce power. The performance of the proposed BLSA algorithm is evaluated using the IEEE 34-bus benchmark. The optimization process aims to get the lowest daily exchange and minimize energy loss by 10 %. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other traditional optimization methods.
## (s10) Modifications of lightning search algorithm
(p10.0) This paper proposes a quantum lightning-based algorithm (QLSA) based on controlling the speed of disk drives called search engines (IM) to develop the algorithm (QLSA) [67]. Through which the speed of the chat engines was managed to create an input and output function to suit the speed of the motor.

(p10.1) To develop a device that controls the speed of the algorithm (QLSAF) through the algorithm (QLSA), aims to reduce the average error in the rate of search engines, and deal with variables in speed and mechanical load. During the application of this algorithm in a simulation model in Mat lab, for testing and controlling the search process in search engines. The results were that it was agreed with the control parameters with simulation results in many different circumstances, and was an indicator of the algorithm (SPVWM) as well as the speed and stator responded with the simulation results, as well as checking the Health Controller (QLSAF) provided [67]. It outperformed other studies in time results in simulation.

(p10.2) This paper proposed a new method to obtain the optimum result for power supply, by using an improved quantum lightning-inspired search algorithm (QLSA) [68]. The proposed method is used in Pharmaceutical Quality Management Systems to monitor optimum energy quality and its location in the power scheme to control power and voltages. This method is applied and tested in the IEEE 118-bus. The results showed that the proposed QLSA reported excellent performance in comparison with other optimization methods.

(p10.3) This paper developed a new method to upgrade the fieldoriented indirect fog control technology for management in three-phase induction motors (TIM). The proposed method is based on the quantum-inspired lightning search algorithm, called QLSA [69]. The induction phases are Induction Engine (IM) layout decreases fitness function, adaptive PI controls produced, and fuzzy organic functions (MFs). The obtained results of the proposed algorithm properly overcome the other optimization algorithms in all exams of the corresponding reaction. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods. Moreover, it is an efficient method for advanced control problems.
## (s11) Hybridizations of lightning search algorithm
(p11.0) One of the factors that affect enhancing the quality of the electrical structures is electrical harmonics. This paper suggested a creative design of a harmonic estimator using a pilot optimization technique enthused by the lightning search algorithm (LSA) to generate correct approximations for the estimator, which is vital and needed [71]. The suggested design is tested on many levels of noise and time-varying signals. Also, there was a comparison with the previous methods used, such as a modified artificial bee colony (MABC), which confirmed the efficiency of the proposed estimator suggested design method. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods.

(p11.1) Three projectile types are developed to represent the transition projectiles that create the first step leader population. These space projectiles attempt to become the leader and the lead projectile that represents the projectile fired from the best-positioned step leader. In contrast to that of the counterparts of the (LSA), the proposed algorithm is modeled using the exponential random behavior of space projectile and the concurrent formation of two leader tips at fork points using opposition theory to evaluate the reliability [64]. The efficiency of the proposed algorithm (LSA) is tested using a well-utilized set of 24 benchmark functions with various characteristics necessary to evaluate a new algorithm. An extensive comparative study with four other well-known methods is conducted to validate and compare the performance of the (LSA). Generally. The proposed algorithm provided better results compare with the other tested methods with a high convergence rate.
## (s12) Multi-objective of lightning search algorithm
(p12.0) The problem of the distributed systems lies in their loss of energy in addition to the stability of the effort, and this gives the studies and researches interest [72]. Therefore, it became necessary to pay attention to research and improve operating conditions. Various studies and research have discussed how to reduce energy losses and how to enhance voltage stability. In this paper, a new methodology is proposed to achieve optimal allocation using the Lightning Search Algorithm (LSA) [73]. The research includes a unique multi-objective function that reduces energy losses and maximizes the voltage stability indicator, where different loads are used from light to maximum load with a step size. The optimum amount of storage in each download level is calculated. The proposed method is tested on the IEEE 33 and 69 system. The results confirmed that the main goal is achieved as the stability of the effort is enhanced; the energy losses are reduced by using the LSA. This work is adopted in the long run in planning distribution networks. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods.

(p12.1) Network-to-grid transmission technology (V2G) has become an essential mechanism for providing the power source to distribution networks for what they play in the role of electric hybrid electric vehicles (PHEV) during charging mode [74]. Because vehicles need charging stations (CS) to receive energy, an optimum position (CS) is specified in the distribution network in order to enhance the performance of this network at the time of ordering. Here a general discussion is taken to evaluate the optimal situation when installing (CS) in the distribution network. In this paper, the LSA is proposed in a binary format to improve the detection of events, after which a multi-objective function is set to take advantage of (V2G) technology. This is to reduce line load, voltage deviation, and circuit power loss. As a result of comparing the method with the performance of other indicative improvement techniques, a proposed algorithm has fewer limitations in terms of previous convergence than other heuristic improvement techniques.
## (s15) Machine learning applications
(p15.0) Machine learning domain is a promising search area [78]. In another work, the LSA algorithm has been used for classification [79]. Initially, problems were identified for the first time and the convergence speed of sophisticated and progressive algorithms [79]. Through the LSA algorithm, a trainer was adopted with a set of performance studies. Moreover, represented by measurement data such as (appendicitis, liver, breast cancer, primary diagnosis, second diagnosis, Parkinson's disease, and diabetes) and then used a set of quantitative and qualitative measurement tools for comparison. To achieve the goal, research training algorithms (GA, DE, ES) and swarm-based algorithms (PSO, ACO, ABC) and gradient algorithms (LM, BP) were used. The results showed that this algorithm works more powerfully than the rest of the algorithms in analyzing the results by determining the cause of the problem and by relying on the calculation and analysis of the standard deviation of the results.
## (s16) Engineering applications
(p16.0) Syed Nasir et al. [80] presented mitigation of harmonic distortion caused by indicting station at the selected bus rates. The authors in this paper are concluding that the proposed algorithm, modified LSA, got appropriate positions and best dimensions of multiple variable passive filters (VPF). The proposed modified LSA is introduced to find twenty-two units of VPF coordination considering the varying of patterns, harmonic impact, reducing power loss, less harmonious based on 415V bus to the medium-voltage network. Power system harmonious flow, VPF, CS, battery models have been built and analyzed by MATLAB/mfile platform. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods.

(p16.1) Identifying the photovoltaic models is a common engineering problem [81]. A new approach to generate a proper and correct illustration of solar cells (SCs) features is proposed based on voltage (V) and current (I ) relation [82]. The proposed approach is based on using the improved version of the lightning search algorithm (LSA) to obtain the parameters of one single diode and paired diode (SCs) as well as for a photovoltaic (PV) unit. Several factors were considered, such as the influence of varying shading environments and different temperatures. At the same time, most of the previous tests were only derived for one cell type, or (PV) unit. Experiments are conducted on multicrystalline KC200GT and monocrystalline SQ150-PC solar panels for testing purposes. Data in these experiments were gathered at a similar temperature in five diverse radiation levels to get accurate results. The results illustrated that the proposed algorithm archived better results in comparison with other optimization methods in terms of I and V, accuracy, and speed. Furthermore, the value of the objective function using LSA was lower.

(p16.2) After the development in the modern world and with what is called the dynamic world, the concentration of air pollution affects the generation of energy, which led to its change from traditional methods to non-traditional methods. The factors affecting the real power loss of the system are the optimal size and location of the DG and the fixed distribution date, and also change the improvement of the voltage of the distribution system. In this paper, the lightning search algorithm (LSA) is proposed to find the optimal position in the distribution system [83]. The main goal of the proposed algorithm is to reduce real energy losses in the distribution system. The IEEE-33 transcriber standard test system is used to examine the proposed method; the final results indicated that the performance of the proposed algorithm is better than other comparative optimization methods.
## (s19) Benchmark functions
(p19.0) In this section, we provide a depth set of benchmark evaluation problems (as seen in Tables 2-3) to test, analyze and demonstrate the efficacy of the LSA algorithm in comparison to other relative optimization algorithms including Whale Optimization Algorithm (WOA) [100], Salp Swarm Algorithm (SSA) [101], Dragonfly Algorithm (DA) [102], and Ant Lion Optimizer (ALO) [103]. All experiments are conducted 30 times (runs), and the maximum number of iteration is fixed to 1000 for all tested algorithms to make fair comparisons. The parameters setting are taken from the original papers, as mentioned before. The algorithms codes are taken from the Mathworks site as follows.

(p19.1) 1-WOA 1 2-SSA 2 3-DA 3 4-ALO 4 5-LSA 5 The setting parameters values for the comparative methods are presented in Table 1. Figure 4 show the details of the used 23 benchmark function that generally used to test any optimization algorithm [104][105][106][107][108]. Table 2 show the results of the comparative methods on 13 benchmark functions (F1-F13) and Table 3 show the results of the comparative methods on 10 benchmark functions (F14-F23).

(p19.2) As Tables 2-3 reveal, the acquired results indicate that the LSA in these experiments obtained better and promising results in nearly all test functions. First of all, the LSA provides more (better) consistent performance on four of seven unimodal benchmarks. The results confirmed that LSA had a high search potential to solve the problems and stable convergence rates due to the characteristic features of We concluded that the LSA in tested the used set of functions is a robust algorithm. It got promising results that can attract future researchers to use it in their future research. This algorithm (LSA) can be used to solve various optimization problems and, in the future, can test its performance on different scenarios. This opens the researchers' opportunities and facilitates their job in finding a research path for the future.

(p19.3) Moreover, a statistical ranking test, called the Friedman ranking test, is carried out and shown in Table 4 in order to assess the value of the results obtained by LSA. Table 4 demonstrates all comparative optimization algorithms with the summation, average, and final ranking of their results using all benchmarking functions. The findings in Table 4 indicate the statistically significant performance of the LSA. As shown, the LSA algorithm obtained the first ranking compared with the other algorithms (i.e., WOA, SSA, DA, ALO, and LSA). The SSA obtained the second-ranking, followed by, WOA, ALO, and finally DA. Generally, according to the significant test, the LSA is an efficient algorithm that can be used to solve optimization problems.

(p19.4) The convergence speed is a necessary criterion for analyzing optimization algorithms' performance and investigating their improvement capabilities. To fast and clearly explain the effectiveness and search trend of the studied algorithm (LSA), 23 benchmark functions are chosen as the convergence curves of the LSA algorithm and shown in Fig. 5. In all cases, the convergence rate of the LSA is faster than that of other optimization algorithms (the comparative methods: WOA, SSA, DA, ALO, and LSA). The convergence efficiency is also higher than other comparative methods. Figure 5 explains the convergence trajectory of LSA and other original algorithms for different 10-dimensional benchmark functions. Based on the convergence curve presented in Fig. 5, we can observe that LSA has a consistent convergence speed in most functions such as in F2, F3, F4, F5, F6, and F710 test functions. At the same time, LSA has better exploratory and exploitative experiences than other original methods. It can produce a more constant efficacy by adjusting these search strategies to obtain the global optimum quickly.    
## (s21) Problem 1: tension/compression spring design
(p21.0) The problem of tension/compression spring design is given to degrade the entire weight of a given spring [42]. Three variables are examined in this problem: (1) wire diameter (d), (2) mean coil diameter (D), and (3) the number of active coils (N), as presented in Fig. 6. The result of the comparative methods are given in Table 5. The comparative methods are HHO [109], PSO [110], RO [51], HS [111], ES [112], BA [113], MFO [114], and LSA [64]. The results in Table 5 showed that the LSA got comparative results compared to other published methods. As shown in Fig. 7, the LSA reached the optimal solution very fast in the first iterations, which reflect the ability of the LSA in solving the complex real-world problems, especially, in solving the Tension/compression spring design problem.
## (s22) Problem 2: pressure vessel design
(p22.0) The problem of pressure vessel design is given to degrade the entire weight of a given pressure vessel [115]. Four variables are examined in this problem: (1) width of the shell (T s ), (2) the width of the head (T h ), (3) internal radius (R), and (4) height of the cylindrical part without studying the head (L), as shown in Fig. 8. The result of the comparative methods are given in Table 6. The comparative methods are HS [116], CPSO [110], CSCA [117], HPSO [118], GSA [119], ACO [120], MVO [48], ES [112], and LSA [64]. The results in Table 6 revealed that the LSA produced also comparative results compared to other published methods. As presented in Fig. 9, the LSA gave the optimal solution early in the first iterations, which shows the strong capability of the LSA in addressing complex realworld problems, especially, in solving the Pressure vessel design problem. 
