# FLAVONOIDS IN THE SPECIES OF THE FAMILY ARACEAE: A REVIEW Sebuah tinjauan: Senyawa-senyawa flavonoid pada suku Araceae

CorpusID: 225922320 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b10938a92fcb38dd326ee047c060d75ed5e7de5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b10938a92fcb38dd326ee047c060d75ed5e7de5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s1) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY GYMNOSTACHYDOIDEAE
(p1.0) Gymnostachys anceps alone belongs to this subfamily and was surveyed for flavonoids (Table  1). A flavonol glycoside, kaempferol 3-sophoroside-7-rhamnoside ( Figure 8) was isolated from the leaves of this species (Williams et al. 1971). Other flavonoids were not reported. Williams et al. (1971) surveyed the C-glycosylflavones which were common flavonoids in the Araceae including Lemnaceae, however they were not present in this species.   
## (s2) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY ORONTIOIDEAE
(p2.0) Four species of subfamily Orontioideae, i.e. Lysichiton camtschatcensis, Orontium aquaticum, Symplocarpus foetidus, and S. renifolius, were surveyed for flavonoids (Table 2). Williams et al. (1981) and Whang & Lee (1999) reported that major flavonoids of this subfamily were flavonols, namely, kaempferol 3-arabinosyl-(1→6)-galactoside, 3xylosylgalactoside and 3-sophoroside-7-glucoside, quercetin 3-arabinosyl-(1→6)-galactoside ( Figure  9), 3-galactoside, 3-sophoroside and 3sophoroside-7-glucoside, and isorhamnetin 3arabinosyl-(1→6)-galactoside ( Figure 10).
## (s3) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY LEMNOIDEAE
(p3.0) Nineteen species of four genera of the Lemnoideae were surveyed for flavonoids (Table 3) Quercetin 3-and 3,7-diglycosides were found in three Wolffiella species (McClure & Alston 1966). Various C-glycosylflavones, e.g. isovitexin, vitexin, orientin, isoorientin, vicenin-2, and their Oglycosides and acylated glycosides, were isolated from Lemna species, together with anthocyanin (cyanidin 3-glucoside) and flavones (McClure & Alston 1966, Wallace & Alston 1966, Veen 1975, Akhtar et al. 2010.
## (s4) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY POTHOIDEAE
(p4.0) The subfamily Pothoideae consists of ca. 900 species of four genera. Twenty two species of two genera and Anthurium cultivars were surveyed for flavonoids (Table 4). Anthocyanins were found in the fruits, spathe and spadix of many Anthurium species and identified as cyanidin 3-glucoside, 3rutinoside, pelargonidin 3-rutinoside ( Figure 22) and peonidin 3-rutinoside. Proanthocyanidins, procyanidins were also detected in some Anthurium species (Williams et al. 1981).

(p4.1) C-glycosylflavones flavones were isolated from three Anthurium species. They were relatively rare compounds, except for vitexin in A. versicolor, i.e. three embigenin (Figure 23) O-glycosides, 2´´-rhamnoside, 2´´-(4´´´-3,4-dimethoxycinnamoylrhamnoside) and 2´´-(4´´´-feruloylrhamnoside) from A. andraeanum (Clark et al. 2012), isoschaftoside ( Figure 24) and schaftoside ( Figure 25) from A. bellum (Williams et al. 1981), and cytisoside ( Figure  26) 3´´-rhamnoside, and isocytisoside ( Figure 27) 3´´-apiofuranoside, 3´´-rhamnoside and 6´´-xyloside from A. versicolor (Aquino et al. 2001). Crude extract of A. versicolor including their flavonoids was shown to have radical-scavenging activity (Aquino et al. 2001). Common flavonols, kaempferol and/or quercetin, were reported from four Anthurium species (Williams et al. 1981) and cultivars (Li et al. 2013).
## (s5) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY MONSTEROIDEAE
(p5.0) The Monsteroideae consists of ca. 360 species and 12 genera. Only one species, Scindapsus pictus, was surveyed for its flavonoids. Flavone (chrysoeriol) and flavonol (quercetin) were detected (Table 5) (Williams et al. 1981). 
## (s6) FLAVONOIDS IN THE SUBFAMILY LASIOIDEAE
(p6.0) About 60 species of 10 genera belong to the Lasioideae. Two species, Dracontium asperum and Lasia spinosa, were surveyed for flavonoids (Table  6). Common anthocyanins, cyanidin and pelargonidin 3-rutinosides, were found in Dracontium asperum (Williams et al. 1981). C-Glycosylflavones were detected in D. asperum and L. spinosa, and characterized as isovitexin xyloside and vitexin glucoside (D. asperum) (Williams et al. 1981), and vitexin and its 2"-glucoside (L. spinosa) (Hong Van et al. 2006). Table 6. Reports on the flavonoids from the species of subfamily Lasioideae Dracontium asperum K.Koch Anthocyanin: cyanidin 3-rutinoside, pelargonidin 3-rutinoside (pt), C-Glycosylflavone: isovitexin xyloside, vitexin glucoside (lf) (Williams et al. 1981) Dracontium asperum (as Dracontium foecundum Hook.f.) (Williams et al. 1981) Anthocyanin: cyanidin 3-rutinoside, pelargonidin 3-rutinoside (sp, sx) (Williams et al. 1981) Lasia spinosa (L.) Thwaites Flavonol: quercetin 3-rutinoside (wp), C-Glycosylflavone: vitexin, vitexin 2´´-glucoside (wp) (Hong Van et al. 2006)
