# A Review of Patient and Provider Satisfaction with Telemedicine

CorpusID: 221825466 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c5093e7fce081f89283c86e4b4ea394578f77481](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c5093e7fce081f89283c86e4b4ea394578f77481)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Measurement of Satisfaction
(p1.0) Conceptually, six dimensions need to be considered when measuring quality of care. These include the overall satisfaction with care, who the stakeholders are, the type of care, type of system used, the context in which the care is delivered, and methodologies (Table 1) [7]. The dimensions of overall satisfaction that likely are influenced using TM include the technology's perceived usefulness, its ease of use, and its reliability. Stakeholders that need to be considered include the providers, the patients, and the administrators who manage a TM system. The type of care dimension refers to the medical specialty (e.g., allergy, cardiology, mental health) and the type of service provided (e.g., ongoing care, consultation, triage). Systems used to implement TM include synchronous visits (e.g., video conferencing, facilitated visits), asynchronous TM (e.g.: store and forward, remote patient monitoring), or use of mobile devices or web-based tools. The context dimension accounts for where the visit occurs (e.g., physician's office, patient home, school, workplace). The methodology dimension is determined by how satisfaction is measured (e.g., in-person, by mail, web-based, telephone). A system that fails to meet the expectations considered by these dimensions is unlikely to be satisfying and therefore is unlikely to be adopted by the stakeholders.

(p1.1) Measurement of satisfaction can be either formative (i.e., improves clinical services using an iterative process that maximizes the measurement) or summative (i.e., judges the quality of clinical care). One summative reason for its measurement is to compare satisfaction with two different types of care delivery such as telemedicine vs. in-person care among various stakeholders such as providers and patients. This is important because adoption of TM hinges critically on whether patients and providers are satisfied with the care; they either receive or deliver when using it. If either group is not satisfied with telemedicine, they can always revert to in-person visits.
