# Citation: Rana SVS (2020) A Comprehensive Assessment of Hepatotoxicity Induced by Engineered Nanoparticles-A Review

CorpusID: 227183057 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fe5bd47b65a52dd5459e19d81e780ce0efbc1b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fe5bd47b65a52dd5459e19d81e780ce0efbc1b7)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) It was during the meeting of American Physical Society (1959) when Richard. P. Feynman asked, "What would happen if we could arrange the atoms one by one the way we want them"? This meeting gave birth to the concept of nanotechnology. The word nano is linked to a Greek term "nanos" meaning dwarf. Today, nano is popular label in science, technology and medicine. During 1990-2000, new processes for the synthesis of nanoparticles (NPs) were developed. In subsequent years, health hazards posed by NPs were recognized. NPs have emerged as a new class of environmental pollutants that may affect atmosphere, terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. Their prevalence in ecosystems can be harmful to human beings, animals, plants and aquatic species [1]. Furthermore, occupational exposure to NPs during their production, commercial and biomedical use may lead different health problems and safety issues [2].
## (s8) Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs)
(p8.0) Silver from ancient times has been used as a therapeutic element. However, silver nanoparticles have been used for their antimicrobial activity. Very few workers have studied the cytotoxicity of AgNPs. The effects of different dose regimen on hepatotoxicity of Ag-NPs in rat have been studied by a few researchers [54]. They performed liver function tests and recorded the bioaccumulation of AgNPs in liver. Though elevated values for ALP were observed, other parameters showed no significant changes in comparison to controls.

(p8.1) Contrarily, hepatoprotective effects of AgNPs against CCl 4 induced hepatotoxicity were observed [55]. Authors used AgNPs synthesized using aqueous leaf extract of a mangrove based plant Rhizophora apiculata. In other reports, edema and necrosis in the liver of male ICR mice after a single intravenous (8 µmol/kg) injection of AgSe (5.1 nm) QDs were observed [56,57]. However, mechanisms of cytotoxicity expressed by AgNPs have not yet been established. Silver ions released from medicaments may enter circulation facilitating translocation and accumulation in soft organs like liver and kidney [58].

(p8.2) Effects of two dose regimen i.e. 20 and 50 ppm (14 days) of silver nanoparticles on liver function of BAL-B/C mice were also studied [59]. These workers noticed that level of serum transaminases viz: alanine aminotransaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) increased significantly in AgNP treated mice. No significant difference was noted in male and female mice.

(p8.3) A study made on approximately 8.7 nm silver nanoparticles administered in albino rats for 28 days at 1, 2, 4 mg/kg b.w. concluded that AgNps induced hepatotoxicity through oxidative stress mechanisms. Bioaccumulation of AgNPs in liver and chromosomal aberrations in bone marrow was also recorded [60]. Oxidative stress induced by AgNPs was found to be a dose dependent phenomenon. Administration of 10 nm citrate stabilized AgNPs at 0.2 mg/kg b.w. to male Wistar rats for 14 days induced mild oxidative stress in brain but not in the liver [61]. A few researchers have attributed AgNPs toxicity to its preferential accumulation in liver. AgNPs in combination with copper and boron as a composite in the dose range of 1-20 mg/kg on early (4-24 h) acute exposure and late phase (96 h) exposure in normal and NLRP-3 deficient mice were found to cause acute liver injury. Elevated values for ALT, AST and LDH along with necrosis, Kupffer cell hyperplasia and lobular granulomas were observed [62].
## (s10) Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO 2 NPs)
(p10.0) Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO 2 NPs) are now widely used in food, cosmetics, agriculture, medical devices and building engineering related processes. Their effects on human health have recently been reviewed. Liver disorders caused by TiO 2 NP were reported to increase the level of serum trans-aminases, LPO and oxidative stress in Wistar rats treated with 300 mg/kg of TiO 2 NP for 14 days by gavage [83]. These researchers showed that glycyrrhizic acid (GA) protected the rats against hepatic injury caused by TiO 2 NP. In vitro and in vivo toxicity of TiO 2 NP enhanced under oxidative stress conditions. A study made on BRL-3A liver cells and in the liver of Sprague-Dawley (SD) rat suggested a synergy between oxidative stress and TiO 2 NP induced hepato-toxicity [84]. Further cell death ratio was significantly enhanced (up to 2.62 fold) in BRL-3A cells exposed to OS and TiO 2 NP. A comparative study on the hepatotoxicity of TiO 2 NPs and sodium oleate coated iron oxide nanoparticles (OC-Fe 3 O 4 NPs) was made in Wistar rat [85]. Based on results on redox defences, these researchers concluded that OC-Fe 3 O 4 NPs do affect redox results on serum transaminases and histopathological findings [70]. Coating of AuNPs with citrate and chitosan also affected the hepatotoxicity of AuNPs. Chitosan capped NPs were less toxic than citrate capped ones in Swiss mice. This observation was made by after analysing the inflammation related genes using RT-PCR [71].
## (s11) Platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs)
(p11.0) Platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) are widely used in cosmetics, industry and diagnostics. On absorption, nanoplatinum can accumulate in soft tissues viz: liver, spleen, kidney, lungs and heart. A study from Poland recently reported that PtNPs can induce DNA damage and apoptosis in liver [72]. Dose dependent hepato and renotoxicity of PtNPs has also been demonstrated. NP of 1 nm diameter when administered with CCl 4 or cisplastin induced hepatotoxicity whereas those of 8 nm did not exaberate the toxicity in mice [73]. Toxic effects of subnanosized platinum particles (snPt) in mouse liver were also studied. Increased levels of inflammatory cytokines and histopathological changes in liver of mice were observed after intravenous administration of snPt at 15 mg/kg body weight. However, administration of nanosized platinum particles did not produce these abnormalities [74].
## (s13) Copper nanoparticles (CNPs)
(p13.0) Copper nanoparticles (CNPs) work as anti-biotic, anti-microbial and antifungal agents when added to plastic items and textiles. They are used in conductive inks and pastes as a substitute for expensive metals in electronic displays and transmissive conductive thin film applications. Toxicity of CNPs is not fully understood. However, available data show that CNPs at a high dose (200 mg/kg/d for 5 days) could induce overt hepatotoxicity in rats. An integrated metabolomic study revealed mitochondrial failure, enhanced ketogenesis, fatty acid β oxidation and glycolysis to contribute in its toxicity [96]. High dose(s) of CNPs could elevate serum enzymes, triglytcerides and bilirubin. Histopathological observations exhibited necrosis. Further, gene expression studies indicated that genes related to oxidoreductases, metabolism and signal transduction pathways were involved in the development of hepatotoxicity [97]. CNPs have been found to be toxic in fish also. A fresh water fish, Cyprinus carpio, when exposed to CNPs and CuO at 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 mg/L showed higher values for malondialdehyde in the liver. It was concluded that LPO contributes in the hepatotoxicity of CNPs [98].

(p13.1) Amelioration of CNPs induced hepatotoxicity by extracts of green tea has also been reported [99]. Theses researchers concluded that green tea offered protection against hepatotoxicity of CNPs (20-30 nm) administered at a dose of 40 mg/kg/b w. Green tea improved the activity of liver enzymes, antioxidant status and suppressed DNA fragmentation and the expression of caspase-3 and Bax proteins. Another agent that offered protection against CNPs induced liver damage was α lipoic acid [100]. Status of LPO, NO, copper and apoptotic genes (c-myc and c-jun) improved in CNPs treated rats when co-adminstered with α lipoic acid. These results suggest that CNPs induce hepatotoxicity through oxidative stress in rat.
## (s14) Cerium oxide nanoparticles (CeO 2 NP)
(p14.0) Cerium is the second member and the most reactive element in the lanthanide series. Cerium oxide (CeO 2 / ceria) is considered the most suitable oxide of cerium. Ceria nanoparticles demonstrate the formation of more oxygen vacancies. The large surface area to volume ratio in its nanoparticle enables CeO 2 to react differently resulting in unique properties.

(p14.1) Nanoceria is used in solid oxide fuel cells, cata-enzymes but liver is able to retain its functional integrity. TiO 2 NPs were also found to affect metabolic function of liver. In a study made in mice treated with TiO 2 NP (21 nm) for 14 days, ultrastructural changes viz: Mitochondrial oedema and gene expression variations were noticed [86].

(p14.2) A few studies have been made to investigate the reversal of TiO 2 NP toxicity by antioxidants. Oxidative stress induced by TiO 2 NPs and TiO 2 bulk particles (150 mg/kg) in the liver of Sprague-Dawley rats was reversed by extracts of a common herb cinnamon (Cinnamonium cassia). Morphological as well as haematological improvements were also recorded [87]. In another study, tiron was also found to protect against the toxicity of TiO 2 NPs. While TiO 2 NPs upregulated the proapoptotic Bax gene and down regulated the antiapoptotic Bcl-2 gene, tiron upregulated Bcl-2 and decreased Bax expression. These results were supported by observations on serum enzymes and histopathological changes [87]. Moreover, quercetin and idebenone also ameliorated hepatotoxicity caused by TiO 2 NPs. These antioxidants modulated serum enzymes, VEGF, NO, DNA damage in the liver of TiO 2 NP treated rat liver [88].

(p14.3) Protective role of vitamin A and vitamin E against liver injury caused by TiO 2 NPs in male Wistar rat has also been determined. Enzyme biomarkers of liver function, histopathological changes, antioxidant enzymes and inflammatory mediators were increased in TiO 2 NPs (300 mg/kg) treated rats. Vitamin A and E both inhibited these parameters showing an ameliorative effect [89].
## (s16) Dendrimers
(p16.0) The term dendrimer comes from a Greek word meaning "Dendron". Dendron is translated into a tree. A dendrimer possesses a symmetric structure around a core. A dendrimer molecule has hundreds of possible sites to couple to an active species. It possesses a hydrophobic core and hydrophilic periphery. It exhibits a micelle like behaviour. Dendrimers have been explored for encapsulation/scaffolding of hydrophobic compounds and anticancer drugs.

(p16.1) There are certain anticancer drugs i.e. methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine that exhibit hepatotoxicity. When these drugs were encapsulated by the dendrimer based melamine and administered in C3H mice at subchronic doses, significant reduction in hepatotoxicity was observed [112]. Subsequently, the same group of researchers showed that melamine dendrimer given at 40 mg/kg to mice resulted into hepatotoxicity as determined through serum enzymes and histopathological changes [113]. Role of their route of administration was also discussed [114]. It was interesting to note that the nanomaterials such as poly-amidoamine (PAMAM) that are widely used in pharmaceutical industry caused hepatotoxicity through growth inhibition, mitochondrial injury and apoptosis in human liver cells. Blockage of autophagy in PAMAM treated mice led to hepatoprotection [115].
## (s17) Conclusion and Perspectives
(p17.0) In recent times, nanoparticles have emerged as a new class of environmental pollutants. Additionally, occupational exposure to NPs may contribute to some unknown health issues in humans. Their toxicity is determined by barrier functions and clearance mechanisms at respective portals of entry. Experimental studies demonstrate their adverse effects on skin, lungs, liver, kidney, heart and brain of experimental animals. The interaction between NPs and biomolecules causes conformational changes that determine cellular health. The adverse effects are categorized as autophagy, apoptosis, necrosis, pyroptosis, oxidative stress, cytoskeleton changes and altered intracellular signalling pathways. Change in gene and protein expression affects transcription and translation functions.

(p17.1) Present review summarizes the specific hepatotoxic effects of ENPs. To note, CNTs can directly induce oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis, whereas, silver NPs could cause edema and necrosis. They exhibit protective effects against liver injury caused by CCl 4 and acetaminophen. It is interesting to note that subnanosized platinum nanoparticles cause increased secretion of in-lytic applications and photocatalysis. Recently it has drawn considerable attention as a therapeutic agent in the treatment and prevention of diseases associated with oxidative stress. A few reports are available on its hepato-protective rather than hepato-toxic effects. D-galactosamine and lipo-polysaccharide induced hepatotoxicity in rat was alleviated by CeO 2 [101]. These workers showed that CeO 2 NP decreased translocation of cytoplasmic Nrf-2 with concomitant decrease in gene expression of HO-1. These effects were attributed to its antioxidative properties. Results on antioxidant enzymes and histopathological observations supported this conclusion. Another evidence of antioxidative potential of CeO 2 is provided by experiments made on monocrotaline induced hepatotoxicity in mice [102]. It was shown that monocotaline induced decrease in hepatic GSH, GPx, GR and GST is normalized after the treatment of CeO 2 NPs.

(p17.2) A recent study showed that CeO 2 NP offered protection against diethylnitrosamine induced hepatotoxicity in mice. Pretreatment of CeO 2 NPs attenuated the activity of antioxidant enzymes and expression of Bcl 2 and Cox 2 . This report again supports the antioxidative role of CeO 2 NPs [103].
## (s18) Silicon nanoparticles
(p18.0) Silica nanoparticles are employed in several commercial, agriculture and medical applications. However, the information on their health effects remains elusive. A few studies are available on their effects on structure and function of liver. Size of silica nanoparticles seems to be a confounding factor in their toxicity. It was reported that silica particles having a diameter of 300 to 1000 nm elicited no adverse effects while SP-70 could induce liver injury at 30 mg/kg b.w. [104]. Repeated administration of SP-70 twice a week for four weeks at 10 mg/ kg b .w. caused hepatic fibrosis. Serum enzyme markers were also increased. Hasezaki, et al. also confirmed that SP-70 is potent hepato-toxin [105]. Silica nanoparticles (14 nm) were found to induce apoptosis in human liver (HepG 2 ) cells that was regulated by ROS through p53, bax/bcl-2 and caspase pathways. ROS scavenger, vitamin C modulated apoptotic markers [106].

(p18.1) There are reports suggesting that SiO 2 NPs (10-80) when administered to rats (nm) disturb tricarboxylic cycle and liver metabolism. It can induce oxidative stress and alter liver cell morphology (150 µg) for 90 days [107]. Another study supported these results through global metabolomic study on SiNPs treated human hepatoma cells (HepG 2 ) and ICR mice liver. This study concluded that glutathione metabolism and oxidative stress are amongst the principal causes of SiNP induced hepatotoxicity [108]. SiNPs influence CYP 450 both in rat and human hepatocytes [109]. In addition to apoptosis, SiNPs can induce pyroptosis through NLRP3 inflammasome activation which is caused by mesosporous sil- flammatory cytokines. Smaller CdSNPs induce greater hepatotoxicity than larger NPs. Earlier studies demonstrated TiO 2 NPs affect metabolic function of liver. IONPs were found to cause ER stress. Copper nanoparticles can cause mitochondrial failure. However, CeO 2 NPs offer protection against dimethylnitrosamine toxicity. Available reports indicate that redox imbalance is the principal cause of SiNP induced hepatotoxicity. Dendrimers do affect growth inhibition, mitochondrial function and induce apoptosis.

(p18.2) These observations suggest that there appears an urgent need to develop nanosafety research. In vitro studies on NP toxicity on new models like hepatocyte like cells derived from puripotent stem cells using toxicogenomic tools have opened new avenues in NP research [116]. Further research on molecular toxicology of NPs as well as on their therapeutic values is warranted. Defining the interactive mechanism between NPs and biological molecules will be helpful in designing safer nanomaterials.
