# Concurrent Genetic Alterations and Other Biomarkers Predict Treatment Efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in EGFR- Mutant Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer: A Review

CorpusID: 228076781 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1366ff2d7527971331b10e1626abe25026f86015](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1366ff2d7527971331b10e1626abe25026f86015)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Lung cancer is the most prevalent cancer type and is one of the leading causes of cancer-related death (1). The discovery of epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) and the fact that most patients with EGFR-mutant non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) can benefit from TKI treatment have dramatically changed the therapeutic approach for NSCLC. EGFR mutations occur in approximately 10-35% of lung adenocarcinomas (2), with a higher prevalence of about 40-55% in East Asian patients (3). Because EGFR-TKIs, including first-generation gefitinib, erlotinib, and icotinib, secondgeneration afatinib and dacomitinib, and third-generation osimertinib, have demonstrated higher objective response rates (ORR) and prolonged progression-free survival (PFS) compared to standard chemotherapy (4)(5)(6)(7), they have become the first choice for patients with advanced EGFR-mutated NSCLC. However, approximately 20-30% of patients exhibit primary resistance to EGFR-TKIs (4). Furthermore, even in patients with an initial response, significant heterogeneous outcomes have been observed. Some patients only respond for a few weeks, while others may benefit for years without progression.
## (s2) TP53 Mutations
(p2.0) p53 can induce cell cycle arrest, senescence, and apoptosis and, thus, regulates the response to various cellular stress signals (66). Mutations in the tumor suppressor TP53 gene, which encodes p53, are found in 35-55% of NSCLC cases, more prevalent in squamous cell carcinoma than adenocarcinoma (67), and highly correlated with smoking habits (68). TP53 mutations may have a negative prognostic effect for NSCLC (69).

(p2.1) TP53 is the most prevalent co-alteration observed in EGFRmutant NSCLC patients, with a frequency of 55-65% (8,28,70). Preclinical studies have shown a link between TP53 status and EGFR-TKI response (71)(72)(73). Apoptosis induced by gefitinib in NSCLC cell lines requires wild-type p53, which can induce Fas and caspase-dependent cell death, thus increasing TKI sensitivity. In contrast, gefitinib-induced apoptosis is reduced in mutated p53 cells (71). Some in vitro models of other tumor types also demonstrated a correlation between TKI response and TP53 mutation, especially in urothelial carcinoma (74,75). Several studies revealed that patients with coexisting TP53 mutations treated with EGFR-TKIs showed a trend toward lower ORR, shorter PFS, and OS compared to patients with wild-type TP53 that did not reach statistical significance (28)(29)(30)(31)68). However, a recent meta-analysis indicated significantly poorer prognosis for patients with concurrent TP53 mutations treated with first-line EGFR-TKIs (pooled HRs for PFS and OS of 1.69 and 1.94, respectively) (76).

(p2.2) Interestingly, a study focused on TP53 exon 8 mutations demonstrated reduced responsiveness to EGFR-TKIs and worse prognosis, mainly in patients harboring EGFR 19del (29). The data showed that TP53 exon 8 mutations were associated with a significantly lower DCR (42 vs. 87%; p < 0.001) and a trend towards shorter PFS and OS compared to TP53 exon 8 wild-type patients in the whole cohort. These differences in PFS and OS became significant in the EGFR 19del subgroup (median PFS, 4.2 vs. 16.8 months; p < 0.001; median OS, 7.6 months vs. not  (31) found that the PFS for patients with TP53 missense mutations was significantly shorter than for TP53 wildtype patients. This study demonstrated that the patients with concurrent EGFR and TP53 mutations who progressed on EGFR-TKIs treatment (n = 24) were less likely to have a secondary EGFR T790M mutation [45% (5/11) vs. 69% (9/13); p = 0.41]. These data are similar to the recent work of VanderLaan et al. (30) who also showed a trend towards a decreased acquired T790M rate in tumors with concurrent TP53 mutations. Among the patients with secondary T790M, 12 received third-generation EGFR-TKIs (11 were evaluable). The ORR was not significantly different between TP53 mutant and wild-type patients in this subset [100% (3/3) vs. 88% (7/8)] (31). The influence of co-occurring TP53 mutations on the efficacy of third-generation EGFR-TKIs in patients with acquired T790M mutations following initial EGFR-TKI failure has also been explored (28). Surprisingly, patients with TP53 mutations had a significantly shorter PFS and worse OS compared to patients with wild-type TP53 (median PFS, 8.9 vs. 12.8 months; p = 0.029; median OS, 17.8 vs. 26.6 months; p = 0.007) in this cohort.

(p2.3) Coexisting of certain mutation sites (e.g., exon 8 mutations) or certain types of TP53 mutations (e.g., missense mutations) may be related to poor EGFR-TKI efficacy, and additional studies focusing on these different types of TP53 mutations are needed to confirm their prognostic impact. Nevertheless, it seems that EGFR-TKIs have lower efficacy in patients with concurrent TP53 mutations. A combination of EGFR-TKI with antiangiogenic therapy showed encouraging efficacy for these patients. In the RELAY study, ramucirumab plus erlotinib first-line therapy showed a superior PFS benefit in patients with EGFR-mutant metastatic NSCLC compared to erlotinib alone (19.4 vs. 12.4 months; HR, 0.591; p < 0.0001). Thus, this combination may be a better choice for these patients. Indeed, significant PFS improvement was observed in EGFR-mutant (19del/L858R) patients with concurrent TP53 mutations (77). In the ALTER-L004 study (NCT03736837), anlotinib plus icotinib showed encouraging efficacy and good tolerability for previously untreated, EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC patients. Fourteen patients with TP53 mutations had an ORR of 78.5% and DCR of 100% (78). Moreover, in the ACTIVE phase III study, apatinib plus gefitinib demonstrated superior PFS as first-line therapy in patients with EGFR-activating mutations, and patients with TP53 exon 8 mutations significantly benefited from this combination (HR 0.24) (79).
## (s3) PIK3CA Mutation
(p3.0) The PI3K/AKT pathway is a downstream signaling pathway of the HER family that is important in oncogenesis and lung cancer progression (80,81). PIK3CA encodes the catalytic subunit, and PIK3CA mutations can activate the PI3K/AKT pathway (82). PIK3CA mutations are found in about 2-5% of NSCLC cases (83)(84)(85) and are considered rare oncogenic drivers in NSCLC. The majority of mutations occur in exon 9 (E545K, E545Q, E545G, E545A, Q546R, E542K, and T536I) and exon 20 (H1047R, H1047L, M1043L, G1007R, and Y1021C), with E545K and H1047R being the most frequent mutations (32,33,86,87). In contrast to the mutual exclusivity of many oncogenic drivers in lung cancers, PIK3CA mutations frequently coexist with other oncogenic driver mutations, especially EGFR and KRAS (83,(88)(89)(90). Indeed, PI3KCA mutations have been found in approximately 3.5% of EGFR mutation-positive patients (91) and appear to be an indicator of resistance and poor survival for NSCLC patients treated with EGFR-TKIs (92). In a preclinical study, the introduction of an activated PIK3CA p.E545K mutation in exon 9 into the EGFR mutation-positive (19del) HCC827 cell line conferred resistance to gefitinib (93).

(p3.1) The role of PIK3CA mutations in predicting the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs was first investigated by Ludovini et al. (92,94), who reported that six patients with a PIK3CA mutation had a shorter time to progression (TTP, median, 2.3 vs. 6.0 months; p = 0.01) and OS (median, 9.9 vs. 30.2 months; p < 0.001) after treatment with gefitinib or erlotinib. It should be mentioned that this study included patients with an unselected EGFR mutation status, with 75.3% (125/166) having a wild-type EGFR. Only two of the six PIK3CA-mutant patients had a concurrent EGFR mutation. One patient had an EGFR S784F mutation in exon 20 and experienced progressive disease (PD) on EGFR-TKI treatment. The second patient with EGFR 19del showed a partial response (PR) to erlotinib but experienced treatment failure after four months of therapy.

(p3.2) Three studies directly compared the efficacy of EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mutant patients with or without concomitant PIK3CA mutations. Eng et al. (32) found that patients with concurrent PIK3CA mutations had a lower ORR (62% vs. 83%; p = 0.80) and shorter median TTP (7.8 vs. 11.1 months; p = 0.84) to EGFR-TKIs. However, these differences were not statistically significant, and these two groups had the same median duration of EGFR-TKI therapy (14.6 months; p = 0.65). A prospective study also explored the impact of PIK3CA mutations on the clinical characteristics and treatment response to EGFR-TKIs in lung adenocarcinoma (33). Of the 344 patients enrolled, six had coexisting PIK3CA mutations. These patients had a similar response to EGFR-TKIs as patients with wild-type PIK3CA (ORR, 66.7 vs. 78.7%; p = 0.476). Interestingly, these PIK3CAmutant patients showed a tendency of longer PFS (median, 12.0 vs. 8.8 months) and OS (median, 25.1 vs. 21.4 months) compared to those with wild-type PIK3CA, although the differences were not significant (p = 0.401 and p = 0.247, respectively). These data are contrary to the Eng study described above (32). However, a recent study analyzing eight patients with coexisting PIK3CA mutations in a cohort of 54 EGFR-mutant advanced NSCLC patients treated with first-generation EGFR-TKIs found that concurrent PIK3CA mutations were significantly associated with a longer PFS compared to wild-type PIK3CA (95). Interestingly, further study revealed a domain-dependent effect of the PIK3CA mutations on PFS. Mutations in the p85 binding domain (R88Q, R108H, and K111E) were associated with an improved PFS, while mutations in the kinase (Y1021H and H1047R), helical (E542K), and C2 (N345K) domains were associated with a worse PFS (95). Although these findings need to be validated in larger cohorts, they provide a clue for understanding the controversial results of the described studies.

(p3.3) In summary, the available PIK3CA studies had limited sample sizes and inconsistent results. Therefore, additional studies on PIK3CA mutations in different domains and their impact on EGFR-TKI efficacy in a larger population are needed. Based on the present results, we believe that decision-making regarding whether to initiate EGFR-TKI therapy in the clinic should not be affected by the presence of a concurrent PIK3CA mutation.
## (s4) PTEN Alterations
(p4.0) Gene of phosphate and tension homolog deleted on chromosome ten (PTEN) is a tumor suppressor gene and master negative regulator of the PI3K/AKT pathway (81,96). PTEN inactivation, which can be caused by several mechanisms (e.g., decreased protein levels, mutations, loss of heterozygosity, and epigenetic silencing (97)), plays an important role in lung cancer oncogenesis and progression (81,96). Indeed, it is a frequent event in NSCLC. Such a loss in PTEN function can constitutively stimulate the PI3K/AKT pathway and increase cellular proliferation (96) and may be associated with EGFR-TKI sensitivity (98)(99)(100).
## (s7) ROS1 Rearrangements
(p7.0) Oncogenic ROS1 is a well-recognized and targetable driver in NSCLC. ROS1 rearrangements occur in 1-2% of NSCLC patients (119,120). The triple ALK, ROS1, and MET-TKI crizotinib is highly effective in ROS1-positive NSCLC patients (121,122). Patients with ROS1 rearrangements concomitantly with EGFR are extremely rare, with a frequency of less than 1% (123). It would be almost impossible to conduct a clinical trial to compare the different therapeutic strategies in this subtype, although isolated cases can provide some information.

(p7.1) Lambros et al. (124) identified ten patients with ROS1 rearrangements and concomitant EGFR mutations that were treated with first-line EGFR-TKIs. Their responses included six PR, two stable diseases (SDs), and two PDs. Second-line crizotinib therapy was used in four patients with progressive disease during EGFR-TKI therapy, with two PR, one SD, and one PD observed. Interestingly, in the Zhuang study (21), two patients harbored triple EGFR/ROS1/KRAS co-alterations. One patient had PD after receiving second-line crizotinib and PR after third-line icotinib (PFS: 27.5 months), whereas the other patient had a PR after receiving gefitinib as first-line treatment (PFS: 12.7 months).

(p7.2) Despite the limited data, recommending EGFR-TKI as the first-line therapy for patients with dual EGFR and ROS1 alterations is reasonable, while crizotinib may be more useful as a second-line treatment after EGFR-TKI progression.
## (s8) MET Alteration
(p8.0) Mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) receptor is a transmembrane tyrosine kinase. It can activate downstream signaling pathways (e.g., RAS/RAF/MAPK and PI3K/AKT/ mTOR) by binding to the ligand hepatocyte growth factor. These pathways play important roles in cell proliferation, survival, migration, motility, and invasion (125)(126)(127)(128). MET gene amplification has been recognized as a common mechanism of acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs (129,130), which encouraged researchers to pay more attention to the role of MET in the intrinsic resistance to these agents. In vitro studies have shown that MET amplification in HCC827 lung adenocarcinoma cells, which harbor EGFR 19del, mediates resistance to EGFR-TKIs (131). In addition, the coexistence of positive MET FISH status and EGFR mutations is associated with shorter DFS and OS after surgery in patients with lung adenocarcinoma (132). However, the relationship between MET FISH status and clinical outcomes for EGFR-TKI treatment is unclear.

(p8.1) Two distinct processes (i.e., polysomy and amplification) lead to MET copy-number gains (133). FISH, used to identify MET status in many clinical trials, can distinguish polysomy and true amplification. True MET amplification causes copy number increases without an increase in centromeric region of chromosome 7 (CEP7). Thus, the MET/CEP7 ratio increases. In polysomy, a MET copy increase is associated with an increase in the corresponding centromere. Therefore, polysomy has a preserved MET/CEP7 ratio (133). No standard criteria for MET positivity have been established. Two commonly used scoring systems are PathVysion (MET/CEP7 ratio ≥ 2), which only includes amplification, and the Cappuzzo scoring system (≥5 MET signals per cell), which includes both polysomy and amplification (132). MET amplification can be detected by FISH, IHC, and NGS. Lack of platform harmonization and thresholds for defining MET positivity has contributed to the conflicting results.

(p8.2) Noro et al. (38)  However, all five patients with MET amplification had a poor or short-lived response to the EGFR-TKI (median TTF, 5 months; range, 1.0 to 6.4 months), suggesting that MET amplification concurrent with CNG ≥5 affects the response to EGFR-TKI. Furthermore, a patient harboring the EGFR L858R mutation and a coexisting MET amplification with a CNG of 7.3 and MET/CEP7 of 3.4 experienced disease progression within four weeks after starting erlotinib but showed significant regression of a pulmonary lesion when treated with crizotinib monotherapy. Li et al. (23) reported that a patient with coexisting EGFR 19del and de novo MET amplification had disease progression after initial treatment with icotinib, but the lung mass shrunk significantly after switching to crizotinib monotherapy. These data suggested that primary MET amplification could be a possible mechanism of intrinsic EGFR-TKI resistance, and patients harboring this genomic alteration may benefit from MET inhibitors.

(p8.3) Preliminary data from several small studies demonstrated crizotinib efficacy in patients with de novo MET amplification. In 15 patients with de novo MET amplification (A MET/ centromere ratio [MET/CEN] ≥1.8), the ORR, PFS, and OS for crizotinib were 73.3%, 6.5 months (95% CI, 2.7-10.3), and 31 months, respectively (134). In addition, MET and EGFR inhibitor combination has had some effect in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC that developed resistance to prior EGFR-targeted therapies through MET gene amplification (127). A case report revealed that this combination might also have efficacy in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC and concomitant de novo MET amplification (24). While the patient had primary resistance to erlotinib, the tumor shrank after the addition of crizotinib to the treatment strategy.

(p8.4) In summary, it is still uncertain whether MET positivity is related to primary TKI resistance in patients with EGFR-mutant NSCLC, mainly due to the limited patient numbers and different evaluating systems. Further study in larger patient populations using uniform criteria to assess MET status is needed. MET inhibitor monotherapy and combinations with EGFR-TKIs appear to be potential treatment strategies for EGFR-mutant patients with primary MET alterations but require further validation.
## (s11) BIM Polymorphism
(p11.0) BIM, also known as B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia/ lymphoma (Bcl-2)-like 11 (BCL2L11), is a BH3-only proapoptotic member of the Bcl-2 family. BIM gene products containing BH3 domains are required for the induction of apoptosis by EGFR-TKIs (153)(154)(155)(156)(157). The BIM deletion polymorphism is a 2,903-bp fragment deletion in intron 2 of the BIM gene. It results in splicing of exon 3 over exon 4 in the BIM pre-mRNA, generating an inactive BIM protein isoform lacking the crucial BH3 domain. This BIM deletion polymorphism occurs in 12-16% of lung cancer patients with EGFR mutations (158,159). It impairs EGFR-TKI-related apoptosis and mediates intrinsic resistance to EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cell lines (154).
