# APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND MECHANICS (ENGLISH EDITION) A review of computational modeling and deep brain stimulation: applications to Parkinson's disease *

CorpusID: 227015687 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common chronic neurodegenerative disorder, which involves several neural pathways of motors and non-motors. The core pathology underlying PD is degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc) in midbrain, leading to the decrease in the dopamine (DA) level in striatum. PD is characterized by motor impairments including rigidity, slowness of movement, and tremor. It can also cause a wide range of non-motor symptoms that appear normally in the course of the disease both early and late-loss of smell, sleep disorders, autonomic dysfunction, cognitive decline, and depression [1] . The severity of these symptoms increases as the PD progresses [2] .
## (s1) Computational models of CTBG circuits
(p1.0) The BG is an intricately connected assembly of many subcortical nuclei, forming the core of an adaptive network connecting cortical and thalamic circuits [7][8] . The striatum, GPe, GPi, STN, the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr), and SNc are generally considered to be the main components of the BG. The striatum is the main input structure and the principal recipient of cortical inputs and the DA inputs [9] , and only two types of neurons are commonly considered in the modeling of striatum, i.e., fast spiking interneuron (FSI) and medium spiny neuron (MSN).

(p1.1) The motor circuit consists of multiple parallel polysynaptic loops, which begins with a convergent input from the cortex to the input nuclei of the BG and then proceeds through different pathways to the GPi or SNr, which projects to the thalamus and the cortex. There are three pathways through the BG, i.e., the direct, indirect, and hyper direct pathways, as depicted in Fig. 1(a). The direct pathway is composed of MSN that expresses DA D1 receptors (D1 MSN), and projects to both SNr and GPi. The indirect pathway is composed of MSN that expresses DA D2 receptors (D2 MSN), and projects to the GPe [10] . The hyper direct pathway is a projection from the cortex to the STN.

(p1.2) In PD, the degeneration and death of dopaminergic neurons in SNc and decrease in the DA level of BG bring about the abnormal function of neural circuitry (see Fig. 1(b)), which also leads to the emergence of the movement disorders and slighter cognitive issues. Albin et al. [11] were the first to put forward the functional explanation for the effects of DA depletion of the BG. The classic model believes that the lack of DA would suppress the D1 MSN projecting to the GPi, and therefore inhibit the direct pathway. Conversely, it would facilitate the activity of the D2 MSN projecting onto the GPe, thus exciting the indirect pathway (see Fig. 1(b)). For striatum microcircuits, DA depletion was implemented by changing the circuit properties. These changes include a reduction in connections between D1 and D2 MSNs, the removement of the connections between D1 MSN, a reduction in mutual inhibition between D2 MSN, and an increase in FSI inhibition to D2 MSN [10] . A result of this effect would be an over-inhibition of the thalamus, which would depress excitatory synapses input in the thalamus to MSNs and cortex. At present, even if many advancements in the fields of anatomy, physiology, and biochemistry of these nuclei have yielded new information in the last decades, the internal mechanisms of PD are far to be fully understood. Accordingly, the establishment of reliable computational models to investigate the inner events of the pathogenesis represents a key issue in the field. Current models of neuron and mean-field are predominantly biophysically based and account for several factors that influence the electrophysiology of neurons, e.g., processing of synaptic inputs, ionic basis of electrical excitability, and the effect of DA [12][13][14][15] . Here, we review the neuron model and mean-field neural model which are of physiological significance.
## (s2) Neural network models
(p2.0) The biological Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) and derivative models have confirmed their availability for recognizing and signifying the electrical activities in single neurons [16][17][18][19] . Studies have shown that the CTBG network model for central nervous systems has always been the physiological basis for studying PD. In the past modeling process, the conductivity-based HH model is used to describe the dynamic behavior of different neurons from a mathematical perspective. The HH model is based on the electrical equivalent circuit model which is a useful method to describe the behavior of membrane potential. It mainly includes three parts, i.e., ion channel, power supply, and capacitor. Figure 2(a) shows an equivalent circuit representation of neurons with sodium (Na), calcium (Ca), and potassium (K) ion-channels and leakage current (L). The membrane capacitance current can be expressed as

(p2.1) where C m is the membrane capacitance. In the equivalent circuit, each ion channel is usually represented by a series of conductors. Assume that the conductance of a single ion channel a is g a . According to Ohm's law, the current of ion channel a can be expressed as

(p2.2) where E a is the reversal potential given by the Nernst potential. According to Kirchhoff's current law, the sum of the total current flowing into the cell is zero. The differential equation of membrane potential is obtained as

(p2.3) Besides, a simple spike model, i.e., the Izhikevich model, reproduces a variety of behaviors of biological neurons, including bursting, spiking, and subthreshold oscillations [20] . It can also be used in the modeling analysis of PD research. Here, we review the computational network models based on a single neuron which has been used in the past few decades, ranging from the BG circuit model, the BGTH model, and the striatum microcircuit model. Both STN and GPe are the essential components of the indirect pathway in BG, and it is crucial in the motor circuit. The interaction between STN and GPe nucleus is complicated. GPe neurons are excited by the glutamate action of STN neurons, send gamma-aminobutyric acidergic (GABAergic) inhibitory projections to STN, and then are reactivated by the rebound excitatory action of STN [21] . These properties suggest the possibility for intrinsic oscillations arising within the STN-GPe circuit, and therefore capture the dynamic interaction of the STN, and GPe is important to generate the pathological changes in PD. Based on experimental data, Terman et al. [21] established a single-compartment conductance biophysical model of STN and GPe cells, which laid a model foundation for subsequent studies. The dynamics of the neuron membrane potential of STN and GPe can be expressed by the following standardized HH neuron differential equations:

(p2.4) where V is the membrane voltage of STN or GPe, and V is the derivative of V . I ion k represents the total ion current of the neuron, and I syn represents the synaptic current. In the network connection between STN and GPe, I app is the bias current acted by peripheral nerve nuclei to adjust the discharge characteristics of different types of neurons. For STN, it includes the potassium current
## (s3) Neural field models
(p3.0) The neuron model focuses on modeling individual neurons with a specific connection structure, and lacks a systematic understanding [31] . When paying attention to the potential dynamics of the BG neural network itself, a different approach, the mean-field model, is used to attempt to simulate population behavior while using fewer dimensions. The mean-field model uses concepts in statistical physics and approximates the more general overall density model, which ignores the interactions between models of a higher order than average activity. It is easier to capture the average electrophysiological activity of a large, spatially distributed neuron collection, thereby enabling a theoretical analysis and extensive simulation of large neural tissue layers.
## (s4) DBS therapy
(p4.0) DBS is an effective strategy used in the treatment and control of PD [42] . It inserts electrodes into the deep nucleus of the brain and then connects the electrodes to the square wave generator placed in the human subcutaneous tissue with wires to complete the stimulation of parkinsonian patients [43] . The doctor can adjust the frequency, pulse width, or amplitude of the stimulation signal to get the best treatment effect [44][45] .

(p4.1) Although DBS is considered to be an effective treatment for PD, its side effects are more obvious. From the system perspective, DBS is an external local control input into the network, which causes several problems. (i) DBS generally uses a single nucleus as the target, and prolonged stimulation will cause specific physical damage [46] . (ii) The battery needs to be replaced by clinical surgery [47][48] . At present, the stimulation frequency required for STN-DBS or GPi-DBS is about 130 Hz-185 Hz [5] , and the high energy consumption leads to battery replacement, which will increase the risk of infection in patients. (iii) Due to the lack of adaptation to the needs of patients and the effects of symptoms, doctors need to adjust parameters for a long time to achieve the optimal stimulation effect [44][45] . Therefore, how to improve this inherent treatment strategy and choose a safer and more effective stimulation method is the main problem of the current studies.
## (s5) Optimization of DBS: waveform, target, and electrode
(p5.0) In recent years, many studies have proposed that using neuron models improves DBS from different perspectives to reduce stimulation side effects. Improvements to DBS can be divided into three categories (see Fig. 4). The first one is about waveforms. The most commonly used DBS waveform is dominated by rectangular pulse stimulation [22][23][49][50] . Terman et al. [21] modeled this rectangular pulse stimulation as

(p5.1) where i D is the stimulation amplitude, ρ D is the stimulation period, and δ D is the duration of each pulse. H(x) represents a Heaviside step function. The HH neuronal network model is usually used to analyze the treatment strategy of DBS. DBS targeting STN and GPi is considered to be an important form of intervention to relieve PD-related motor symptoms. The DBS is embodied as

(p5.2) The simulation of DBS shows that as the stimulation frequency increases, STN neurons gradually exhibit high-frequency discharges, synchronized with DBS pulses, thus masking the original bursting activity of STN neurons [22][23] . STN activates GPe and GPi neurons through synapse action, causing them to also display high-frequency and regular discharge (see Fig. 5(a)). The application of stimulus changes the firing pattern of neurons and affects the error index (EI) of the thalamic relay. In the modified BGTH model, the relationship between the frequency of EI and DBS is consistent with the clinical observation, that is, the fidelity of the response of thalamic cells is equivalent to that of health, only when the stimulation frequency is greater than 100 Hz [23] . Figure 5(b) shows that EI decreases gradually between 40 Hz and 100 Hz. However, such unbalanced single-phase stimulation currents can damage nerve tissues and cause serious side effects [46] . Therefore, charge-balanced bi-phasic (CBBP) pulses are generally used in actual surgical operations. Fan et al. [46] modeled the CBBP pulse. In order to be consistent with the electrophysiological experiment, a short-duration positive-phase anode pulse of 60 μs was used in each unit stimulation cycle accompanied by a longer-duration negative-phase pulse. I CBBP-DBS can be considered as
## (s6) Closed loop DBS
(p6.0) The electrodes of DBS are usually permanently implanted in the BG, and the stimulator delivers electrical impulses continuously and independently, without relying on any feedback (open-loop stimulation). On the contrary, in closed-loop stimulation, electrical stimulation is delivered as a function of neuronal activity, which is adjusted in real-time [71] . Demand-based closed-loop feedback control is smarter than the normal DBS and avoids harmful side effects caused by constant stimulation [72] . It can maximize the treatment effect while minimizing the amount of stimulation and the time to adjust stimulation settings.

(p6.1) Closed-loop stimulation methods mainly include two types. The first type method uses the high-frequency DBS waveform, and adjusts the stimulation parameters through closed-loop control. The second type method can be considered as a "mild stimulation", which attempts to adjust the pathological oscillation network in an on-demand manner [73] . Regarding the feedback signal of closed-loop stimulation, we usually use the LFP of STN in modeling [74] . In clinical experiments, it can be recorded from the end of the electrode used for DBS. Studies have shown that the LFP is closely related to the activity of individual neurons and shows obvious β-band oscillations in the PD state [74] . The amplitude of the filtered LFP can indirectly reflect the degree of synchronization of neurons (see Fig. 3(c)). Generally, in the neuronal network model, to calculate the magnitude of the stimulus signal, the LFP is modeled, which is related to the average synaptic activity of the neuron,
## (s7) Summary and outlook
(p7.0) We systematically summarize the dynamic modeling analysis and control strategies related to PD in recent decades. According to the records and analysis of clinical experiments, the nucleus within the BG in the parkinsonian network exhibits bursting a discharge behavior, and the synchronization level increases. Through the power spectral density analysis, it is found that the energy of STN and GPi nucleus increases significantly in the beta-band. Using the neuron model and the field model, these dynamic characteristics are well reflected. Models are generally based on CTBG circuits. Except for the striatum, we generally consider other nuclei as a whole in modeling. Recently, optogenetics has been used to specifically stimulate the neuron population in GPe [84] , where targeted interventions reliably induce long-term exercise rescue in PD mouse models. Studies have developed molecular and genetic strategies to subdivide GPe neurons into subgroups, which have different physiological and anatomical projections [85][86] . In the prototype population, neurons can be further subdivided according to the expression of parvalbumin (PV)-GPe and Lim homeobox 6 (Lhx6)-GPe [85][86] . The long-lasting recovery of the movement of PD mice can be achieved by selective excitatory stimulation of PV-GPe or inhibitory stimulation of Lhx6-GPe [84] . Therefore, the identification of different cell types in the BG is essential for us to understand the function of the BG and treat neurological disorders, especially PD. At present, in terms of modeling study, the specific modeling of the nucleus within the BG is blank, which will be an important node for subsequent study. Because certain dynamic effects are only achieved by limiting the operation of specific neuron subgroups, rather than by regulating all neurons at the same time. The specific modeling of neurons helps us to further understand the dynamic mechanism of PD [5] .

(p7.1) At present, the computational model has been widely used to find more novel, irregular, and low-frequency DBS strategies, and the results obtained are generally more energy-efficient than traditional DBS. In order to solve the problem of higher damage to a single target, the multitarget stimulation strategy is proposed. However, the current study on targets mostly stays on the structure of the BG. Simulating complex neural networks provides a unique opportunity to evaluate new stimulation targets. It is necessary to explore more effective stimulation targets. In addition, to reduce the adjustment time of DBS, many studies have combined model-based control techniques to design a closed-loop aDBS strategy. However, the improvement of DBS seems to be a huge project, the clinical application is not abundant, and there are still considerable differences between the models and the actual applications. In general, these solutions are still in the early theoretical stage, and it takes a long time to transition from the preclinical trial stage to the clinical trial stage [5] .

(p7.2) In addition to electrical stimulation, optogenetic stimulation is slowly emerging for the regulation of neurons. This technique can control neural activity in a cell-specific way with a high degree of time accuracy, which is a significant advantage over traditional techniques such as electrical stimulation [87] . Optogenetic stimulation combines genetic and optical tools to stimulate specific neurons. Electrical stimulation will drive the activity of all cells in the area where the electrode is located through the coupling relationship between neurons [88] , including some axons in the cell body far away from the target [89] . These compound effects may make it difficult to understand the stimulus and may lead to off-target adverse effects. Optogenetic stimulation is aimed at specific cell types. It is potentially highly spatially selective, and external stimuli can have no direct contact with cells [87] . Neuron optogenetic tools can also be divided into excitatory and inhibitory [89] . Therefore, it can tell us more specifically whether the effect on neurons is excitatory or inhibitory. Therefore, we can use optogenetic stimulation to explore the therapeutic mechanism of DBS, which can be further used to understand the mechanism of PD and improve electrical DBS.
