# molecules Processing Factors Affecting the Phytochemical and Nutritional Properties of Pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) Peel Waste: A Review

CorpusID: 223557061 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff6b39e1304d955b404c8c1fdf4c41fcb1786b93](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff6b39e1304d955b404c8c1fdf4c41fcb1786b93)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) (Lythraceae; formerly belonging to the Punicaceae family) is a fruit-bearing deciduous shrub or tree [1]. Native to Iran and Afghanistan, it is found growing wild in the outer hills and warm valleys of the Himalayas, and is often cultivated throughout northern India, but now pomegranate is grown commercially in various parts of the world, including South Africa, North Africa, South America, North America, the Middle East, Israel, and Australia [2][3][4].
## (s1) Introduction
(p1.0) The pomegranate (Punica granatum L.) (Lythraceae; formerly belonging to the Punicaceae family) is a fruit-bearing deciduous shrub or tree [1]. Native to Iran and Afghanistan, it is found growing wild in the outer hills and warm valleys of the Himalayas, and is often cultivated throughout northern India, but now pomegranate is grown commercially in various parts of the world, including South Africa, North Africa, South America, North America, the Middle East, Israel, and Australia [2][3][4].
## (s6) Phytochemistry and Nutritional Constituents of the Pomegranate Peel
(p6.0) Pomegranate peel accounts for about 49-55% of the fruit weight, depending on the cultivar [5,34,63]. It contains numerous vitamins, minerals, and organic acids, dietary fibre, and phenolic compounds such as flavonoids, which include anthocyanins and flavonols; as well as condensed tannins such as proanthocyanidins and hydrolysable tannins, which include ellagitannins and gallotannins [5,8,34,55,64]. As a collective, these compounds exhibit strong antioxidant, antimicrobial, antimutagenic, cardio-protective, apoptotic, and antigenotoxic potential, which may produce ameliorating effects against numerous critical diseases [5,8,34,55,57,58,64]. Different parts of the pomegranate tree contain substantial amounts of the secondary compounds ( Table 3) that are responsible for the reported biological activities ( Table 2). The chemistry of pomegranate is complex and about 124 different phytochemicals can be found in the pomegranate fruit. From these, approximately 48 phenolic compounds, especially anthocyanins, hydrolysable tannins, hydroxycinnamic acids, gallotannins, and hydroxybenzoic acids, have been detected in the peel and other parts of the fruit [19,63,64]. Interestingly, the above phenolic compounds, particularly the hydrolysable tannins, are predominantly higher in the pomegranate peel as compared to other parts of the pomegranate fruit [5,8,19]. As a result of this, the phytochemical concentration of the peel is said to be effective without the addition of other fruit fractions [5,63]. Approximately 30% of all fruit contents of anthocyanidins are concentrated in the fruit peel [19]. All of these secondary compounds have a great role in the performance and potency of the antioxidant effect, flavour, texture, and colour of the whole fruit, which aid in its attractiveness in the market and exploitation of its biological activity [5,8,10]. The concentrations of these compounds and their strong biological properties depend on the cultivar, developmental stage of the fruit, environmental conditions, and processing method used to recover the phenolic compounds [3,4,19,34]. Table 3. Phytochemical constituents in different parts of the pomegranate plant (P. granatum L.) [45,65].
## (s12) Organic Acids and Total Sugars
(p12.0) Organic acids (such as citric acid, acetic acid, gluconic acid, lactic acid, itaconic acid, and ascorbic acid), as well as total sugars, are in great demand worldwide, and as a result, are produced at high volume (millions of tons per year) [66]. They are used in the food and beverage industries as flavourings in various products [66][67][68] and have applications as preservatives in the medical industry, as organic acids inhibit microorganisms, prolonging the shelf life of products [66]. It is predicted that by the year 2030, almost 35% of chemical products will be generated in a biotechnological manner [66]. Numerous studies have been conducted on the biological roles played by citric acid, succinic acid, and various other organic acids obtained from several fruit peel sources [69][70][71][72][73][74]. This shows that there is an economical alternative and an environmentally friendly way to solve the problem of waste management of fruit peel.
## (s14) Effects of Drying Methods
(p14.0) Pomegranate peel is high in moisture and cannot be stored for further utilisation without the application of a preservation method. This affects the quality of polyphenols at the extraction stage. Therefore, it is necessary to choose the right technique for processing that will not compromise the integrity of the product. The drying process is a dehydration technique and is a vital step in reducing the moisture content for preservation purposes, thus increasing the shelf life and directly influencing the physical and chemical changes of the products [81][82][83][84]. This is the most widely used method for the preservation of decomposable materials such as fruits and vegetables (including their waste products), which have huge commercial and industrial relevance [81,83].
## (s19) Freeze-Drying
(p19.0) Freeze-drying, also known as lyophilisation, involves dehydration by sublimation of a frozen sample and desorption under vacuum conditions [100]. The solid state of water during freeze-drying preserves the primary structure, aroma, and flavour of the product, causing very low reductions in volume [100]. Mphahlele et al. [34] determined the effects of drying on the bioactive compounds and antioxidant, antibacterial, and antityrosinase activities of pomegranate peel (cv. Wonderful) using freeze-drying, confirming that overall the freeze-dried peel had the lowest residual moisture. Furthermore, freeze-dried peel had the highest rutin, catechin, epicatechin, and hesperidin contents at 4666.03, 674.51, 70.56, and 16.45 mg/kg DM, respectively. Furthermore, freeze-drying gave the highest total phenolic content (TPC), total tannin concentration (TTC), and total flavonoid concentration (TFC) values, which were between 3-and 5-fold higher in freeze-dried peel than the oven-dried peel at all temperatures (40, 50, and 60 • C). Calín-Sánchez et al. [88] observed the highest content of punicalagin isomers (α-PC and β-PC) in freeze-dried peels at 113 and 98.7 mg/g of DW, respectively, compared to the vacuum microwave drying method (Table 4).
## (s22) Effects of Extraction Methods
(p22.0) The secondary metabolites in the pomegranate peel are affected by various horticultural factors, such as the fruit cultivar, growing region, agro-climate, maturity, cultivation practice, processing factors (drying and extraction), and storage conditions [2,8,10,64]. Such variations influence the physical and chemical makeup of the pomegranate fruit peel, affecting the quality of the fruit peel products. Finding novel ways to optimise the extraction of these phytochemicals and using pretreatment to reduce the loss of these heat-sensitive phytochemicals is necessary in the competitive pharmaceutical and nutraceutical industries.
## (s24) Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE)
(p24.0) Supercritical extraction technologies have been used extensively in the past to extract target compounds from a variety of matrices at commercial and laboratory scales. For quantification purposes, this technique is often used for the recovery of the total target analyte and can grant optimal conditions for bioactive compound recovery with the aim of commercial extraction. The technique is a pressurised extraction method that reduces waste solvent production. Its high standard of recovery of pure compounds makes it a suitable match for the extraction of phytochemicals in the pomegranate peel.

(p24.1) Several researchers have used this method for pomegranate peel extraction (Table 5). Ara and Raofie [118] extracted essential oil compounds from pomegranate peel using supercritical fluid extraction, whereby the results were compared with those obtained using the hydrodistillation technique. Supercritical fluid extraction led to a higher extract yield of 1.18% (v/w), whereas a value of 0.21% (v/w) was noted for hydrodistillation. Bustamante et al. [119] optimised phenolic compound and oil extraction from pomegranate peel with supercritical CO 2 and peel extracts using a supercritical carbon dioxide extraction process, which gave a high punicalagin content, total phenolic content, and antioxidant activity with values of 9.7%, 10.01 mg gallic acid equivalent (GAE)/g, and 99.4 lg Trolox equivalent per g, respectively, once optimal conditions were determined. Similarly, high phenolic content recovery was noted in a study by Mushtaq et al. [120], who utilised the maceration power of different enzymes to develop an effective, quick, and green extraction protocol for the optimum recovery of phenolic antioxidants from pomegranate peel. They confirmed that enzyme-assisted supercritical fluid extraction (EASCFE) doubled the recovery of crude extracts, with increased levels of total phenolic content reported (301.53 mg gallic acid equivalent (GAE)/g). In addition, numerous phenolic compounds were present in high amounts, such as vanillic acid contents ranging from 65.87-108.36 µg/g, in enzyme-assisted solvent extraction and enzyme-assisted supercritical fluid extraction (Table 5).

(p24.2) Several published papers have shown that pomegranate peel contains bound and free phenolics [63,121]. Therefore, there is a need to optimise the recovery of these phenolics, which have been proven to be beneficial for health and for the industry [63,121]. Furthermore, carbon dioxide is a safe, food-grade product that is widely available at a relatively low cost and with high purity [120,122]. However, the disadvantage is that carbon dioxide is relatively apolar, requiring the addition of a co-solvent such as methanol or ethanol for polar analyte extraction [120,123]. This, however, does not assist the extraction of bound phenolics. Thus, a pretreatment process before extraction may be used to improve or release the bound phenolics by breaking down the cellulosic composite structure of the cell wall [120]. Supercritical extraction technology is a green process for extraction and isolation of high-value natural products and phytochemicals. The technique is relatively safe and does not alter the structures of heat-and oxidation-sensitive compounds [120,123].  Methanolic peel extracts had the highest extract yield at 9.38% weight for weight (w/w), followed by water at 7.53% weight for weight (w/w) and ethyl acetate (EtOAc) at 1.04% weight for weight (w/w). Methanol (MeOH) extract had highest total phenolic content (TPC) at 44.0% weight for weight (w/w), while lowest was found in aqueous extract at 3.00% weight for weight (w/w).

(p24.3) [108] Punicalagin content range was 0.32-0.84 g/100 g dryweight (DW) using supercritical fluid extraction (SFE). Acetone with sonication produced the highest phenolic compound contents (in either solvent or ultrasound-assisted solvent extraction methods, 40.0 and 35.0% for sonication and solvent extraction, respectively; lowest values were found in ethyl acetate extracts (0.2 and 0.2%)). The ethyl acetate extract and extract of modified supercritical fluid extraction carbon dioxide (SFE CO 2 ) had similar but comparatively small extraction yields. Over 76 essential oils were identified using gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GCMS), with oleic acid, palmitic acid, and (−)-borneol being the major compounds in both extracts. The optimum extraction yields were 1.18% weight for weight (w/w) for supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) and 0.21% volume per weight (v/w) for hydrodistillation.
## (s30) Pressurised Liquid Extraction (PLE)
(p30.0) Pressurised liquid extraction (PLE) is also known as accelerated solvent extraction (ASE) or subcritical solvent extraction. PLE is another innovative extraction technique that recovers polyphenols of plants through high temperature and pressure [139,142,144]. Pressurised liquid extraction may serve as a good alternative extraction technique for commercial use in phenolic recovery from pomegranate peel waste. This technique is gaining popularity, as shown in Table 5. For example, Ҫam and Hişil [141] examined the suitability of pressurised water extraction of polyphenols in nine Turkish pomegranate (cv. Izmir 8, Izmir 10, Izmir 16, Izmir 23, Izmir 26, Izmir 1264, Izmir 1479, Izmir 1499, and Izmir 1513) peels, as well as the subsequent use of the extracts as natural antioxidants. They reported that pressurised water extraction compared to conventional methanol extraction took approximately 15 min for total extraction, whereas methanol extraction took 1 h. Moreover, the highest condensed tannin value of 9.5 mg catechin equivalent (CE)/g DW was obtained using pressurised water extraction, while the lowest value of 3.7 mg catechin equivalent (CE)/g DW was obtained using a water extraction method. The highest amount of hydrolysable tannins (262.7 mg tannic acid equivalent (TAE)/g DW) was recorded using the pressurised water extraction technique in comparison to value of 82.6 mg tannic acid equivalent (TAE)/g DW for the water extraction method. Punicalagin was the major phenolic compound recovered from the pomegranate peel using HPLC-DAD at 378 nm, highlighting the effectiveness of pressurised liquid extraction in the recovery of polyphenols in the peel versus conventional solvent extraction using methanol.

(p30.1) Similarly, Sumere et al. [142] evaluated the possibility of combining two extraction techniques (ultrasound-assisted extraction and pressurised liquid extraction, forming ultrasound-assisted pressurised liquid extraction) to improve the efficiency, selectivity, and yield of the extraction of phenolic compounds from pomegranate peel (cv. Wonderful) and the influence of the most important variables in the process. Using a larger peel particle size of 1.05 mm compared to 0.68 mm and using water extraction at a temperature of 70 • C with ultrasound power of 480 W for 3 cycles, the best extraction conditions were, thus, established. Through this protocol, superior levels of phenolic compounds (61.72 mg/g) were recovered from the pomegranate fruit peel. Contrary to this, the use of higher ethanol lowered the phenolic compound extraction yield. Furthermore, it was concluded that it is possible to combine two extraction techniques, such as ultrasound-assisted extraction and pressurised liquid extraction, to enhance the recovery of phenolic compounds from pomegranate peel by manipulating process parameters (Table 5).

(p30.2) Alexandre et al. [143] studied the effects of high-pressure-assisted extraction on antioxidant activity and bioactive compounds of Portugal pomegranate peel, using a Box-Behnken design to evaluate the effects of pressure, extraction time, and ethanol concentration to estimate the optimum extraction conditions by using the response surface methodology. It was evident that high pressures of 300 and 600 MPa led to increases in the total phenolics, with values of 12% and 6% being attained, respectively, which could be attributed to the cell wall breakdown resulting from the high pressure. Furthermore, greater amounts of extract of 6% and 3% were recovered when pressures of 300 and 600 MPa were applied, respectively. The optimum conditions were reported at an extraction time of 30 min, pressure of 492 MPa, and an extraction concentration of 37%. Pressurised liquid extraction is considered a "green technology" that requires small amounts of organic solvents. Operators have the ability to adjust the processing parameters to isolate or select a particular group of compounds. Moreover, it has a faster extraction time compared to other conventional methods [142,144]. This type of technology enables the rapid isolation of valuable compounds from the pomegranate peel and is also environmentally friendly and important for industry, as it saves labour costs and energy. Innovative extraction technologies that can easily be translated to an industrial context from laboratory-based research are, thus, in high demand.
## (s31) Conclusions and Future Prospects
(p31.0) This review has highlighted past and present research and development activities in the use of the pomegranate fruit peel, which is a rich source of phytochemicals, organic acids, total sugars, vitamins, and other minerals. Due to the many established health benefits of this type of fruit peel, many opportunities in the cosmeceutical, pharmaceutical, and nutraceutical industries exist due to its value addition potential, which could change the mindset of viewing it as an agricultural waste. The incorporation of bioactive compounds from the pomegranate peel into different products is, thus, foreseen to lead to its profitable commodification. This scenario is highly desirable as an economical and environmentally friendly alternative, solving the current problem of fruit peel waste management.

(p31.1) Despite these benefits, processing of the pomegranate peel using drying and extraction techniques may change the chemical and nutritional properties, and consequently alter the biological strength of the processed pomegranate peel products. To avoid the loss of these phytochemicals and nutritional properties, many researchers have found novel ways to optimise the drying and extraction of these phytochemicals in pomegranate peel. However, these processing techniques are energy-intensive, have long drying and extraction times, and are not all environmentally friendly; many of them are also expensive. This leads to the agro-processing industry being reluctant to adopt them as routine procedures in the manufacture of various pomegranate products. Such waste from industrial food processors can also be changed into more valued resources if the recovery of valuable peel-based chemical components is possible. The advantage here is, thus, two-fold, as not only does the fruit peel waste get converted into value-added products, but also at the same time this practice is more eco-efficient. Valorisation of the pomegranate fruit peel will be of great benefit to the economies of developing countries where pomegranates are currently grown. This will possibly occur through creating novel industries that will bring more job opportunities, supporting the bio-economies of such countries, whilst also reducing the amount of waste discarded into the environment. To understand the impacts of processing factors on the phytochemistry and nutritional properties of pomegranate peel, more studies need to be conducted that directly associate these factors to relevant biological potencies and human health promoting properties. It is clear from this review that at present not all scientific research into fruit peel biology integrates pharmacological assays that show the underlying bioactivities of the peels when they are subjected to different test treatments. In addition, phytochemicals and other nutritional compounds consumed through dietary sources (supplements and fortification purposes) usually undergo considerable processing before being consumed. Research on this topic is also somewhat lacking.

(p31.2) To our knowledge, limited studies have reported the effects of pretreatments of pomegranate peel, even though others have shown the potential to improve the quality and phytochemical recovery of other fruit peels (for details, refer to the work of Boluda-Aguilar et al. [145], Choi et al. [146], Deylami et al. [147], Duarte et al. [148], Nurhuda et al. [149], and Peerajit et al. [150]). Pretreatment of the pomegranate peel has been limited to only enzymatic digestion [120]. With respect to hot water blanching, no studies are presently available in the literature, despite the availability of a number of pretreatment methods, whether it be wet blanching, dry blanching, or mechanical (physical), enzymatic, or chemical pretreatments. Pretreatment processes are typically applied to vegetables and fruits after harvest and prior to further processing, with the aim of enhancing both safety and quality attributes. By doing so, the retention of phytochemicals and nutrients is maximised while reducing the retention of enzymes that cause degradation of fruits and vegetables [151][152][153]. The use of pretreatments may enhance the recovery of phytochemicals and further minimise the drying time, subsequently reducing the loss of heat-sensitive phytochemicals and other nutritional properties in the pomegranate peel during processing.

(p31.3) Future research should focus on exploring pretreatment methods to preserve the phytochemical and nutritional properties of the pomegranate peel in order to produce high-quality value-added products. There is also a need to focus on designing and implementing strategies that will use fruit peel phytochemicals in generating new marketable products. More information will also be required to determine the shelf life and performance of these products during the storage associated with pomegranate fruit peels and peel-derived products. In addition, it will be crucial to ascertain the stability and availability of these functional phytochemicals in processed foods and other useful products, once drying and other similar processes have been employed as part of the production value chain. In our view, such research has a high potential to generate unique and novel applications for the pomegranate peel and "turn waste into gold". 
