# molecules Toxicity and Anticancer Potential of Karwinskia: A Review

CorpusID: 227251902 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89f39515f6a44227e993a01bdebeb58307f06e31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/89f39515f6a44227e993a01bdebeb58307f06e31)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s5) Peripheral Nervous System (PNS)
(p5.0) Most of the published reports about Karwinskia toxicity are focused on the PNS. Oral administration of crude homogenate of K. humboldtiana fruit, or toxins isolated from it, produces distal segmental demyelinization and degenerative changes of peripheral nerves in several animal species [14,[55][56][57][58][59]. In turn, these changes produce a conduction block of nerve impulses [60,61] and a depression of fast axonal transport [62][63][64]. Furthermore, it has been observed that distal hind limb muscles of treated animals are partially denervated [60,65].
## (s6) Central Nervous System (CNS)
(p6.0) Charlton and Pierce [71] reported that an axonal dystrophy occurred in the CNS of goats experimentally poisoned with the fruit of K. humboldtiana. Lesions were more evident in the cerebellum (especially in the neocerebellum), while some swelling occurred in axons of the white matter of the spinal cord. There was a positive relationship between the cerebellar lesions and clinical signs observed in affectated goats: increased alertness, tremor, increased responsiveness to external stimuli, and high-stepping movements.

(p6.1) Ortiz et al. [72] studied the cerebral motor cortex, the CA1 region of hippocampus, and the caudate nucleus in rats orally intoxicated with the fruit of K. humboldtiana. Hyperchromasia, cell death, and widening of the Virchow-Robin spaces were observed in cerebral motor cortex; hyperchromasia, cell shrinkage, and cell death were evident in the CA1 region of hippocampus; and neuronphagia and cell shrinkage occurred in caudate nucleus. These alterations may be related to the nonparalytic motor disturbances occurring early after K. humboldtiana intoxication.

(p6.2) In rats chronically poisoned with the fruit of K. humboldtiana, Becerra-Verdin et al. [73] found chromatolysis in most neurons of the pons nuclei. The corticopontocerebellar tracts presented alterations, which probably caused the chromatolysis seen in their corresponding neurons. Lesions in the pons may cause the equilibrium loss observed before paralysis in intoxicated rats. On the other hand, a loss of Purkinje cells, or alterations in their morphology (retraction, hyperchromasia, pyknosis) were found in some areas of the cerebellar cortex. The terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) reaction was negative, therefore the loss of neurons was not caused by apoptosis. Damage to Purkinje cells causes movement alterations, as those seen in intoxication with K. humboldtiana. Finally, in the cerebral motor cortex, pyramidal internal and external neurons showed characteristics related to ischemia and hypoxia.

(p6.3) Using the same experimental model mentioned in the last paragraph, Díaz-Pérez et al. [74] analyzed the histopathological alterations in the striatum. These authors found hyperchromic neurons, gliosis, and disorganization of the myelin sheaths and neuropil, along with increased axonal diameters. Changes observed may be related to the gait alterations, the weakness, and the paralysis observed in the intoxication caused by K. humboldtiana.
## (s7) Damage to Liver, Lung, and Kidney
(p7.0) As mentioned earlier, copious ingestion of K. humboldtiana fruit causes death within first 48 h by cardiopulmonary arrest without paralysis signs, with extensive damage in several organs, mainly liver, lungs and kidneys [14,42,43].

(p7.1) Acute experimental intoxication of mice with either fruit or isolated toxins T514 or T544 of K. humboldtiana produced gross alterations in liver and lung. In liver, alterations consisted of degeneration of hepatocytes, necrosis of central zone, acute diffuse necrosis, congestion, and hemorrhage. In lungs, vascular congestion and hemorrhage were the principal findings [14].

(p7.2) A single oral preparation of K. humboldtiana fruit was given to rats, guinea-pigs, hamsters, and dogs. Interestingly, there were no clinical or histopathological evidence of damage in dogs. There is currently no explanation for this finding. Curiously, the coyote (Canis latrans), a species close to the dog, can eat the fruit of K. humboldtiana without becoming intoxicated. In fact, one of the common names for the plant is coyotillo [6]. All other species presented the same histopathological pattern. Liver showed sinusoidal congestion and centrilobular necrosis; massive necrosis occurred in some animals. Lungs showed interstitial congestion, edema, and massive hemorrhage. Kidneys depicted interstitial congestion and areas of cloudy swelling of the proximal convoluted tubules. Lesions in the liver and lung were considered as the cause of death of the intoxicated animals [42].

(p7.3) Several studies have attempted to clarify the mechanisms behind the histopathological findings described above. Garza-Ocañas et al. [75] assessed the cytotoxicity of T514 and T544 in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes and keratinocytes. Cytotoxicity was determined by release of LDH (plasma membrane integrity), MTT reduction (mitochondrial metabolic activity), and neutral red (NR) uptake (lysosomal activity). Hepatocytes were more sensitive to both toxins than keratinocytes. T514 was more hepatotoxic than T544. This finding is correlated with in vivo studies, in which T514 was more toxic to liver than T544 [14].

(p7.4) Production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by T514 was analyzed in primary liver cell cultures and microsomes. The protective role of two antioxidant enzymes, catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD), against T514 cytotoxicity was also investigated. Cytotoxicity was determined by the MTT assay. The dichlorofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA) fluorescent probe and the reduction of ferricytochrome c were used as indicators of intracellular ROS. T514 induced the production of ROS in both hepatocytes and microsomes. CAT and SOD had a protective effect in both in vitro systems. It was concluded that T514 leads to the formation of ROS, and that oxidative stress may be a mechanism of cytotoxicity of T514 [76].

(p7.5) T514 injected intraperitoneally induced apoptosis in hepatocytes from mouse. Apoptosis occurred through the intrinsic mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. An increased expression of the pro-apoptotic markers p53, Bax, and Bak was observed, whereas a down regulation of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and the anti-apoptotic molecule Bcl-2 occurred [77].

(p7.6) A single oral dose of ground K. humboldtiana seeds administered to rats resulted in a decrease in blood pressure, along with a marked reduction in renal perfusion pressure. Also, decrements of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), renal plasma flow (RPF), and filtration fraction (FF), and an increment in the fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) were observed. These data suggest that the effect of K. humboldtiana in kidney is both on hemodynamic and epithelial parameters, since GFR, RPF, and FF are dependent on circulatory conditions, whereas FENa is mainly dependent on tubular epithelial function [43].

(p7.7) Using the same experimental model mentioned in the last paragraph, the effect of K. humboldtiana on kidney energetic metabolism was analyzed. In treated rats, the concentration of total proteins in renal tissue and the ATP concentration in renal cortex decreased significantly. Also, concentration of ATP in total blood and hemoglobin decreased significantly. These metabolic alterations might explain, at least partially, the mortality observed in the treated rats [67].

(p7.8) On the other hand, in the liver of rats chronically poisoned with the fruit of K. humboldtiana, García-Garza et al. [78] found necrotic areas, vascular congestion, and vacuoles in the hepatocytes. These pathological findings increased during intoxication phase and decreased in the recovery stage. Thus, in chronic intoxication with K. humboldtiana there is a damage in liver that may be reversible. In experimental chronic intoxication, damage in lung and kidney has also been observed. In lung, García et al. [79] found vascular congestion, fibrosis, and thickening of the alveolar septa by infiltration of mast cells. In kidney, blood vessel congestion, tubular necrosis and fibrosis of renal capsule were observed by light microscopy, while a thickening of the filtration barrier and of renal capsule was identified by electron microscopy [80].
## (s8) Damage to Other Tissues and Organs
(p8.0) Dewan et al. [81] described degeneration of cardiac and skeletal muscles in goats caused by experimental feeding with K. humboldtiana fruit. In heart, some of the animals showed fatty degeneration involving all cardiac fibers, while other exhibited only areas of granular degeneration. Some fibers showed more advanced changes, like a greater eosinophilia of the sarcoplasm, or fragmented sarcoplasm with pyknotic nuclei. In skeletal muscles, alterations were more variable in severity, including vacuolar degeneration, sarcoplasm fragmentation, and proliferation of sarcolemmal nuclei with infiltration of macrophages and lymphocytes.

(p8.1) Carcano-Diaz et al. [82] examined the effects of acute intoxication with the K. humboldtiana fruit on pancreatic tissue of rat. In the exocrine pancreas, damage included a reduction in the number of zymogen granules, presence of autophagy-like vesicles, apoptosis, necrosis, and inflammatory infiltrate, culminating with a complete loss of acinar and lobular architecture. Of note, morphology of the islets of Langerhans was preserved.
## (s9) Damage to Embryo and Fetus
(p9.0) Mouse embryos were exposed in vitro to T544 for 24 h. Alterations observed included encephalic dilatation, swelling and hemorrhage of the mandible, and kinky tail. Furthermore, a significant decrease in protein content was observed [83].

(p9.1) Later, the effect of K. humboldtiana toxins on the developing mouse embryo was analyzed in vivo. At day 8 of gestation, dams were injected intraperitoneally with either T514 or T544. Animals treated with T544 showed a significantly higher incidence of reabsorptions and malformations compared with control groups. Also, fetal crown-rump (CR) length and weight were significantly lower than controls. Malformations observed included lower limb deformities, abdominal evisceration, and exencephaly. The animals treated with T514 did not show significant differences compared with the controls. Thus, T514 had no teratogenic effects, which is important in view of its probable use as antineoplastic agent [84].

(p9.2) In summary, toxins of Karwinskia cause damage mainly to nervous system, liver, lung, kidney, cardiac and skeletal muscles, pancreas, and to embryo and fetus. The pathophysiological mechanism has not been fully understood but includes metabolic and structural alterations that can lead cells to apoptosis or necrosis.
## (s10) Karwinskia as a Potential Antineoplastic Agent
(p10.0) Piñeyro-López et al. [15] analyzed the in vitro effect of T514 upon normal and neoplastic cells derived from liver (hepatoma), lung (adenocarcinoma, undifferentiated bronchogenic carcinoma, squamous cancer cells, small cell carcinoma) and colon (adenocarcinoma) of human origin, and compared the results with those obtained with the known antineoplastic drugs doxorubicin, epidoxorubicin, vincristine, 5-fluorouracil, and mitomycin. For T514, the minimum cytotoxic concentrations (MICC) for normal cells were significantly higher than the maximum cytotoxic concentrations (MACC) for neoplastic cells. In contrast, for the known antineoplastic drugs MICC and MACC were similar for both normal and neoplastic cells. Thus, cells of benign origin were several times more resistant to the action of T514 than those of neoplastic origin. This selective toxicity towards transformed cells suggested than T514 could be used as an anticancer agent.

(p10.1) On the other hand, Sepulveda Saavedra et al. [16] studied the in vivo effect of T514 using the yeasts Hansenula polymorpha and Candida boidinii as model organisms. At sublethal doses (2 µg/mL), T514 caused an irreversible and selective damage of peroxisomes: disruptions appeared in the organelle membrane causing leakage of matrix proteins. Damaged peroxisomes were eliminated by macropexophagy (recently, we found that damaged peroxisomes can also be eliminated by micropexophagy [85]). As mentioned earlier, this was the reason by which T514 was renamed peroxisomicine A1 (PA1). PA2 and T544 produce a similar effect on C. boidinii [86].
