# Pharmacological and pharmacognostical aspect of Prosopis juliflora: A review

CorpusID: 228973335 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/101ec8428beac2b6d09fc3e91803cffb3fd9464b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s4) Wood
(p4.0) The woods of P. juliflora are diffusely porous in its gross structure and are (bark) pale brown in colour when present in dried form. At microscopic level P. juliflora contain fibers (48%), vessels (18%), rays (18%) and axial parenchyma (16%) [13].
## (s5) Leaves
(p5.0) They are bipinnate in nature and have nodes, petiole and rachis (5-20 cm) long. The leaves are medium to large, 10-20 cm long. Leaflets are 8-18 mm long, either elliptic-oblong, linear-oblong or ovate in shape, with pointed apex. Glands are sessile with an apical pore, cuculiform and they are present at the junction of pinnae or the junction of leaflets [14].
## (s8) Phytochemistry
(p8.0) The air-dried leaves of P. juliflora, also known as Velayati Kikar were evaluated for phytoconstituents that are alkaloids, flavonoids, phenols, saponins and tannins [22]. Anti-bacterial, anticancer, anti-inflammatory and antiviral are some pharmacological activities shown only by alkaloids and saponin. P. juliflora or we can say it as mesquite, its different parts such as pods, flowers, leaves, stem and seeds contain a large class of metabolites. Pods and leaves contain a large amount of phytoconstituents as compared to other different parts of P. juliflora [3].

(p8.1) In the year 2012 Singh perform the phytochemical analysis on leaves, pod, flower, root and stem of P. juliflora and found the presence of various phytochemicals in varying concentrations in different parts. Phytochemical analysis revealed that the pods and leaf show the presence of alkaloids, steroids, terpenoids, flavonoids, tannins and phenolics. The flower extract shows the presence of alkaloids, steroids, terpenoids, flavonoids and phenolics. Also stem shows minimum concentration of compounds like phenolics, terpenes, flavonoids and steroids, while roots extracts show the presence of phenolics, tannins, flavonoids, steroids, alkaloids, terpenes and saponin. Phlobatannin and cardiac glycoside are absent in all parts of the plant, whereas saponin is only found in roots [23].
## (s16) Antimalarial activity
(p16.0) Due to the development of resistance to some antimalarial drugs that are used to treat malaria and fever, numerous plants have been examined for in-vitro antiplasmodial activity which are used traditionally to treat malaria. According to a study by Simonsen et al., P juliflora ethanolic extracts from flower and fruit showed an IC50 value of 24 µg/ml and posses good antiplasmodial activity [53]. In another study, in-vivo antimalarial potential has also been evaluated in the formate salts of julifloridine and juliprosopine isolated from P. juliflora and compared with chloroquine. Juliprosopine was found to be more potent at 2 mg/kg as compared to chloroquine at 50 mg/kg [54]. 
## (s21) Antimicrobial activity
(p21.0) P. juliflora crude extracts, alkaloid-enriched fraction and isolated alkaloid was explained by dos santos et al. that was evaluated for antimicrobial potential by in-vitro methods. In 1999, Satish et al. described the potential use to combat microorganisms in crop plants and Caceres et al., studied the treatment of gonorrhea by using tincture of P. juliflora. For that plant material was macerated in 50% alcohol and the tincture tested for in-vitro activity by measuring the inhibition zone. The leaf extract or tincture showed 9.6 mm of inhibition which was maximum and most active against Neisseria gonorrhoeae (Isolated from symptomatic patient) [61]. Besides the studies on microorganisms that affect humans, Satish et al. found that antibacterial property was only found in the aqueous extracts of P. juliflora, Lawsonia inermis and Oxalis corniculata. P. juliflora leaves have antibacterial activity against various Xanthomonas sp. (inhibition zone of 18-23 mm) comparable to bacterimycin and streptocycline and manage diseases in several crops [62]. In 2013, dos santos et al. described in-vitro antimicrobial activity to evaluate pods of P. juliflora as feed additives for ruminants which contain alkaloid enriched fraction for study. Chloroform extract of P. juliflora pods contains alkaloids which have invitro antimicrobial activity against Micrococcus luteus (MIC = 25 µg/ml), Staphylococcus aureus (MIC = 50 µg/ml) and Streptococcus mutans (MIC = 50 µg/ ml) and gas production have been evaluated with monensin as the positive control.
## (s24) Antipustule activity
(p24.0) Pimple eradication is the hot core and important task for research in the cosmetic sector. They occur due to growth of Staphylococcus species whose biomass swells and develops as a pimple. Acetone extract of P. juliflora have anti-pustule activity which inhibit staphylococcus sp. that was explained by using well diffusion method. Rajadurai et al., found the minimum inhibitory concentration of acetone extract of P. juliflora and it was 0.75 mg/ml. FTIR was done to confirm the functional group and growth curve analysis was done for the determination of inhibitory action of acetone extract. The extract when used with synthetic creams increase the anti-pustule activity because with the extract the activity was increased and chances of skin blackening, itching of skin and damage of tissue due to synthetic creams are decreased [68].
## (s26) Cholinesterase inhibitory activity
(p26.0) Choudhary et al. investigated that P. juliflora contains alkaloids such as juliflorine which inhibit acetylcholinesterase and butyryl cholinesterase in non-competitive manner with IC50 value 0.42 and 0.12 µM and Ki values 0.4 and 0.1 µM respectively. It was also confirmed by molecular docking in which the alkaloid interacts with the active site of acetylcholinesterase and it also blocks calcium channels. It was confirmed by human neutrophils viability assay which make juliflorine as an interesting alkaloid for Alzheimer diseases. Juliflorine also showed dose dependent (30-500 µg/ml) spasmolytic and calcium channel blocking activity in isolated jejunum of rabbit [48].
## (s27) Anti-inflammatory activity
(p27.0) The study was designed by Choudhary and Nagori, to phytochemically screen the anti-inflammatory potency of the ethanolic extract of P. juliflora leaves (100, 200 and 400 mg/kg) against carrageenan induced paw edema in rats. The phytochemical screening showed that flavonoids, saponins, carbohydrates, cardiac glycosides, tannins, and alkaloids are present in ethanolic extract of P. juliflora leaves. The oral median lethal dose (LD) of ethanolic extract was found to be 3807.9 mg/kg and > 5000 mg/kg in mice and rats respectively. The extract of P. juliflora shows highest activity at a dose of 400 mg/kg at which paw edema is attenuated. This study has been supported the traditional belief that P. juliflora used in the management of inflammations [70].
## (s28) Toxicity studies
(p28.0) Toxicity refers to the harmful interaction between chemicals and biological systems. A toxicant is any substance that has harmful effects on a living system. P. juliflora or mesquite or algarroba parts are used by both animals as well as by human beings due to their beneficial effects. But sometimes due to consumption, intoxication is seen in animals, mainly in ruminant animals (in USA, Peru, Brazil). Mesquite is a very common plant in dry areas and easily available but the reports showed that it also causes animal poisoning due to the consumption of pods [71]. A disease known as "Caratorta" is most common in the ruminant animals specially in goats and cattle. In this the lateral deviation of the head occurs due to cranial nerve dysfunction, degeneration and disappearance of neurons in the trigeminal motor nucleus which perform to keep food in the mouth during mastication. This disease occurs only in those animals which eat P. juliflora pods for 8 months or more [29,71]. Also, other clinical signs during rumination are seen like dysphagia, incoordination of chewing movements, atrophy, dysphagia and profuse salivation of the masseter muscle in animals, ruminal atony, anemia, submandibular edema and progressive weight loss [72]. All the symptoms result in degradation of brain flora like neuromuscular alteration, histologic lesions like spongiosis, gliosis, the loss of Nissl granules, fine vacuolation of the perikaryon of neurons from trigeminal motor nuclei and finally which results in the degeneration and disappearance of neuronal cells in the trigeminal motor nucleus [72,73].

(p28.1) A toxicity study was performed by Silva et al. on P. juliflora plant which leads to the isolation, purification, identification of juliprosopina and juliprosinene from the mixture of alkaloids. The study shows that piperidine alkaloids show toxicity in laboratory animals because they act directly on neural cells causing intracellular impairments, principally to mitochondria. Neural cell cultures technique was used to understand the main cellular alterations seen in "cara torta" disease and the mechanism of action of piperidine alkaloids which is the main neurotoxic compound in P. juliflora leaves and pods. This study showed that autophagy shows protective mechanisms for neural cells against programmed cell death started by mitochondrial damage [74].

(p28.2) P. juliflora also induces glial cell activation, cytotoxicity and NO production and this was explained by using rat astrocyte culture medium. The culture was treated with the total alkaloid extract of P. juliflora leaves and its chromatographic fractions to understand the direct effect of these metabolites and the toxicity. LDH activity and MTT test was done to reveal that TAE and other alkaloids fractions in culture medium were cytotoxic to astrocytes or vice versa [75].
