# materials Influence of Design Parameters on Fresh Properties of Self-Compacting Concrete with Recycled Aggregate-A Review

CorpusID: 229324604 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd4112e6581effd42d38de9b09a13610a3a03d89](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd4112e6581effd42d38de9b09a13610a3a03d89)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s1) Material Properties of SCC Ingredients
(p1.0) The origin of SCC can be diverse, but there is a definite role of ingredient properties on the SCC fresh concrete properties. Hence, it is necessary to understand the properties of ingredients used in SCC. Tuyan et al. [14] used a laboratory-made aggregate from concrete waste, crushed with a jaw crusher. Pereira et al. [32] used two types of RA from a C&DW recycling plant. Señas et al. [49] used an RA from construction sites. The material was crushed with a jaw crusher. It was sieved to achieve a size similar to that of NCA and washed before adding it to the SCC. Duan et al. [67] used an RA from a C&DW recycling plant. The fine fraction was obtained by further grinding the RCA. Tang et al. [68] used an RA of unwashed, crushed concrete from a C&DW waste recycling plant. The aggregates were immersed in water 24 h before and air-dried for 1 h before adding them to the concrete.

(p1.1) In Djelloul et al. [69], the RA were obtained by crushing 1 m × 1 m concrete slabs with a thickness of 10 cm, manufactured in the laboratory, and kept for 28 days in water. They were first subjected to manual crushing and later with a mechanical crusher. Sasanipour et al. [56] used laboratory crushed concrete aggregates. They were first crushed with a small machine to produce RCA and then manually crushed using a hammer to produce the RFA. Aslani et al. [70] used aggregates that came from the demolition of buildings and concrete infrastructures. The rubber aggregates were obtained from the mechanical grinding of tires at the end of their useful life. Ouldkhaoua et al. [45] used metakaolin as obtained from the calcination of kaolin. Nieto [71] used an aggregate from crushed structural concrete. Dapena [72] used RA from structural concrete, crushing plants with a strength between 15 and 35 MPa.

(p1.2) The average value of ingredients used for SCC other than RA by various researchers is tabulated in Table 1. It is observed that the average specific gravity is obtained as 3.108. Specific gravity for fine and coarse aggregate investigated by several authors are 2.651 and 2.646. From Tables 1 and 2, it is observed that the physical properties of natural aggregate are higher than that of the RA due to old mortar adhering to it. The specific gravity of RA is lower than that of natural aggregate and is observed by most researchers, this leads to a density of RCA mixture as it it lower than that of the natural aggregate mixture. Higher water absorption of RA is observed from Table 2 when compared to  Table 1 and it is reported by most authors.  RA size investigated by most researchers less than 16 mm is observed in Table 2. It is also observed that the specific gravity and bulk density are lesser than natural aggregate. And also, higher water absorption than natural aggregate with an inconsistent form of fineness modulus of RA is noted. The quality and quantity of cement paste adhering to the surface RA affects the properties of it [15,32]. Accordingly, the RA has a lower density, higher water absorption, and lower mechanical strength properties [15]. From Table 2 and in past studies it can be observed that the density of RA is lower than that of natural aggregate due to the coating of cement paste on the surface of RA. This excess amount of cement paste results in an increase in the water absorption capacity of RA [15,32]. Coarse aggregate particle size is largely a result of the adhering of excess cement paste on it when compared to fine aggregate. Hence, most researchers have used an RCA size less than 16 mm. Coarser RCA shows a more negative effect than finer RFA [77][78][79]. To achieve the same workability compared to control concrete, concrete with RA requires a greater quantity of water due to the presence of excess cement paste [78]. This result in a higher water to binder ratio leads to the formation of more porosity in RA concrete and reduction in durability properties. Hence, usage of mineral admixtures may reduce this effect, since they provide the same workability to the mixture without increasing the water to binder ratio [15].

(p1.3) Salesa et al. [6] observed that the introduction of RCA in SCC leads to drops in fresh concrete properties [6]. This drop in fresh concrete property is due to two factors influenced by RCA. Firstly, RCA has a greater surface roughness to react and secondly, RCA has more fine particles adhering to the surface than natural aggregates and because of this they required more water to achieve similar fresh concrete properties.

(p1.4) Zhang et al., 2016 [80] observed that old ITZ in RCA did not develop with an increase in curing time, irrespective of surface treatment on RCA using nanomaterials (nano silica + nano calcium slurries or cement + nano silica slurries). Nanomaterials are not able to infiltrate into old ITZ to react with a few unhydrated particles present in it. New ITZs formed in RCA (surface treated by nano materials) were enhanced significantly. ITZ improvement is directly related to the elastic modulus of that particular ITZ. Old mortar adhering to RCA was surface-strengthened by nano surface treatment, resulting in enhanced RCA properties (water absorption, crushing value apparent density).
## (s2) Mix Design
(p2.0) The development of the SCC reference mix based on the strength achieved at 28 days as the average value of authors are shown in Table 3. Dosages of ingredients without RA as proposed by several authors are compiled for the production of control SCC in order to identify the range of ingredients required for it. It is also observed that the unit weight of the mix is found to be less than the standard weight of concrete. The proportion of coarse aggregate to total aggregate from the reference mix is 0.477, which is suitable for SCC as prescribed by subsequent mixes by several authors. Design constants for control mix from Table 3 are water to binder ratio as 0.34, water to powder ratio as 0.26, % of SP as 0.94%, % of SCM as 0.5, and filler to binder ratio as 0.29. Table 3. Average of reference mix proportions (control mix in weight basis) used by several authors from 2010-2020. We have selected the most representative studies of the use of SCC concrete with RA published in recent years and summarized in three tables (Tables 4-6) based on the weight basis of ingredients.   Tuyan et al., 2014 [14] design four types of mixes with substitutions of 0%, 20%, 40%, and 60% of NCA with RCA. The cement was class C with a content of 315 kg/m 3 . Three W/C ratios are used, 0.62, 0.69, and 0.76. The SP content was adjusted about the percentage of replacement from 0.95% to 1.97% of the cement weight. The water absorption of the RA was 4.80%.
## (s10) Effect of Water to Powder Ratio on Fresh Concrete Properties
(p10.0) Safiuddin et al. [33] reported that the increase in incorporation ratio results in increased segregation resistance up to lower replacement levels of NCA. For higher replacement levels of NCA, the segregation resistance decreases because the increase in RCA content leads to an increase in the fineness content of the mixture. Grdic et al. [94] found that the increase in RCA content leads to an increase in the W/C ratio, resulting in a decrease in segregation resistance.
