# cells Protein Glycosylation Investigated by Mass Spectrometry: An Overview

CorpusID: 221467059 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75aeb5dd6890e6a732241f65f63fd30fb6708b3a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75aeb5dd6890e6a732241f65f63fd30fb6708b3a)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s3) Immunity and Inflammation
(p3.0) Immune system cells express glycoproteins and glycolipids associated with the cell surface able to detect environmental signals and modulate the adaptive immune response. A comprehensive review must deal with the antigenic role of glycoproteins, glycoconjugates, polysaccharides, or glycolipids as components of T-cell epitopes or toward their presentation by major histocompatibility complex (MHC) pathways on antigen-presenting cells [37]. Glycopeptides can bind to MHC molecules and to specifically stimulate T-cells thanks to their glycosylated portion, suggesting the structural importance of carbohydrate moiety for the T-cell stimulation and of the amino acid sequence to be allocated within a closed binding groove of MHC-I or MHC-II, in agreement with the length of peptide [38].
## (s6) Sample Preparation: Pre-MS Analysis for Glycoproteomics
(p6.0) The bottom-up proteomics studies provide the use of simple protocols of in solution or in situ digestion to release peptides from proteins to be submitted to the MS analysis. This approach enables the detection of a wide plethora of peptides mainly free from any variable modifications, such as phosphorylation or glycosylation, for the higher ionization efficiency in comparison to the modified peptides. Actually, an increase of the negative charge and the acidity of the phosphorylated or glycosylated peptides affects their ionization efficiency. This event clearly speculates that the MS signals of phosphorylated and glycosylated peptides undergo an effect of ion suppression due to the competition with a much higher number of non-modified peptide counterpart displaying a more intense ion current.

(p6.1) Many methods have been developed during the last decades to overcome the challenges associated to the glycoproteome analysis mainly based on mass spectrometry. The most widely used approach to characterize glycosylation involves the enzymatic or chemical cleavage of glycans from glycoprotein, followed by purification steps previous in the MS analysis. This method is limited exclusively to the glycoproteins with one glycosylation site, because it is unable to correlate glycan composition with the different glycosylation sites. This limitation can be overcome using another approach based on the characterization of intact glycopeptides released by glycoprotein proteolysis. Thus, the glycan composition can be correctly correlated to the glycosylation site of specific glycopeptides by using this approach referred to as 'a glycosylation site-specific analysis'. The information obtained in a site-specific manner can be extremely important in correlating glycosylation profiles with specific glycosylation sites, which is useful in understanding structure-function relationships [92,93].

(p6.2) Numerous protocols are now effective for the highly sensitive characterization of broad glycans by MS analysis [94]. Figure 2 summarizes the main stages of sample preparation combined with the MS analysis. The most used protocols for biological samples provide the enrichment and purification of glycopeptides by using different molecular mechanisms. To overcome ionization difficulties and to prevent the suppression of the glycopeptide signal from the non-modified peptides in complex mixtures, it is possible to combine several purification methods. One of the most common methods for purifying glycopeptides before MS analysis is reverse phase purification (RP) on the high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. This method provides a separation of the various glycopeptides based on their different amino acid sequence since the retention mechanism is governed by the hydrophobicity of peptide portion [95]. The techniques that could be combined with RP-HPLC include purification strategies based on hydrazine resins, lectin affinity chromatography, carbohydrate-based gels such as cellulose or sepharose, and gel filtration, or size exclusion chromatography (Figure 2).
## (s7) Glycans and Glycopeptides Characterization by MALDI-MS or LC-MS/MS
(p7.0) The analysis of glycans or glycopeptides has always been very challenging due to the limited quantities that are released from glycoproteins. Since the structure of a glycan may depend on the expression, activity, and accessibility of the different biosynthetic enzymes, it is not possible to use recombinant DNA technology in order to produce large quantities of glycans for structural and functional studies as it is for proteins. Mass spectrometry could be a valuable tool for their characterization thanks to high sensitivity and selectivity. MALDI-MS is an effective technique for N-glycan analysis of simple or complex matrices such as recently reported [105,106]. Amoresano et al. published a glycoproteomic characterization of human sera from healthy donors and patients affected by myocarditis for the identification of glycoproteins (even the least abundant), including the location of N-glycosylation sites and the profile of glycans present [107]. The strategy was simply based on the proteolytic digestion of serum proteins followed by a single enrichment step of glycopeptides by affinity chromatography using ConA lectin. The glycopeptides were then deglycosylated by treatment with PNGase-F and the free peptides analyzed by nano-LC/MSMS, which allowed both the identification of the individual proteins and the elucidation of their modification sites. Profiles of oligosaccharides released by MALDI-TOF (time of flight) were also obtained.

(p7.1) The glycans profile is obtained by MALDI-TOF analysis of the intact glycan mixture and the attribution of the different structures is carried out by checking the molecular weight and the knowledge of molecular pathways for the biosynthesis of oligosaccharides. However, this approach is useful in glycoforms profiling, but nevertheless it does not provide structural information such as sugar anomericity, neither on glycans site-specificity. To obtain this type of information, the combination of a profile by MALDI-TOF, with experiments of tandem mass spectrometry by post-source decay (PSD) or collision-induced dissociation (CID), is generally required [108]. The LC-MS/MS of whole glycopeptides provide, instead, more information about the site-specificity of glycans.
## (s9) Conclusions
(p9.0) The extensive literature on protein glycosylation reveals numerous examples in which these post-translational modifications play essential roles in the events of biological recognition, signaling and cell-cell communication. In fact, oligosaccharide structures perform crucial functions throughout the cell: in the cytosol, on the cell surface, in the secretory compartments, and in the extracellular space. Among the many roles that glycans play on the cell surface, the importance of specific glycosylated forms of the protein domain to facilitate or modulate biological recognition events has been highlighted. Therefore, the knowledge of the diversity of the structures of glycans becomes a further level of information content in the understanding of biological systems, laying the foundations for the greatest challenge of the near future, that is, identifying the critical contexts in which the functions of the glycans contribute to the biological regulation of the inside the surprisingly large array of heterogeneous glycan structures.

(p9.1) As widely described in this review, recent advances in qualitative and quantitative analytical strategies based on the use of mass spectrometry provide the necessary breadth, depth, and sensitivity of the analysis to define the entire spectrum of the complexity of glycan in various biological contexts. The continuous high-performance adaptations of these methodologies enable the collection of essential structural datasets to reveal the mechanisms in the biosynthetic pathway regulation, to define unique glycan signatures for pathological states and to provide correlations between structure and biological functions.

(p9.2) In this way, by increasing the ability to decode the numerous functions of glycoprotein or glycans in complex biological systems, the development of new therapeutic approaches, such as vaccines or targeted pharmacotherapies, is encouraged. Although technological progress in the field of targeted mass spectrometry has made great strides in the recognition of specific glycan structures, future studies are necessary for the realization of standardized methodologies that can be used in common clinical and diagnostic practice.

(p9.3) With the improvement and evolution of MS technology and sample preparation techniques, these types of test will play a more important role in the quantification of glycoproteins. In a futuristic scenario, to build high-performance platforms for the verification of cancer-exclusive glycoforms, these MRM-MS assays could be associated with methods to enrich robotic immunoaffinity [162,163].
