# Are eastern and western monarch butterflies distinct populations? A review of evidence for ecological, phenotypic, and genetic differentiation and implications for conservation

CorpusID: 224883795 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f342daf118c64948ffde2cc4fa126e25b222c7c7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f342daf118c64948ffde2cc4fa126e25b222c7c7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s4) Population genetics
(p4.0) Researchers have been investigating the potential for genetic differentiation between eastern and western monarchs since at least 1991. As early as 1995, researchers cautioned against human-assisted movement of eastern and western monarchs across the continental divide, in part because of the perceived risk of gene flow potentially disrupting patterns of local adaptation (Brower et al. 1995). The current consensus-developed over the last eight years and with the advent of novel sequencing methods-is that there is a lack of genetic differentiation between eastern and western monarchs.
## (s8) Adaptive capacity in non-migratory monarch populations around the world
(p8.0) A number of recent studies have addressed the question of adaptive capacity in nonmigratory monarchs.  found that non-migratory monarch populations from Queensland retain migration-associated traits such as induction of reproductive diapause, suggesting that the loss of migration may be due to a lack of relevant seasonal cues, rather than an inability to sense and/or integrate those cues. However, two recent studies (Tenger -Trolander et al. 2019; Tenger-Trolander and Kronforst 2020) found that commercially-reared monarchs whose breeding history precludes seasonal migration can lose their ability to consistently directionally orient, a critical part of their ability to complete migration. These studies suggest that some aspects of monarch migration are phenotypically plastic and may be shielded from selection and maintained in non-migratory populations, while other migration-associated traits might be selected against and lost. Freedman et al. (2020) also found that non-migratory monarch populations from Pacific Islands and Puerto Rico developed more slowly and were smaller as adults than their North American ancestors, potentially suggesting a general loss of vigor in these populations. Finally, non-migratory monarch populations tend to have high prevalence and abundance of infection with OE (Altizer et al. 2000, Bartel et al. 2011, Satterfield et al. 2015. Despite having greater tolerance and resistance to OE, non-migratory populations' parasite loads may render them less capable of completing long-distance flights (Bradley and Altizer 2005), thus generating a positive feedback loop of infection and non-migratory status (Faldyn et al. 2018). Together, these results call into question the notion that derived non-migratory monarch populations are adequate stand-ins for their migratory North American ancestors if the goal is to conserve functional genetic diversity.
## (s9) Conclusions
(p9.0) Eastern and western monarchs are geographically and demographically distinct, though there is only modest evidence for phenotypic differentiation and no current evidence for genetic differentiation between them. In response to declining numbers of overwintering monarchs, many western states have proposed their own conservation measures. where do these monarchs go, what host plants do their offspring utilize, and how sensitive is the timing of this process to temperature and precipitation conditions? Furthermore, the role of non-native milkweed plantings, whose phenology differs from those of native milkweed species, should be investigated as a potential contributor to the decline of overwintering western monarchs. This line of research could include comparisons of cardenolide fingerprints (e.g. Malcolm et al. 1989, Knight and Brower 2009, Satterfield et al. 2018) of western monarchs through time to determine whether non-native milkweeds have become more prevalent, as well as community science initiatives to document the prevalence of non-native host use in areas near overwintering sites.

(p9.1) Policy-makers who are considering how to contextualize the decline of western monarchs will need to decide whether to adopt a parsimonious or precautionary approach in their decisionmaking. A parsimonious approach based on presently available genetic data would suggest that western monarchs do not constitute a distinct population: at present, there are no diagnostic criteria that could reliably be used to distinguish an eastern from a western monarch. A precautionary approach would recognize the potential for western monarchs to provide adaptive capacity and would involve treating the two populations as distinct based on their phenotypic and demographic differences. In the meantime, there is a clear role for scientists to collect additional data to resolve the somewhat mysterious discrepancy between phenotypic and genotypic patterns in North American monarch butterflies.
