# Dexamethasone for the Treatment of Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) : a Review

CorpusID: 226202406 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c5332cc89aa43a2d2805bd2938cb22b7c879c6e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c5332cc89aa43a2d2805bd2938cb22b7c879c6e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Corticosteroids/Dexamethasone
(p3.0) Corticosteroid drugs are a class of synthetic steroid hormones that are produced in the adrenal cortex in healthy individuals. Corticosteroids include glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids; they are used to treat a wide range of diseases and symptoms [26]. Dexamethasone is a steroid compound, belonging to the corticosteroid class (more precisely a glucocorticoid). It is used in the treatment of numerous conditions, including chronic obstructive lung disease, severe allergies, rheumatic problems, asthma, several skin conditions, brain swelling and alongside antibiotics in tuberculosis (https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm. nih.gov/compound/Dexamethasone).
## (s5) Mechanism of Action
(p5.0) The mechanism of action of dexamethasone depends on the dose used: the genomic (in the case of low doses) and nongenomic mechanisms (with high doses of dexamethasone). Most effects of dexamethasone are via the genomic mechanism which require a longer period, whereas dexamethasone effects through the non-genomic mechanism occur more rapidly, at the risk of more side effects [33,34].
## (s6) I-Genomic Mechanisms
(p6.0) Being small, lipophilic substances, dexamethasone can easily pass through the cell membrane by diffusion and enter the cytoplasm of the target cells and proceed by binding to glucocorticoid receptors in the cytoplasm.

(p6.1) Dexamethasone binds to the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) on the cell membrane (Fig. 3), and the formation of this complex leads to translocation of the corticosteroid into the cell, where it travels to the nucleus. Here, it reversibly binds to several specific DNA sites resulting in stimulation (transactivation) and suppression (transrepression) of a large variety of gene transcription [36]. It can inhibit the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin IL-1, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, TNF, IFN-gamma, VEGF and prostaglandins [33,37]. Importantly, five of these are linked to SARS-CoV-2 severity [38]. At the same time, it can also induce the synthesis of glucocorticoid response element resulting in the activation of anti-inflammatory cytokine synthesis, notably IL-10 and lipocortin-1.
## (s7) II-Non-Genomic Mechanisms
(p7.0) At high doses of the medication, dexamethasone binds to the membrane-associated GR on cells, such as T lymphocytes, resulting in the impairment of receptor signalling and a T lymphocyte-mediated immune response [39]. The glucocorticoid receptor combines to integrins, leading to the activation of FAK (focal adhesion kinase) (Fig. 3). As well as that, a high dose of dexamethasone also interacts with the movement of Ca +2 and Na +1 across the cell membrane, resulting in a rapid decrease in inflammation [40].
