# Battery Energy Storage Systems in the United Kingdom: A Review of Current State-of-the-Art and Future Applications

CorpusID: 221700653 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/638ec24c0da40543adc0122ff8aa2027f1cb13f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/638ec24c0da40543adc0122ff8aa2027f1cb13f6)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Modern power systems are characterised by an ever-increasing proliferation and penetration of distributed energy resources (DERs), which have been causing a transition from centralised to decentralised energy generation. More recently, electric vehicles (EVs) have been introduced, thus resulting in added demand, but also increased flexibility to the load patterns [1].

(p0.1) However, the adoption of these technologies does not come without consequences, since various technical and economical issues arise due to their operation. One issue is the difficulty to maintain power balance between electricity generation and consumption, which, in contrast to large-scale centralised generation using fossil-fuel based power plants, in modern electricity systems becomes more challenging to achieve due to the inherent intermittency of renewable energy sources (RESs) [2].

(p0.2) Another difficulty is related to voltage regulation. For example, during periods of high photovoltaic (PV) generation and low demand, the reverse power flow occurring upstream of the PV units results in overvoltages at different nodes, thus increasing the number of operations of switched shunt capacitor banks, load tap changers and line voltage regulators, and consequently reducing their life expectancy [3,4].

(p0.3) Thirdly, these power electronics-based sources deteriorate the power quality of the grid, due to the injection of harmonic components [5,6]. Finally, an increasing concern of system operators is the decrease in system inertia associated to the retirement of fossil-based plants [7]. of DERs are installed at the distribution system, thus making demand response management more challenging at low voltages and justifying the connection of the battery units.

(p0.4) Regarding the battery technology, lithium-ion is the most deployed, followed by the more mature technology of lead-acid, whereas three of the projects differentiate from this trend, featuring the technologies of Li-ion titanate, vanadium redox flow (VRF) and sodium-nickel-chloride [32,33]. A description of the characteristics of each technology will be given in Section 3.
## (s2) BESS Technologies
(p2.0) For power system applications two parameters are commonly used to characterise BESS units. The first is the power capability (W), shown in Table A1, corresponding to the rate at which energy can be transferred to or from the battery (this quantity is also referred to as "rated power flow"). The second is the amount of energy that can be stored in the device, or capacity (Wh). These two parameters are not independent of each other: optimising the design in terms of power-to-energy ratio to meet the needs of a specific application (power or energy) leads to more cost-effective solutions [37].

(p2.1) Both characteristics depend on the battery chemistry, and therefore as part of this literature review, the most popular BESS technologies are presented. While a large variety of technologies for rechargeable batteries are available for grid applications, this paper will focus on the ones deployed for the projects presented in Table A1: lead-acid, lithium-ion, sodium nickel chloride and vanadium redox flow.

(p2.2) In the following sections, a brief description of the operating principle of each technology is given. This is followed by a review of the advantages, disadvantages and limitations, while the main research trends, gaps and future developments for each technology are identified.
## (s3) Lead-Acid
(p3.0) The structure of a lead-acid battery is given in Figure 1. It consists of a positive and a negative electrode, which contain a lead dioxide (P b O 2 ) and a spongy lead (P b ) respectively, with both electrodes immersed in an aqueous sulphuric acid electrolyte (H 2 SO 4 ) [38]. The two most common types of lead-acid batteries in the market are the vented lead-acid (VLA) and the valve regulated lead-acid (VRLA) [1]. Compared to other battery technologies, lead-acid is the oldest and most mature, featuring low cost due to its widespread application [39,40]. In case of cost-sensitive applications, in which low energy density and limited life cycle are not an issue, while there is demand for roughness and tolerance against misuse, lead-acid batteries are dominating [1]. Additionally, they constitute a good solution for use as backup power source, since their characteristics of long-life and low-cost suit these application, where low duty cycle is required [41].

(p3.1) In addition to the low cost-to-performance ratio, lead-acid batteries present some other advantageous characteristics such as high voltage per cell, good capacity life, acceptable performance at room temperatures and good life cycle under measured conditions [42]. Furthermore, their charging technology is relatively simple, the maintenance requirements are low and they are characterised by large storage capacity [8,43]. Besides, they are spill-proof and easy to transport [44]. Other advantages include: fast response time, small daily self-discharge rate and moderate efficiency, which is higher in advanced designs such as the ones described in [10,45,46].
## (s6) Sodium Nickel Chloride
(p6.0) The sodium nickel chloride (NaNiCl 2 ), also known as "Zebra" battery, belongs to the broader family of high temperature batteries, operated at temperatures between 280 • C and 350 • C. The ionic conductibility of their ceramic electrolyte increases with temperature, which also justifies why the anode and cathode are in molten state during their operation [64]. Figure 4 shows the typical configuration of a NaNiCl 2 battery. The cathode consists mainly of nickel (Ni) and sodium chloride (NaCl) and the anode is made of sodium (Na). The electrodes are separated by a beta-alumina ceramic wall [38,45].  NaNiCl 2 batteries are characterised by high energy density, they present long life cycle and are practically maintenance-free [8]. Due to the characteristics of long life cycle, long discharge time and fast response, they are well suited to applications that engage bulk energy storage such as the ones within transmission systems, railway transportation and large renewable energy plants [44]. This claim is further expanded in [64], where the high suitability and compatibility of the electrical characteristic of this battery (e.g., its volumetric and gravimetric energy densities) with large-scale stationary storage is highlighted. Compared to the nickel cadmium (Ni-Cd) and nickel metal hydride (Ni-MH), they feature higher efficiency, in the range of 90% [42].

(p6.1) Compared to other types of high temperature batteries, they possess inherent overcharge capabilities and lower operation temperatures. In addition, their power-to-energy-ratio is flexible, and their cooling to ambient temperatures does not cause damage to their components [38].
## (s10) Ancillary Services Provided by BESSs in Power Systems
(p10.0) This section will provide a description of the most common ancillary services provided by BESS projects in the UK, and presented in Table 1. To this end, different sources have been utilised, including databases and peer-reviewed academic publications. These were supplemented by grey literature, i.e., technical reports and white papers from agencies, research and development laboratories and organisations and private companies, since grey literature features up-to-date research knowledge on the topic of battery energy storage, which constitutes a fast-paced industry.

(p10.1) Based on the existing literature, the terminology used for ancillary services and their classification varies broadly [69]. A commonly employed approach to classify these services is based on the power rating of the system and the discharge time [70]. Under this approach, services are divided into power and energy applications, depending on if their discharge duration is less or more than 30 min respectively [67,71,72].

(p10.2) In this paper, an alternative approach is adopted, based on the work presented in [11], because it is deemed more appropriate to categorise the ancillary services provided by BESSs in the UK Therefore, ancillary services are divided in four families:

(p10.3) • Short-term (system enhancement): to ensure the stability, robust operation and reliability of the electrical grid via the provision of rapid-response services, responding to small-time scale (seconds to several minutes) fluctuations in generation and demand. • Customer energy management: to enhance the power quality of a specific part of the grid by mitigating short-term power delivery issues, e.g., supply interruptions and voltage dips. Long-term (bulk energy): to boost the system's efficiency and reduce the electricity costs by providing services that operate over a long period of time, which can be several hours.
## (s11) •
(p11.0) Renewable energy integration: to enhance the energy-efficient and cost-effective penetration and operation of RESs into the grid. This can be achieved by smoothing the output and control the ramp rate of RESs in order to eliminate rapid voltage and power swings on the grid. Since this paper is focused on the UK, where RESs are gradually overtaking the coal-fired generation, it seems reasonable to consider the renewable energy related applications as a distinct family of applications [1]. Figure 5 illustrates the four main families of ancillary services listed above. For simplicity, each one of the ancillary services listed in Table 1 is associated to one family, although the authors recognise that some services could have been associated to more than a family.  In the following sections, a more detailed description of each application family and of the corresponding services is provided.
## (s24) Renewable Energy Integration Applications
(p24.0) In this family of applications, a BESS is used with the aim of facilitating the integration of RESs and ensure their smooth operation. These applications are similar to other ones used for more general purposes, however, in this paper a different category is created to highlight that BESSs can be beneficial to renewable resources integration.

(p24.1) Renewable energy integration applications considered in this section are: renewable capacity firming and time-shifting [11]. In this section, only capacity firming is described, since time-shifting has been already described in another subsection (i.e., Section 4.2.1). Both applications are shown in Figure 5.
## (s26) Customer Energy Management Applications
(p26.0) This group of applications refers to the utilisation of BESSs to deliver power to the customer in a reliable manner and in accordance with power quality standards. In addition, the storage units can offer services that create economic benefits for both costumers as well as system operators and utilities [1]. The three main services that fall into this category of applications are explained in the next sections.
## (s33) Enhancement of Distribution System Resilience
(p33.0) As defined in [91], resilience is "the ability to prepare for and adapt to changing conditions and withstand and recover rapidly from disruptions. Resilience includes the ability to withstand and recover from deliberate attacks, accidents, or naturally occurring threats or incidents". In this context, there is an increasing research focus on the utilisation of DERs with the aim of boosting the resilience of the distribution grid, which has been reflected in many recent literature works.

(p33.1) More specifically, [91] presents a resilience-based design approach for a VRF-based BESS in advanced distribution grids, showing that improved selection of its power-to-energy ratio leads to improved resilience. The paper includes the collection of actual hardware-characterised dynamic data, thus describing an accurate response of the BESS.

(p33.2) In [92], the concept of transportable energy storage systems (TESSs) is presented. This research is the first one to consider the joint scheduling of TESSs and network reconfiguration with MGs to restore the operation of the distribution system after the occurrence of a black out. The developed model, which is tested in a modified 33-bus test system, shows that the resiliency of the distribution system with TESSs is improved compared with conventional ESSs, since a reduction in the total system cost is achieved.

(p33.3) In [93], the equivalent term of mobile energy storage systems (MESSs) is used. The units can be moved and connected at different system buses by the use of a truck and provide various localised services. The paper proposes a day-ahead energy management system (EMS) for a MESS so that the distribution network operator (DNO) minimises the day-ahead cost of the power imported from the grid, while the unit provides voltage regulation at the same time. Although the specific research work is not directly linked to the enhancement of resilience, it shows the potential of the MESSs to provide multiple benefits for the grid.

(p33.4) Finally, [94] highlights the contribution of strategically-placed MESSs and timely disaster forecast to the prevention or mitigation of critical failures in the grid. This paper develops an optimisation model, which identifies the economically optimal location for the battery units during normal operation. The installed units are then moved between different buses to form dynamic MGs and to prevent load shedding during disasters. The paper shows that this approach results in the reduction of the operating costs and the amount of load shedding that is caused by natural disasters, compared to the cases where stationary energy storage units or no energy storage units are deployed.

(p33.5) The aforementioned research works highlight the central role that BESSs are expected to hold in terms of maintaining the robustness and resilience of the future distribution networks. Mobile BESSs seem to gain significant attraction due to their advantages in terms of transportability, operational flexibility and installed capital cost, which is expected to fall in the coming years, rendering them a strong competitor against other distributed generation units [92].
## (s34) Implementation of Active Filtering Function
(p34.0) The rapid growth and interconnection of power electronics based RESs and non-linear loads result in an increase of current harmonic content, which causes grid voltage distortion. A mitigating solution to this problem is the use of active filters (AFs). However, they are characterized by significant capital and operating costs and the commercially available products are not suited for low voltage (LV) power distribution systems [95].

(p34.1) Due to the aforementioned disadvantages, the provision of active filtering as ancillary service has increasingly been considered in the literature. This service can be provided by various devices that are connected to the grid by means of power converters.
## (s35) Voltage Unbalance Mitigation
(p35.0) In light of the increasing penetration of single-phase loads and sources into the grid, such as PVs and EVs, voltage unbalance issues are expected to be exacerbated. Thus, the next generation of grid codes should consider compensation of this effect in steady-state and transient system operation [101].

(p35.1) Voltage unbalance has been traditionally tackled by power system operators by trying to distribute equally the loads on the three phases, by using delta-connected systems, and by applying transposition on long lines. When these mitigating solutions are not viable, active filters can be deployed [95,101]. More recently, unbalance compensation can be achieved by controlling power electronics interfaced DGs, since their converters are not operating at full power continuously. As a result, the available rating can be used for mitigating grid voltage unbalance, as presented in [101].

(p35.2) The majority of control strategies found in the literature are implemented in either three-phase voltage source converters (VSCs) or current source converters (CSCs) [100,102], whereas the unbalance compensation by single-phase devices is addressed in only a few references. In [103], single-phase and three-phase PV inverters are managed by a central controller, which calculates the active and reactive power reference values required from the inverters to mitigate voltage unbalance. In [104], the reactive power provided by single-phase plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) chargers is controlled to achieve unbalance mitigation. In [105], single-phase DG inverters are controlled without modifying their active power production. The reactive power references are the outcome of an optimization function that minimizes the negative and zero current sequence components.

(p35.3) Low-power BESSs may provide unbalance compensation since they are generally single-phase connected. In [106], a single-phase BESS is connected to an experimental three-phase LV distribution network, incorporating an interconnected single-phase PV and loads, with the aim of mitigating the network voltage unbalance and reduce losses.

(p35.4) The literature review performed has shown that there is still room for further application of BESSs for unbalance compensation, since this is a relatively new research area. However, in contrast with active filter operation, compensation of voltage unbalance involves charging and discharging of the energy storage unit, and may have an impact on the state of charge (SOC) and the lifetime of the battery [107]. This issue is common to other ancillary services and will be described more in details in Section 5.6.
## (s36) Coordination and Optimisation of BESS Units
(p36.0) With the increase of BESS installations, coordination between units, with other devices, and with a central controller will gain importance. In the context of the smart grid concept, coordination can be realised with the utilisation of advanced metering infrastructure provided by smart sensors and metres [4]. As a result, increased power quality, grid efficiency and stability will be ensured through the coordinated control of DGs, BESSs and end-user loads, that can respond rapidly to voltage deviations.

(p36.1) A smart coordination scheme of multiple BESSs is proposed in [108], with the aim of controlling the voltage in a distribution network with high penetration of PVs. The results show that an effective mitigation of overvoltage and undervoltage issues can be achieved, preventing reverse power flows into the medium voltage network and reducing the power drawn from it, which lowers the stress placed into the network infrastructure.

(p36.2) In [109], a control scheme coordinating BESSs, on-load tap changer (OLTC) transformers and step voltage regulators is proposed, resulting in: reduced number of operations of the tap changer during high PV penetration, decreased transmission and distribution losses and improved battery life by limiting the DOD.

(p36.3) Approaches such as the ones described above require coordination of numerous compensation devices, which might bring other disadvantages, such as increased cost, difficulty to control and reduced efficiency due to numerous switching operations. Therefore, [110] introduces a novel coordinated control concept for distributed BESSs, where a main control centre is in charge of neighbouring battery units. The authors compare the performance of the proposed control strategy against a control scheme that features uncoordinated control of BESSs and use of OLTC.

(p36.4) The proposed method is shown to achieve enhanced power quality, i.e., the load factor is improved, and smaller voltage and frequency deviations are obtained. At the same time, the number of charges and discharges are reduced, which translates to extended lifetime and decreased capital cost for the battery units.

(p36.5) Finally, another important coordination aspect is balancing the SOC among multiple BESSs, in particular as the size of the batteries increases. As a result, there is need for deploying more efficient control strategies to achieve optimal dispatching and lifetime management of the units. In [111], the authors answered these challenges by proposing a distributed equalisation strategy, which is deployed in an interconnected distributed battery management systems (BMSs) and aims to balance the SOCs. In contrast to conventional centralized approaches, which present the drawbacks of increased computational burden and communication latency that might result in unbalanced operation, the experimental results show that the adopted approach achieves unification of the SOCs across the distributed batteries to an identical level, which is restored even when a fault occurs in one of the batteries. Thus, the proposed strategy is able to ensure balanced operation and improved robustness.
## (s37) Impact on State of Charge and Battery Lifetime Enhancement
(p37.0) The impact of implementing ancillary services on state-of-charge (SOC) is an important aspect of BESS operation that should be taken into account when designing a new BESS installation and its associated ancillary services.

(p37.1) The two main factors that contribute to battery degradation are the frequency of cycling and the DOD [107]. Some services, such as reactive power compensation, do not affect the above quantities, since they do not affect the active power flow. Services provided in the frequency regulation market require high frequency of cycling and low DOD. On the other hand, services provided in the energy arbitrage market, such as load shifting, require low cycling frequency and deep DOD [107]. Therefore, each service will have a different impact on the life span of the BESS and on its performance.

(p37.2) In [112], the impact of implementing three ancillary services (primary control reserve, peak shaving and uninterruptible power supply, UPS) on the ageing of an Li-ion BESS prototype is evaluated using a semi-empirical model that calculates two types of battery ageing: calendar (when the battery is in idle condition) and cycling (when the battery is charged and discharged). This paper shows that the primary control reserve service leads to the highest fade in BESS capacity due to the long operating time.

(p37.3) In [113], the authors highlight the necessity to have accurate information about a battery's degradation in order to operate the battery efficiently and guarantee that the unit will successfully deliver a service throughout its life. More specifically, information about degradation of the two main performance parameters, i.e., capacity and power capability (Section 3), is the focus of this research work. A lifetime model of lithium iron phosphate batteries is developed with the aim to investigate the degradation of BESS units subjected to a field measured mission profile. To this end, two inputs are given to the developed model: the SOC and temperature mission profiles, which have been measured for batteries providing frequency regulation in the Danish energy market. This paper concludes that capacity is the parameter that limits the most the battery lifetime. The capacity fades mostly due to calendar ageing, which is accelerated when the battery is idle at high SOC levels. The lifetime can be enhanced by decreasing the idling SOC level, however this approach will affect the revenues obtained from frequency regulation service since less power will be bid in the market.

(p37.4) More recently, the integration of hybrid ESSs into DERs has been proposed to facilitate the implementation of ancillary services such as inertia emulation, black start, or power oscillation damping [114,115]. The authors of [115] propose a device that combines the large storage capacity of electrochemical batteries and the high dynamic performance of the supercapacitors. The system is controlled to provide frequency support, and a power sharing control strategy is implemented such that the supercapacitor bank delivers the high-frequency component of the demanded active power, while the battery injects the average power. The computational and experimental results show that this control scheme achieves reduced variation in the battery voltage, discharge capacity and SOC. As a consequence, less stress is experienced by the battery during its operation, which results in improved lifetime and eliminates the need to oversize the battery capacity with additional branches in parallel.

(p37.5) A control scheme that aims at extending a battery's lifetime and reducing its size is presented in [116]. A coordinated control strategy is developed for the provision of frequency regulation from a system including a wind power plant and a BESS. The latter is used as the secondary resource to share the frequency regulation burden. An adaptive SOC-feedback control is designed to maintain SOC at an optimal value. Based on the simulation results, lower values are obtained for the rate of charge, rate of discharge and DOD, compared to the case where the BESS takes full responsibility to regulate the frequency. In addition, the SOC is kept within an optimal range, thus resulting in an extension of the battery's lifetime.

(p37.6) Based on the above, when planning a new BESS installation, it is important to consider not only the potential revenues gained from the ancillary services provided on the short term, but also the consequences on the battery ageing and depreciation in the long run.

(p37.7) In line with this requirement, [107] proposes a novel whole-life-cycle planning method for a BESS, with the aim of balancing the revenue and battery lifetime, considering the impacts of battery operation and cycling on its life span. More specifically, the BESS is initially used for primary frequency regulation services in the reserve market and, after a certain degradation of its capacity, it is transferred to load shifting services in the energy arbitrage market. Comparing the results of this approach with the cases where the BESS is used to provide a single service or stacked services, it is shown that a balance between maximizing revenue and extending battery life duration is achieved, thus also reducing the environmental impact caused by battery recycling due to its frequent replacement.

(p37.8) The literature review has shown that more research is needed to optimise profit and battery life duration. Additionally, the impact of various services on battery life and performance is still not well understood, in particular taking into account that different battery technologies, such as the ones described in Section 3, exhibit different performances when subject to the same charge/discharge cycle.
## (s38) Remuneration for Each Service
(p38.0) At the moment, it is still lucrative to perform certain type of ancillary services such as "load following" because of the relatively small number of energy storage units installed and providing these functionalities. However, it is expected that in the future, the remuneration for each service provided will decrease. In this sense, [117] shows that when more DERs provide the same service in a given portion of the grid, the marginal value decreases.

(p38.1) At the same time, it is expected that new ancillary services will become more remunerative: for example, with the decrease of system inertia, services related to frequency regulation will be sought. This is specifically relevant for the UK power grid, that is not synchronised with main continental Europe (Section 5.1). Although providing virtual inertia may not be currently remunerated in the markets, it possesses a potential high value by contributing to the avoidance of load curtailment and the associated high costs for end users [118].

(p38.2) Several research works have shown that there is a need for reconsideration and improvement of the pricing and reward structure in relation to ancillary services provided by BESSs. As an example, [119] presents a cost-benefit analysis of an Li-ion-based BESS in a distribution network, with the operation of the battery unit being optimized to provide load-shifting to the end-user. The analysis is based on real-life load data and a proposed technique for forecasting electricity prices. The results show that no profitability is achieved from the investment in the BESS, highlighting that the current trends of market price and electricity tariff structure should change to benefit not only the distribution grid owners but also the BESS owners.
