# A survey on application of machine learning to manage the virtual machines in cloud computing

CorpusID: 225156886 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec5f4f60455dad84e9c6bc716b5671b51a226689](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ec5f4f60455dad84e9c6bc716b5671b51a226689)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Virtualization
(p1.0) The technique of virtualization has the aim of efficient management of extremely large datacenter by executing different operating systems in isolation on individual host or PM. It performs as a layer between computer hardware and the operating system. The hardware resources split into the logical unit known as VMs and virtualization enable the system to place more than one VM to share the resources of a single PM. Each VM hosts the operating system and has access to the hardware resources of PMs. This technique enables cloud datacenter with more flexibility and provides better support for on-demand resource allocation using VM migration. Migration is a mechanism in which a VM is relocated from one PM to another without any interruption [1]. However, it reduces the performance of running applications in a VM [2]. Virtualization is the key characteristic of cloud framework that differentiates cloud computing from the earlier computing paradigm (e.g., grid computing, distributed computing, parallel computing). It provides dynamic management of VMs, cost-effective utilization, and PM resources to different users with isolation. VMware, XEN hypervisor, and Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM) are widely used virtualization platforms to create a virtual environment in a cloud datacenter.
## (s3) PREDICTION AND MANAGEMENT OF RESOURCES
(p3.0) Datacenter consists of several PMs or servers equipped with a large amount of CPU, memory, disk and bandwidth (BW) resources. The efficient utilization of these resources is the primary task done by the cloud vendor to maintain the service quality and power consumption cost. Maintaining the quality of service and power cost are the major research challenges in cloud computing. To achieve this, various research works have been successfully done in the field of optimum utilization of resources in the datacenter while considering the VMs scheduling and placement as a primarily focused task. The cloud service providers have to provide optimized VMs placement in the datacenter while maintaining the SLA and power consumption cost. This is an NP-hard problem and can be solved using a bin packing approach [15]. A lot of methods were proposed using heuristic, meta-heuristic and ML-based solutions for optimization. In most of the ML methods, historical data or workload traces were used as a required input to predict future resource utilization. The prediction of resource utilization requires system behavior by learning hence various algorithms were developed to make an accurate prediction for VM management. VMs management is applied when the required resources are being used completely. But in the case of less resource utilization PMs suffer the under-loading situation. Moreover, due to static allocation, these resources cannot be redistributed among PMs. The solution for such a problem is dynamic VMs consolidation that can be developed using the various ML techniques. In dynamic VM consolidation, the selection of VMs was done for migration in suitable PM to avoid PM overloading and under-loading. Most of the research work was done for dynamic resource management using the ML strategies on current and past resource usage data. This data only provides information about utilization values in a particular duration of time. It does not provide any information about resource utilization in the future, so various approaches are being developed to predict the utilization of resources.

(p3.1) Providing cloud services and maximizing their capital gain is still a challenge, while maintaining the SLA and power consumption cost. To achieve this, the efficient management of resources can be done using the prediction of the future workload and the utilization pattern. Therefore, ML-based techniques are useful approaches for prediction and found better for resource allocation and management.
## (s7) Migration of VMs from the overloaded and underutilized PM
(p7.0) Detection of overloaded or under-loaded PMs initiates the process of VMs migration and keeps balancing the load on PMs. All VMs from underutilized PMs are migrated to suitable PMs and underutilized PMs are turned off. In the case of PMs overloading, some of VMs are to be processed for migration from overloaded PMs to get the optimum load balancing. The selection of VMs for migration from overloaded PM is a key task. When VM is migrated to PM, then it is necessary to reconfigure the VM for new PM, in order to achieve improvement in performance. VM selection techniques were applied to transfer VM which reduced more power consumption after migration in comparison to other allocated VMs in the same PM.

(p7.1) Ahmad et al. reviewed about VM migration, server consolidation, network BW optimization, and power consumption. In their review work, strength and weakness of VM migration mechanisms were discussed. They identified various issues in the current solution and highlight the recent trends in VM migration [32].
## (s8) Selection of PM
(p8.0) The selection of PM to place migrating VMs is done to complete the consolidation process to maintain the SLA and power consumption cost. In a cloud datacenter, VMs are required to place in appropriate PM for the best service delivery and minimum power cost. Migrating VMs from overloaded PMs were placed using various techniques, in this survey we found that the RL technique was applied for the selection of PM. The algorithm, based on Best RAM and bandwidth (BRB) was developed in which,PMs with enough resources for VM was assigned a mark (as a ratio of the required VMs random access memory (RAM) and available BW of PM) and the lowest mark PM was opted for placement of migrating VM [27]. In order to achieve the optimum cost of EC and SLA, the process of VM scheduling and placement optimization (Algorithm 1) is started from the prediction of resource utilization to detect overloaded (Algorithm 2) and underutilized PMs. All VMs are migrated from the underutilized PM and PM has to be made switched off or in sleep mode for maintaining the power consumption cost. VM is selected (Algorithm 3) from overloaded PM for the migration to maintain the load and finally, a PM is selected to place the migrated VM (Algorithm 4) [14].

(p8.1) ML models cover almost all goals to perform resource management in the cloud datacenter. Hence, it clearly indicates that it may be an acceptable approach to manage resources in the datacenter. The majority of work is done using ANN and LR for resources prediction while RL and SVM were used mainly for VM management activities. Above algorithms are based on the various work presented in this survey, these algorithms present the entire VM management process. This process starts with resource utilization monitoring then utilization history is generated for further analysis of the utilization prediction. Prediction can be done using LR, ANN, or K-NN. This predicted value of utilization is further used to find out the overloaded PMs, if predicted value is larger than a certain threshold then PM is considered as overloaded otherwise it can accommodate new VMs. When a PM is found overloaded then the suitable technique is required to find out the VM for migration. VM is selected in such a way that PM overloading chances should be migration duration minimum. Finally, the VM placement policy is developed to find out a suitable PM for hosting the migrating VMs. This process is demonstrated using an example in which a cloud environment was simulated and results were generated using CloudSim.

(p8.2) A simulation environment is created in CloudSim to represent the cloud datacenter, in which 800 PMs were used. The details of the cloud environment are mentioned in Table 1. We simulated this cloud setup and performed simulation using the PlanetLab workload (for the day 03/04/2011). The workload was fed into the simulator and after certain time when sufficient CPU utilization history of PMs is available then Algorithm 2 finds out the overloaded PMs and calculates the predicted utilization of PMs. Algorithm 2 was implemented using various ML models to predict the CPU utilization for the next time interval. The selection of a suitable VM from the overloaded PM was done using Algorithm 3, the selected VM was further migrated to the appropriate PM for the placement using algorithm 4. ML model was also applied for the VM selection and placement. The entire process is known as dynamic consolidation of VMs, which is implemented to address the EC and SLA violation issues in a cloud datacenter.

(p8.3) EC, SLA and VM migration was the key parameter to assess the performance of most of the developed solutions in literature. We have executed the solution developed by [15] for the cloud environment mentioned in Table 1, the findings are mentioned in Table 2:

(p8.4) Amir et al., addressed the problems of dynamic consolidation of VMs, they presented a survey and taxonomy for consolidation methods of server in datacenter. They described various parameters and algorithms to perform dynamic consolidation of VMs. They also classified the server consolidation techniques in terms of time, constraints, requirements and algorithmic with their objective functions and evaluation methods [33]. 
## (s10) Linear regressions (LRs)
(p10.0) The LR model can be applied for the forecasting of the upcoming workload in a cloud system. It uses the number of utilization values at a given point of time in certain time intervals (e.g., planet-Lab data). This is applied to establish the relationship between the predicted and the current workload. It can be observed that the cloud workload trend is linear for a very short time interval [15]. So, an LR model can be used to solve such a problem. It is used to predict the real utilization (e.g., CPU, for the single resource) based on continuous values. LR can be used as an efficient statistical tool to develop a relationship between the independent variable and the dependent variable. The relationship is established between independent (current utilization in a given point of time) and dependent variables (predicted utilization) using the regression line. The LR model can predict future utilization values by analyzing the history of resource utilization. The slope and intercept of the regression line are updated based on past utilization values to predict future utilization. The difference between the predicted and real values of resource utilization in each data point is to be minimized using this method to predict the approximate correct utilization. Most of the regressionbased approach follows the single VM resource management e.g. CPU utilization and provides VMs migration based on CPU utilization by considering the relationship between the total power consumed by PM and its CPU utilization. The value of CPU utilization was considered as the main parameter to manage SLA and power costs. However, RAM and BW utilization are rarely considered for VM scheduling and placement, but their impact on power consumption and SLA cannot be neglected. Multiple regression approach can be used for dynamic VMs consolidation considering CPU, Memory, Disk, Network BW utilization as the factor to detect overloaded PMs using multiple regressions. Multiple regression is a simple LR that predicts the value of the dependent variable using two or more other independent variables. It is to learn more about the relationship between more than one independent variable and a dependent variable. CPU, memory, disk, BW and I/O utilization values can be used to enhance VMs scheduling and placement using multiple regression algorithms to predict future resource requirements.

(p10.1) Farahnakian et al., developed a LR method for forecasting the upcoming CPU utilization of PM (LiRCUP) using the PlanetLab historical data. They have established a linear relationship between the future and current CPU utilization in which expected utilization is the dependent variable and current utilization is the independent variable. Their model detected overloaded PMs by comparing the predicted CPU utilization value with current utilization and maintained the SLA and power consumption using the migration of some VMs from the overloaded PMs. LiRCUP algorithm was developed to detect overloaded PM using past  utilization values and determined the future CPU usage in PM, if the value of predicted utilization was found larger than the currently available CPU resource then PM is in the overloaded state [17]. Multiple regression was applied to find out the overloaded PMs using CPU, RAM, and BW utilization. These values were used as the independent variables in the multiple regression equation to predict the utilization at the next time interval. If utilization was more than or equal to one then PM was considered as overloaded. Abdelsamea et al., proposed a method that uses multiple regression where CPU, RAM, and network BW were used for the detection of PM overloading and significantly reduced EC. They used multiple factors to perform VM management while maintaining the consumption of energy and SLA [26]. Khoshkholghi et al., proposed a dynamic and adaptive energy-efficient management of VMs using iterative weighted linear regression (IWLR) to detect overloaded and underutilized PMs. They reduced the consumption of energy in the cloud datacenter and guarantee the system performance regarding CPU, RAM, and BW. IWLR was applied for predicting the PM utilization which determines the upper and prethreshold. If the predicted utilization of the resource is greater than or equal to one, then PM will not accept new VM and moved to under pressure list, PM will be moved to the overloaded list if the upper threshold is greater than or equal to one [27]. Islam et al., developed a technique for the prediction of future resource requirements using the LR method. They used historical data generated by running the standard client-server benchmark (TPC-W) as the input data set. CPU usage percentages of all VMs were used to train the system for prediction [16].
## (s12) ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORK (ANN)
(p12.0) ANN has an input layer, hidden layers, and an output layer. Each layer has certain numbers of nodes (neurons), integrated with the sigmoid activation function. This technique provides selflearning mechanisms based on the concept of neurons, connections and transfer functions. Research works based on neural networks indicate that the prediction of resource utilization is an effective approach to manage the resources in the cloud datacenter. The neural network is used as an efficient tool for forecasting in various kinds of research problems. It was also applied to forecast resource requirements in cloud computing. It can be used to extract and analyze actual workload patterns to predict the upcoming workload on the datacenter in the next time instance. Historical data or workload traces were divided into training and testing data for the prediction model. In most of the research, the CPU resource requirement at each time interval in the historical data was used mostly as an input data for the prediction of resource utilization. Further, it was taken as an input for the neural network to propagate through the network with a certain weight. The output layer was used to provide an output signal after the processing of neurons.

(p12.1) Hence, the input signal was considered as the CPU requirement at a certain time. CPU requirement for the next time interval was represented by the output signal. Neural networks are better ML approaches to predict CPU utilization. The prediction of future CPU, Memory, Disk, network or other required resources based on historical data will identify unused, under-loaded and overloaded PMs. This knowledge is helpful to determine which PM should be made ideal and from which PM migration of VMs will be done to reduce consumption of energy and the cost of the datacenter.

(p12.2) Vinh et al. [11], presented an energy-aware method to forecast future load requirements using neural networks based on historical data and reduced the number of PMs by making them shutdown or start when required. Their work aimed to optimize the power consumption in the cloud datacenter. Their system turns on/off some PMs when the system load decreases/increases.

(p12.3) Kousiouris et al. [12], focused on allocation percentages, co-placement of VMs and real-time scheduling in the same PM based on the prediction of the various parameters' effect on VMs performance. They optimized ANN by genetic algorithm and investigated the degradation in prediction.

(p12.4) Islam et al. [16], applied neural networks for resource allocation and implemented adaptive management of resources in the cloud system. They trained the neural network using the back-propagation algorithm and their experimental results shown that Neural Network-based predictions have less percentage error than LR.

(p12.5) Duggan et al. [24] developed a method using the recurrent neural network for predicting the future values of CPU utilization. Their neural network was enabled to retain information for making an accurate prediction with the time series data. They also investigated the accuracy of the network for prediction. Experimental results presented that the CPU utilization prediction was possible with high accuracy for fluctuating data sets in terms of changes.
