# Imaging Deep Learning-Based Crowd Scene Analysis Survey

CorpusID: 225200350 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34424e701824a70d7be5d668f3de06b809b3fe99](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34424e701824a70d7be5d668f3de06b809b3fe99)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Detection-Based Approaches
(p3.0) Early approaches used detectors to detect peoples' heads or shoulders in the crowd scene to count them, such as in [16,17]. Counting by detection is usually performed either in monolithic detection or parts-based detection. In monolithic detection, the detection is usually preformed based on pedestrian detection methods such as optical flow [18], histogram of oriented gradient (HOG) [19], Haar wavelets [20], edgelet [21], Particle flow [22], and shapelets [23]. Subsequently, the extracted features from the former detectors are fed into nonlinear classifiers such as Support Vector Machine (SVM) [24]; however, the speed is slow. A linear classifier such as linear SVM, hough forests [25], or boosting [26] usually provides a trade-off between speed and accuracy. Then, the classifier is slid over the whole image to detect candidates and to discard the less confident candidates. The results of sliding give the number of people in the scene.
## (s8) Deep Learning Approaches
(p8.0) Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are similar to plain Neural Networks (NNs) from the the perspective that they consist of neurons/receptive fields that have learnable weights and biases. Each receptive field receives a batch input and performs a convolution operation, and then, the result is fed into a nonlinearity function [55] (e.g., ReLU or Sigmoid). The input image to CNN is assumed to be an RGB image; therefore, the hidden layers learn rich features that contribute to the performance of the whole network (hidden layers and classifier). This structure has benefits in terms of speed and accuracy since the crowd scene images have lots of objects that need computationally expensive operations to detect. End-to-end networks mean the network takes the input image and directly produces the desired output.

(p8.1) The pioneering work with deep networks was proposed in [56]. An end-to-end deep convolutional neural network (CNN) regression model for counting people of images in extremely dense crowds was proposed. A collected dataset from Google and Flickr was annotated using a dotting tool. The dataset consists of 51 images, each of which has 731 people on average. The least number of counts in this dataset is 95, and the highest count is 3714. The network was trained on positive and negative classes. The positive images were labelled with the number of the objects, while the negative images were labelled with zero.

(p8.2) Network architecture: This network consists of five convolutional layers and two fully connected layers. The network was trained on object classification with regression loss, as shown in Figure 3. Another CNN-based approach following the former approach [57] proposed a real-time crowd density estimation method based on the multi-stage ConvNet [58]. The key idea in this method is based on assumption of some CNN connections being unnecessary; hence, similar feature maps from the second stage and their connections can be removed.

(p8.3) Network architecture: The network consists of two cascaded classifiers [59]; each classifier is multi-stage. The first stage consists of one convolutional layer in addition to a subsampling layer. The same architecture is used for the second stage. The last layer consists of a fully connected layer with five outputs to describe the crowd scene as either very low, low, medium, high, or very high. The feature maps from the first stage contribute only 1/7 of the total features; thus, the authors optimized this stage. The optimization was done based on measuring the similarity between maps. If the similarity is less than a predefined threshold, this map will be discarded to speed up the processing time.

(p8.4) In [60], the author observed that, when the trained network was applied on unseen data, the performance droped significantly. Consequently, a new CNN mechanism was trained on both crowd counts and density maps with switchable objectives, as shown in Figure 4. The nonparametric fine-tuning module is another contribution in this work. The main objective was to close the domain gap between the training data distribution and unseen data distribution. The nonparametric module consists of candidate scene retrieval, patch, and local patch retrieval. The main idea behind the candidate scene retrieval was retrieving training scenes that have similar perspective maps to the target scene from all training scenes. The local patch retrieval scene aims to select similar patches which have similar density distributions with those in the test scene, as shown in Figure 5.

(p8.5) Another framework to formulate the crowd scene uses generative adversarial network (GAN) [61]. In [62], the author provided two inputs to the network: the parent patch and the child patch. The parent patch is the whole image, while the child patch is 2 × 2 sub-patches. The idea behind this architecture is to minimize the cross scale consistency count between the parent and child patches.

(p8.6) Network architecture: The framework has two generators: parent G large and child G small . The generator network G learns an end-to-end mapping from input crowd image patch to its corresponding density map with the same scale. Each generator consists of an encoder and a decoder [63], back to back, to handle scale variation.   In [64], the authors proposed two models for object and crowd counting. The first model is Counting CNN (CCNN), which learns how to map the image to its corresponding density map. The second model proposed is Hydra CNN, that can estimate object densities in very crowded scenes without knowing the geometric information of the scene.
## (s10) Traditional Computer Vision Methods
(p10.0) One of the ways of examining crowd behavior was used in [72]. The authors proposed a way for detecting abnormal behavior from sensor data using a Hidden Markov Model [73], which is a statistical method based on a stochastic model used to model randomly changing systems.
## (s11) Deep Learning Approaches
(p11.0) In [77], the authors provided the model in Figure 7 for capturing and learning dynamic representations of different objects in an image. The structure consists of four bunches of convolutional layers on xy-slices. Dimensions are then swapped using semantic feature cuboid so that xy becomes xt, followed by a bunch of xt convolutional layers. The last part of the network is a temporal layer to fuse cues learned from different xt-slices followed by fully connected layers. Another big problem in crowd action recognition is recognizing semantic pedestrian attributes in surveillance images [78]. The authors proposed a Joint Recurrent Learning (JRL) model [78] for learning attribute context and correlation. The network utilizes Long short-term memory (LSTM) neural network for encoding and decoding. The intra-person attribute context of each person is modelled by the LSTM encoder. To make up for the poor image quality, the network uses auxiliary information from similar training images to provide inter-person similarity context. Lastly, LSTM decoder is constructed to model a sequential recurrent attribute correlation within the intra-person attribute context and the inter-person similarity context.

(p11.1) Detection of abnormal behavior in a crowded scene is a very promising research area that aims to prevent crimes before they happen. In [79], the authors proposed a model for abnormal event detection in a crowded scene. As Figure 8 shows, the model utilizes density heat maps and optical flow of the image frame. The network has two streams: one for density heat maps and one for optical flows of the frames. Both streams go through the same number of convolutional layers followed by fully connected layers, and then, the output of both streams are concatenated to output a classification of the frame sequence, thus detecting any abnormality. One of the state-of-the-art methods for action recognition was proposed in [80]. The authors of the paper proposed a 4D model that recognizes actions using volumes of persons in the image. First, a people classification CNN was used to classify and detect every person in the image. Then, using the cropped image frame of each person, the volume of the person was used as input to the network Action4DNet shown in Figure 9. The input was convoluted multiple times in a 3D CNN; then, an attention model was used to learn the most relevant local sub-volume features, while max pooling was used to learn the global features. Both features were used as input to an LSTM network for action classification. Action 4D achieved very high accuracy compared to other evaluated models. However, in a scene with 10+ people, the accuracy went down because the network is dependent on having each person's body clearly visible in the image. This shows that accurate action recognition in a crowd scene is still far from an achievable task in the current year. Table 2 compares crowd action recognition methods.  
## (s14) Discussion
(p14.0) In this survey, we compared both traditional and deep learning methods for crowd counting and crowd action recognition. It turned out that deep learning-based approaches have high MAE and MSE compared to traditional-based approaches. One of the most important challenges is the lack of training dataset for different categories. One way to tackle this problem is (1) using data augmentation and applying scale changes augmentation and color changes and (2) using transfer learning to transfer the knowledge from a pretrained network to another (e.g., from the IMAGNET dataset [90] to the ShanghaiTec dataset [66]). A very important observation in crowd scene analysis is that CNN-based approach works very well; however, GAN networks such as in [62] have the highest performance in terms of MAE and MSE. Generative adversarial network (GAN) is a promising framework for crowd scene analysis, as shown in Table 4. Following GAN, the next context-aware method such as that in [91] achieves high performance. 
