# A Review of Classic Torque Control Techniques for Switched Reluctance Motors

CorpusID: 221903199 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b6f6871212d747330e223b97609814f9b4c6f2b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b6f6871212d747330e223b97609814f9b4c6f2b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Switched reluctance machines (SRMs) main advantages are their simple structure, without coils, and rare materials in the rotor, low cost, ruggedness, brushless operation, operation in high temperature environments, high reliability, fault tolerance, wide speed range of operation, high efficiency and high torque, and power density. These advantages enable SRMs as competitive to more traditional electric machines, such as induction motors, permanent magnet synchronous machines (PMSM), and DC machines in many applications [1,2].

(p0.1) Besides the advantages, SRMs are strongly dependent in electronic converters for its drive. Also, automatic control of these machines is complex due to nonlinear characteristics. Furthermore, the efficiency and power factor of SRM are generally lower than those of PMSM as a result of higher losses in SRM. The switched reluctance machines have doubly salient structure and nonlinear characteristics, thus, these machines present elevated torque ripple and acoustic noise. These are the predominant disadvantages encountered in SRMs [3,4].

(p0.2) The scientific community focuses on mitigating these disadvantages through electronic control or through structural changes in the machine. For instance, in [5], the authors analyze the effect of different frames and ribs structure topologies over the acoustic noise production. The methods that target the structural changes consist in manipulating the magnetic flux linkage in such way that the reluctance variation between cycles is smaller, thus resulting in shallower torque ripple. On the other hand, the speed range of operation is diminished because the torque per ampere ratio is also diminished.

(p0.3) In contrast, the electronic control methods aim to minimize the torque ripple by manipulating a set of control parameters, such as electric phase current, turn on angle, turn off angle, and excitation voltage, which regulate the machine operation. These parameters may be controlled directly or indirectly. The electronic control methods will be focused in this chapter.
## (s1) Torque production in switched reluctance machines
(p1.0) The SRM motion is directly linked to the minimum reluctance principle, that is, when the stator pole winding is energized, the closest rotor pole tends to move toward the energized stator pole, and during this process, the reluctance is minimized and the inductance is maximized. The coordination of this process leads to rotational acceleration. The electromagnetic torque produced by an SRM phase may be expressed as in Eq. (2), where T e is the electromagnetic torque.

(p1.1) From Eq. (2), one can infer that: (1) the torque production does not depend on the direction of the electric current because of their quadratic relation; (2) the direction of the torque produced depends exclusively on the inductance derivative according to the rotor position. The inductance depends on the electric current and on the rotor position; and (3) the SRM is able to operate in all four torque-speed quadrants [19].

(p1.2) The total instantaneous torque produced by the SRM can be expressed as the sum of the individual torque produced by the phases as in Eq. (3), where N is the number of phases and T e,k is the electromagnetic torque produced by the phase k. Each phase torque can be calculated as Eq. (2).

(p1.3) Thus, the average developed torque T tot ÀÁ in a period is given by the time integral of the total torque produced in the same period as in Eq. (4), where τ is one revolution period.

(p1.4) As aforementioned, due to the SRM working principle and driving methods, strong torque undulations occur. These undulations are known as torque ripples and one way of measuring this phenomenon is through the ratio between peak to peak torque and the average torque produced in one cycle as in Eq. (5), where max T e ðÞ and min T e ðÞ are the maximum and minimum torque produced in one electric period, respectively.
## (s2) Average torque control
(p2.0) The main aspect of average torque control (ATC) techniques is to keep a constant value of reference current throughout an electric cycle. Therefore, the major task of the controller is to adjust the control variables, for instance driving angles θ on ð and θ off ) and electric current reference (i * ), for each operation point T, ω ðÞ in the torque-speed plane. The basic structure for ATC is presented in Figure 4.

(p2.1) There are two main methods for implementing the ATC [20]. The first consists of maintaining the driving angles while varying the electric current reference in each cycle, and the realization of this method is straightforward, but the operation region is limited and no efficiency optimization may be achieved. In the second method, both the electric current and the driving angles are controlled. Thus, although the control system becomes more complex and expensive, a good performance can be achieved, and the machine can operate in the entire speed range.

(p2.2) Studies focus on methods that enable real time variation of all control variables. This can be achieved online, through formulation and controllers or through genetic algorithms, or it can be achieved offline, using lookup tables [20,21].

(p2.3) There are different combinations of control variables that attain the same control requirements for each operation point, such as minimizing the torque. It is possible, through cumbersome simulations, to create lookup tables containing the optimum values for each of these parameters according to the control objective.

(p2.4) Different optimization objectives may be conflicting, for example, minimizing torque ripple and maximizing efficiency. Thus, for a multi-objective optimization, a weighting process must be added to the optimization [22]. In this chapter, only torque ripple minimization is considered as objective.

(p2.5) Therefore, for the tables, creation diverse simulations were realized with the SRM modeling process developed in [23]. An open loop simulation of the system is implemented, while the control parameters and the load torque are varied covering all the operation region of the SRM (One Factor at a Time -OFAT optimization). After each simulation, the data are stored. The stored data incorporate the steady state rotational speed, the control variables used, and the torque ripple. By comparing the data, a combination of control parameters is selected, which enable the SRM to operate in the entire torque Â speed plane T, ω ðÞ with the minimum torque ripple. The selected parameters are stored in a lookup table.

(p2.6) Graphic representation of the lookup tables with the optimum values for the turnon angle, turn-off angle, and reference current from the simulations are presented in Figure 5. As expected, both the turn-on and the turn-off angles must be advanced according to the rotational speed and load torque rise. On the other hand, the optimal electric current rises according to the increase in speed and load torque.

(p2.7) In some applications, the excitation voltage must also be considered as control parameter. The addition of one control parameter increases exponentially the number of simulations. To avoid this problem, Inderka [20] proposed a closed-loop average torque control method known as direct average torque control (DATC). The method is based on comparing the reference torque to the average torque produced. However, measuring the average torque with a torque transducer is expensive. To overcome this downside, the average torque may be estimated through the machine terminal quantities.
## (s4) Direct average torque control
(p4.0) In total, the DATC method relies on three lookup tables, one for reference electric current of the phase i * k T, ω ðÞ , one for the turn-on angle θ on T, ω ðÞ , and one for the turn-off angle θ off T, ω ðÞ . The block diagram structure for the DATC is presented in Figure 7. An external speed loop is responsible to generate the reference torque through a PI controller. A feedforward is added to the control system and generates a new reference torque. The lookup tables output the control parameter values. A hysteresis current regulator drives the AHB converter according to the control parameters.

(p4.1) Since the average torque is estimated only once per electric cycle, the DATC method requires low sampling ratio. This imply in lower cost for the controller mass production. On the other hand, the controller response to reference torque variations tend to be slow. To cope with that, one can use a torque estimator per SRM phase and recalculate the average torque at the beginning of each phase electric cycle. This solution increases the computational effort and cost of the system.

(p4.2) In order to verify the method, a computational model was developed in Matlab/ Simulink ® environment. The mathematical model of the SRM was developed as explained in [23]. The parameters for the SRM used for the simulation tests are presented in Appendix A. The base speed of the SRM is 954:93 rpm or 96 rad=s. The excitation voltage for the tests was maintained in 80 V. A constant load torque of 2 N:m was used for the tests.

(p4.3) For this test and for the following tests, two types of simulation are performed. The first simulation (S1) is performed for a constant load of 2 N:m and a reference speed of 30 rad=s (below base speed). For the second simulation (S2), the load is maintained in 2 N:m and the reference speed is increased to 130 rad=s (above base speed). The same simulations setup will be used in future subsections for the other torque control methods presented, where they will be referred to as S1 and S2, respectively.

(p4.4) The simulation results for the S1 and S2 setups using the DATC method are presented in Figures 8 and 9, respectively. The torque ripple in S1 conditions is 69:4%, while in S2 conditions, the torque ripple is 58:64%: Note that in S1, when the rotational speed is 30 rad=s, the electric current is limited by the hysteresis controller, while in S2, when the rotational speed is 130 rad=s, there is almost no chopping   in the current waveform because the back EMF is high and preclude the current rise. The results show a high torque ripple in both simulation setups. This occurs because the DATC main objective is to control the average torque produced, and this way, the instantaneous torque is not controlled, leading to a high torque ripple response.
## (s7) Current profiling technique through torque sharing functions
(p7.0) Given the relation between electromagnetic torque and electric current, it is possible to indirectly control the instantaneous torque produced through current control. On the other hand, the nonlinearities of the inductance profile must be accounted. Thus, to maintain the produced torque constant, the current profile presents a nonlinear waveform that varies according to the SRM characteristics, which is hard to interpolate.

(p7.1) The current profiling technique consists of controlling the electric current around a desired reference. The reference current is generated aiming to minimize the torque ripple or maximize the system efficiency. Some current profiling techniques are based on finite element analysis (FEM) [3,4], and other methods are based on generating a reference electric current from desired torque profiles named torque sharing functions (TSF). The TSF may be generated and/or compensated online or offline. The TSF are responsible for dividing the produced torque equally through the phases and may present different formats. The most common formats are linear, sinusoidal, cubic, and exponential. In some cases, modifications are applied to these TSF by performing optimization techniques with different objectives.

(p7.2) Considering that the controller is fully capable of regulating the electric current, the torque production may be distributed among the phases in such a way that the sum of the torque produced by the phases is equal to the reference torque (T * ).
## (s9) Current profile creation
(p9.0) After obtaining the reference torque signals for each phase with the TSF, the reference current signals per phase (i * k ) must be determined. This procedure may be accomplished by inverting the Ti , θ ðÞ lookup table into an iT , θ ðÞ lookup table. In [25], the authors use the inverted Ti , θ ðÞ LUT to estimate electromagnetic torque and compare to a non-unity torque reference. The inverted Ti , θ ðÞ LUT is also applied in [26,27], and in these cases, the contribution of the authors is to propose an alternative to commonly used TSFs. Alternatively, a nonlinear function of current as function of torque and rotor position can be used. The development of such function is cumbersome and requires a mathematical approach that models the inductance variation as function of electric current and rotor position. The analytical inversion function is expressed in Eq. (18), where L 0p θ ðÞis the inductance derivative for one SRM phase before saturation, that is, with low electric current, f θ ðÞis the function that describe the ratio change between the produced torque and the electric current according to the saturation level. More detailed explanation about the derivation of Eq. (18) may be found in [28].

(p9.1) The iT , θ ðÞ lookup table obtained after inverting the Ti , θ ðÞ lookup table from the SRM model is presented in Figure 11. The parameters of the SRM used for the development of Eq. (18) and of the lookup table are presented in Appendix A.
## (s14) Simulation results
(p14.0) The block diagram for the DTC implementation is shown in Figure 19. The error between reference and instantaneous speed is processed through a PI controller to generate the reference torque. The flux linkage reference is according to Eq. (26). The torque reference is compared to the instantaneous torque, and the error is processed by a hysteresis controller to determine the torque condition. The same happens for the flux linkage to return the flux condition. Clarke transform is employed to estimate position and to calculate the total flux linkage in the stator. The sector selector block informs the sector according to the estimated position. The  sector and the conditions are then used to choose the voltage state vector according to Table 3.

(p14.1) The DTC controls the electromagnetic torque produced and the flux linkage in the stator. Considering the stationary frame (αβ-reference frame), the phase of the flux linkage vector must be accelerated or decelerated to produce torque, while the magnitude of the vector must be maintained constant. Plotting the α flux component (λ α ) against the β flux component (λ β ) should result in a circular profile as depicted in Figure 20.
