# Highlights Neural Networks based approaches for Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar Disorder Diagnosis using EEG signals: A review Neural Networks based approaches for Major Depressive Disorder and Bipolar Disorder Diagnosis using EEG signals: A review

CorpusID: 221969961 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9710707dcbc71a0f12e0964785cd1d123f8f9cfb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9710707dcbc71a0f12e0964785cd1d123f8f9cfb)

Fields: Psychology, Biology, Medicine, Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Search Strategy and Eligibility Criteria
(p4.0) We have searched IEEEXplore, PubMed, Embase, Springer, ScienceDirect and Web of Science, for articles published between January 2010, and May 2020 by using the following keywords: (âĂĲDepressionâĂİ OR âĂĲshallow neural networkâĂİ OR âĂĲDeep learningâĂİ OR âĂĲElectroen-cephalogramâĂİ OR âĂĲCross-validationâĂİ OR âĂĲBipolar depressionâĂİ OR âĂĲArtificial neural networkâĂİ OR We also explored the articles that cite the ones that we found by the key-words mentioned above. There were no language restrictions. We performed this systematic review by conforming to the PRISMA statement [42] that helps to improve the reporting of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Eligibility criteria of this review includes the suitable depictions of different shallow and deep neural network techniques for the automatic assessment of depression by using EEG and representation of scientifically acquired data and generation of real-time results. Different technical reports and procedures [43], [44] of systematic reviews are followed to complete this survey. Publication dates of the EEG based depression studies meeting the criteria of ten years is considered. Only  Table 2. These keywords were used interchangeably, in combinations of two or more, with either âĂĲORâĂİ or âĂĲANDâĂİ operands.
## (s7) Brain Structure
(p7.0) The Human brain is an incredible part of the body that controls all the body's functions and interprets the information from the outside world. It is composed of cerebrum, cerebellum and brainstem that is enclosed within the skull. The cerebrum is a major part of the brain. It accomplishes complex functions like inferring touch, visualization, hearing, speaking, cognitive, sensations, learning, and adequate control of movement. The cerebrum is made of left and right hemispheres, that controls the opposite side of the body and have distinctive fissures. Each hemisphere has four lobes: frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital that are illustrated in Fig. 1b.

(p7.1) Each lobe represents different information of the human brain, i.e., frontal lobe controls the consciousness, the temporal lobe is responsible for the computation of complex stimuli and the senses of smell and sound, the parietal lobe represents the sensual information and the management of objects while the occipital lobe provides information about the sense of sight. To extract the information about the depressive and non depressive subjects, EEG electrodes are placed at different lobes (frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital) of the cortex, as can be seen in Fig. 1c. The placement of the electrodes at the scalp is important, because different lobes of the cerebral cortex are responsible for giving the information of electrical activities of the brain by mono polar and bipolar recordings [57]. Mono polar recording extracts the voltage variance among a reference electrode on the ear lobe and an electrode on the scalp. In contrast, Bipolar electrodes gathers the voltage variance among two scalp electrodes.
## (s9) Clinical Background of Depression
(p9.0) Depression is a leading source of disability worldwide and significantly contributes to the global burden of disease. According to the World Health Organization (WHO) 4 , depression is a common psychiatric disorder characterized by a persistent undesirable effect like sadness, lack of attention, or pleasure in formerly satisfying or enjoyable activities. While the symptoms of the depression can be psychological (e.g., feeling hopeless, having continuous sadness, feelings of guilt and low self-esteem, loss of interest, having suicidal thoughts, and so on), the link between the depression and physical symptoms (e.g., headache, constipation, limb pain, stomach problems, pain at joints, back pain, tiredness, appetite and weight changes, sleep changes, and so on) has also been reported in the literature [62,63]. The causes of depression comprise complex relations among psychosomatic, social, and biotic factors. Life moments such as childhood and teenage adversity, death, major events like losing a job, genetics, and substance abuse may increase the chance of depression. Pharmacological and psychosomatic treatments are available for moderate and severe depressive disorder. However, in low-and middle-income states, treatment and care facilities for depression are frequently absent or undersized [64]. WHO 3 reports that approximately 76âĂŞ85% of people in such countries have a lack of access to the depressive treatment they need.
## (s11) Questionnaire-based assessment of Clinical Depression (Assessment by Verbal Signs)
(p11.0) In this section, we highlight existing self-reported questionersbased depression detection techniques and their limitations. These questioners are designed for individuals and composed of questions to capture the signs of depression such as desperation, irritability, feeling guilty, and physical indications such as tiredness, weight loss, and lack of attention in sex, as well. Many instruments have been used by clinicians for depression assessment. Among these, we chose widely-accepted ones: PHQ-9, BDI, DSM-IV, CES-D, HAM-D.

(p11.1) The Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) is a multiplechoice self-report inventory and used to monitor the severity of depression [71]. It consists of nine items, each scored from 0 to 3, which results with a total score varying from 0 to 27. Based on the score range where the total score of the questioners fall into, subjects are categorized into different depression levels like Minimal, Mild, Moderate, Moderate severe, and Severe depression. Scoring system provided by PHQ-9 presented in Table 4. In [72,60,73], PHQ-9 is used for the participants' selection for EEG based experiments.
## (s12) Biomarkers-based assessment of Clinical Depression (Assessment by Nonverbal Signs)
(p12.0) A biomarker is defined as âĂĲa characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an indication of normal biologic processes, pathogenic processes, or pharmacological responses to a therapeutic interventionâĂİ [87]. The Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) diagnosis and treatment can  Severe Depression be enriched by decreasing the useless treatment trials by having accurate predictive bio-markers. Biomarkers-based assessment provides accurate predictions of depression and bipolar disorder and is capable of adequately measuring the changes in disease conditions. The scientific community uses different invasive and noninvasive tools and techniques as biomarkers to understand the mechanisms behind the MDD.
## (s13) Neural networks-based approaches for Depression recognition using EEG signals
(p13.0) The fields of Affective Computing (AC) and Neural Networks (NNs) are useful in solving complex and multidimensional problems such as modeling social affective behavior and mental disorders. These problems involving affective datasets need Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), neural networks with two or more hidden layers, for effective temporal modeling, and real-time performance analysis. The ability of DNN to identify latent structures in raw, unlabeled, unstructured, noisy, and incomplete EEG datasets makes it suitable for EEG based depression diagnosis. The effectiveness of DNN based solutions for depression diagnosis depends on the EEG experimental protocols, placement, and types of EEG electrodes, and the availability of EEG datasets. This also requires investigating automatic depression assessment Theta band activation's x x x Frontal theta asymmetry increased in normal subjects but reserved in depressed patients during music listening. [103] Antidepressant treatment response(ATR) index
## (s15) Public EEG Datasets for Depression Diagnosis
(p15.0) Due to the sensitive nature of depression data and for privacy and confidentiality reasons, very few public datasets are available for EEG based depression diagnosis, therefore, data that is launched by the child mind institute. The major goal of HBN is to produce a dataset that captures a wide range of heterogeneity and impairment that occurs in evolving psychopathology. The HBN contains information about depressive disorder, behavioral, intellectual, eye tracking, and phenotype data, by using multi-modal EEG and brain imag-  [53] No psychotic disease DSM-IV BDI,HADS (BDI-II,HADS)score>14 [111] No medication Psychiatrists interview --

(p15.1) Watch pictures BDI(II)score 14-28 [54] No medication Psychiatrists interview -- [112] -Psychiatrists interview -- [113] No mental disorder interview Working on ladder - [114] No mental disorder BDI-II -BDI(II)score 14-28 [55] Free of neurological disease MINI interview, -(DSM-IV) Score [56] No medication -Watch 5sec film of pictures BDI(II), Hamilton score [57] No mental disorder -Watch pictures BDI(II)score 14-28 [115] No mental disorder BDI-II -BDI(II)score 14-28 [116] No drug addiction BDI(II) Sit in rest position BDI(II)score 14-28 [72] No medication (PHQ-9), Mini-Mental State Exam(MMSE)

(p15.2) Sound stimulation MMSE score [117] No epileptic BDI(II) -score>14 [118] Free of drugs --- [119] No psychopathology BDI-II Watch picture BDI-score>14 [60] No psychopathology (PHQ)-9, DASS-21 DASS-21 DASS-score>14 [77] No mood stabilizer (DSM)IV,(HAM-D) Resting position HAM-D score>14 [73] Free of psychopathology (PHQ)-9 -(PHQ)-score>5 [120] No psychopathic history BDI-II -BDI-score>14 [121] Free of any medicine BDI(II) -BDI(II)>13 [116] No neurological history --- [122] Hospital inpatient PSQI,PHQ-9,GAD-7,MINI Play sound track PHQ-9>5 [78] No drug history DSM-IV,(BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [123] No psychiatric drug --- [124] No mental disorder Written consent -- [125] No mental disease (DSM)-IV,HUSM -(DSM)-score [126] Free of any medications (BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [127] Free of any medications Written consent -- [128] Free of drugs (BDI)II -(BDI)II-score>14 [138] No psychopathology.

(p15.3) (BDI)II Watch images (BDI)II-score>14 [129] No psychopathology BDI-II Watch pictures (BDI)II-score>14 [130] No mental disease DSM-IV -DSM-IV score [131] No medication -Play the VR game - [116] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [132] No psychiatric disease Hospital patient -- [133] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [134] No mental disease Hospital patient -- [135] No psychiatric disease PHQ-9,DASS-21 PHQ-9,DASS-21 PHQ-9>5 [136] No psychotic DSM-IV BDI,HADS (BDI-II,HADS) score>14 [137] No psychotic MOCA MMSE MOCA score ing MRI. In the HBN, a clinical assessment of mental health and learning disorders is performed. The HBN protocols include the behavioral and physical measures, family structure, stress, trauma, cognition, and language tasks. About 10,000 subjects of New York with ages between 5 and 21years participated in data collection. The clinical team consisted of a mixture of psychologists and social workers. The safety and eligibility of the participants was confirmed by prescreening interview. The screening interview collected information about the subjectâĂŹs psychiatric and medicinal history.
## (s16) EMBARC (Establishing Moderators/Mediators for a Biosignature of Antidepressant Response in Clinical Care)
(p16.0) is a public data set made available by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). It recognizes the neurological sign of reaction to antidepressant treatment by using the resting-state EEG and machine learning algorithm. A total of 16 posterior electrodes were comprised of P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8, PO3, PO4, PO7, PO8, POz, O1, O2, and Oz. [140].
## (s17) Investigating Automatic Depression Assessment Methods
(p17.0) In this section, automatic depression assessment methods are investigated by different prepossessing techniques, Neural networks (NNs), and deep learning-based approaches for depression detection. 6 Depresjon Data set link https://datasets.simula.no/depresjon/ #data-collection 7 Patient Repository for EEG data and computational tools (PREDICT) Data set Link PatientRepositoryforEEGdataandcomputationaltools(PREDICT
## (s18) Pre-processing
(p18.0) The EEG signal recording is a time-consuming procedure in which depressed patients perform some tasks. During recording, EEG signals are contaminated by undesired or polluted signals called artifacts. The artifacts that occur due to the patient body movement, heartbeat, eye blinks, muscle movement are called physiological artifacts. The artifacts that occur due to the electrodes placement, environmental noise, and device error are known as non-physiological artifacts [147]. These artifacts affect the quality of the actual EEG signals; hence it is important to sanitize useful data from contaminated EEG signals through preprocessing of the EEG data. In this phase, different undesired artifacts are filtered by using different noise removal and artifact elimination algorithms to prepare data for the next stage. Table 11 shows the shows the different artifact removal techniques. Mumtaz et al. [53], claim that raw EEG signals have poor resolution due to the low Signal-to-Noise ratio (SNR). Therefore, to enhance the performance of EEG signals, multiple source eye correction (MSEC) technique is used to remove the undesired signals. The authors of references [111,54,117,116,123,124,131,135] used a Notch filter with 50Hz to remove power line intervention and to sanitize EEG signals from artifacts. While, articles [75,113,114,121,123,129,130,134,135] used a low pass and high-pass-filter with 40Hz and 1Hz cutoff frequency to filter the noise. Adaptive noise canceller and fast ICA is used in [55,137] to remove inaccurate information from the false EEG recordings. As per our findings, the low pass, high pass, and Notch filter are frequently used to remove the artifacts in EEG based depression detection.
## (s19) Neural networks-based approaches for depression recognition
(p19.0) Neural Networks (NNs) [148] are non-parametric, flexible, and parallel computing systems that consist of neurons layers and weighted links in which information is transferred from the input neurons to the output neurons in a forward or backward way. In recent years, ANN-based approaches are used in EEG studies for classification and diagnosis of major depressive disorder. ANN can classify nonlinear relations and incorporates high-order dealings between predictive variables to produce accurate results. Most of the articles [57,77] use it for the classification of the unipolar and bipolar depression and have achieved good accuracy of 89.09% by implementing the pre-treatment cordance of frontal QEEG.

(p19.1) Multi-layer FFNN, Back Propagation Neural Network (BPNN), and Enhanced probabilistic neural network (EPNN) have been used in [60,121,78] for discriminating MDD and non-MDD patients. In the test, EEG recording of depressed and age control subjects were collected under the 10 crossvalidation technique. EEG electrodes were placed at the prefrontal (Fp1 and Fp2), frontal (F3, F4, F7, and F8), cerebral (C3 and C4), and temporal (T3, T4, T5 and T6) regions of the brain. The results indicate that the signals collected from the cerebral (C3 and C4) region gives slightly higher accuracy as compared to the other brain regions. Multi-layer In [56,115,116], a comparative study of FFNN, neurofuzzy networks, relative wavelet energy (RWE), and probabilistic neural networks (PNN) has been performed for differentiating the depressed and normal patients through EEG signals. Classification abilities of neural, neuro-fuzzy network, and relative wavelet energy (RWE) networks are authenticated by the EEG recordings. The FFNN leads the PNN, neuro-fuzzy networks, and relative wavelet energy (RWE) achieving 100% classification accuracy with time and wavelet energy as the input features.

(p19.2) EEG entropies based depression detection has been performed in [123,149] by comparing the Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN) performance with Radial Basis Function (RBF) and different machine learning classifiers. Results show that PNN performs better with 99.5% classification accuracy.
## (s21) Clinical background of Bipolar Disorder
(p21.0) Bipolar Disorder(BD) or manic-depressive illness (MDI) is a dangerous neural disorder that is predicted by mood uncertainty and may start from early ages (i.e., in infants and teenagers). Individuals with BD face recurrently swings between depressive and manic episodes [15]. According to the American Psychiatric Association [16], there are four major categories of bipolar disorder: bipolar I disorder, that has one atleast one full episode of mania or diverse episodes of mania and depression. Bipolar II disorder has no manic episode, minimum one hypomanic episode and many depressive episodes. Patients with cyclothymic disorderhas many hypomanic and depressive episodes. Bipolar disorder includes both depressive and hypomanic episodes alternatively.

(p21.1) Bipolar disorder and depression have various resemblances, yet they have some crucial dissimilarities [157]. Bipolar disorder has experience of high mood swings, different episodes of depression and periods of excessive highs (also known as mania). In contrast, depression is just one state of bipolar disorder that is above from the low feeling. It's a deep grief or hollowness that an individual can't manage. Sometimes, bipolar patients feel disheartened, valueless, and tired and might fail to concentrate in possessions that they had enjoyed before the illness. Clinical depression (also known as major depressive disorder or MDD) frequently drives with sleep difficulties, alterations in hunger, and trouble focused. It can lead to suicidal activities or actions. People with major depressive disorder do not practice any extreme, elevated feelings that bipolar patients face (such as mania or hypomania).
## (s23) Bio markers based assessment of Bipolar disorder (Assessment by Nonverbal Signs)
(p23.0) The pathophysiology of bipolar disorder is complex, multi factorial, and not fully understandable. To overcome this complexity, the biomarkers based assessment not only facilitates the diagnosis and monitoring of complex bipolar disorder, yet also provide biological effects of treatment. These assessments devise a new hypotheses about the causes and pathophysiology of bipolar disorder. The peripheral biomarkers like neurotrophins, oxidative stress and neuroinflammation are used in [165] to measure the illness activity of bipolar disorder. The neurotrophins [166] is a family of proteins that induce the survival, development, and function of neurons. It shows distinct patterns in the different stages of bipolar disorder; therefore, [167] use it as brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) bipolar disorder biomarker. The oxidative stress is an imbalance of antioxidants and free radicals in the human body. Its ratio increased during the bipolar disorder episodes; therefore, in [168] oxidative stress is used to diagnose the bipolar disorder. The neuroinflammation is a localized physical condition of the body that becomes reddened or swollen during bipolar disorder. The authors of [169] use it for bipolar disorder study. The spectral entropy modulation that quantifies the EEG signal degree of uncertainty gets deficit during manic episodes of bipolar disorder, so in [9] it is used as a bipolar disorder and schizophrenia biomarker for altered function. The brain oscillations and lithium response variate during bipolar disorder condition and used as bipolar disorder biomarker in [170] .
## (s24) Neural Networks based approaches for Bipolar disorder recognition using EEG signals
(p24.0) Bipolar disorder (BD) is a composite disorder that oscillates between two mood states depression and mania and is often misdiagnosed by physicians [15]. It is an enduring condition in which BD patients spend most of their life in a misery of symptoms of depression, which complicates accurate identification and analysis of bipolar disorder. The fundamental clinical challenge of this disease is the differentiation between BD patients and the patients showing symptoms of general depression. Neural networks (NNs) based approaches offer new ways to predict bipolar disorder recognition and clinical outcomes for individuals and reduce the complexity of bipolar disorder identification process. NNs process the psychiatric data that is relayed on the brain structure and by resolving the complex real-world problems which is otherwise difficult for conventional tools and techniques. In contrast to the human data processing ability, NNs provide better precision and time effective solutions for pattern recognition and prediction problems.

(p24.1) Multi-layer perceptron (MLP) is the most popular supervised neural network that is widely used for classification and assessments. It is a class of FFNNs (Feed Forward Neural Networks) that contains at least three layers: an input layer, a hidden layer and an output layer. In [171], MLP is used as BD (Bipolar Disorder) classifier with five neurons and one hidden layer. To acquire the best conceivable precision, several discriminative features can be extracted from the EEG recordings by using the four diverse feature selection algorithms. These algorithms are CMIM(Conditional Mutual Information Maximization),MIM(Mutual Information Maximization),DISR(Double Input Symmetrical Relevance) and FCBF(Fast Correlation Based Filter). The extracted features can be fed to the MLP for classification purpose. Results shows that MLP achieve 91.83% classification accuracy for bipolar disorder sub types and normal subjects [171]. The artificial neural networks and quantitative EEG have been used in [172] for differentiating fronto temporal dementia from late-onset bipolar disorder. All patients are assessed by the clinical MRI scan(Magnetic Resonance Imaging) and EEG(Electroencephalogram). The results represents that a combination of EEG and MRI with ANN classifier gives better classification results as compared to EEG and MRI separately.

(p24.2) As one of the major unbearable neural syndrome, BD(bipolar disorder) is commonly misdiagnosed as UD(unipolar disorder) , that further leads to suboptimal cure and poor results. Therefore,the classification of UD and BD at initial phases can therefore support to assist effective and precise treatment. In [57] artificial neural network classifier with quantitative EEG is used as a biomarker for the classification of the unipolar and bipolar disorder and it achieved an accuracy of 89.89%. A bipolar depression patient experiences both manic and depressive periods. To classify these two depressive periods, the feedforward neural network (FFNN) and probabilistic neural network (PNN) is used in [115]. The FFNN showed 98.75% classification accuracy while PNN achieved an accuracy of only 46.5%. The results show that FFNNs give better classification results for bipolar disorder as compared to PNN.
## (s25) EEG Experimental Protocols for Bipolar disorder Recognition
(p25.0) EEG experimental protocols are a set of rules that are defined before EEG recording. It includes the number of subjects that have participated in the EEG based study, selection criteria of participants, placement standard and types of electrodes that are used for recording the bipolar activity.

(p25.1) Participants: The ratio of the number of participants for the diagnosis of bipolar disorder varies in different studies according to their resources and requirements. Participants' strength, gender, age group, prior history of medication has a great effect on the diagnosis of bipolar disorder; therefore, most of the studies consider it as their initial protocols requirements as shown in Table 13. As far as participant strength is concerned, [171,172] include 38 subjects with the age group in the range of 15 to 16 years and 18:20 ratio, which means 18 subjects belongs to the bipolar disorder type I and 20 belongs to the bipolar disorder type II. No distinction about gender is mentioned in this study. To classify the unipolar, bipolar and healthy subjects [57,115,116,175] have performed EEG experiments for 30 ,60, 89 and 134 subjects in which half of the participants are depressed and the others are healthy. Participants age varies from 20 to 50 years with no discrimination of gender. The classification of bipolar, schizophrenia and healthy subjects is performed in [174] in which 35 participants have schizophrenia, 35 are with bipolar illness and the remaining 35 are healthy subjects. From the available literature of bipolar disorder diagnosis, it is observed that there is no standard ratio of number of participants and it varies in different studies according to their resources and requirements of the experiment. Selection Criteria of Bipolar Disorder Participants: The participants are selected based on two major parameters of self-reported psychometric test and inclusion criteria of participants. For all subjects, the inclusion criteria are history of epilepsy, head injury, psychiatric disorders and effect of illegal drugs as shown in Table  14. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) and Back Depression Inventory (BDI-II) are the two major self-reported psychometric tests that are used in bipolar studies [115,116,175,174] for primary selection of the participants. Based on inclusion criteria and psychometric test, only those participants are considered for EEG study that have no psychotic disorder and their self-reported psychometric test score is above 14. Interview by a psychiatrist is also conducted in some studies [111] to ensure that the selected participants are taking no medication to treat bipolarity and depression. After the selection of the participants, a ten minutes EEG experiment is performed with open and close eye conditions for each subject. Placement and   [171] No psychotic DSM-IV,BDI -(BDI-II score>14 [172] Brain hospital patient DSM-5 -DSM-5 score [57] No mental disorder Watch Pics BDI(II)score 14-28 [115] No mental disorder BDI-II -BDI(II)score 14-28 [116] No neurological history -- [175] Heroin addiction aatients DSM-IV Stay relaxed and awake DSM-IV score [174] Age no more than 65 DSM-IV --
## (s26) Types of EEG Electrodes:
(p26.0) The electrode placement and types of electrodes play a major role in EEG based bipolar disorder data acquisition. Minor mistakes in electrode placement pollute the overall EEG results that further affect the classification of the EEG signals. The two major international electrode placement standards at the scalp are 10-10 and 10-20 [176]. According to the literature presented in Table 15 most of the studies used international placement standards [171,172,115] but few create their own electrode placement strategy [57,116]. Wet and dry types of electrodes are used in EEG based studies to diagnose bipolar disorder. Wet electrodes are usually made of silver and silver chloride material and applied on a scalp by using the electrolytic gel material that works as a conductor between the skin and the wet electrodes. Dry electrodes consist of a single metal and can be directly placed on the scalp without the need to apply the conductive gel. Dry electrodes are the most efficient and easy to use as compared to wet electrodes. As patients feel comfortable with dry electrodes therefore latest technologies prefer to use them [177].
## (s27) EEG based public data sets for bipolar disorder.
(p27.0) Several public datasets, such as BioGPS [178], Bipolar Disorder Neuroimaging Database [179], Bipolar Disorder Phenome Database [180] etc., exist for bipolar disorder recognition. However, after an extensive literature survey, we found that no EEG based public data sets are available for bipolar disorder recognition research.
## (s28) Automatic assessment of Bipolar disorder
(p28.0) Automation of bipolar disorder assessment is a major challenge for the research community. The automatic methods make the investigation procedure quick and easy. In these methods, features are automatically extracted from the EEG signals and then based on these features a mental disorder is diagnosed. In this article, artificial neural network and deep learning-based approaches are considered for automated bipolar disorders diagnosis.  Bandpass, notch filter and visual inspection [172] Bandpass filter at 0.15 to 70 Hz [57] Bandpass filter 40HZ [115] Total variation Filtering(TVP) [116] Notch filter at 50HZ [175] Independent component analysis [174] -
## (s29) Pre-processing
(p29.0) The pre-processing or artifact removal is a major part of EEG data acquisition, except this activity no analysis can be performed directly on the EEG data. It is necessary to filter the EEG signals from the different physiological and non-physiological artifacts and interference before using it. The researchers used different techniques and tools to manually or automatically remove the artifacts from the EEG signals as shown in Table: 16. The band pass, notch and ICA (Independent Component Analysis) are the important filters that are used in most of the bipolar disorder studies [171,172,57,116,175] to remove the noise, interference and physiological and non-physiological artifacts with 40 Hz to 70Hz frequency range. These filters remove the artifacts from EEG signals based on the frequency and amplitude level of the EEG signals (upper and lower level of the signals). The Total Variation Filtering (TVP) and visual inspection are signal filtering techniques that are used in some studies [115] and remove noise manually from the signals.
## (s30) Neural network based approaches for Bipolar disorder recognition
(p30.0) For the past few decades, neural networks are widely used in EEG based studies due to their ability of self-learning and producing the output that is not limited to the input provided to them. Different models of ANN are used in EEG based bipolar disorder diagnosis and classification as shown in Ta- and Artificial neural network (ANN) are the models that are used in bipolar disorder studies [171,172] with online feature extraction mechanism. They achieve a 91.83%, 58.75%, 98.75% and 90% classification accuracy respectively.
## (s32) Discussion
(p32.0) Our umbrella review provided an up-to-date overview and synthesis of the literature of neural networks-based approaches using EEG signals for the diagnosis of Major De- pressive Disorder and Bipolar Disorder. We included data from different sources like Healthy Brain Network (HBN), PREDICT, pubMed, IEEE explore, embase, google scholar, research gate and web of science etc. We noticed in this research area several limitations, which we discuss in the form of lists of points and to which we make suggestions for better improvement:

(p32.1) Few Existing Works: Deep learning approaches for EEG based depression diagnosis have been found in only 4-5 recent articles from 2018-2020 [53,54,111]. In case of EEG based bipolar disorder no deep learning based article exists for diagnosis. Despite the few existing works in deep learning-based approaches for EEG depression and bipolar disorders analysis, deep learning seems to be promising in many research areas. Deep learning can play a key role in developing a more accurate biomarkers.

(p32.2) Data Availability: The significant issue regarding the data is availability. The most of the techniques reviewed here are relied on private datasets, very few public data sets exist for EEG based depression diagnosis due to the sensitive nature of depression data, and for privacy and confidentiality reasons. In bipolar case no public dataset is available for EEG based bipolar disorder diagnosis. However, for collective innovation and financial growth, there should be some standard public datasets. Open datasets provide new opportunities for administrations to collaborate with people and evaluate public services by giving access to the data about those services. Further, these datasets can be useful to evaluate and validate methodologies/approaches presented by different researchers.

(p32.3) AI for a psychiatry revolution: EEG is a non-invasive strong biomarker from the AI revolution, that mental health and psychiatry does not benefit yet. Suggestion: This domain needs to attract more attention from the scientific community especially the computer vision community to develop more innovative methods and applications for a better diagnosis of mental disorders.

(p32.4) Deep learning for more complex patterns: The feature extraction phase has a great effect on the precision and accuracy level of the research. The processing is applied only on the data that is extracted from the feature extraction phase. However, the majority of the approaches reviewed here used the conventional machine learning approaches for feature extraction that does not predict how many features should be extracted for a high classification accuracy. Suggestion: Feature extraction phase should be automatic and predictable for higher classification ratio.
