# Low-achieving grade K-3 children's early numeracy competences: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 229490767 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3dd2e1474f82c1aeb45a4a5141d4fbbe08698956](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3dd2e1474f82c1aeb45a4a5141d4fbbe08698956)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Mathematics

## (s3) Previous reviews
(p3.0) In the following, a summary of previous reviews that target the theme of low achieving children's numeracy competencies is made with the intention to describe the rationale of this paper and how it contributes to the current literature. Kroesbergen and Van Luit (2003) conducted a meta-analysis of 58 interventional studies for elementary school for students with special needs (i.e. students who performed at a lower level and had more trouble learning maths than their peers). The selected studies used a between-subjects or within-subjects control condition in the three domains: preparatory mathematics, basic skills, and problem-solving strategies. The results showed that interventions in the domain of basic skills, which includes numeracy, produced the highest effect sizes (Kroesbergen and Van Luit 2003). Mononen et al. (2014) instead analysed studies that focused on early numeracy interventions that used random assignment or quasi-experimental design for children aged four to seven years at risk of mathematical difficulties, showing that early numeracy interventions can effectively improve the numeracy skills of children at risk of mathematical difficulties. In another review, Sinnakaudan et al. (2016) examined Malaysian grade one pupils' underperformance in solving mathematics problems. The authors concluded that the development of number sense (especially understanding part-whole number decompositions) seemed to be the major reason for their underperformance. Raghubara and Barnes (2017), in their review of longitudinal studies, describe what neurocognitive abilities underpin preschool class children's numeracy skills.

(p3.1) However, no study has reviewed empirical research resultswhether qualitatively or quantitativelythat specifically reports on low-achieving grade K-3 children's numeracy competencies, which this systematic review addresses. Since the choice of research approaches could affect the results, it is an important aspect to investigate. Further, while research has identified the essential parts in early maths learning (i.e. numeracy) it is also of great relevance to investigate what competencies the children are assessed for and what definitions are used to identify low achievers.
## (s17) Numeracy competences assessed
(p17.0) An overview of what numeracy competencies the children were assessed on, for identifying low achievers and competences further explored in the studies (low achievers) appears in Table 3. The analysis resulted in 22 different competencies organised in accordance with Dowker's (2001) eight themes.
