# Roads to objectivity: Quantum Darwinism, Spectrum Broadcast Structures, and Strong quantum Darwinism -a review

CorpusID: 220403353 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66f74c4cb15e2e0807d7f294c01ac7fd1ba8f703)

Fields: Philosophy, Computer Science, Physics

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The fact that classical limit of quantum theory should not only reproduce the correct kinematics and dynamics of classical theory, but on a deeper level also its objective character, has been noted fairly late, at least to the author's knowledge, by W. H. Zurek and collaborators (see e.g. [1][2][3] and the references therein). Quantum measurements inevitably perturb measured system, unless the state of the system is specially tailored for a given measurement, thus precluding in general any objective character of the measured quantity as different observations will yield different results. This is in a stark contrast to classical mechanics, where system's characteristics, e.g. positions or momenta, have an objective, observer-independent character. This problem of objectivity, unlike the well studied problems of uncertainty and contextuality, arises already at the level of a single observable. In recent years several objectivization mechanism have been proposed, in particular quantum Darwinism [3], Spectrum Broadcast Structures (SBS) [4,5], and strong quantum Darwinism [6]. The aim of this work is to analyze these ideas from a foundational point of view and study their mutual interrelations in an attempt to bring more clarity to the growing field.

(p0.1) To set the ground, it is worth to first define what "objectivity" means. A particularly straightforward, and to some extent operational, definition has been proposed in [3], namely: Definition 1 (Objectivity). A state of the system S exists objectively if many observers can find out the state of S independently, and without perturbing it.

(p0.2) It is worth stressing that the notion of objectivity used here concerns the state of the system and not the system itself. Definition 1 does not give a hint on how * jkorbicz@cft.edu.pl the objectivization process happens and this has to be added separately. Here comes the idea of redundant information proliferation [3]: Information about the state of the system is multiplied and deposited in many identical records during the dynamical evolution. If it then can be independently accessed without a disturbance, whatever that may mean, it becomes objective. This heuristic idea, central to quantum Darwinism, is actually at the core of all the three approaches. It is in its implementation where they differ.
## (s1) II. QUANTUM DARWINISM AND THE MEANING OF QUANTUM MUTUAL INFORMATION
(p1.0) As mentioned in the Introduction, the main idea behind quantum Darwinism is that in the course of the interaction with the environment, some information about the system's state not only "survives" the interaction but also "multiplies" in the environment in the sense that it becomes: i) redundantly encoded in many copies in the environment fragments and ii) locally accessible for a readout without disturbance, thus becoming objective. To check if that has taken place, Zurek and collaborators proposed an entropic condition [3], which in its sharp (ideal) form can be stated as follows:
## (s2) III. NON-DISTURBANCE, EPR-BOHR DEBATE AND OBJECTIVITY
(p2.0) Consider two observers performing generalized measurements M A = {M A i } and M B = {M B j } on their respective subsystems. Recall that a generalized measurement is defined as a collection of Hermitian operators M = {M i }, each corresponding to a given result i, and satisfying M i ≥ 0, ∑ i M i = 1. The probability of occurrence of the result i when measuring M is then given by p(i|M) = Tr(M i ). In case of the two observers, they obtain a joint probability distribution of the results according to: p(ij|M A , M B ) = Tr(M A i ⊗ M B j A:B ) and can calculate the classical mutual information for this distribution I(M A : M B ) ≡ I(p(ij|M A , M B )), describing the observed correlations between the measurement results. Recall that classical mutual information for a joint probability distribution p ij is defined as

(p2.1) the Shannon entropy and p i,j are the marginals of p ij . It is then a well known fact [25,26] that for almost all quantum states, i.e. except for a set of measure zero, the quantity known as two sided discord D(A : B) satisfies: (9) i.e. information extractable via local measurements, as quantified by I(M A : M B ), is strictly less than the quantum mutual information. Moreover, as proven in [24,25], local information extraction typically disturbs the whole state in the sense that:

(p2.2) where p ij is some two-party probability distribution and {Π A i ≡ |i i|}, {Π B j ≡ |j j|} are one-dimensional projective (von Neumann) measurements, i.e. measurements associated with some orthonormal bases {|i } and {|j }. A notation remark: Π A i will always denote a projective measurement, acting on space A with the results indexed by i. One-dimensionality, also called sharpness, is crucial here as otherwise the above fact will not hold. Some of the implications in (10) are easy to prove. For example, if the state is of the  entropy) and similarly for the reduced states A , B . Hence D(A : B) = 0. The rest is a bit more difficult to show. As a remark, the magnitude of discord will not play any role here, only if it is non-zero. Now it becomes clear where the problem with the quantum mutual information lies in the objectivity setting: Eq. (9) implies that the correlations between measurements on the environment fragments and directly on S (performed by some reference observer) will be typically strictly less than I(S : f E), even if we optimize the measurements. Moreover (10) says that they will in general disturb the state. Thus the presence of discord prevents operational checking for (1) using local measurements. Relaxing to one-sided measurements, will not help as the results (9), (10), including genericity, still hold for the one-sided discord [26]:
## (s3) IV. THE ROLE OF CONDITIONAL QUANTUM MUTUAL INFORMATION IN QUANTUM DARWINISM
(p3.0) So far I have analyzed quantum mutual information and the notion of disturbance without any reference to condition (1). But the right hand side of (1) puts strong mathematical constraints on I and it can still happen that despite the above objections, these constraints somehow force the discord to vanish. This is to some extent so. It will be helpful to first look at (1) from the classical information theory point of view, substituting density matrices with random variables X, Y, and entropic functions H and I with their classical counterparts H and I. Let us consider three random variables X, Y, Y with the corresponding joint probability distribution p(x, y, y ). Then the "redundancy" part of (1), demanding that including more degrees of freedom brings no new information about the system, can be in the simplest form written as:
## (s4) V. SPECTRUM BROADCAST STRUCTURES (SBS)
(p4.0) In [4,5] another approach to the objectivity problem was taken. Instead of using somewhat classically motivated conditions for redundant information proliferation, the authors formalized Def. 1 and surprisingly were able to derive a unique state structure compatible with it. I will repat the process below, generalizing it compared to the original derivation [5] Let us look at the phrase 'finding out of the state of S by many independent observers' of Def. 1. First of all, the 'state of the system' is understood as one of the eigenstates |i of the reduced density matrix of the system:

(p4.1) Thus what we are trying to make objective is |i , or more precisely its index i, since when talking about objectivity of a certain property, i.e. position or momentum, we should first of all know which property we are talking about. Then 'finding out [...] by many independent observers' is formalized as observers performing uncorrelated von Neumann measurements, {Π k i k }, on their respective subsystems E k . Note that the number of observers need not be specified at all and is in a sense a 'free parameter'. Common sense says that at least two as for one observer everything is objective by definition. A notation remark: The subscript k enumerates here the environment subsystems so that Π k i k is a projector acting in the space of E k and corresponding to the result i k . Von Neumann measurements are chosen over generalized ones as the most informative (due to their orthogonality property).
## (s5) Theorem 5 (SBS).
(p5.0) Definition 1 ⇐⇒ state (34) with property (39), in the sense that (34,39) is the only state structure compatible with Def. (1). The above version of the SBS theorem together with its proof is a substantial generalization of the original result from [5] as nothing is assumed about the structure of the states i apart from (39). In the original SBS derivation [5] an additional assumption of the, so called, strong independence was used: The only correlation between the parts of the environment is common information about the system. This forces a fully product structure (cf. [38]):
