# A Review of Methods Used to Measure Treeline Migration and Their Application

CorpusID: 229232316 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/574a3464248bf8eb7e4217072e4dc11c90820734](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/574a3464248bf8eb7e4217072e4dc11c90820734)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Treelines, which indicate the boundary between trees and other types of vegetation, exist as vegetational transition zones in high mountain regions and at high latitudes. Treelines indicate a threshold of which above trees are no longer capable of growing and are dependent on local climate characteristics (Körner and Paulsen, 2004). Naturally occurring treelines primarily exist in cold areas and are often limited by low temperatures (Paulsen and Körner, 2014). The regions in which climate-restricted treelines are primarily located, such as high mountains and the Arctic, have experienced more rapid rates of warming compared to the global average (Nogué s-Bravo et al., 2007;IPCC, 2014). For example, the Arctic has experienced a 24% increase in days with temperatures above freezing (Bhatt et al., 2010), while temperatures in the Swiss mountain regions has increased at approximately twice the magnitude compared to the mean trend of the Northern Hemisphere (Rebetez and Reinhard, 2008). The increase in temperature has led to an expansion of suitable habitat for trees in many regions. As a result, many of the world's studied treelines have migrated to higher elevations and latitudes (Harsch et al., 2009).
## (s1) Methods of Treeline Measurement and Monitoring
(p1.0) There are several challenges associated with monitoring the location and movement of treeline positions, including their large spatial extent and often remote locations, the sometimesdiffuse gradient between forests and non-forested areas, as well as the slow movement of many treelines. While all methods can be used, studies that use a combination of different methods as these can provide complementary information. Repeat photography can be used in combination with experimental research methods, such as induced warming or altered atmospheric gas concentrations, to track both how treelines have moved in the past and how they are likely to respond to future climate change (Myers-Smith et al., 2011). This review paper does not aim to provide an exhaustive guide as to how all of the examined methods should be applied. Instead, this paper aims is to help the reader identify which method may prove to be the most suitable approach depending on the aim of the study, the resources available, and the local conditions of the study site.
## (s5) Photography and Remote Sensing
(p5.0) A range of different remote sensing methods has been applied to identify treeline positions, as well as an array of various processing techniques. While field surveys can be used to very accurately map local treeline positions (Rundqvist et al., 2011;Kirdyanov et al., 2012), the extent and remote location of many treelines have made remotely sensed data the primary method for monitoring and mapping many treelines (Sitch et al., 2007;Guay et al., 2014;Ameztegui et al., 2016). Remote sensing is used both as a standalone method and in combination with field surveys and models (Epstein et al., 2012;Coops et al., 2013). There is a range of imagery that can be used to capture treeline positions, including historic and recent photographs from hand-held cameras, aerial photographs, satellite-derived data, and images captured from airborn scanners. The methods used to track and monitor treelines depend on variables such as the spatial extent of the study area, level of detail required, the temporal scale desired for mapping changes in treeline positions, and most importantly, data availability.

(p5.1) One of the best forms of remote sensing when it comes to high-resolution measurements is aerial photography. This method has successfully been used to map canopy cover changes, allowing tree cover changes to be traced more than 100-years back in time (Myers-Smith et al., 2011). Repeat aerial photography methods have been applied extensively around the world. For example, it has been used to map changes to treeline positions in the Catalan Pyrenees (Ameztegui et al., 2016), in the Swiss Alps of Europe (Gehrig-Fasel et al., 2007), as well as in Alaska in the US (Wilmking et al., 2006). The issue can often be to find historical aerial photograph of sufficient resolution, as the lack of colour and shades that often appear in these photographs can make identification of vegetation difficult (Luo and Dai, 2013). Most research utilising aerial photography cover areas of relatively small spatial scales, due to the time and cost associated with capturing larger areas using aircraft. The number of photographs required for aerial photography analysis is mostly dependent on the size of the study site. This can range from hundreds of photographs for areas stretching thousand kilometres (Ameztegui et al., 2016) to only one for areas covering a few hundred meters in size (Wilmking et al., 2006).
