# Downlink MIMO-NOMA With and Without CSI: A Short Survey and Comparison

CorpusID: 226853942 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/881be70f55ae163777c92f599eddcc275e498b4b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s5) A. System Model
(p5.0) Consider a scenario similar to the previous one, but now with a massive-MIMO BS with M antennas transmitting to users equipped with N antennas. The users are also grouped into L clusters, each of which with K users, all with different channel matrices, however, they all share the same spatial correlation matrix R l . In such cases one can apply the Karhunen-Loève channel decomposition [34,35], according to which the k-th user in the l-th cluster can have its channel matrix written as:

(p5.1) where G l,k ∈ C N ×N denotes a fast fading complex Gaussian matrix, Λ l ∈ C M ×M is a diagonal matrix that contains the eigenvalues of R k and U l ∈ C M ×M is a matrix that contains the eigenvectors of R l , meaning that

(p5.2) since that a correlation matrix is always symmetric. However, R l only has r l non-zero eigenvalues, with r l being the rank of R l . Therefore, Λ l is of the form:

(p5.3) and thus can be reduced to a r l × r l matrix, turning G l,k a N × r l matrix and U l a r l × M matrix. Obtaining CSIT for the fast fading matrix G l,k may often be difficult. Because R l is a slowly-changing channel correlation matrix, its estimation at the BS is easier to obtain. The BS sends a precoded M × 1 NOMA vector with superimposed symbols

(p5.4) where s l,k is the symbol for the k-th user in the l-th cluster, α l,k is the power coefficient for the k-th user in the l-th cluster. The number of effective BS antennas for each cluster isM l = (M − r l (L − 1)) and, P l is the M ×M l precoding matrix of the l-th cluster. w l = [0 · · · 0 1 0 · · · 0] T is theM l × 1 precoding vector that has a 1 in the l-th position. The k-th user in the l-th cluster therefore receives
## (s6) B. Performance
(p6.0) A system with a massive array with M = 50 antennas at the BS and terminals with N = 3, which is the same number of antennas considered at the terminals in the openloop setup. Comparing Figures 6 and 7 with Figures 2 and  3, also with two PD-NOMA users and the same modulations, one can see that the performances very similar. This is because the channel models of (11) and (16) are in fact equivalent in terms of end-to-end SNR per user. To understand why this happens one needs to revisit equations (11) and (24) and note that G 1,1 Λ 1 2 1 U 1 = H 1,1 (Karhunen-Loève decomposition) and that v m,k = P 1 = 1. Hence, both equations are in fact equivalent in terms of the ratio between the signal power and the noise power in each of these ZF schemes, when averaging over several channel realizations.
