# Biomass Pretreatment and Characterization: A Review

CorpusID: 224928544 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd1e5b1d34cd0a8b2f88e86b4c75e15e7ee96129)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s4) Chemical pretreatment
(p4.0) Chemical pretreatment of biomass involves the use of organic or inorganic compounds to bring about disruption of biomass structure through interaction with intra-and inter polymer bonds of primary organic components. Biomass, particularly LCB materials are resistant to chemical breakdown hence biomass is regarded as being recalcitrant in nature. A host of factors are responsible for the recalcitrance nature of biomass including the structural complexity and heterogeneity of biomass, the crystalline nature of its cellulose content, and the extent of lignification [7,28]. Throughout the chemical pretreatment process, the structural recalcitrance of LCB is disrupted, resulting in the reduction of cellulose crystallinity and depolymerization as well as the degradation of cellulose and the breakdown of lignin [29,30]. For biochemical conversion of biomass, particularly LCB, chemical pretreatment is commonly undertaken in order to isolate the respective biopolymeric constituents of the material. Figure 3 shows the effect of chemical pretreatment on LCB.
## (s6) Biomass characterization
(p6.0) Heterogeneity remains an inherent characteristic of biomass. The feasibility and viability of products recovery from biomass depends upon its properties. The two main conversion pathways earlier mentioned are basically used to recover products of value from biomass. The choice of the conversion route also depends on the features of biomass hence characterization is essential to better understand quintessential physicochemical properties of biomass that will determine how suitable the material is for conversion; these properties are keys to the efficient utilization of biomass in bioconversion processes [1,7]. However, the characteristics of biomass are largely swayed by its primary organic components (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), which vary depending on biomass source, species, climatic conditions, etc. Depending on the end use of biomass, characterization of biomass is commonly determined and reported in terms of proximate and ultimate analysis using a variety of analytical tools some of which are described in subsequent sections of this review. This provides vital information for evaluating various application potential of biomass, particularly its energy production potential, which also takes into account heating value when the biomass is used as feedstock in thermochemical conversion processes such as gasification [25]. Table 3 presents the most important characteristics of various lignocellulosic and non-lignocellulosic biomass materials. The proximate analysis estimates the physical properties of biomass with direct influence on the combustion performance of biomass, while ultimate analysis provides a qualitative and quantitative estimation of chemical properties in terms of the weight fractions of elemental components (such as C, H and O) and determines the heating value of biomass, a vital property of biomass materials intended as feedstock for thermochemical conversion processes; the amounts of other elements such as N, S and Si can help determine the environmental impact of using biomass as a fuel [25,50,51]. The proximate and ultimate analyses are discussed further in the following section.
## (s8) Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopic analyzer
(p8.0) The Fourier transform infra-red spectroscopic (FTIR) is a sensitive technique for the qualitative and quantitative analysis of organic materials such as biomass. It identifies chemical bonds by generating a range of infrared (IR) retention in the form of spectra that represents sample profile. This analytical tool is particularly useful for tracing and tracking changes in biomass molecular structure caused by pretreatment and can distinguish between functional groups [51]. It is a useful technique for the characterization of biomass materials intended for a whole range of applications including biochemical and thermochemical conversion applications. For example, the FTIR can be used to investigate the possibilities of the removal of hemicellulose and lignin from a chemically pretreated biomass in a pulping process. It can also be used to understand the most reactive components of biomass  Table 3.

(p8.1) The properties of various lignocellulosic and non-lignocellulosic biomass materials [49]. materials and how these components affect the thermochemical conversion process of biomass. The FTIR technique relies on the fact that most organic materials absorb light within the IR region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The frequency of absorption of light is measured in wave numbers that is typically in the range 4000-600 cm À1 .
## (s9) X-ray diffraction analyzer
(p9.0) To the best of the author's knowledge, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) is the only analytical instrument able to reveal comprehensive structural information of materials. Structural information that can be obtained includes chemical composition, deformation, crystal structure, crystal size and orientation as well as layer thickness. This instrument can be used to analyze a wide range of materials including nanomaterials. The XRD is equally a valuable analytical tool for studies involving biomass characterization for various applications. In XRD analysis, the extent of crystallinity is calculated based on an equation: (Eq. (1)) [52,53]:
## (s10) Solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
(p10.0) For the analysis of biomass materials considered for the purpose of biofuels, biochar or chemicals production, the solid state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (SSNMR) is the ideal technique. This technique allows detailed structural elucidation of major constituents of biomass, particularly lignocellulosic biomass such as wood. It complements the XRD technique since the degree of cellulose crystallinity can also be determined. Nonetheless, the XRD is based on the proposition that X-ray scattering can be divided into two structural components that are amorphous and crystalline [54], while SSNMR is characterized by orientationdependent interactions that are observed in a very broad spectrum that provides detailed information on material chemistry, structure and dynamics in the solid state. The production of biofuels and chemicals from lignocellulosic biomass require an unfettered access to cellulose and hemicellulose, thus SSNMR can be used to comprehend bioconversion of biomass as a function of process conditions [55].

(p10.1) The chemical barriers resulting from lignin renders the hydrolysis process of biomass into fermentable sugars quite complicated. Therefore, advances in spectroscopic techniques, especially spectroscopic methods, have enabled researchers to elucidate the structural characteristics of biomass in relation to specific applications.
## (s11) Thermo-gravimetric analysis analyzer
(p11.0) When there is a need to investigate the combustion behavior of biomass materials, the thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) is particularly useful and valuable for determining thermal parameters relevant to the thermochemical conversion of biomass. Proximate analysis data can be obtained from TGA. In this technique, the sample is combusted at desired heating rates in a chemically inactive atmosphere of nitrogen or argon such that the mass of the sample is monitored as temperature increases. The change in mass of the sample is usually plotted as a function of time or temperature. The TGA is a high temperature analytical instrument that adequately mimics the conditions existing in a typical thermal energy production system [56]. For studies involving the need to determine the kinetics of thermal decomposition of biomass, TGA is equally very helpful as it provides qualitative information that can be used to understand process conditions and design parameters of thermochemical conversion systems [57]. This requires that TGA be conducted at different heating rates and its derivative (DTG) used to simplify the reading of the characteristic peaks obtained from the thermogram of change in mass versus temperature.
## (s16) Future prospects
(p16.0) The large-scale substitution of fossil fuel with biomass resources is a topical issue not just for the production of energy but also for the production of chemicals, bio products and materials. Moreover, due to the large availability of biomass throughout the world, the production of the high value-added products from biomass can be achieved under any geographical conditions and the feasibility and viability of the production of the value-added products depends on biomass characteristics and the pretreatment method employed. However, biomass complexity and the high capital and operation costs associated with biomass pretreatment as well as the mechanisms involved in the conversion process of biomass are some of the challenges associated with the use of biomass for the production of energy, chemicals and fuels. Therefore, efforts should be geared toward the design of more easy-touse and cost effective technologies at all levels so as to encourage the widespread application of biomass and attract investment in this field. In addition, not much is known about the optimal biomass pretreatment conditions because they are seldom reported. Consequently, for the efficient and feasible utilization of biomass in bioconversion processes, information about the optimum conditions of pretreatment is vital and efforts made to report such information. It has been reported [61] that researchers and policy makers are in need of useful information that may lead to the much needed improvements in this field of research. So, efforts made to report optimal pretreatment conditions for biomass will create further awareness on the advantages of the exploitation of biomass resources for the production of renewable energy and other bio products.

(p16.1) On the other hand, characterization of biomass also faces significant challenges ranging from the nature of the biomass and the multiphase bioconversion processes using the biomass as feedstock as well as the lack of experimental validation of the cutting-edge analytical techniques used for biomass characterization. Efforts made to address these barriers through continued research will equally lead to optimization of bioconversion and bio refinery processes. Needless to say that, since a single analytical technique cannot provide all of the needed information simultaneously with optimal resolution and high sensitivity, complementary techniques are often required to achieve full understanding of the physical and chemical underpinnings of the prodigy of biomass recalcitrance as it undergoes bioconversion processing. This may ease the challenges associated with experimental validation. Nevertheless, it is vital to mention that each type of characterization technique has its own merits and demerits under a particular set of circumstances and that the shortcomings of one technique may be compensated for by the merits of the other.
