# Analysis of the Effectiveness of Different Endodontic Irrigation Techniques in Smear Layer Removal: Literature Review

CorpusID: 225632436 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51dd83b618bfe7aafa8c95200023803098432c0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51dd83b618bfe7aafa8c95200023803098432c0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) One of the main objectives of endodontic treatment is the decontamination of root canal systems (SCR), to reestablish the function of the tooth instead of opting for its extraction. Disinfection is done through the use of manual and mechanical instruments with the association of irrigating solutions (URBAN et al., 2017).

(p0.1) Along the chemical -mechanical preparation of the root canal system, an amorphous and irregular layer is formed on the root canal wall (CR), known as the smear layer. The smear layer is composed of organic and inorganic substances originating from dentin, odontoblastic processes, necrotic dentrites and microorganisms, together with their metabolic products (AHUJA et al., 2014;YILMAZ et al., 2017). This smear layer can retain bacteria inside the dentinal tubules, act as a barrier against disinfectant agents and interfere with the adhesion of the filling materials. Therefore, it must be removed due to its potential for contamination and to enhance the effect of irrigants and medicines (PRADO et al., 2016).

(p0.2) Irrigation becomes an essential complement to the success of the treatment, as it has several important functions, which may vary according to the solutions used: it reduces the friction between the instrument and the dentin, improves the efficiency of cutting files, dissolves the tissues in addition, it has a washing effect and an antimicrobial/antibiofilm effect (HAAPASALO et al., 2014).

(p0.3) Among the various options, sodium hypochlorite (NaOCL) is the most used at the present time and the closest to being an ideal solution, in association with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (HARGREAVES; COHEN, 2011).
## (s2) III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
(p2.0) To extract data from the main references included in the review based on the level of evidence (systematic review), we used a research instrument containing the identification of the article, the objectives, the methodological characteristics, results and the conclusions of the authors. The summary is shown in table 1.

(p2.1) During the endodontic treatment through instrumentation, a smear layer is formed, which consists of organic and inorganic substances, including fragments of odontoblastic processes, microorganisms, their by-products and necrotic materials (SABER; HASHEM, 2011;YILMAZ et al. , 2017).
## (s3) International Journal of Advanced Engineering Research and Science (IJAERS)
(p3.0) [  (2011), compare in their research the removal of the smear layer using apical negative pressure (ANP) with the EndoVac device, manual dynamic agitation (MDA) and passive ultrasonic irrigation (PUI) using 2.5% NaOCl and 17% EDTA as irrigating solutions, and according to the data obtained, EndoVac and MDA removed the smear layer better than PUI. A possible explanation for what happened was that both techniques reach full working length of the instrumented channels and, therefore, allow for adequate replacement of the irrigator, which is not possible or recommended with conventional needle irrigation devices or ultrasonic agitation. Ahuja et al. (2014) obtained similar results in their study, in which the EndoVac was more effective in removing smear layer followed by MDA and PUI, also using 2.5% NaOCl and 17% EDTA as irrigators.
