# Job Demands and Resources among Healthcare Professionals during Virus Pandemics: A Review and Examination of Fluctuations in Mental Health Strain during COVID-19 JOB DEMANDS AND RESOURCES AMONG HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS DURING VIRUS PANDEMICS 121

CorpusID: 229349493 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8b66e861c401f261843abb91d701db633bdcda6d)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) Brief Overview of the Job Demands-Resources Model
(p2.0) The Job Demands-Resources (JD-R) model is one of the most commonly applied models of work stress in occupational health psychology and is a useful framework for conceptualizing burnout and well-being at multiple levels of analysis (Bakker & Demerouti, 2017). The JD-R model posits that burnout and other adverse mental health outcomes are a function of both the job demands facing employees and the personal and job resources available to help employees meet those demands (Demerouti, Bakker, Nachreiner, & Schaufeli, 2001). The job demands component of the model addresses those factors of work that require continuous amounts of physical, mental, or emotional effort. Sources of these demands can be found in physical aspects of the work environment (e.g., high levels of noise or crowding), social aspects of the work environment (e.g., interpersonal conflict, abusive supervision), or organizational aspects of the work environment (e.g., organizational constraints, time pressure). Chronic exposure to job demands creates a strain on employees through the continuous effort required to address the demands present in the work environment. One advantage of the JD-R model over other models is the focus on broad categories of job demands that have the potential to apply to diverse organizational settings .

(p2.1) The job resources of the model refer to those factors in the work environment that facilitate achievement of work-related goals, help reduce job demands, or stimulate professional growth and development . Resources can also come from various aspects of the work environment, including physical (e.g., mechanical assistance for lifting heavy equipment), psychological (e.g., positive feedback from supervisors), social (e.g., co-worker support), or organizational (e.g., perceived support from the organization). The range of job resources included in the model also allows the JD-R model to be applied to diverse organizational settings. Furthermore, the inclusion of personal resources within the model (e.g., self-efficacy, optimism, hardiness) further expands the ability of the model to account for a variety of factors that reduce the probability of burnout and other mental health problems (Xanthopoulou, Bakker, Demerouti, & Schaufeli, 2007).

(p2.2) As noted by Bakker and Demerouti (2017), there is a large amount of support for key propositions of the JD-R model. Given that the focus of the present research is on how virus-related work demands are associated with strain among healthcare professionals, we are primarily focused on the health-impairment process, where the presence of job demands creates strain on the employee, with indicators of strain including burnout, anxiety, and other health problems . Figure 1 highlights the health-impairment component of the model applied to virus outbreaks. In addition to the direct links between job demands and resources on strain, the model also posits that job resources have the capacity to moderate the job demands-strain relationship (i.e. high resources can reduce the negative impact of job demands).
## (s7) COVID-19 Demands and Resources as Predictors of Fluctuations in Mental Health Strain among Emergency Medicine Professionals
(p7.0) The present study was designed to address these gaps in prior research by examining EMP who were treating potential COVID-19 positive patients over the course of 6 weeks during the pandemic as it began spreading in the United States. EMP are at the forefront of the COVID-19 pandemic and are the initial healthcare professionals confronted with positive cases who are experiencing symptoms severe enough for them to go to the emergency room (Rodriguez et al., 2020). Therefore, this specific group of healthcare professionals provides a unique and important sample for investigating how changes in demands and resources are linked to changes in mental health strain across multiple weeks of the pandemic.

(p7.1) The current study was part of a process improvement effort already underway at a large non-profit academic health organization. Participants responded to an assessment of mental health strain (Dyrbye, Satele, Sloan, & Shanafelt., 2013), COVID-19 specific demands present in the workplace (e.g., lack of PPE; Tam et al., 2004), COVID-19-related personal demands associated with work (e.g., concern with getting infected; Tam et al., 2004), and resources related to social support (Preti et al., 2020) and meaningful work (Britt, Adler, & Bartone, 2001).

(p7.2) In addition to the assessment of these constructs via self-report, the number of hours personnel worked each week were assessed from an administrative database to provide an objective index of workload. These demands were assessed both as predictors of mental health strain as well as moderators of the relationships between the COVID-19 demands and mental health strain. Schneider and Weigl (2018) have detailed the numerous stressors facing EMP under non-pandemic conditions. Existing demands related to workload such as work hours have the potential to magnify the effects of pandemic-related work demands.
## (s9) Measures
(p9.0) The weekly survey required brief measures that were easy to complete from a computer or mobile device. Therefore, checklists were primarily used to assess the constructs of interest, as has been done in similar studies of healthcare professionals during prior virus epidemics and the COVID-19 pandemic (e.g., Schecter, Pham, Hua, Spinazzola, Sonnenklar, Li, & Milanaik, 2020;Wu et al., 2009). Total scores on the checklists are best considered formative constructs that assess the total amount of strain, demands, and resources present on a given week.

(p9.1) Mental Health Strain. The survey designed and administered for the present research included an adapted 7-item version of the Mayo Clinic Physician Well-Being Index (PWBI), for which prior research has established construct and criterion validity and reliability (Dyrbye et al., 2013). Specifically, in the current survey the first item in the 7-item PWBI, "Have you felt burned out from your work?" was omitted and instead included the single item burnout measure from the Mini Z burnout measure (Dolan, Mohr, Lempa, Joos, Fihn, Nelson, & Helfrich, 2015). Given that all items in the measure assess strain-related mental health issues (e.g., depression, anxiety, fatigue), for the present article we use the term mental health strain to describe scores on this measure. Therefore, the sum of the items resulted in a mental health strain score ranging from 0 (low mental health strain) to 7 (high mental health strain).
## (s17) Interactions between COVID-19 Demands and Workload.
(p17.0) Results for the multilevel models examining the interactions between hours worked and the two COVID-19 demands are provided in the first two sections of Table 4. All predictors were group mean centered (i.e. centered within person) before interaction terms were created (Aguinis, Gottfredson, & Culpepper, 2013;Enders & Tofighi, 2007). Hours worked the prior week interacted with COVID-19 personal demands to predict mental health strain. The interaction is plotted in Figure 2 and indicates that the relationship between COVID-19 personal demands and mental health strain was magnified when participants had worked more hours the week prior to the assessment. That is, as COVID-19 personal demands increased, mental health strain increased. However, this relationship became stronger as hours worked the prior week increased. Thus, Hypothesis 2(b) was supported. However, hours worked the prior week did not interact with COVID-19 job demands to predict participants' mental health strain; thus, Hypothesis 2(a) was not supported.  Note. The mental health strain control variable controlled for participants' mental health strain from the prior week. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the three models testing Hypothesis 1(a), 1(b), and 1(c), respectively, were .57, .57, and .50. Abbreviations: B, slope; CI, confidence interval; LL, lower level of the 95% CI; MHS, mental health strain; p, significance value; SE, standard error; t, t approximation; UL, upper level of the 95% CI. *p < .05 (two-tailed); **p < .01 (two-tailed); ***p < .001 (two-tailed).  Note. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the models testing Hypothesis 2(a) and 2(b), respectively, were .52 and .53. The marginal pseudo-R 2 values for the models testing
## (s19) DISCUSSION
(p19.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has been challenging in many ways for healthcare professionals, particularly in terms of the mental health strain it has added to a workforce that has been experiencing an increase in burnout and stress in recent years (Rodriguez et al., 2020). Accordingly, it is critical to understand what specific factors play a role in generating increased mental health strain as well as factors that may aid in supporting healthcare professionals and in mitigating the impacts of such strain. The purpose of this article was to address this issue by presenting an integrated review of prior literature examining healthcare professionals' experiences during similar epidemics and pandemics, and by offering an empirical examination of weekly fluctuations in EMP mental health strain during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. In the following sections, we further synthesize the results of our review and empirical study, highlighting key contributions to theory as well as practice. We also note limitations of the study and offer several recommendations regarding important next steps for future researchers aiming to continue to expand this important area of work.
## (s20) Contributions to Theory and Practice
(p20.0) This research makes several unique theoretical and practical contributions. First, in applying the JD-R model to the healthcare professional context, our review of the literature contributes an overarching theoretical framework that clarifies the novel job and personal demands that healthcare professionals may face during virus epidemics and pandemics, as well as the resources that may be beneficial in addressing these demands. Overall, this review contributes to our understanding of healthcare providers' mental health and wellbeing during virus epidemics and pandemics, namely that they are likely to be impacted by an imbalance of increased unique demands and stagnated or declining resources. In light of our subsequent study, this may be especially critical for emergency departments and other frontline healthcare workers as EMP experience higher levels of stress than other occupations even during regular, non-pandemic work (Schneider & Weigl, 2018). Our empirical study of EMP's demands, resources, and mental health strain serves as an important contribution towards addressing the need for an increased understanding of within-person fluctuations in mental health strain during a virus epidemic or pandemic. Furthermore, the mixed results provide interesting insights regarding what may impact healthcare professionals on the frontline of a virus epidemic or pandemic. Notably, we found support for our hypotheses regarding the negative impacts of COVID-19 job and personal demands on EMP's mental health strain over time, as well as the interactive effects of personal demands and number of hours worked per week. As expected, increases in COVID-19 personal demands, COVID-19 job demands, and number of hours worked were each associated with an increase in EMP's mental health strain. However, while there was not an interaction of COVID-19 job demands and number of hours worked, the relationship between COVID-19 personal demands and mental health strain was amplified as the number of hours worked increased.

(p20.1) One explanation for these results could be that several personal demands were unique to the COVID-19 pandemic context and may have been unusually concerning, such as fear of getting loved ones sick or feeling uncertain as to how long the pandemic would last. When paired with an increasing number of hours, EMP have less time to detach from work and manage these unexpected demands, especially when personal resources that are typically available to help manage these personal demands (e.g., social support from family) may not be an option, leading to greater mental health strain (see Sonnentag & Fritz, 2015). However, an increased number of hours may not have the same effect on COVID-19 job demands if appropriate resources were still available. Overall, these findings contribute to our growing understanding as to what demands may be more influential in regard to healthcare professionals' mental health, especially in terms of highlighting the role of personal demands for EMP as a potential area for increased attention.

(p20.2) An additional explanation for the findings regarding COVID-19 job demands and mental health strain is that the pandemic context may be exacerbating systemic issues that are typically more manageable by EMP in typical non-pandemic settings, and that some of these organizational issues may be uniquely driven by the structure of healthcare systems within the United States. In the United States, individuals often rely much more heavily on the Emergency Department (ED) as a primary healthcare resource, leading to challenges such as overcrowding, inadequate staffing, and misuse of the ED for non-emergency routine care . Accordingly, typical job demands in pandemic and virus epidemics are likely to be not only exacerbated, but to also introduce or reveal additional weaknesses in an already stressed system, such as the inadequate provision of PPE. When paired with an increasing number of work hours, these perpetual and newly introduced job demands are likely to play that much more of a role in negatively impacting EMP's mental health strain.

(p20.3) Regarding the role of social support and meaningful work as potential resources for buffering against mental health strain, we were unable to demonstrate any statistically significant impact. While initially these results seem surprising, there are a few issues that may offer a clearer understanding as to why this was the case. First, it may be that while these are valuable resources, these two may not be the most needed resources for addressing EMP's mental health strain during the early stage of the COVID-19 pandemic. This is in alignment with the previous discussion of personal demands and resources being misaligned. If EMP are consistently and increasingly feeling personal demands such as a fear of getting others sick or being unable to share concerns about the pandemic with others, receiving social support may actually increase their concerns and result in the subsequent increase in mental health strain.

(p20.4) Instead, EMP may need resources such as being able to fully disconnect and detach when not at work, or adjustments to their schedules or work hours to provide recovery time. Taken as a whole, the findings of this study offer important insight as to the value of identifying specific resources that may be most beneficial to supporting EMP and other healthcare professionals during virus epidemics and pandemics. While further research is warranted, this initial within-person study makes a contribution to our understanding in particular of personal demands and the need to rapidly identify the specific resources that may serve as buffers to ensure mental health strain does not increase over time.
## (s21) Limitations and Future Directions
(p21.0) As with any study, there are limitations that must be considered when interpreting the results of our study. There are also future research directions that can address these limitations and enhance theory and practice in this context. First, in order to keep the survey to a manageable length so that EMP would respond on a weekly basis, we were not able to include previously validated, complete scales for variables such as meaningful work, which may have reduced our ability to capture meaningful variations over time. Regarding the measurement of demands and resources, we did rely upon similar measurement approaches implemented in studies of healthcare professionals during virus epidemics and pandemics, including the COVID-19 pandemic (Rodriguez et al., 2020;Tam et al., 2004). We also utilized objective metrics for capturing the demand of work hours, which helped to reduce the survey length while also providing reliable and accurate data. However, the checklists were formative measures that were summed from dichotomous items, which again may have reduced the ability to capture finer grained, significant fluctuations over time.

(p21.1) From a future research perspective, continued refinement and testing of appropriate measures is a critical future step for this area of research, and may benefit from increased inclusion of less obtrusive, more objective measures. For example, researchers have examined the potential use of psychophysiological responses as a measure of physicians' cognitive demands while on the job (Johannessen, Szulewski, Radulovic, White, Braund, Howes, Rodenburg, & Davies, 2020), while others are developing methods for objectively capturing physician stress using wearable sensors (Kaczor, Carreiro, Stapp, Chapman, & Indic, 2020). These types of metrics may be very useful for dynamically monitoring healthcare professionals' physical demands and workload during virus epidemics and pandemics. However, a mixed methods approach will most likely be the optimal approach for effectively capturing and analyzing all elements of the JD-R framework over time.

(p21.2) Another limitation of the study relates to the timing of the study. While we did conduct this study over a 6-week period and were therefore able to examine fluctuations during that time period, the experiences and subsequent mental health strain of EMP during this initial phase of a virus pandemic may be different for a more extended period of time. For example, some demands-such as a shortage of PPE-may have had a greater impact on mental health strain at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, while other demands-such as having to quarantine multiple times due to exposuremay have greater effects later in the pandemic. Furthermore, the compounding effects of months of high demands and potentially inconsistent resources may also result in different patterns of strain over these extended periods of time. Future research is critically needed to explore these issues regarding mental health strain fluctuations in these contexts.

(p21.3) Finally, our sample drew from a single healthcare organization within one region of the United States and, therefore, may need to be examined in other contexts and with multiple organizations to ensure generalizability. The US healthcare system operates differently than many other countries, particularly in terms of the reliance upon EDs as a source of primary care . Other countries' healthcare systems may rely less on EMP as frontline sources of care and may have different systems for managing resources such as PPE (Khalil, Alam, Arefin, Chowdhury, Huq, Chowdhury, & Khan, 2020). Therefore, the external validity of these findings is limited primarily to the United States and international healthcare systems with similar structural features. However, it is important to note that despite drawing from a single organizational entity, the sample does include responses from multiple, distributed sites, with some sites being newer to the organization than others, and urgent care sites that are more similar in their operation to general practitioner models. As such, the present study sample is likely to be more representative of EMP more broadly than if the data been collected from a single site within the organization.
