# Overview of Randomized Controlled Trials in Primary Total Hip Arthroplasty (34,020 Patients): What Have We Learnt?

CorpusID: 221187990 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8266dc1a9ce05f4f9eb5cc36b10cba6e91c7ad7d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8266dc1a9ce05f4f9eb5cc36b10cba6e91c7ad7d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Surgical Approach
(p2.0) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.

(p2.1) Twenty-two RCTs looked specifically at minimally invasive surgery techniques and compared the outcomes with standard techniques including anterior, anterolateral, and posterior approaches; none have reported significant differences in their measured outcomes. The remaining 45 RCTs were as follows (Appendix 1): mini-incisions and two-incision approaches in 13 RCTs, anterior versus posterior approaches in 9 RCTs, anterior versus lateral approaches in 7 RCTs, lateral versus posterior approaches 4 RCTs, variant posterior approaches such as repair of soft tissues or not in 4 RCTs, piriformis sparing approach in 2 RCTs, use diathermy and electrocautery in 2 RCTs, and one RCT for each supercapsular percutaneously assisted approach, trans-trochanteric approach, outpatient anterior approach and patient positioning; none of these 45 RCTs reported any significant differences.

(p2.2) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.

(p2.3) Twenty-two RCTs looked specifically at minimally invasive surgery techniques and compared the outcomes with standard techniques including anterior, anterolateral, and posterior approaches; none have reported significant differences in their measured outcomes. The remaining 45 RCTs were as follows (Appendix 1): mini-incisions and two-incision approaches in 13 RCTs, anterior versus posterior approaches in 9 RCTs, anterior versus lateral approaches in 7 RCTs, lateral versus posterior approaches 4 RCTs, variant posterior approaches such as repair of soft tissues or not in 4 RCTs, piriformis sparing approach in 2 RCTs, use diathermy and electrocautery in 2 RCTs, and one RCT for each supercapsular percutaneously assisted approach, trans-trochanteric approach, outpatient anterior approach and patient positioning; none of these 45 RCTs reported any significant differences.
## (s3) Fixation (Cemented Versus Cementless) of Total Hip Arthroplasty
(p3.0) Seven RCTs compared cemented and cementless THA of different brands with a total of 1271 patients. Only one trial, Corten et al, 17,18 reported significantly better survivorship for cementless THA in their 20-year follow-up report of their 93 patients from an original RCT sample size of 250 patients (P = 0.020). The cementless tapered stem had an extremely good survival rate of 99%.

(p3.1) Radiographs showed evidence of mild stress-shielding around 95% of the cemented stems and 88% of the cementless stems; stress-shielding of grade 3 or greater was seen around the remaining 12% of the cementless stems. The remaining six RCTs reported no significant differences between cemented and cementless THA although their follow-up was only up to 5 years.

(p3.2) Seven RCTs compared cemented and cementless THA of different brands with a total of 1271 patients. Only one trial, Corten et al, 17,18 reported significantly better survivorship for cementless THA in their 20-year follow-up report of their 93 patients from an original RCT sample size of 250 patients (P = 0.020). The cementless tapered stem had an extremely good survival rate of 99%.

(p3.3) Radiographs showed evidence of mild stress-shielding around 95% of the cemented stems and 88% of the cementless stems; stress-shielding of grade 3 or greater was seen around the remaining 12% of the cementless stems. The remaining six RCTs reported no significant differences between cemented and cementless THA although their follow-up was only up to 5 years.
## (s5) Femoral Stems Trials
(p5.0) Forty-six RCTs with 5242 patients evaluated aspects specifically related to femoral stems. Only three RCTs reported significant differences. Berger et al 24 reported a significantly lower rate of cement mantle deficiencies when using stem centralizer in 60 patients (P , 0.001). In their trial of 39 patients at a 2-year followup, Tanzer et al 25 assessed femoral bone remodeling using dual-energy radiograph absorptiometry after a titanium proximally porous-coated femoral implant with or without hydroxyapatite (HA)-tricalcium phosphate coating. The HA-tricalcium phosphate-coated stems had significantly less femoral bone loss. Luites et al 26      Cup placement time, total fluoroscopy time, and cup position Cups placed using software were significantly closer to the target abduction angle (P , 0.001) with fewer outliers. Cup placement took longer in the software group (P , 0.001), and 2 seconds more total fluoroscopy time (P , 0.001). Takada et al 13 Supine versus lateral position using the modified Watson-Jones approach (n = 60)
## (s10) Surgical Technique and Miscellaneous Trials
(p10.0) Twelve heterogeneous RCTs looking at surgical technical aspects of THA are presented in this group with 1098 patients. Five RCTs (41.6%) reported significant findings in favor of using a measuring device to minimize leg length discrepancy, 51 high-efficiency particulate air to reduce colonyforming units within 5 cm of the surgical wound, 52 better acetabular component positioning measured on postoperative CT scan with the use of patient-specific instrumentations, 53 the use of transverse acetabular ligament for cup anteversion and inclination, 54 and the use of digital inclinometer-assisted cup insertion technique 55 (Table 7).

(p10.1) The remaining seven RCTs reported no significant differences and made the following comparisons: sequential versus simultaneous bilateral THA; removal versus retention of subchondral bone plate for cemented cups in two trials; cup insertion with or without inclinometer; the use of abductor shuck versus transosseous pins (a level-caliper system using trans-osseous periacetabular and femoral pins as two fixed points) versus patella electrocardiogram leads to measure intraoperative leg length; plasma-rich platelets versus no plasmarich platelet in bilateral THA; and autologous impaction bone grafting versus traditional technique in cementless THA (Appendix 1).

(p10.2) Twelve heterogeneous RCTs looking at surgical technical aspects of THA are presented in this group with 1098 patients. Five RCTs (41.6%) reported significant findings in favor of using a measuring device to minimize leg length discrepancy, 51 high-efficiency particulate air to reduce colonyforming units within 5 cm of the surgical wound, 52 better acetabular component positioning measured on postoperative CT scan with the use of patient-specific instrumentations, 53 the use of transverse acetabular ligament for cup anteversion and inclination, 54 and the use of digital inclinometer-assisted cup insertion technique 55 (Table 7).

(p10.3) The remaining seven RCTs reported no significant differences and made the following comparisons: sequential versus simultaneous bilateral THA; removal versus retention of subchondral bone plate for cemented cups in two trials; cup insertion with or without inclinometer; the use of abductor shuck versus transosseous pins (a level-caliper system using trans-osseous periacetabular and femoral pins as two fixed points) versus patella electrocardiogram leads to measure intraoperative leg length; plasma-rich platelets versus no plasmarich platelet in bilateral THA; and autologous impaction bone grafting versus traditional technique in cementless THA (Appendix 1).
## (s27) Surgical Approach
(p27.0) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.

(p27.1) Twenty-two RCTs looked specifically at minimally invasive surgery techniques and compared the outcomes with standard techniques including anterior, anterolateral, and posterior approaches; none have reported significant differences in their measured outcomes. The remaining 45 RCTs were as follows (Appendix 1): mini-incisions and two-incision approaches in 13 RCTs, anterior versus posterior approaches in 9 RCTs, anterior versus lateral approaches in 7 RCTs, lateral versus posterior approaches 4 RCTs, variant posterior approaches such as repair of soft tissues or not in 4 RCTs, piriformis sparing approach in 2 RCTs, use diathermy and electrocautery in 2 RCTs, and one RCT for each supercapsular percutaneously assisted approach, trans-trochanteric approach, outpatient anterior approach and patient positioning; none of these 45 RCTs reported any significant differences.

(p27.2) Seventy-two RCTs with 6728 patients evaluated different surgical approaches or related aspects with only five RCTs (6.9%) reporting significant differences between the intervention groups (Table 2). Hamilton et al 12 evaluated the use of implant positioning software with fluoroscopy in anterior THA in 200 patients and reported closer results to target but with longer operative and fluoroscopy time. Takada et al 15 compared direct anterior with anterolateral approaches in bilateral THA in 30 patients at a 1-year follow-up focusing on nerve injury and muscle atrophy measured on CT and MRI. They reported no differences in clinical outcomes despite significant differences in muscle atrophy and increased nerve injury with the anterior approach. Acetabular implant positioning was compared radiographically in 60 patients using supine versus lateral patient positioning through a modified Watson-Jones approach with more accurate cup positioning in the supine position. 13 Moon et al 14 compared two techniques of posterior soft tissue repair in 167 hips (150 patients) at a 28-month follow-up and reported better outcomes and less dislocations with trans-osseous repair compared with gluteus medius/short rotators tendon-to-tendon repair. Finally, Kruse et al 16 compared radiographic outcomes of posterior and lateral approaches in 80 patients and reported that the femoral offset and abductor moment arm were significantly increased when using posterior compared with lateral approach.

(p27.3) Twenty-two RCTs looked specifically at minimally invasive surgery techniques and compared the outcomes with standard techniques including anterior, anterolateral, and posterior approaches; none have reported significant differences in their measured outcomes. The remaining 45 RCTs were as follows (Appendix 1): mini-incisions and two-incision approaches in 13 RCTs, anterior versus posterior approaches in 9 RCTs, anterior versus lateral approaches in 7 RCTs, lateral versus posterior approaches 4 RCTs, variant posterior approaches such as repair of soft tissues or not in 4 RCTs, piriformis sparing approach in 2 RCTs, use diathermy and electrocautery in 2 RCTs, and one RCT for each supercapsular percutaneously assisted approach, trans-trochanteric approach, outpatient anterior approach and patient positioning; none of these 45 RCTs reported any significant differences.
## (s28) Fixation (Cemented Versus Cementless) of Total Hip Arthroplasty
(p28.0) Seven RCTs compared cemented and cementless THA of different brands with a total of 1271 patients. Only one trial, Corten et al, 17,18 reported significantly better survivorship for cementless THA in their 20-year follow-up report of their 93 patients from an original RCT sample size of 250 patients (P = 0.020). The cementless tapered stem had an extremely good survival rate of 99%.

(p28.1) Radiographs showed evidence of mild stress-shielding around 95% of the cemented stems and 88% of the cementless stems; stress-shielding of grade 3 or greater was seen around the remaining 12% of the cementless stems. The remaining six RCTs reported no significant differences between cemented and cementless THA although their follow-up was only up to 5 years.

(p28.2) Seven RCTs compared cemented and cementless THA of different brands with a total of 1271 patients. Only one trial, Corten et al, 17,18 reported significantly better survivorship for cementless THA in their 20-year follow-up report of their 93 patients from an original RCT sample size of 250 patients (P = 0.020). The cementless tapered stem had an extremely good survival rate of 99%.

(p28.3) Radiographs showed evidence of mild stress-shielding around 95% of the cemented stems and 88% of the cementless stems; stress-shielding of grade 3 or greater was seen around the remaining 12% of the cementless stems. The remaining six RCTs reported no significant differences between cemented and cementless THA although their follow-up was only up to 5 years.
## (s30) Femoral Stems Trials
(p30.0) Forty-six RCTs with 5242 patients evaluated aspects specifically related to femoral stems. Only three RCTs reported significant differences. Berger et al 24 reported a significantly lower rate of cement mantle deficiencies when using stem centralizer in 60 patients (P , 0.001). In their trial of 39 patients at a 2-year followup, Tanzer et al 25 assessed femoral bone remodeling using dual-energy radiograph absorptiometry after a titanium proximally porous-coated femoral implant with or without hydroxyapatite (HA)-tricalcium phosphate coating. The HA-tricalcium phosphate-coated stems had significantly less femoral bone loss. Luites et al 26      Cup placement time, total fluoroscopy time, and cup position Cups placed using software were significantly closer to the target abduction angle (P , 0.001) with fewer outliers. Cup placement took longer in the software group (P , 0.001), and 2 seconds more total fluoroscopy time (P , 0.001). Takada et al 13 Supine versus lateral position using the modified Watson-Jones approach (n = 60)
## (s35) Surgical Technique and Miscellaneous Trials
(p35.0) Twelve heterogeneous RCTs looking at surgical technical aspects of THA are presented in this group with 1098 patients. Five RCTs (41.6%) reported significant findings in favor of using a measuring device to minimize leg length discrepancy, 51 high-efficiency particulate air to reduce colonyforming units within 5 cm of the surgical wound, 52 better acetabular component positioning measured on postoperative CT scan with the use of patient-specific instrumentations, 53 the use of transverse acetabular ligament for cup anteversion and inclination, 54 and the use of digital inclinometer-assisted cup insertion technique 55 (Table 7).

(p35.1) The remaining seven RCTs reported no significant differences and made the following comparisons: sequential versus simultaneous bilateral THA; removal versus retention of subchondral bone plate for cemented cups in two trials; cup insertion with or without inclinometer; the use of abductor shuck versus transosseous pins (a level-caliper system using trans-osseous periacetabular and femoral pins as two fixed points) versus patella electrocardiogram leads to measure intraoperative leg length; plasma-rich platelets versus no plasmarich platelet in bilateral THA; and autologous impaction bone grafting versus traditional technique in cementless THA (Appendix 1).

(p35.2) Twelve heterogeneous RCTs looking at surgical technical aspects of THA are presented in this group with 1098 patients. Five RCTs (41.6%) reported significant findings in favor of using a measuring device to minimize leg length discrepancy, 51 high-efficiency particulate air to reduce colonyforming units within 5 cm of the surgical wound, 52 better acetabular component positioning measured on postoperative CT scan with the use of patient-specific instrumentations, 53 the use of transverse acetabular ligament for cup anteversion and inclination, 54 and the use of digital inclinometer-assisted cup insertion technique 55 (Table 7).

(p35.3) The remaining seven RCTs reported no significant differences and made the following comparisons: sequential versus simultaneous bilateral THA; removal versus retention of subchondral bone plate for cemented cups in two trials; cup insertion with or without inclinometer; the use of abductor shuck versus transosseous pins (a level-caliper system using trans-osseous periacetabular and femoral pins as two fixed points) versus patella electrocardiogram leads to measure intraoperative leg length; plasma-rich platelets versus no plasmarich platelet in bilateral THA; and autologous impaction bone grafting versus traditional technique in cementless THA (Appendix 1).
