# R E V I E W SGLT2 Inhibitors as Add-On Therapy to Metformin for People with Type 2 Diabetes: A Review of Placebo-Controlled Trials in Asian versus Non-Asian Patients

CorpusID: 221174980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/418ad3ac218e6b8a748eb08b13294398250d906a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/418ad3ac218e6b8a748eb08b13294398250d906a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Study Characteristics
(p7.0) The study selection process is depicted in Figure 1. A total of 3549 references were identified through the initial electronic search. When combined with the term "metformin", the number of references was reduced to 601. Subsequent combination with "placebo" allowed to reduce the number of references to 146. From this first set of references, we excluded citations based upon study characteristics after title/abstract evaluation (n=95) and subsequently other citations based upon inclusion/exclusion criteria after abstract/ full-text evaluation (n=34). At the end of this search strategy, 17 RCTs that fulfilled all criteria were identified and were separated according to the ethnic group in two categories: RCTs that recruited Asian patients versus RCTs that recruited exclusively or mostly (>65%) non-Asian patients. In the end, we identified 7 eligible RCTs (3 of them tested two doses, thus a total of 10 sets of data: n=1164) in Asian patients [28][29][30][31][32][33][34] and 10 eligible RCTs (6 of them tested two different doses, thus a total of 16 sets of data: n=2482) in non-Asian patients. [35][36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43][44][45] The results of one RCT were reported in two different complementary publications. 38,39 In addition, two international studies recruited a mix population with both non-Asian and Asian patients with T2DM, one that tested ertugliflozin (respective proportions of ethnic groups not mentioned) 46 and one that evaluated empagliflozin (53% non-Asian and 46% Asian patients). 47 As no separate results were provided according to ethnicity, these two studies have not been included in the main analyses comparing Asian versus non-Asian patients and their results will be shown separately.
