# The Burden of Endometriosis on Women's Lifespan: A Narrative Overview on Quality of Life and Psychosocial Wellbeing

CorpusID: 220310517 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b532ffa0b3b1ae143578161eb8413348f1a4d6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b532ffa0b3b1ae143578161eb8413348f1a4d6)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) The data research was conducted using the following databases MEDLINE, EMBASE, Web of Sciences, Scopus, ClinicalTrial.gov, OVID and Cochrane Library querying for all articles related to endometriosis from the inception of the database up to February 2020. The studies were identified with the use of a combination of the following text words: endometriosis, quality of life, sex, cost, depression, anxiety, emotion, social relationship, economic burden, health care resource, questionnaire. The selection criteria of this narrative review included randomized clinical trials, nonrandomized controlled studies (observational prospective, retrospective cohort studies, case-control studies, case series), and review articles. A review of articles also included the abstracts of all references retrieved from the search. Conference papers and reviews and studies with information overlapping another publication were excluded. In the event of overlapping studies, we selected the most recent and/or most comprehensive manuscript.

(p1.1) We initially selected 108 studies from different databases: of these, only 88 records were screened. Of these, 57 studies were assessed for eligibility whereas 31 were excluded because of not reporting original data (10) and lacking specific data on quality of life assessment strategies in patients with endometriosis (21) (Figure 1). Titles and/or abstracts of studies retrieved using the search strategy and those from additional sources were screened independently by 2 review authors (L.D.C. and C.D.F.) to identify studies that potentially meet the aims of this nonsystematic review. The full text of these potentially eligible articles was retrieved and independently assessed for eligibility by other 2 review team members (O.G. and S.R.). Any disagreement between them over the eligibility of particular articles was resolved through discussion with a third (external) collaborator (P.G.). Two authors (C.D.F. and O.G.) independently extracted data from articles about study features and included populations, type of intervention (duration of therapy and drug posology), and outcomes. Any discrepancies were identified and resolved through discussion (with a third external collaborator where necessary).   According to World Health Organization (WHO), quality of life (QoL) is defined as a multidimensional construct of the individual perception of one's position in life in the context of culture and value systems about goals, expectations, standards, and concerns [38]. Painful symptoms and infertility due to endometriosis, alone or combined, reduce QoL, impacting on all aspects of a woman's life such as daily activities, employment and work productivity, mood, social and sexual relationships, family planning, and work productivity [39]. Several types of instruments are available to evaluate the multiple domains of QoL.
## (s7) "Costs" of Endometriosis
(p7.0) The economic burden of endometriosis has been well documented in the literature. A prospective, multicenter survey conducted in 10 European countries (EndoCost study) demonstrated that the average annual total cost per patient with endometriosis in 2008 was almost €10,000, including health care as well as loss of productivity costs [85]. The most important items of health care costs were surgery (29% of health care costs), monitoring tests (19%), hospitalization (18%), and physician visits (16%). The annual economic burden of endometriosis, including direct health care costs and indirect productivity loss, was estimated to be $22 billion in 2002 and $69.4 billion in a 2009 follow-up study, a substantial apparent increase in costs attributed to endometriosis over time [91]. Fuldeore et al. (2015) found that in the US, annual healthcare resource utilization and costs were highest in the first year following an endometriosis diagnosis, costing $13,199 compared with $6041 in the year before diagnosis and $6720 in the following year. Additionally, in the five years before an endometriosis diagnosis, costs were $7028 higher among patients with endometriosis compared with matched controls without endometriosis [92]. Soliman et al. evaluated, in a retrospective cohort study, direct health care utilization and costs among women with endometriosis in comparison with age-matched controls in a U.S. Medicaid population. Direct health care resource utilization (HCRU) during the 12-month follow-up period was significantly higher for endometriosis cases compared with controls in all measured categories: hospital admissions, emergency room visits, mean office visits, and finally prescription claims. The highest expenditure category for endometriosis patients was inpatient admissions ($5,785) followed by other outpatient services ($4363) and outpatient prescriptions ($2,096). The mean ± SD total health care costs were higher for patients with endometriosis, $13,670 ± $29,843, compared with those without endometriosis, $5,779 ± $23,614 [93]. The same authors of the above-mentioned review have also shown that, in employed women with endometriosis, as a consequence of productivity loss of 6.3 h per week, the total loss per person is approximately $10,177.54 per year [49].
