# A Comprehensive Overview of the COVID-19 Literature: Machine Learning-Based Bibliometric Analysis

CorpusID: 229535897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1e782ad8be1903c27de50beac2c46af68035c07e)

Fields: Psychology, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s6) Document Clustering
(p6.0) For document clustering, we first converted each document (ie, abstract) to a feature vector, where features were defined by term (ie, words) frequency-inverse document frequency (TF-IDF) weights. TF-IDF represents the importance of a word relative to a document in a corpus. This importance increases proportionally to the number of times the word appears in the document but is offset by the frequency of that word in the corpus. This ensures that TF-IDF-based similarity measures between documents are influenced mainly by discriminative words with relatively low frequencies in the corpus [22]. For TF-IDF representation of the abstracts, we used TfidfVectorizer module of the Python scikit library.
## (s15) Topic 4: Epidemic Models for COVID-19 Spread
(p15.0) A total of 10.25% (2964/28,904) of the included publications were related to this topic (eg, [39][40][41][42][43]). The 5 most prominent authors in this cluster were Gerardo Chowell (n=22), Benjamin J Cowling (n=18), Kenji Mizumoto (n=14), Shi Zhao (n=13), and Rosalind M Eggo (n=13). The most common journals and preprint servers where the articles related to this topic were published included Chaos, Solitons & Fractals (n=73), medRxiv (n=66), the International Journal of Infectious Diseases (n=36), Zhonghua liuxingbingxue zazhi (n=30), and bioRxiv (n=26). The first paper related to this topic was published on the January 19, 2020. Although there was a sharp increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 12 and 15, the trend was almost stable from week 15 to week 22. Then, a rapid decline in the number of weekly publications was noticed (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 101.6 (SD 68.2).
## (s16) Topic 5: Therapies and Vaccines for COVID-19
(p16.0) In all, 6.38% (1845/28,904) of the publications were about the development and repurposing of therapies and vaccines for COVID-19 (eg, [44][45][46][47]). The following authors published the highest number of articles related to this topic: Wei Zhang (n=13), Xiuna Yang (n=9), Haitao Yang (n=9), Zihe Rao (n=9), and Yao Zhao (n=8). The journals and preprint servers publishing the highest number of studies in this cluster were bioRxiv (n=174), the Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics (n=74), Trials (n=49), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=20), and Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics (n=14). In this cluster, the first article was published on January 6, 2020. The number of weekly publications increased dramatically from week 14 until a peak was reached in week 22 (n=144); thereafter, it decreased noticeably (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 62.9 (SD 52.3).
## (s26) Topic 15: Detection of 2019-nCoV Antibodies
(p26.0) Detection of antibodies against 2019-nCoV using serological assays was a topic discussed in 1.42% (411/28,904) of all publications (eg, [92][93][94][95][96]). The top 5 authors writing about this topic were Florian Krammer (n=6), Jing Wang (n=6), Yong Zhang (n=5), Juan Chen (n=5), and Viviana Simon (n=5). The top 5 journals and preprint servers that published the highest number of studies in this cluster were bioRxiv (n=30), medRxiv (n=20), the Journal of Medical Virology (n=18), the Journal of Clinical Virology (n=14), and the Journal of Clinical Microbiology (n=7). Only 1 study in this cluster was published in the first 6 weeks. There was a dramatic increase in the number of weekly publications between weeks 16 and 21. Although the number of weekly publications slightly decreased from week 22 until week 26, it increased rapidly until reaching the peak in weeks 28 and 29 (n=36) (Multimedia Appendix 1). The mean number of weekly publications in this cluster was 14.1 (SD 12.8).
## (s29) Topic 18: Pregnancy and Childbirth During the COVID-19 Pandemic
(p29.0) About 1.08% (312/28,904) of the publications focused on numerous aspects of pregnancy and childbirth during the COVID-19 pandemic (eg, [105][106][107][108][109]). The most common authors writing about this topic were Ling Feng (n=7), Jiafu Li (n=6), Olivier Picone (n=5), Dunjin Chen (n=5), and Guoqiang Sun (n=5). The top 5 journals in terms of publishing articles in this cluster were the International Journal of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (n=18), The Journal of Maternal-Fetal & Neonatal Medicine (n=16), the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology (n=20), Obstetrics and Gynecology (n=10), and the American Journal of Perinatology (n=9). The earliest article in this cluster was published on February 10, 2020. The mean number of weekly publications related to this topic was 10.8 (SD 8.9), and the highest number of weekly publications was 27 in week 21 (Multimedia Appendix 1).
