# Stroke Epidemiology in South, East, and South-East Asia: A Review

CorpusID: 22221174 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/df96d57ec7ef966b52e5f6bd356d5e4cdd53052e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Incidence
(p4.0) Stroke incidence data are available for most countries in East Asia, but only for some in the other regions (Table 1). [6][7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] The lowest rate is observed in Malaysia (67/100,000 person-years). The highest rates are in Japan (422/100,000 person-years among men and 212/100,000 person-years among women) and Taiwan (330/100,000 person-years). However, the results are not strictly comparable, as the methods used were variable and the studies were performed at different time points. However, the observed variations may reflect differences in the risk-factor prevalence, screening/detection method and level of control.
## (s5) Prevalence
(p5.0) Data on stroke prevalence are more readily-available than those on incidence; especially so in East Asia (Table 1). [6][7][8][9]12,[15][16][17][18][19][20][21][22][23] Comparisons of the studies are difficult to perform as differing study methods were used for case-finding, and differing age bands were investigated. These studies were also conducted at different time points. As prevalence reflects the balance between incidence and mortality, a low prevalence may be due to low incidence or high mortality or both; conversely, a high prevalence may be due to high incidence or low mortality or both. Competing illnesses such as coronary artery disease may reduce the number of stroke survivors and provide a falsely low stroke prevalence value. Prevalence still, however, reflects the status of disease in the community that healthcare services for chronic diseases need to actively deal with.
## (s7) Vascular factors
(p7.0) Increasing age, sex (male), and genetics are non-modifiable risk factors for stroke. The modifiable stroke risk factors are shown in Table 2, based on data from the WHO. 6,24 These were derived from community-based cross-sectional surveys. Similar criteria were used for diagnosis, which makes the studies comparable.

(p7.1) Hypertension remains the most common medical risk factor for stroke, whereas current smoking and inactivity are the most predominant among lifestyle-related risk factors. In most countries, high or low frequencies of occurrence are observed consistently across all risk factors for that country, compared to other countries. There is a range of frequencies within each region. A high prevalence of hypertension is seen in Mongolia and Pakistan (low in Korea and Singapore); diabetes mellitus in Papua New Guinea, Pakistan, and Mongolia (low in Vietnam, Timor Leste, and DPR Korea); hypercholesterolemia in Japan, Singapore and Brunei (low in Nepal, Timor Leste, and DPR Korea); inactivity in Malaysia (low in Nepal and Lao PDR); obesity in Brunei, Papua New Guinea, and Mongolia (low in Timor Leste, Cambodia, and Bangladesh); tobacco smoking in Indonesia (low in India). In general, hypertension, diabetes mellitus and tobacco smoking tend to be more prevalent among men, whereas hypercholesterolemia, inactivity and obesity tend to be more prevalent among women. Data on the vascular risk factors among stroke patients are available for a number of countries (Table 3). These are derived from hospital-based stroke registries. 6,12,[25][26][27][28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36] They are not strictly comparable as varying definitions were used, and studies were performed at differing time points, but there is still some consistency in the findings. Hypertension is the most common risk factor, with diabetes mellitus and smoking following closely. A significant proportion of stroke patients have had previous cerebrovascular events and coronary artery disease.

(p7.2) Possessing knowledge on the risk factors in each population can inform policy makers and healthcare planners on which factors should be targeted and what appropriate preventive measures should be taken.
## (s9) Geographical variations within countries
(p9.0) Variations in stroke epidemiology have been found within many countries. Studies in China have shown that the stroke incidence is higher in the northern regions compared to the south, 9 with double the incidence along the stroke belt. 41 In India, on the contrary, the incidence is higher in rural areas. 7 In Thailand, the stroke prevalence is highest in the cities, and then, in a decreasing fashion, in the central, south, north, and northeast regions of the country. 23 Similarly, stroke prevalence was found to be higher in cities and urban areas than in rural regions, in Indonesia. 20 These differences have been attributed to the differences in the risk factors between various regions in the same country. However, there is no difference in the age-standardized stroke mortality between the metropolitan cities of Korea and the other regions in the country. 12
## (s10) Comparative epidemiology
(p10.0) Heart disease and stroke are competing causes of mortality. Generally, stroke-associated mortality, as a percent of total mortality, is lower than ischemic heart disease-related mortality, in most parts of the world. 42 This has been attributed to the higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus and higher mean serum cholesterol levels among those with ischemic heart disease, 
## (s11) South-East Asia
(p11.0) Brunei Myanmar than stroke patients. However, in some countries, the converse is true, wherein the stroke-related mortality exceeds the mortality caused by ischemic heart disease (in China by 11.9%, Korea by 9.9%, Mongolia by 8.0%, Thailand by 6.6%, etc.). Yet, the stroke mortality in Asia is higher than in North America or Europe. 43 Likewise, globally, the disease burden-as measured by the DALYs lost-associated with stroke is lower than that associated with ischemic heart disease. 42 However, in terms of mortality, the stroke burden exceeds the ischemic heart disease burden in the same countries in which an excess stroke mortality is observed-China, Mongolia, and Thailand.

(p11.1) As in much of the world, ischemic stroke occurs more frequently than hemorrhagic stroke (Table 4). However, the 15-40% incidence of stroke due to hemorrhage, in Asia, is much higher than the 15% observed in most developed countries in North America and Western Europe. The incidence of hemorrhagic stroke is highest in East Asia, notably in China, compared to North America and Western Europe. 44
## (s13) Limitations and strengths
(p13.0) Our study has several limitations. The data from the WHO, though comprehensive and available for almost all countries, are based on routinely available data in those countries. There may be variations in the comprehensiveness of the data collection and data reporting, accuracy of the cause of death, and extent of disability. Prevalence and incidence studies, though community-based, were performed at different time points, involved varying ages (especially prevalence studies), used differing methods to screen and assess cases, and thus are not directly comparable. The data were not granular enough to allow for a systematic review. Data were unavailable for a number of countries. Hospital-based studies are prone to selection bias, with a significant flaw in their representativeness; they were performed at different time points; they used varying definitions for the risk factors; and few had 100% brain scan rates. Nation-wide data with good representativeness would be preferred-at present, such data are only available from the country-wide hospital-based registry in China. 29 However, our paper has several strengths. It includes up-todate reliable data from the excellently-performed GBD study and WHO, as well as large, recently-conducted studies from most Asian countries. Data on South-East Asia are available, alongside data on South and East Asia. The paper summarizes and compares, in an easily readable manner, key epidemiological data on stroke that could be helpful to clinicians, researchers and healthcare planners.
