# INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF RESEARCH IN PHARMACEUTICAL SCIENCES Pharmacognostical And Pharmacological Activity of Punica Granatum (Pomegranate): An Overview

CorpusID: 225393579 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b770942f2557850c472889a0bf9cf99cdc9de70b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b770942f2557850c472889a0bf9cf99cdc9de70b)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Plants have always been used for medicinal purposes since the prehistoric period, and the herbal medicinal plants (whole parts) play a signi icant role in developing countries for in luential therapeutic agents. Representation of rich customs, traditional and herbal biodiversity offers a unique opportunity to the researchers of drug discovery in India. Our country, India, is a massive repository to the medicinal plant and medical treatments, and about 22,000 medicinal plant species are in record nowadays. More than 400 traditional cultures, however, use about 800 plant species to treat different diseases, and at present, about 25% pharmaceutical prescriptions in the United States have at least one plantderived ingredient (Garach et al., 2012). According to WHO estimation, about 80% of the population still depends on historic medicine based mostly on plant species and animals for their primary health care.

(p0.1) Punica granatum L. (Pomegranate or Anar) is a deciduous shrub or small tree, growth of 1.8-4.6m tall, belonging to the family Punicaceae. The fruits Glucose (excess), Anthocyanins, ellagic as well as gallic acid, quercetin, iron, amino acids and various minerals. Flower
## (s2) Phytochemicals of P. granatum
(p2.0) Punica granatum contains various phytochemicals constituents which are responsible for their therapeutic and potential activity against various disease. The plant parts with their phytochemical constituents are listed in the below Table 1 ( Mena et al., 2011).
## (s3) Nutritive compositions
(p3.0) The fruits of pomegranate per 200gm serving 10-12% daily value of vitamin C and folate and 16% of vitamin K and 20% dietary ibres. The total carbohydrates present is about 9-14% and contains 8% of vitamin B6, and other nutritional values are in the given Graph 1 (Jasuja et al., 2012).
## (s5) Effects Of Punica Granatum As An Antioxidants Agent
(p5.0) In a human body, variable chemicals are created as free radicals through an oxidation process, and these free radicals can destroy cell membranes and other structures as their amount increases in the human body. Antioxidants work on these free radicals to remove and neutralize it from the body to make a correct balance.

(p5.1) The phenolic compounds and tocopherols present in Punica granatum have been studied for antioxidant activity by using various methods as differential pH methods, HPLC analysis. The hydrolysis of ellagitannins and gallotannins produced two hydroxybenzoic acids, i.e., ellagic acid and gallic acid, respectively, that are responsible for antioxidant activity. It was investigated that the seed oil contains a high volume of tocopherols having great activity as antioxidant using ORAC and FRAP assays (Elfalleh et al., 2011). The aqueous and ethyl acetate extracts of P. granatum evaluated for antioxidant activity using reagents and methods like DDPH test, chemiluminescence assay, and 5-lipoxygenase assay and this study investigated that the peel, juice, and extracts of pomegranate possess a signi icant antioxidant activity (Ricci et al., 2006). The ethanolic, methanolic and aqueous extracts of peel and seed of pomegranate exhibited a various degree of antioxidant activity that is determined with the bleaching of β-carotene and DDPH methods. The methanolic extracts of pomegranate peel possess the highest potential as antioxidants (Singh et al., 2002). The antioxidant action of Egyptian Punica granatum peel extracts was studied using HPCL modi ied analysis and standardization, ellagic acid, and gallic acid was consid-ered as markers or positive control. The peel extraction with 70% ethanol showed the highest capacity to scavenge DDPH free radicals to exhibit a pronounced antioxidant activity (Motaal, 2011).
## (s6) Effects Of Punica Granatum As An Antidiarrheal Agent
(p6.0) The most common and known condition that affects all age group people is Diarrhoea and recognized by a frequent loose, watery bowel motion. The acute or brief diarrhoea is mainly caused by a parasitic, bacterial, and viral infection of the bowels and chronic might be caused by some disorder and conditions associated with gastroenteritis.

(p6.1) The aqueous and alcoholic extract of fruits rind of pomegranate was investigated on Albino rats to evaluate the antidiarrheal activity and compared with the most effective commercially available Loperamide hydrochloride. The aqueous extract was observed with the 86.6% effectiveness at 500mg/kg than alcohol extract for signi icant antidiarrheal activity (Pillai, 1992). A study that was carried on the gastrointestinal motility in vivo, isolated rats ileum, and on castor oil-induced in rodents have revealed the extract contains many substances that inhibit intestinal motility and intestinal luid accumulation and hence reduced diarrhoea. The potency of that extract showed similar effects to commercial drugs like loperamide (Qnais et al., 2007) and its inhibitory percentage of defaecation was 71.25% for castor induced diarrhoea (Akter et al., 2013). Punica granatum seeds that were extracted with methanol have shown inhibitory action against PGE 2 induced enteropooling in rats and castor-induced diarrhoea. It has also shown a notable decrease in gastro-intestinal movement (motility) in the charcoal meal test in rats (Das et al., 1999). In castor oil-induced diarrhoea, extract inhibitory percentage of defaecation at a concentration/dose of 200mg/kg was 31.25%, and at the dose of 400mg/kg was 53.75%. The extract inhibitory percentage of defaecation has found to be 45.71% and 57.14% at the dose of 200mg/kg and 400mg/kg, respectively, in magnesium sulfate-induced diarrhoea (Akter et al., 2013).
## (s8) Effects Of Punica Granatum As An Antibacterial Agent
(p8.0) Antibacterial agents are those that combat pathogenic bacteria by killing and reducing metabolic activity in the biological environment and its pathogenic effects. The agent may avoid accumulation of bacterial plaque in oral surrounding.

(p8.1) The antibacterial activity of Pomegranate with methanol, acetone, extracts were investigated by pour plate method against a gram-positive as well as gram-negative bacteria. A potent radical-scavenging activities has shown with all extracts at low concentrations, but acetone extract showed the best potential than the other two extracts (Negi and Jayaprakasha, 2003).
## (s12) Effects Of Punica Granatum As A Radioprotective Agent
(p12.0) The term radioprotection is explained that the prevention from the ionizing radiation that can be planned or unplanned exposure of the radiation of the biological system. Acetone extract of the Punica granatum fruit rind showed the radioprotective effect on male Swiss albino mouse (mus musculus norvegicus) at the various concentration (5,10,15,20,30,40 and 50mg/kg body weight). The effect of the various concentrations was evaluated against the gamma radiation (8Gy) (Mathur and Sharma, 2013).
## (s13) Effects Of Punica Granatum As An Aphrodisiac Agent
(p13.0) The juice of the Punica granatum showed the reproductive effect against the carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4 ) induced testes toxicity on adult male Wistar albino rats (Al-Olayan et al., 2014).The ethanolic extracts of the pericarp of Punica granatum showed the reproductive effect at the dose of 500mg/kg body weight against the lead acetate induced toxic effect on adult male Holtzman rats sperm production (Leiva et al., 2011) Iso-lavonoid extracted (Ethyl acetate fraction) from the fresh, dried rind powder of the plant Punica granatum has been shown the reproductive effect in male rabbits (Al-Saeed and Hadi, 2015). The juice of pomegranate showed a significant increase in plasma gonadotropin and testosterone level at the dose of 8ml/kg, i.e., increase in reproductive capacity, as compared to control and standard (Riaz et al., 2018).
## (s14) Effects Of Punica Granatum As An Trypsin And Protein Denaturation Inhibitory Agent
(p14.0) Methanolic and ethanolic extract of the plant Punica granatum showed the concentration-dependent trypsin (Proteinase) and protein denaturation inhibitory activity at the dose of 10, 50,100, 200, 400, 800, 1000 and 2000µg/ml when compared with diclofenac as standard using UV visible spectrophotometer at 660nm and viscosities were measured using the Ostwald viscometer (Gautam et al., 2013).
## (s16) Effects Of Punica Granatum As A Hrbc Membrane Stabilization Agent
(p16.0) The aqueous, ethanol and methanol extracts of the Punica granatum has shown the concentrationdependent in-vitro membrane stabilization activity against the HRBC membrane stabilization assay at the different concentrations with 50, 100, 200, 400, 800 and 1600 µg/ml using UV spectrophotometer at 560nm. The parameters were compared with diclofenac as a standard drug (Gautam et al., 2013;Kota et al., 2018).
