# Melhor que nada? uma revisão e crítica do patrocínio infantil Better than nothing? a review and critique of child sponsorship ¿Mejor que nada? una revisión y crítica del apadrinamiento de niños

CorpusID: 225805269 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/567693b8f8f4ade4fd0f64dff6efe7c6109c65d0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/567693b8f8f4ade4fd0f64dff6efe7c6109c65d0)

Fields: Education, Sociology

## (s13) Child sponsorship is not faceless
(p13.0) In the study by Prendergast and Maggie (2013), a key finding was that because sponsors had a close knowledge of and relationship with the child, and strongly believed that the money was directly impacting the lives of the children, the sponsors expressed concern "about the impact on the children if sponsorship was withdrawn" (p. 138). In some cases, the sponsors admitted to sustaining their sponsorship because they felt guilty and did not want to damage/lose the close relationship with the child. Prendergast and Maggie (2013) share that "[e]ven though some sponsors may face financial problems and think of giving up, they will be reluctant to stop because they have already established a close relationship with their sponsored children and do not want to let the children down and damage the current relationship or the child's living conditions" (p. 134). Eekelen (2013) confirms this advantage for NGOs to keep a name and a face for child sponsors, as the strategy makes sponsors feel important by "tell[ing] each sponsor that much depends on his or her monthly contributions as nobody else sponsors this child" (p. 471). The website of Canadian Feed the Children states:
## (s17) Through the lens of the complex audience member
(p17.0) Andreotti (2016) describes her challenges as an educator and educational researcher in the areas of global citizenship and international development. With some notable parallels to Westheimer and Kahne's (2004) three conceptions of citizenship, Andreotti offers a four audience-orientation conceptualization which "reflect different levels of willingness to engage with [international development] issues in depth" (pp. 105-106). For her, the audience is primarily university students; however, the applicability of the conceptualization, I would argue, extends beyond that specific audience and into the realm of the general public.

(p17.1) The four audience-orientations are (p. 106): Seeking awareness for inspiration; problem solving for personal affirmation; circular criticality; education for existence otherwise. Students in the first two audience orientations are generally described as those willing to pay attention to an issue as long as practical solutions are readily available and the issue (or solution) does not threaten their existing investments or privilege. In other words, there is a need "to feel, to look, and to be seen as doing 'good'" (p. 106). The third audience, which might be considered comparable to Westheimer and Kahne's (2004) justice-oriented citizen, includes students who are open to deeper critiques of injustices and they can even begin to recognize their own complicity in historical asymmetries and structural harms.
