# SPECIAL SECTION ON KEY ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES FOR PROSUMER ENERGY MANAGEMENT Paving the Path for Two-Sided Energy Markets: An Overview of Different Approaches

CorpusID: 229374792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/416e84520981609e0dd83f8a210f151041f51bf0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/416e84520981609e0dd83f8a210f151041f51bf0)

Fields: Economics, Computer Science, Engineering, Business, Environmental Science

## (s1) II. LITERATURE SURVEY
(p1.0) A range of studies have been performed in the literature in the topics related to two-sided markets, including DR, VPP, P2P and TE. DR and its applications for demand-side management have been reviewed in several works. An extensive review of DR potentials and benefits, and enabling technologies that facilitate the coordination of efficiency and DR in a smart grid is presented in [8]. Shariatzadeh et al. [9] reviewed application and implementation strategies of DR programs in a smart grid. An overview of the literature on residential DR programs and the required information and communication technology (ICT) for the implementation is presented in [10], where challenges in implementing residential DR of smart grids are highlighted and analyzed. A comprehensive performance comparison of different pricing signals, and optimization methods used for DR is presented in [11]. Authors of [12] focused on the role of aggregator for participation of small loads in DR. A review of definition, classification, implementation mechanisms, and impacts of DR on power systems is presented in [13]. In [14], DR models are categorized based on their applicability for retail and wholesale markets. A classification and analysis of DR barriers and enablers in a smart grid context is presented in [15]. A review of advances in industrial and commercial DR programs is provided in [16], in which potential and technologies of DR in these sectors are investigated. In [17], a review of the current developments of the DR programs for residential building sector is provided, in which methodologies and procedures for assessing building energy flexibility and DR programs are described.

(p1.1) The VPP and its relevant concepts have been reviewed by several researchers. The operation and components of VPPs are reviewed in [18], with a focus on the reviewing the modeling of essential components of VPPs. In [19], the scheduling problem of DER in the microgrid and VPP frameworks is studied, in which different aspects such as modeling techniques, solving methods, and DR are considered. Authors of [20] reviewed structures, architecture and the optimization algorithms used with each type of VPPs. A review of structures, operation, and participation of VPPs in electricity markets is provided in [21]. In [22], a comprehensive review of VPPs is presented, including their applicability for different purposes, their structural and operational optimizations and uncertainty modeling techniques for VPP operation.

(p1.2) In recent years, a few number of works have been performed in the literature to review different aspects of P2P markets. Tushar et al. [23] presented an overview of the research in P2P trading, in which the challenges related to P2P trading implementation are discussed. An overview of projects on P2P energy trading is provided in [24], where a comparison of their similarities and differences is presented. A comprehensive review of different types of community-based and P2P trading is given in [25]. The works in [26] and [27] focused on different approaches for P2P trading, where in [26] the focus is on the market clearing approaches in the local P2P trading, and [27] discusses the application of game-theoretic approaches for energy trading.

(p1.3) Given that TE is a new concept, the literature in this field is thin, and the first review article was published in 2017 [28]. Chen et al. [28] discussed the transition from DR to TE by reviewing the state of the art of research and industry practice on DR and TE. Recent discussions on TE and distribution marginal pricing, and market decentralization are provided in [29]. A taxonomy for the classification of the TE concepts related to the latest advances in TE technology has been provided in [30]. Extensive review of architectures, distributed ledger technologies, and local energy markets for TE-based microgrids is presented in [31]. The work presented in [32] reviewed distributed ledger technology and its application for TE systems. The cyber-physical infrastructure of a TE system, and its characteristics, as well as scheduling methods of transactive agents are discussed in [33]. In [34], a bibliographical review on the researches and implementation of the TE concepts in power systems is provided. Authors of [35] presented a review of DER integration approaches in the context of TE systems including home energy management, distributed optimal power flow, and P2P energy trading.

(p1.4) Each of these studies made a notable contribution toward the market reformation in energy sector and provides researchers with a good understanding of the relevant concepts. However, the requirements for transition to a two-sided market and the way these approaches facilities this transition are not discussed in a unified work. Hence, in this paper, 223710 VOLUME 8, 2020
## (s7) 1) GRID INTEGRATION LAYER
(p7.0) This layer consists of key entities participating in the market and connection points through which end-users are connected to the grid. In a two-sided market, active end-users providing or receiving services at the connection points are the key participants. An end-user can be an inflexible energy consumer, a flexible demand resource, or a DER with energy producing capability. In its most complete form, the end-user can be a prosumer who can consume and provide energy services [41]. End-users include residential, commercial, and industrial electricity customers such as battery owners, EV owners, PV owners, small and large customers, and smart buildings connected to distribution networks.
## (s9) 3) MARKET AND REGULATORY LAYER
(p9.0) The current regulatory frameworks, which are based on centralized and hierarchical structures, need to evolve to accommodate the emerging active end-users. Under the deregulated and competitive environment created by a two-sided market, economics and profitability would be the major concerns of every market participant [42]. The regulatory frameworks for the two-sided market need to be flexible to incorporate different business models to encourage market participants to engage in market activities and help them to achieve their desired objectives. End-user decisions in the market are influenced by the way they are charged for energy services. Therefore, an important step in designing a two-sided market is to design an appropriate pricing mechanism which provides the right price signals to the market participants to achieve their desired operational goals in the market. Pricing reform is critical to the efficient evolution of the energy market and ensuring that end-users are being charged for what they actually use. For example, end-users who curtail their PV generation in response to the network request should be paid for the service that they provide and be compensated for the cost of energy they have to buy for their load requirements, since they are not able to use their self-generated energy.

(p9.1) A two-sided market can support a range of different services related to energy, ancillary services, and reserve services. These services include frequency control ancillary services (FCAS), network support control ancillary services (NSCAS), system restart ancillary services, and the reliability and emergency reserve trader (RERT). End-users can provide these services through their direct participation in the market, or indirectly through an aggregator or a retailer.
## (s13) 2) BLOCKCHAIN
(p13.0) In recent years, blockchain has received a tremendous attention as a communication framework for smart grid [47], [48]. Blockchain is an immutable database, shared across all participants, that stores the history of communications. In case a communication involves transferring data, the hash of the data is recorded in the blockchain while the raw data is stored off-chain, e.g., in a local or cloud storage, that in turn ensures blockchain scalability and reduces the associated overheads. The data owner authorizes the nodes to access data stored either in cloud or local storage. Any data modification or access is recorded in the blockchain that enables the data owner to monitor their data.

(p13.1) Incorporating blockchain in two-sided markets introduces a number of advantages which are: i) decentralization: as blockchain establishes a trusted network over untrusted participants without relying on trusted third party (TTP) using distributed consensus algorithm, ii) security: transactions are sealed using asymmetric encryption and contain the hash of the transaction content which in turn ensure data confidentiality and integrity. The consensus algorithm ensures that malicious nodes cannot control the network which in turn enhances the security of the blockchain, iii) anonymity: the users are known by a changeable Public Key (PK) which in turn introduces a level of anonymity, iv) auditability: the transactions are stored in the public ledger permanently that facilitates auditability.
## (s15) V. TRADING ARRANGEMENTS IN TWO-SIDED MARKETS
(p15.0) The transition toward a two-sided market needs innovative approaches that engage end-users in the market activities. These approaches are focused on the distribution side of the network, in which end-users are the key players. In this section, four main approaches that lay the groundwork for a two-sided market are reviewed, and a classification of existing methods, along with examples of academic and industrial works related to these concepts, are provided. Fig. 3 illustrates the concepts related to different trading arrangements. A. DEMAND RESPONSE AND NEGAWATT TRADING 1) OVERVIEW DR is a subset of demand-side participation, in which customers can participate in the market in different ways. DR programs are established to motivate changes in electric consumption by end-user in response to changes in the price of electricity [52]. Active participation of the demand-side in the market allows to achieve the supply-demand balance by the lowest combination of resources, and to prevent the congestion problem [53].

(p15.1) There are many types of DR programs that can be classified according to various criteria. DR can be provided by giving permission to direct load control of end-users appliances to a third party. Alternatively, end-users can provide DR by cutting their electricity use at high price times by signing a contract with a retailer or an aggregator. DR can also be TABLE 1. Classification of DR programs based on the financial scheme and the behavioral approach followed by end-users [8], [17], [51].

(p15.2) provided by reducing or shifting the load of controllable devices of end-users. For example, by exploiting building thermal inertia, heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning systems can be utilized for different DR programs [54]. Also, some DR programs allow end-users to bid demand reductions into different markets directly or through a third party. Table 1 provides a classification of DR programs based on the employed financial scheme and the type of behavioral approach followed by the end-user. End-users behavioral approach in DR programs can be classified as passive, active, and transactive. Passive end-users adjust their demand based on predefined prices to minimize their operational costs, while active end-users decide on their responses following specific request from the grid. Transactive end-users are able to decide on when and in which price they want to reduce their demands, or to sell their right to buy energy.

(p15.3) Based on the employed financial scheme, DR programs can be classified in different categories namely, price-based, incentive-based, and market-based. Price-based programs utilize approved utility tariffs or contractual appointments to adjust demand of end-users. End-users receive varying prices that are defined based on the cost of electricity in different time periods, and adjust their consumption based on these prices. Time of use tariffs, critical peak pricing, extreme peak pricing, and real time pricing are examples of tariffs which can be utilized to encourage end-users to change their consumption based on the price. Incentive-based programs provide financial incentives to participating end-users for reducing/shifting their electric loads or for giving some level of control to the system operator over some of their electrical assets. Incentive-based programs include direct load control, interruptible/curtaiable, and emergency services.

(p15.4) Market-based programs allow end-users to participate in different markets and offer a demand reduction. In these programs, end-users can offer the available demand reduction capacity and the requested price. Demand bidding, capacity market and ancillary services market are examples of market-based programs. A specific type of market-based programs is negawatt trading. The term negawatt (negative watt) was first introduced in 1989 as a technique for energy management [55]. In the negawatt trading, end-users are considered as a kind of energy resource, in which the difference between the baseline demand and the demand after responding to the market signal is provided by the consumers. Unlike other DR programs which are mainly based on rules, established by the grid, negawatt trading enables end-users to independently decide on when and in which price they want to reduce their demands, or to sell their right to buy energy [56].

(p15.5) Different methodologies for DR based on these programs have been proposed in the literature. A price-based approach for demand response is proposed in [57], in which the load profile attributes of responsive loads are taken into account. In [58], price-based approach is utilized to adjust the loads to adapt the uncertainties in renewable generation resources. In [59], an incentive mechanism is proposed, which uses differentiated revenue price that is influenced by the response of each end-user. An online privacy-preserving incentive-based approach is proposed in [60], in which a recommender system is used to select the optimal customers for demand reduction offer. A blockchain-based negawatt trading platform is proposed in [61], in which buildings can offer their demand reduction to a DR aggregator. In [62], incentive prices are employed to procure negawatt from consumers to manage demand and supply optimally.
## (s17) B. VIRTUAL POWER PLANT 1) OVERVIEW
(p17.0) The VPP is an approach which supports the transition to a two-sided market by aggregating and coordinating DER across the network to exploit their flexibility [6]. A VPP can be considered as an alternative version of DR programs, which includes DR aggregation by focusing on flexible loads [66]. VPP enables demand-side participation in the market, either by direct control of their flexibility [67], or influencing their energy consumption pattern by sending indirect control signals, such as price signals [68]. A VPP involves the collaboration of a number of stakeholders including consumers and prosumers, aggregators, system operators, network providers, and regulatory bodies to form a kind of collaborative business ecosystem with high degree of interactions and interdependences. The role of an aggregator or coordinator in the VPP is crucial as it schedules, coordinates and controls participating end-users by providing control instructions or price signals to deliver specific services to the network. The emergence of VPP concept is supported by different principles from different fields of study including ICT, electrical and electronics engineering, social sciences, and economics [69].

(p17.1) A VPP is similar to the microgrid in several aspects. However, it differs from a microgrid as it is not limited by geography and can be easily incorporated into the existing regulatory frameworks. A microgrid can operate in either the connected to the grid or in the isolated modes, while a VPP can only work in connection with the grid [19]. A microgrid has a focus on local resource optimization at the low and medium voltage level, which may or may not participate in wholesale markets. It can operate its own local market to manage local resources. A microgrid can participate in wholesale markets through contracting with a VPP, or if it can operate at wholesale market scale, it may present itself as a VPP to the market, depending on its business model and broader ambitions.

(p17.2) The VPP frameworks can be segregated into three types based on the VPP operator's objective and the behavioral approach followed by end-users. The first type of VPPs is the passive VPP (utility VPP), in which the VPP operator controls end-users' flexible resources (e.g. batteries). In this model, which can be viewed as the aggregation of direct load control model, end-users are passive players who have no control over their controllable assets. The VPP operator aim is to manage end-users flexibility to support the grid by providing different services, and in turn, rewards end-users. The proposed VPP in [70] is an example of passive VPP that manages a large number of customers with thermostatically controlled appliances through direct load control. The second type of VPPs is called an active VPP, in which the VPP operator performs an optimization problem to minimize the system costs taking into account end-users preferences. This model also requires end-users to give control of their flexible assets to the VPP operator. The proposed model in [71] is an example of active VPP which considers customers comfort in the optimization problem. The third type of VPPs is the transactive VPP, in which the VPP operator's objective is to minimize system and end-users costs, while end-users preferences are taken into account. In this model, price signals will be used to coordinate end-users, and to achieve the system objectives. Different from passive and active VPPs, in this model, end-users are able to control their assets and decide on their actions by responding to price signals [72]. Table 2 summarizes different VPP models and their features. 
## (s22) VI. DISCUSSION
(p22.0) Different approaches explained in Section V are compared and discussed here in relation to the way they facilitate a two-sided market implementation. The efficient integration of end-users in a two-sided market allows to exploit their capabilities and provides value streams for them and the power network. Though DR programs enable exploiting flexibility of demand-side for providing different services, there are many barriers which prevent the full potential of DR being realized, including economic, social, technological, and regulatory issues. These programs are usually concentrated on the consumption part of the network and neglect the importance of active participation of the supply-side. DR programs rely on scheduling flexible demands of end-users, and hence, they would affect the comfort level of energy consumers. Though negawatt trading enables end-users to participate in a two-sided market taking into account their preferences, uncoordinated operation of flexible end-users hinders to unlock their potential values for the network. More details on challenges and barriers in implementing DR programs and negawatt trading can be found in [15], and [56].

(p22.1) Alternatively, coordinated operation of flexible end-users in VPPs can unlock potential values for both end-users and the network by increasing network efficiency, reducing pollution, and increasing energy security [6]. VPPs can coordinate and orchestrate responsive demands to integrate them in the two-sided market, and provide new value streams to customers and other stakeholders. By being aggregated in a VPP, the assets in the demand-side can be forecasted, optimized, and traded like a single power plant. However, due to the top-down coordination scheme of VPPs, there are some challenges with regard to end-users autonomy and preference consideration. End-users may have various preferences in terms of environmental and social concerns and energy security. To effectively integrate end-users in a VPP, the VPP operator needs to know their preferences. However, it endangers the privacy of end-users as they need to reveal their private information with a third party. Also, VPPs that use direct control strategies threaten autonomy of end-users and hinder exploiting their flexibility efficiently (see [82] for more details on challenges in VPP). Some of these challenges can be alleviated through a P2P trading structure, that enables direct interaction between endusers, while each end-user is in control of its assets [84]. Compared to a VPP, P2P trading can offer additional source of values such as energy matching, uncertainty reduction, and preference satisfaction [82]. However, lack of a central operator in P2P approaches makes it difficult to have an accurate assessment of the network state, which may endangers the security of the system [89]. Besides, P2P trading needs decentralized algorithms to match demand and supply, without the intervention of a third-party. Furthermore, there are some other challenges in implementing P2P trading as reviewed in [23], including the definition of a unified model, the coordination of trading at different levels, and the interaction with the grid.

(p22.2) Given this context, TE can be used as an approach for integrating end-users in the grid while operating the system safely and efficiently. Unlike direct load control DR programs, TE systems respect end-users preferences by integrating their individual decision model into the market-based coordination. Also, different from price-based programs that do not consider the potential load response resulted from the broadcasted price signals, TE uses internal price, designed according to specific control objectives and preferences of the end-users [104]. TE approaches can also be employed in VPPs to from a transactive VPP. This type of VPP is the best fit for two-sided markets as it allows to aggregate and coordinate resources in VPP through a market-based coordination scheme. The P2P trading is fully related to the TE concept as it presents a market-based energy management approach to coordinate peers in the market. Indeed, TE systems can include P2P trading to make the small-scale producers and consumers capable for trading energy directly and locally. However, TE represents a broad set of activities that includes much more than P2P trading. The application for TE approaches include network management, transactive control, and P2P trading [30]. In TE, all customers can participate in the market, either in the demand or supply side, exploiting their local resources, such as PV and storage systems, to create benefit by responding to price signals. Despite extensive attention in recent years, the research on TE systems is relatively new. In order to employ TE approaches in two-sided markets, different challenges should be addressed by future research activities and industrial projects. The implementation of TE approaches is costly as they need a set of automation, and communication infrastructures. Data are a substantial asset of TE systems without that generating value-based signals for coordination is not possible. Hence, the privacy and security of end-users' data are of utmost importance. The other challenge with TE approaches is related to physical or cyber-attack issues, which may affect the resiliency of the system (see [30] and [32] for more details on challenges in TE systems). A summary of main features and challenges of different trading arrangements is provided in Table 4.
