# medicina Can Anorectal Atresia Be Diagnosed in the First Trimester of Pregnancy? A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 226252361 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/32a1a7b10b73b9d4a70c9a6f9a868533776acaa4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/32a1a7b10b73b9d4a70c9a6f9a868533776acaa4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) An imperforate anus can be part of more complex congenital abnormal conditions that include anal atresia and anorectal atresia (ARA). The prevalence is high, ranging from 1/1500 to 1/5000 newborns [1]. The mechanism behind ARA is an impaired development of the urogenital septum that prevents the distal rectal pouch reaching the perineum, and also involves abnormal musculature development of the region (internal sphincter, external sphincter, and puborectalis muscle perianal muscular complex (PAMC)) [2].
## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) The analysis was performed according to the guidelines provided by Moher in 2009, indicated in "Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses" as a PRISMA statement. No ethical committee approval was needed, given the type of study [8].
## (s4) Discussion
(p4.0) ARA is difficult to identify in the first trimester, when diagnosis relies on indirect signs. In assessing the first trimester detection on non-chromosomal anomalies, we found few reports on ARA, as Table 3 illustrates. The prenatal diagnosis rate of ARA detection is low (16%), even when considering diagnosis throughout the whole pregnancy period [6].

(p4.1) In an extensive study on the detection rate of different anomalies in 45,191 fetuses, Syngelaki reported no ano-rectal anomalies were detected [22]. This can be explained by the late first trimester development of the PAMC, so the absence of the anal sphincter could not be identified at the first trimester anomaly scan [2].

(p4.2) More recently, Rohrer evaluated the prenatal diagnosis of the ARA by ultrasound vs. magnetic resonance investigation (MRI) in 56 children over 10 years but did not report a diagnosis made below 20 weeks of gestation [23]. They concluded that, depending on the level of obstruction, the main sign of ARA is bowel dilatation and associated anomalies, and MRI is useful for correct identification of the fluid-filled pelvic organ (rectum, vagina, bladder, cloaca). Despite this important contribution to diagnosis, MRI is not indicated in the first trimester of pregnancy.
