# Asian Scientific Research An Overview of Recent Developments in Hetero-Catalytic Conversion of Cellulosic Biomass ARTICLE INFO ABSTRACT

CorpusID: 225750902 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90f038c4f3286d79f7cb99985f3661a2c941529](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a90f038c4f3286d79f7cb99985f3661a2c941529)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s1) Cellulosic Biomass
(p1.0) Cellulosic biomass, a complex natural material that often exhibits structural heterogeneity, is present in cell walls of most woody and non-woody plants. This structural and componential heterogeneity, in the cellular structure, can be attributed to the presence of carbohydrate biopolymers (cellulose and hemicellulose) and aromatic biopolymer lignin (Y. F. Huang et al., 2016). The carbohydrate biopolymers and lignin are bonded together to form the lignin-carbohydrate matrix, i.e., lignocellulose. Cellulosic biomass can be considered an abundant, inexpensive and renewable resource with an increasing trend in becoming the most promising feedstock essential for many modern industries (Anwar et al., 2014). In general, cellulosic biomass is widely acknowledged as a significant raw material for various applications such as eco-friendly biofuels, chemicals, biomaterials and many other value-added products (Watkins et al., 2015). This biomass is primarily generated as a waste during agricultural activities, or from the forest as forestry residues. Among these, agro-based waste quantities, rice husk (RH), or rice hull, which is produced in large quantities as a by-product of rice (paddy) plantations and processing. Another agro-based cellulosic biomass material is cotton linter, a by-product of the cotton and textile industry (Dhaliwal, 2019).
## (s4) Cellulose and Microcrystalline Cellulose
(p4.0) Cellulose is the most abundant biopolymer on earth and it is the major component of plant cell walls. As a lignocellulosic renewable material, the structure of cellulosic macromolecular consists of long chains of repeatedly linked glucose molecules [ Figure 3; (Tang et al., 2014)] which are linked together by β-(1→4) glycosidic bonds (C. Zhang et al., 2013). Cellulose consists of both amorphous (non-crystalline) and crystalline regions (Vendula & Miloslav, 2013). Cellulose by nature, as illustrated in Figure 3, is associated with hemicellulose and attached in the lignin-carbohydrate matrix. In Consequence, to effectively extract cellulose from lignocellulosic materials, lignin and hemicellulose have to be separated and removed by a two-stage chemical process, i.e., alkali extraction (delignification) and bleaching (whitening) (Syamani & Suryani, 2015). Once extracted, cellulose can be used as the precursor (intermediate material) for NCC production. The none crystalline cellulose regions can be transformed into semi-crystalline or crystalline regions. Upon the improvement of cellulose crystallinity, while converted to its micro/nanostructured materials (MCC, NFC and NCC), cellulose amorphous region can be decreased or removed by applying acidic or enzymatic Hydrolysis.  For the preparation of MCC, the cellulosic pulp needs to be first isolated from the hemicellulose and lignin matrix. After lignin and hemicellulose separation (the noncellulosic materials) using consecutive Alkali extraction and bleaching methods (Syamani & Suryani, 2015). The extracted cellulosic-based material is then, most commonly, subjected to acid hydrolysis treatment to improve the crystallinity by which decomposing its amorphous region, thereby producing MCC. Typically, sulfuric acid (Camacho et al., 1996) and hydrochloric acid (Zhao et al., 2018) have been used as catalysts in conventional acid hydrolysis processes for MCC production. Recently, acidic ionic liquids have been used as catalysts for MCC production (Wu et al., 2017). Despite the good catalytic activities of mineral acids (H2SO4 and HCl), utilization is limited due to their corrosivity and costly processing being required for separation and disposal of the used acidic catalysts (Hara, 2010). In general, acidic ionic liquid catalysts are considered to be environmentally and economically undesirable for large scale MCC production (Rakita, 2003). Unlike the catalysts, as mentioned above, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) can offer a more sustainable alternative as a green replacement for the toxic chlorine-based materials and corrosive acid catalysts. It is a strong oxidant and eco-friendly bleaching agent (chlorine-free bleaching agent). Therefore, oxidative Hydrolysis of cellulosic pulp, catalyzed by H2O2, and concurrently utilizing the same bleaching agent may contribute to a more environmentally benign production process. As such, this may further lower the cost of MCC production.

(p4.1) Due to the considerable amounts of silica, lignin and hemicellulose present in RH, a large scale and commercial production of cellulosic-based materials (especially MCC) are not yet available. To date, most researchers are focused on the lab-scale production of RHbased alpha-cellulose, MCC and NCC. In the present study, RH will be subjected to sequential alkaline and oxidative hydrolysis processes through which the non-cellulosic components need to be removed. For CL, there is a lower emphasis on the need for successive delignification and bleaching pretreatments, due to the higher cellulose content. Thus, CL-based micro-sized cellulose (MCC-CL) is inexpensive and readily available in the market.

(p4.2) Another focus of this study is to investigate the development of MCC and NCC containing both cellulose I and cellulose II and porous microparticles, offering a novel class of cellulosic-based materials. The presence of these two different crystalline forms within the resultant structure may enhance thermal and mechanical properties and overall durability, widening their potential industrial applications. Besides, the development of porous microparticles has drawn great interest for their potential applications as drug carriers, absorbents, catalysts and biosensors (Cai et al., 2013;Gao et al., 2015). Developing MCC with structural porosity may potentially further improve its capability and functionality in many scientific and industrial sectors.
## (s5) Nanocrystalline Cellulose
(p5.0) Nanocrystalline cellulose (NCC) is a term used when referring to nano-sized cellulose or cellulose on the nano-dimensional scale. Besides, NCC can be considered to be cellulose in its highest crystallinity form or its nanocrystalline domain, as shown in Figure 5.

(p5.1) NCC is classed as a renewable nanomaterial with unique properties compared with its cellulose counterpart that has great potential applications such as textiles, carbon nanotubes, nanocomposites, photonics, polymer nanocomposites, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and in particular as value-added products for materials development (Peng et al., 2011). Nano-scaled cellulose has gained growing prominence along with rapidly increasing research interests, as it can be derived from bio-based inexhaustible raw materials.
## (s7) Heterogeneous Acid-Catalyzed Hydrolysis of Cellulose
(p7.0) In recent years, there has been a substantial increase in research activities associated with cellulose hydrolytic conversion via heterogeneous solid acid catalysts, as summarized in Table 2. Certain aspects of these studies include catalytic Hydrolysis of cellulose into glucose and oligosaccharides using magnetic nanoparticulate (Fe3O4@SiO2-SO3H) solid acid catalyst, aimed to produce fermentable sugars (glucose and oligosaccharides) for biofuel production (Xiong et al., 2014). Additionally, a magnetic Fe3O4 core encapsulated in a sulfonated carbon shell (Fe3O4@C-SO3H) showed good catalytic activity as a recyclable acidic catalyst for cellulose hydrolysis (C. Zhang et al., 2013). Carbon-Fe2(SO4)3/γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles have used as a readily recoverable and reusable magnetic nanocatalyst for producing glucose from microcrystalline cellulose (Yamaguchi et al., 2016). A magnetic silica-supported solid acid catalyst (Fe3O4-SBA-SO3H) has used for cellulose conversion into a 50% glucose production yield (Lai et al., 2011). Besides, in an aqueous medium and over a magnetic carbon-based solid acid (MMCSA) catalyst, corncob has depolymerized in a onestep reaction into 71% xylose with cellulose retention of 91% in the residue . For these processes and irrespective to their efficient catalytic conversion of cellulose, the magnetism followed by sulfonation of a carbon-based material requires a long operating time and good handling of the spent sulfuric acid used in catalyst preparation.

(p7.1) Furthermore, cellulose has converted with high yield (69%) to levulinic acid using Amberlyst 70 (acidic resin) as a heterogeneous acid catalyst (Alonso et al.,  2013). The conversion of cellulose into glucose using another acidic resin (Amberlyst 15) has successfully carried out with a production yield of 75% (Ishida et al., 2014). Cellulose has also depolymerized using zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) to produce levulinic acid with a 53% production yield (Joshi et al., 2014). Levulinic acid (LA) is generated from cellulose decomposition and it is considered as a potential precursor for the production of chemicals and biofuel (Serrano-Ruiz et al., 2016). Sulfated Zirconia has also used for the hydrolytic conversion of cellulosic materials into glucose, which was later utilized as a biofuel production feedstock (Kristiani et al., 2015). Additionally, sulfonated activated-carbon (AC-SO3H) catalyst has used in the catalytic hydrothermal reaction of cellulosic material to produce glucose via heterogeneous Hydrolysis (Onda et al., 2009). The resin-activated carbon has also been used to hydrolyze cellulose into butyl Levulinate with a 31% yield (Liang et al., 2019). The abovecited heterogeneous depolymerization and downgrading of cellulose-based materials have mostly conducted using high processing temperature (120 °C or above) with uses of organic solvents and ionic liquids as reaction medium. However, these techniques may result in the disadvantages of higher energy consumption and insufficient separation of the final products. Heteropoly acids (HPA) have applied as a solid acid catalyst for the hydrolytic conversion of cellulose. In detail, the heteropoly acid H3PW12O40 has used as a catalyst for the Hydrolysis of cellulose to glucose with a 50% yield (Fu et al., 2015), although later studies revealed that the yield has increased to 83% (Tian et al., 2011).
## (s9) Conclusions
(p9.0) The nanocellulosic materials have gained a growing prominence with rapidly increasing research interests. In addition, these materials are particularly derived from bio-based inexhaustible raw materials. Among these, NCC which is a renewable nanomaterial with unique properties such as adaptable surface chemistry, biocompatibility, nontoxic and physicochemical and mechanical properties. This making NCC possess great potentials for diverse applications such as polymer nanocomposites, 3D printing materials, carbon nanotubes, photoelectronics, membrane, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals and most notably as value-added products for materials development (Peng et al., 2011;Shankaran, 2018). Those unique properties increased global demands aimed at expanding and developing NCC productions.

(p9.1) The sulfuric acid-catalyzed Hydrolysis of cellulose-based materials is the most commonly used method of NCC production. As yet, this method has greatly disadvantaged from the used concentrated acid, and a large quantity of the spent acid resulted from the production process. Refining and reusing the process effluents may not be cost-effective as well as energyefficient. Recent hydrolysis techniques of cellulosic materials were involved in the application of heterogeneous catalysis with different types of heterogeneous acid catalysts. However, these techniques have mainly focused on biofuel and chemical productions, with major challenges and limitations are the timeconsuming and insufficient separation of the final product. On the contrary, the introduction of heterogeneous solid acids, as an industrially viable green alternative, for the production of nanocellulosic materials may offer costeffective production approaches.
