# The Effects of Personal, Environmental, and Genetic Factors on Epidemic of Coronavirus Disease-19: A Review of the Current Literature

CorpusID: 229528266 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf42bf57719782e6183d2eb3de5ef290ede75836](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf42bf57719782e6183d2eb3de5ef290ede75836)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Genetic Susceptibility to COVID-19 Infection
(p3.0) In the case of COVID-19, what is controversial for researchers and clinicians is that not all COVID-19 exposed people are infected and not all infected patients develop severe respiratory complications. Although the exact mechanisms behind these dramatically different infection outcomes remain to be elucidated, it is quite likely that these disparities are genetically mediated, in part [22].

(p3.1) For entering into the host cells, many viruses use multiple alternative receptors. The study by Lu et al. showed that SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 have similar receptor binding domain structures. Further studies showed that these viruses use the same receptor for entering the cells. This receptor is angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and is involved in the pathogenicity of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 [12], [23].
## (s8) Effect of Disinfectants on COVID-19 Virus
(p8.0) Detailed information about the level of resistance of COVID-19 in the environment is not available, but it seems to behave like other CoVs [72]. Recent studies have shown that the resistance of human CoVs such as SARS-CoV, MERS, and other endemic human CoV, is varied in different surfaces (from 2 h to 9 days) [72], [73]. The survival time of these viruses is affected by many factors such as surface structure, temperature, relative humidity, and type of virus species so that on inanimate surfaces such as metals, glass, and plastics can survive up to 9 days [72], [73].

(p8.1) Unfortunately, there is little information about the suitable disinfectant for confrontation to COVID-19. However, experts believe that effective disinfectants on other CoVs can also be effective to inactivate COVID-19 virus. There is a wide range of disinfectants for surface disinfection. Ethanol 62-71%, hydrogenperoxide 0.5%, and sodium hypochlorite 0.1% can effectively disable the CoVs during 1 min [74]. The WHO believes that a wide range of disinfectants is effective for enveloped viruses such as COVID-19 virus. At present, 70% ethyl alcohol recommends for disinfection of small areas between uses such as reusable equipment (e.g., thermometer). Sodium hypochlorite at 0.5% (equivalent 5000 ppm) is recommended for disinfection of surfaces [72].
