# An overview of traffic congestion detection and classification techniques in VANET

CorpusID: 225040516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9fc9fa09584c0876198aee1a16c8ddaea6a1749](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f9fc9fa09584c0876198aee1a16c8ddaea6a1749)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) For the last decades, traffic congestion has caused significant impact in modern society. Despite the measures taken to reduce the impact it bestowed, traffic congestion is affecting the environment, health, and crippling the economy of many cities around the world in so many different levels. Generally, there are many factors that can cause traffic to congest, and it could be caused by either recurring factors such as insufficient capacity, unrestrained demand or ineffective management of capacity or caused by non-recurring factors such as incidents, construction work zones, bad weather or emergencies [1]. To this effect, the world is witnessing the rise in transportation as well as urban technology researches in addressing this issue. Some are focusing on detecting and classifying traffic congestion in order to provide timely and accurate information to vehicular drivers and transport authorities to take action. While many researches are utilizing on image and video analytics such as through satellites views, surveillance cameras, on-line images, there's a hype in researches utilizing VANET.

(p0.1) Vehicular communications have been extensively researched with the aim of enabling vehicles to exchange information among themselves, also with the infrastructure. This enables the collection of vehicles" traffic data that then ratifies the road traffic characteristics, including speed, density, flow, and travel time.

(p0.2) With the data collected, many researches have adopted various methodologies to among others; control congestion [2,3], provide various applications such as safety alerts, resolving security issues, and many more. A particular focus includes mathematical and statistical algorithms, fuzzy logic, neural network, classifiers as well as utilizing the routing mechanism in VANET networks in detecting and classifying traffic congestion.

(p0.3) Classification of the severity of congestion levels is important to define the state of traffic congestion levels in order to avoid and mitigate traffic congestion. This classification and other traffic information approach often rely
## (s3) During the re-routing phase
(p3.0) Traffic detection during re-routing phase is the strategy used in Dynamic Shortest Path (DSP), Random k Shortest Paths (RkSP) and Entropy Balanced k Shortest Paths (EBkSP) by Pan et al. [15], Brennand et al. [16] and FASTER [17]. DSP, RkSP, and EBkSP are three traffic re-routing strategies that operate through V2I communication whereby the vehicle geographic position, speed, and direction are acquired to detect traffic congestion. In the first data collection and representation phase, a directed graph is used to represent the network in which intersections are represented by the vertices, the edges signify the road segments, and weights are the average travel time. From this representation, signs of congestion are detected through periodic checkings. The detection, however, does not happen in real time, rather in the next re-routing phase.

(p3.1) Similarly in [16], based on a set of distributed RSUs covering an urban area, traffic congestion is detected when it occurs within the RSU"s communication coverage. This strategy is solely dependent on V2I communication in optimizing the traffic flow. Data collection from every vehicle within the communication range consisting of the vehicle"s ID, speed, direction, position and travel time through the route are gathered at the RSU via LTE or 3G single-hop, long-range communication [18]. FASTER differ from the above techniques in its communication design, in which FASTER only relies on V2V communication instead of V2I using RSUs. Instead of aggregating data within the RSU"s communication range, FASTER creates smaller areas called districts in order to identify the traffic condition in those districts. Periodically, each vehicle will convey their individual traffic information through beacons to neighbouring vehicles within the same district. An overall traffic knowledge is achieved in the dissemination of each district"s knowledge to other districts as in the exchanges of information by the vehicles.
## (s4) Fuzzy logic
(p4.0) Fuzzy logic is also a popular mechanism used in VANET. Besides been utilized in detecting traffic congestion as in COTEC [19], CARTIM [20], Rui et.al [21], and most recently Wang et.al [22] and TraD-VANET [23] it is also implemented in localization, clustering, beaconing dissemination, aggregation, and other processes in VANET [24][25][26][27]. The fuzzy mechanism detects traffic congestion based on vehicular speed and traffic density. The local traffic density is obtained through CAM messages of neighboring vehicles, which is further calculated with the number of neighboring vehicles, distance to the estimating vehicle, and the number of lanes on the road. These values are then used to classify the traffic congestion level through a fuzzy-based decision system.  
## (s5) Artificial neural network
(p5.0) Apart from using fuzzy logic mechanism, artificial neural network (ANN) which is a bio-inspired based system is also been developed to solve different complex problems and can be used efficiently to categorize the congestion states as applied in UCONDES [28], INCIDEnT [29] and ICARUS [30]. ANN is composed of several "neurons" or elementary processing units that are connected with each other in accordance with some assigned weights. Each "neuron" takes input from a source of information and produces output with the help of transfer function [31].

(p5.1) A Multi-Layer Perceptron ANN is used in [17] and [30] to detect traffic congestion in urban environment which is using the vehicle speed and neighboring vehicles density as input parameters for ANN to detect and classify the level of traffic congestion. Three layers are configured; (i) two neurons to represent speed and surrounding density at the input layer; (ii) four neutrons at a hidden layer that is able to learn and classify congestion levels; and (iii) an output layer neuron representing the classification of the level of congestion on the roads. Figure 1 illustrates a basic form of an ANN topology used in detecting, identifying and classifying traffic congestion as applied in several techniques such as UCONDES. 
## (s6) Classifiers
(p6.0) SCORPION (System with COoperative Routing to improve traffic cONdition) [32] and CHIMERA (Congestion avoidance through a traffIc classification MEchanism and a Re-routing Algorithm) [33] were developed in tandem in terms of years. Both mechanisms are based on a hybrid system in utilization of the RSU which offers traffic congestion detection, traffic congestion classification and route suggestion to avoid the congestion. Traffic detection applied for both mechanisms is similar to [7] and [8], using weighted graphs. Single-hop, long-range communication adapting 4G and LTE is used as a communication medium in transmitting information consisting of the vehicle"s ID, current position, route, and destination from vehicles to a central hub (RSU). Traffic congestion classification is fulfilled using K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) classifier; which will be briefly described in the following section.
## (s10) K-NN classifier
(p10.0) The K-NN is a simple machine learning algorithm that stores all available cases and classifies data or case based on a similarity context of the aggregated data. The classification is accomplished by a majority vote of the most common of the predominant class known among its k nearest neighbors. It is also characterized as a lazy algorithm, defined as having less ability and is labor intensive when dealing with large datasets [22,23]. The operation of this algorithm is based on comparing a newly received record with the training records and finding training records identical to it. All training records are stored in an n-dimensional space, and each record with n attributes represents a point in the n-dimensional space.

(p10.1) Upon receiving a new record, K-NN algorithm starts to find the space for the training record that is nearest to the new record, assigns this as the new record neighbors and hence predicts the class label for the new record which is similar to the identified neighbors. The algorithm defines nearest in terms of distance metrics, such as the Euclidean distance metric that could define the distance between two records. The identified k neighbors records are then combined, and the algorithm then assigns the classification of the most similar record or records to the new record [24]. SCORPION and CHIMERA both are using KNN classifier to classify the traffic congestion. These techniques train the algorithm based on a synthetic dataset built upon reference to the LOS in HCM.
## (s11) Other classification methods
(p11.0) LOS in HCM and ANN is reviewed as recent and popular methods used by many techniques for traffic management in VANET. However, there are also other approaches to classifying traffic congestion. Upon the basis of traffic information received such as speed, density, number of vehicles per mile per lane, estimated travel time and direction, there are various ways that this information is manipulated into classifying the traffic congestion state. ECODE [37] classifies congestion from traffic information from Traffic Monitoring Record (TMR) generated by vehicles in specific evaluating zones, however, the mechanism or classification values were not discussed.
## (s12) SIMULATION MODELS AND TOOLS
(p12.0) There are various tools providing a myriad of models in simulating VANET environments interactions be fitting the requirements of scalability and applicability, some calibration with one another [48]. As shown in Table 2, SUMO (Simulator for Urban MObility) is the most widely used traffic mobility simulation tool. SUMO supports the simulation of multimodal traffic and vehicle mobility traces to be evaluated with a network simulator on-line [49]. Network simulators listed in Table 2  (Objective Modular Network Testbed in C++), ns-2 (Network Simulator 2) and ns-3 (Network Simulator 3) which are most commonly used to simulate VANET environment. These network simulation tools, however, are not able to simulate road traffic. Therefore iTETRIS and VEINS (Vehicles in Network Simulation) are needed as tools to provide modular simulation platforms that integrate traffic mobility simulator and network simulator to enable wireless communication in real time road traffic simulations. iTETRIS integrates and extends SUMO and ns-3, while VEINS integrates SUMO with OMNeT++.
