# Shift-work: a review of the health consequences Article History

CorpusID: 229405284 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a378688f3fedaaf45f0bc01f2ac737344e0789b7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Psychology, Medicine

## (s1) METHODS
(p1.0) The present article represents an assessment of the evidence, thus a form of knowledge synthesis that follows a systematic approach to map evidence on a topic and identify main concepts, theories, sources and knowledge gaps (Tricco et al., 2018). This review followed some of the guidelines of the PRISMA Statement for a scoping review (Tricco et al., 2018).
## (s10) SLEEP/WAKE CYCLE
(p10.0) To understand how the sleep cycle works, it is necessary to consider and evaluate three criteria: the electrical activity of the cerebral cortex, the degree of ease with which the individual can be awakened and the muscle tone. When an individual is relaxed and eyes closed, EEG activity is constituted by large and slow waves (alpha waves), on the other hand, in people who are alert and with eyes open, EEG activity is more desynchronized , that is, it presents smaller amplitude waves (beta waves) (Filho, 2002).
## (s14) CIRCADIAN RHYTHM SLEEP DISORDER
(p14.0) This disorder is associated with irregularities caused by circadian deregulation due to variations in sleep/wake cycles. Changes in sleep/wake patterns are triggered by shift work, jet lag, light exposure and insufficient sleep time. Circadian deregulation alters neuroendocrine physiology, impairs glucose tolerance, and reduces insulin sensitivity (Buxton et al., 2012;Depner et al., 2014;Markwald & Wright, 2012;Scheer, Hilton, Mantzoros, & Shea, 2009).
## (s19) PARASOMNIAS
(p19.0) Parasomnias are described as recurrent episodes of incomplete awakening, absent or inappropriate responsiveness, limited or no cognition or dream report and partial or complete amnesia for the episode (Sateia, 2014 nurses working two shift (day and evening) and nurses working three shift (day, evening and night) rotational schedules had increased risk of confusional arousal, a NREM-related parasomnia, compared to nurses working daytime only (OR=2.10 and 1.71, respectively). Similarly, nurses working two and three shift rotational schedules had increased risk of nightmares, a REM-related parasomnia (OR=1.64 and 1.57, respectively). This is likely related to the circadian rhythm misalignment and sleep deprivation caused by such shift schedules. Is this study, the other parasomnias evaluated (sleepwalking, sleep terror, sleep-related eating, sleep-related violence and sexsomnia) were not significantly associated with work schedule. It is also worth notice that, in this study, working night shifts only, was not associated with any of the parasomnias (Bjorvatn, Magerøy, Moen, Pallesen, & Waage, 2015).
## (s21) METABOLIC SYNDROME
(p21.0) Metabolic syndrome can be defined as a set of various risk factors, namely high blood pressure, obesity, lowered high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, high fasting glucose and high triglycerides. All of which are frequently present simultaneously in an individual. A pioneering study revealed that unlike workers who perform their activity at the normal daytime schedule, shift workers are gravely vulnerable to three metabolic problems, namely high levels of triglycerides, obesity, and hypertension (Chen, Lin, & Hsiao, 2010). Other study conducted by Burgueño, Gemma, Gianotti, Sookoian, & Pirola (2010), also found a heightened susceptibility to the metabolic syndrome among night shift health care professionals is a result of poor sleeping and resting habits, associated with their professional activity and the time at which they execute it.

(p21.1) Some studies have established a link between shift workers and increased food intake, with a preference for carbohydrate-rich foods, and changes in lipid parameters, especially in triglyceride levels (Al-Naimi, Hampton, Richard, Tzung, & Morgan, 2004). A study conducted in China with 26.382 workers (11.783 men and 14.599 women), with a total of 9.088 shift workers, also established a strong link between shift work and the metabolic syndrome, without adjusting for any confounder's factors. In female shift workers, every 10 years spent in shift work was associated with an increase of about 10% (95% IC:1%-20%) higher odds of developing metabolic syndrome. They also found that shift workers were significantly associated with higher blood pressure levels, higher waist circumference, and increase in glucose levels, all components of metabolic syndrome (Guo et al., 2015). Similarly, a study conducted in Japan involving 3.094 individuals in the daytime work group, 73 in the fixed night time work group, 1.017 in the shift work group and 243 in the day-to-night work group, showed that fixed shift work and night time work, contributed strongly to the number of workers with metabolic syndrome, compared to daytime work (Kawabe et al., 2014).

(p21.2) Social jet lag is a key factor in developing metabolic syndrome since it induces changes in cholesterol levels and implies changes in food processes. It was observed in an experiment that social jet lag potentiated body weight gain by increasing overconsumption of food. As a result, it promoted high levels of insulin and dyslipidemia indicating the risk of metabolic syndrome (Espitia-Bautista et al., 2017). It is also important to mention, in combination with shift work, that a chronic shift in light/dark cycles induces obesity, increases body weight and glucose intolerance, leading to the accumulation of fat in white adipose tissues, and also changes in the expression profiles of metabolic genes in liver (Oike, Mutsumi, Ippoushi, & Masuko, 2015). Trough the studies mentioned above, the connection between shift work and the development of metabolic problems is undenied.
## (s22) DIABETES MELLITUS
(p22.0) Few studies have investigated the relationship between shift work and diabetes mellitus despite a high prevalence of the disease its negative impact that this disease has on multiple organ systems (Forouhi & Wareham, 2014). However, some studies point to the existence of this relationship, namely a cohort study involving 121.700 nurses, aged between 30 and 55 years, concluded that nurses who worked longer shifts were more likely to have diabetes (Kawachi et al., 1995). A meta-analysis involving 226.652 individuals showed a odds ratio (OR) of 1.09 (95% CI 1.05-1.12; P= .014) for the association being stronger in men (OR=1.37, 95% CI 1.20-1.56) than woman (OR=1.09, 95% CI 1.04-1.14) (Gan et al., 2015).
## (s23) OBESITY
(p23.0) The association between weight gain and shift work and night work has also been investigated. A study conducted in Brazil reported extremely high rates of obesity in female night workers aged 40 years or older with low education levels and a family history of overweight. In this study, daily sleep duration was also divided into the three following categories: > 5 hours of continuous sleep, ≤ 5 hours of continuous sleep with some additional rest, or ≤ 5 hours of continuous sleep with no additional rest. After adjusting for confounding factors, obesity rates were significantly higher in the latter two groups than in the first one (composed mostly by day workers, supporting the association between sleep deprivation and obesity (Canuto, Pattussi, Macagnan, Henn, & Olinto, 2013).

(p23.1) Another study, conducted in Japan, which followed 21.693 men and 2.109 women between 1999 and 2006 found that the relative risk of obesity was higher in men who slept for less than 5h/day than in those who had at least 5 to 7 hours of sleep per day. In woman, these variables were not significantly associated. This study concluded that a short sleep period (<5h) accelerated the onset of obesity in shift workers (Osamu, Kaneita, Murata, Yokoyama, & Ohida, 2011 (2011), provided strong evidence on the relationship between shift work and increased body weight. In addition, behavioural changes associated with shift work, such as reduced physical activity, may also contribute to weight gain and the development of associated conditions, such as metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes. However, the generalization of these findings is limited by the heterogeneity of the studies included in the meta-analysis, which varied greatly in follow-up methods and periods, in the control of confounding factors, and in their definitions of shift work.
## (s26) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
(p26.0) Cardiovascular disease associated with shift work is one of the problems that have been studied for more than two decades since it has long been assumed that shift work has a detrimental effect on the vascular system. This assumption was strengthened by several studies conducted in this same area (Karlsson, Knutsson, & Lindahl, 2001;Puttonen et al., 2009;Van Amelsvoort et al., 2004). However, more recent studies have been questioning the absolute causal relationship, since they consider that the evidence is limited, and there are still some studies that conclude that there is no relation between shift work and cardiovascular diseases (Frost et al., 2009;Hublin et al., 2010).

(p26.1) Studies have shown that the relative risk of developing cardiovascular disease in men who work in shifts is 1.5 times higher than that in men working at regular schedules (Akerstedt & Knutsson, 1997). However, risk factors of 0.64-2.25 were reported in other studies and a higher relative risk was still reported in a woman who works in shifts (Bøggild & Knutsson, 1999;Frost et al., 2009;Ha & Park, 2005;Puttonen et al., 2009).

(p26.2) Although these relative risks appear to be low, the hours at which these workers perform may become a much more significant risk when combined with factors that potentiate cardiovascular disease, such as poor eating habits, obesity, high caffeine and tobacco consumption and, in woman, when the protective effects of estrogen cease after menopause or metabolic problems (Canuto, Garcez, & Olinto, 2013).

(p26.3) One theory of the causal link between shift work and cardiovascular disease points to the sleep loss incurred by shift workers is a significant factor, since disturbance of the circadian rhythms, by either sleep loss or change in time of sleep, constitute a major metabolic challenge for the body (Akerstedt & Knutsson, 1997;Frost et al., 2009;Puttonen, Härmä, & Hublin, 2010). This theory encompasses the research that investigates inflammation, blood coagulation, cardiac autonomic function and the interaction between cortisol and catecholamine (stress related) and cardiovascular disease (Puttonen et al., 2010).
## (s27) HYPERTENSION
(p27.0) Like other comorbidities, the link between shift work and hypertension is not completely understood. Considering that shift work schedules may predispose workers to inappropriate behaviours such as smoking, poor eating habits and poor balance between work and personal life, and potentiate the activation of the autonomic nervous system, inflammation, and other metabolic syndromes, it is likely that this type of workers have a higher risk of hypertension (Puttonen et al., 2010).
## (s28) UROLOGIC CONDITIONS
(p28.0) Hypogonadism is a disorder characterized by low levels of testosterone with clinical symptoms of decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, lethargy, difficulty concentrating, sleep disturbances, and loss of muscle mass . Endogenous production of testosterone is linked to sleep, with increasing levels during rapid-eye-movement sleep onset and declining levels upon awakening. Thus, men who experience a reduction in rapid-eyes movement or poor sleep quality, as shift workers often experience, may have lower circulating testosterone levels (Andersen & Tufik, 2008).

(p28.1) However, in a cohort study conducted by Pastuszak et al. (2017), which included 182 shift workers, no association was found between sleep quality and serum testosterone levels. A study involving four oil refinery operators whose serum hormone levels were sampled every two hours in real-time during a night shift, the peak and trough times for serum testosterone concentrations were erratic as overall serum testosterone concentrations in these shift workers were significantly reduced (Touitou et al., 1990).

(p28.2) A study of 26 European junior doctors showed no changes in free and total testosterone levels while subjects were on vacation (baseline), working a week of night shifts, and working a normal week (Smith et al., 2006). Although there has been no definitive evidence suggesting a change in serum testosterone levels after doing shift work, studies have found that shift workers who experience shift work sleep disorder (SWSD) endorsed more hypogonadal symptoms, as determined using the quantitative Androgen Deficiency in the Aging Male questionnaire . When assessing the relationship between sleep quality and symptoms of hypogonadism, Pastuszak et al. (2017) found a significant linear association between sleep quality and Androgen Deficiencies in Aging Male scores (ρ= .008), where individuals who indicated that they were "very satisfied" with their sleep quality had higher scores, compared with those who indicated that they were "somewhat dissatisfied" with the quality of their sleep (ρ= .02). Although there is no consensus on the effects of shift work on testosterone levels, there is evidence to support the existence of more severe symptoms of hypogonadism in shift workers who have poor sleep quality and associated sleep syndrome to shift work sleep syndrome.

(p28.3) Working on shift schedules poses a challenge for couples who wish to achieve fertility. In couples where one or both partners work non-standard shifts, spending time together may be difficult, and limit opportunities for intimacy (Bancroft, 1993). A study of the relationship between infertility and occupation revealed that male infertility was associated with working in industry and construction, fields in which workers were more likely to work shifts (OR=3.13, 95% CI 1.19-8.13) and endure physical exertion (OR=3.35, 95% CI 1.44-7.80) (Sheiner, Sheiner, Carel, Potashnik, & Shoham-Vardi, 2002). More recently, (Eisenberg, Chen, Ye, & Louis, 2015), found that shift work was not directly associated with semen quality but rather a physical effort in the workplace was.

(p28.4) In a study involving 255 infertile men and 267 fertile men, male infertility was more likely to be observed in shift workers (OR= 3.60, 95% CI 1.12-11.57) (El-Helaly, Awadalla, Mansour, & El-Biomy, 2010). Similarly, Irgens, Kruger, & Ulstein (1999) showed that reduction in semen quality was more likely in shift workers, although statistically this difference was insignificant (OR= 1.46, 95% CI 0.89-2.40).
## (s29) PHYCOLOGICAL HEALTH
(p29.0) Continuous rotational work adversely affects the nervous system and may accelerate the development of psychiatric disorders, including bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and major depressive disorder, which impose enormous medical burdens (Hawi et al., 2015;Jeste & Geschwind, 2014;Milham, 2012;Zhao & Castellanos, 2016). The genetic alteration and uncontrolled expression of genes primarily causing the aforementioned disorders are associated with irregular continuous changing of shifts during work (Amstadter, Maes, Sherrin, Myers, & Kendler, 2016;Burmeister, McInnis, & Zöllner, 2008;Sousa et al., 2017;Zhao & Castellanos, 2016). Night shift work contributed toward several psychiatric disorders through circadian misalignment, sleep deprivation, and light-induced melatonin suppression (Smith & Eastman, 2012).
## (s30) CANCER
(p30.0) Malignancies are mostly developed by mitigation in pineal hormone melatonin by a bright light at night. Reduced production of melatonin, phase shift, and sleep disruption, caused by exposure to light at night, might be the possible mechanism that causes cancer and related disorders (Fritschi et al., 2011).
## (s32) CONSEQUENCES ON THE ORGANIZATIONAL CONTEXT
(p32.0) Shift work may lead to increased levels of stress and dissatisfaction in workers. These factors, coupled with excessive sleepiness during the work shift, resulting from the disturbance of the sleep-wake cycle caused by this type of work-time organization, may have repercussions at various levels, compromising not only the health and safety of the worker, but also the performance and alertness, originating problems not only for the worker, but for the company itself (Boivin & Boudreau, 2014;Wright et al., 2013).

(p32.1) According to Santos, Franco, Batista, Santos, & Duarte (2008), some studies have revealed that in the night work there is a significant decrease of the waking state, particularly between 02:00 a.m. and 04:00 a.m. This factor, allied with mental fatigue, will result in a decrease in mental capacity, which will negatively influence work performance, especially in services that require greater concentration.

(p32.2) Studies that related the performance of the workers with shift work, allowed to verify that the physical, psychomotor or cognitive demands lead to a reduction of the performance from 22:00 p.m., with an abrupt drop between 00:00 a.m. and 4:00 a.m., also showing a drop in performance between 14:00 p.m. and 15:00 p.m. (Winget, DeRoshia, & Holley, 1985;Wojtczak-Jaroszowa & Banaszkiewicz, 1974).

(p32.3) In shift work, one of the occupational safety problems that imposes special attention is the occurrence of work-related accidents caused by sleepiness and disturbances of circadian rhythms, more common in night shifts (Folkard & Lombardi, 2006).
