# A Review of Proton Conductivity in Cellulosic Materials

CorpusID: 227128136 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3aef32e088f5fbbe10d38fc25de88e4cb43e106f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3aef32e088f5fbbe10d38fc25de88e4cb43e106f)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s3) Pristine Cellulosic Materials
(p3.0) Fundamental investigations into the electrical conductivity of natural polysaccharides were first reported by Murphy in the 1960s, specifically on natural cellulose (i.e. cotton) in both dry (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b, and humid conditions (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. The conductivity of bulk compressed samples was measured, and the significant influence of even trace amounts of absorbed water was realized. Dry cellulose was reported to have very low conductivity in the range from 10 −16 to 10 −9 mS·cm −1 between 25 and 180°C, respectively. Meanwhile, at 100% RH, the conductivity increased by up to 12 orders of magnitude (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. It is not entirely clear from their description if these measurements were performed in-or through-plane. To explain this strong dependence on water content, theoretical models were built and it was assumed that cellulose possesses periodically distributed "ion-generating sites" where lower energy is required for water dissociation to H 3 O + and OH − , increasing the conductivity. It wasn't until 1963 that it was suggested that ionic rather than electronic conduction was responsible for the observed results, after the products of electrolysis were detected during measurements (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. It was postulated that "conduction in dry cellulose involves tunneling of the proton between equivalent sites, the one in the ion, the other in an adjacent neutral molecule" (Murphy, 1960a(Murphy, , 1960b. Following studies investigated the ionic conductivity of cellulose derivatives, e.g. cellulose acetate, showing that the conductivity decreases by ∼1 order of magnitude in dry samples doped with various ion salts (e.g. LiCl) (Barker et al., 1964a(Barker et al., , 1964b.
## (s4) Polymer Blends With Nanocellulose
(p4.0) Given the advantageous properties of nanocellulose, it was perhaps natural for it to be combined with conventional polymeric ionomers such as Nafion. For example, in 2015, Jiang et al. investigated the use of commercial 5 wt.% Nafion dispersions blended with bacterial cellulose (derived from Medusomyces gisevii). Composite Nafion/BC PEMs (Figure 5b) were prepared by casting and drying, and the cellulose to Nafion ratio was varied (Jiang et al., 2015). The inclusion of nanocellulose reportedly improved the mechanical strength, increasing the storage modulus from 220 MPa for Nafion 115, to 1000 MPa for a 1:1 Nafion-cellulose blend. In addition, the area swelling ratio was significantly decreased from 21% to <10%. However, the thermal stability of the composites was worse compared to pristine Nafion. Increasing the cellulose content decreased the proton conductivity, reflecting the much lower conductivity of cellulose, which likely contributed to a lower ion exchange capacity (Figure 8, 30°C, 100% RH). A PEMFC was fabricated, and a maximum power density of 106 mW·cm −2 was obtained for a 1:7 cellulose-Nafion blend. This was slightly higher than a reference PEMFC using a conventional Nafion 115 membrane (100.8 mW·cm −2 ), although this is difficult to reconcile with the lower conductivity measured in the blend membranes. In addition, the power density of the reference MEA is rather low compared to the literature, possibly because the measurements were carried out at room temperature, or because conditions were not optimized. Additionally, the methanol permeability was initially higher in the composite membranes than in pure Nafion, but decreased after thermal annealing. DMFCs were fabricated, and a maximum peak power density of 21.1 mW·cm −2 was reported at 80°C for the 1:7 composite membrane. However, the DMFC performance for pure Nafion was not reported for comparison. Similarly, in 2016 Gadim et al. investigated 50:50 wt% blends of Nafion and bacterial cellulose . Membranes of ∼100 μm thickness were fabricated by a relatively complex process involving infiltration of Nafion solution into a bacterial cellulose film. The highest in-plane proton conductivity they reported was 140 mS·cm −1 at 90°C ( Figure 9B, circles), and the activation energies were in the range of 10-20 kJ·mol −1 , i.e. comparable to Nafion. The authors therefore concluded that proton transport primarily occurs through Nafion pathways in the membrane. Interestingly, the composite membrane had worse thermal stability than the pure Nafion or cellulose components, attributed to catalytic degradation of cellulose by the sulfonic groups in Nafion. The composite membrane was assembled into a conventional MEA, obtaining maximum power density of just 16 mW·cm −2 , despite the nominally high in-plane conductivity. This highlights the importance of measuring the ionic conductivity of PEMs through-plane if the results are to be relevant to fuel cell devices, optimization of the fuel cell fabrication and measurement protocols, and the measurement of suitable reference cells.

(p4.1) More recently, Wang et al. fabricated similar composite membranes by soaking conventional cellulosic filter papers in Nafion . The through-plane conductivity estimated from fuel cell tests was 15 mS·cm −1 at 90°C and 100% RH. This is relatively low compared to the above study , but this can be attributed in part to the difference between in-plane and through-plane conductivity measurements. Despite this, the conductivity is surprisingly low for a Nafion-containing PEM. The corresponding activation energy was 11.6 kJ·mol −1 (0.12 eV), attributed to the Grotthuss mechanism through the Nafion. MEAs fabricated from these membranes exhibited an output power of 23 mW·cm −2 at 80°C.

(p4.2) Other polymer blends have also been investigated. For example, in 2014, Gadim et al. synthesized poly(4-styrene sulfonic acid) (PSSA) in situ on a bacterial cellulose support (derived from Gluconacetobacter sacchari), using poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate as a crosslinker (Gadim et al., 2014). The assumed polymer structure is depicted in Figure 9A. Different ratios of the component materials were investigated, and the membrane thickness ranged from 50 to 300 μm. The highest through-plane proton conductivity (∼130 mS·cm −1 ) and ion FIGURE 8 | Proton conductivity of BC/Nafion blend membranes before and after annealing, measured at 30°C and 100% RH. The observed trend indicates that when mixed with an ionomer, the conductivity depends on its relative proportion in the composite. Redrawn from Jiang et al. (2015).  .
## (s5) Chemical Modification of Cellulose
(p5.0) From a sustainability point of view, completely avoiding the utilization of fluorinated polymers or other toxic and/or expensive ionomers is preferred. However, as discussed above, pure nanocellulose membranes don't have sufficient intrinsic proton conductivity to satisfy the targets set for PEMFC applications by the US Department of Energy 3 or Fuel Cell Commercialization Conference of Japan (Ohma et al., 2011). A promising alternative to using additives is to directly modify the chemical structure of the cellulose polymer to improve the desired properties. Due to the presence of reactive hydroxyl groups in the structure of cellulose (especially the primary alcohol group -CH 2 OH) such modification can be performed in a variety of different ways, as has been demonstrated historically. For example, surface modification of cellulosic materials improves the efficiency of the defibrillation process, or can be used to make them compatible with specific solvents (Thomas et al., 2018). The most common approaches towards modifying the primary alcohol group of cellulose are carboxymethylation, 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxylmediated (TEMPO-mediated) oxidation, phosphorylation and sulfonation. In the field of PEM development, various forms of sulfonation have been used to improve the proton conductivity.

(p5.1) In the first study of this kind, Seo et al. (2009) used crosslinking of conventional microcrystalline cellulose fibers with sulfonic acid linkers as a method of increasing the proton conductivity by introducing proton donating acid groups. For this purpose, they blended sulfosuccinic acid (from 5 to 30 wt%) with cellulose dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and fabricated the membranes by solution casting in Teflon dishes. The membranes were dried for 2 days at 80°C and annealed at 120°C to promote the crosslinking reaction ( Figure 12A), although the thickness was not reported. They succeeded in significantly improving the in-plane conductivity, reaching ∼40 mS·cm −1 at moderate temperatures (although the conductivity of unadulterated cellulose was not included for comparison). Importantly, the increase of conductivity was exponentially proportional to the loading of acid in the membrane ( Figure 12B), however the conductivity of unchanged cellulose was not reported. The activation energies were calculated to be 11.8 kJ·mol −1 (∼0.1 eV), similar to Nafion ( Figure 12C). However, it should be noted that the conductivity measurements were performed in-plane, rather than the more relevant through-plane configuration.
## (s6) Nanocellulose Blends With Small Molecules
(p6.0) Whilst chemical modification has proven to be effective in improving the proton conductivity of nanocellulose, the steps involved in adding functional groups can be time consuming and costly. As such, there have been several works investigating the simple addition of small molecules to cellulose in order to improve the conductivity. For example, in 2012,  in phosphoric or phytic acids of different concentrations, dramatically improving the in-plane proton conductivity and resulting in good mechanical properties and high thermal stability (Jiang, et al., 2012). The conductivity increased with dopant concentration, reaching a maximum of 110 mS·cm −1 at 80°C for phosphoric acid (6 mol L −1 ), and 90 mS·cm −1 at 60°C for phytic acid (1.6 mol L −1 ) ( Figure 13). Meanwhile, the reported activation energies were surprisingly low, at 4.02 kJ·mol −1 and 11.29 kJ·mol −1 , respectively. Fuel-cell tests at ambient temperature were performed and maximum power densities of 17.9 and 23.0 mW·cm −2 were achieved for 8 M phosphoric acid and 1.6 M phytic acid doped membranes, respectively. These values were much lower than for Nafion, despite comparable conductivity. The authors admit that leaching of the acid during the fuel cell testing in humid conditions may be a problem, and suggested that this may be prevented by e.g. by crosslinking.

(p6.1) In a different approach, Smolarkiewicz et al. blended unmodified microcrystalline cellulose with proton conducting imidazole molecules (∼7.5 wt%). Thick (1.15 mm) pellets of this material were measured to have a proton conductivity of 0.002 mS cm −1 at 160°C under anhydrous conditions. This was stated to be four orders of magnitude higher than the unmodified reference sample, although it was not entirely clear from the experimental details if the conductivity was measured in-plane or through-plane (Smolarkiewicz, et al., 2014).
