# Clinical Medicine Bilateral Subthalamic Nucleus Deep Brain Stimulation under General Anesthesia: Literature Review and Single Center Experience

CorpusID: 221886488 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0e9d76b5adc55a36d9a9046a8d105c8df5a67a2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d0e9d76b5adc55a36d9a9046a8d105c8df5a67a2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) STN DBS Using Intraoperative Imaging or Microelectrode Recording Under GA
(p1.0) The DBS surgical procedure can be divided into two stages: the intracranial implantation of DBS electrodes and the implantation of implantable pulse generator (IPG). In the case of IPG implantation, GA is generally preferred because tunneling is required subcutaneously. For intracranial electrode implantation, the STN DBS procedure under LA and GA are similar, but the specific details are different. The main difference between the STN DBS surgical procedure under LA and GA is the intraoperative verification method for the intended target acquisition, i.e., test stimulation or intraoperative imaging with or without MER. An accurate electrode location is a key factor to determine the postoperative prognosis after STN DBS surgery [17][18][19][20]. Image verification of the lead position is an important step, whether intra-or postoperatively [21]. For STN DBS under GA, some centers perform intraoperative verification using MER even under GA, and other centers use intraoperative imaging without MER. We reviewed each method of STN DBS under GA using intraoperative imaging or MER, respectively (Table 1). 
## (s2) Using Intraoperative Imaging
(p2.0) With the development of the quality of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) over the past decades, it has become feasible to identify the STN boundary can to easily implement DBS under GA using direct targeting using advanced imaging [36]. The combination of direct targeting based on MRI visualization of anatomical structures and intraoperative imaging used to confirm accurate lead placement enables surgeons to accurately identify STN targets. It may allow STN DBS procedure to be performed in an asleep state under general anesthesia (GA) without neurophysiological test [37][38][39].
## (s3) Intraoperative CT
(p3.0) In some centers, intraoperative computed tomography (iCT) during surgery is used to verify the accuracy of lead placement (Table 1). This is achieved through fusion of iCT scans and preoperative MRI scans after intracranial electrode implantation [31,37,41,44,47]. In awake DBS surgery with MER guidance, iCT provides useful information, such as hemorrhage and a general idea of electrode location when fused with preoperative MRI [21]. According to a study about the accuracy of microelectrode trajectory in patients receiving MER-guided awake DBS using iCT, median (IQR) radial error 0.59 (0.64) mm, and median (IQR) absolute x and y coordinate errors were 0.29 (0.52) and 0.38 (0.44) mm, respectively [21]. Burchiel et al. fused and compared iCT and trajectory planning images after electrode implantation for various targets [37]. The mean vector error and mean deviation of trajectory was 1.59 ± 1.11 mm and 1.24 ± 0.87 mm, respectively, and the intraoperative replacement was performed on one electrode with a vector error of more than 3 mm. There was a significant correlation between the distance from the ventricle and the error. Kremer et al. stated that the mean difference between lead tips was 0.98 ± 0.49 mm, and the upper confidence interval did not exceed the non-inferiority margin described when comparing postoperative MRI with iCT [48].
## (s4) Intraoperative MRI
(p4.0) Other centers use intraoperative (interventional) MRI (iMRI) to guide DBS electrode placement to the STN (Table 1) [23][24][25][26][27][28][29]44,[62][63][64]. For example, the UCSF group reported their experience about bilateral STN DBS in PD patients using a first-generation MRI system (Nexframe, high-field interventional MR-imaging) [25] and ClearPoint system (ClearPoint interventional MRI) [27]. There have been few published studies on the use of intraoperative MRI [23,24,[26][27][28]44,[62][63][64][65][66][67]. One of the reported advantages of iMRI is that it provides a real-time image acquisition to prospectively guided both trajectory planning and intended target verification prior to electrode placement [66]. Therefore, iMRI is one of the most useful methods for DBS targeting that allows precise validation of the real location of electrodes relative to the intended targets [66].
## (s5) Targeting Accuracy
(p5.0) The theoretical assumption of STN DBS under GA surgery is that the accuracy in targeting STN is not less and the results are better than STN DBS surgery under LA using MER. Kochanski et al. analyzed MER trajectories after STN DBS using 227 iCTs and found that 1.2 ± 0.2mm of radial error occurred in comparison with the location of the intended targets [68]. These errors may be related to the mechanical errors related with the frame, arc, guide tube, and frame, which can lead to lead deviation [69]. In a large-scale study of DBS patients who underwent surgery using iCT, there were greater Euclidean error and greater medial deviation in the trajectory targeting Vim. The authors found that there are systematic tendencies in stereotactic error that differ with respect to the structure targeted [70]. In the study analyzing stereotactic accuracy of iMRI, the DBS lead placement using iMRI guidance showed a radial targeting error of 0.6-1.2 mm, while the error using iCT was 0.8-1.24 mm [22,25,27,28,31,37,71]. STN DBS surgery under GA using confirmatory iCT is based on the assumption that CT-MRI merge was performed correctly, but there may be some errors in the fusion of imaging modality, which may lead to suboptimal targeting [38,72,73]. The advantage of STN DBS surgery with iMRI guidance is that it has less dependence on image fusion and can reflect brain shift after dura opening. Analysis of the iMRI study revealed that the deep brain structure moves about 2 mm after opening the dura [74].
## (s8) Is MER Possible Under GA?
(p8.0) STN DBS under GA has traditionally been used in patients who are unable to tolerate awake surgery including pediatric patients, or in patients who do not require clinical testing, such as obsessive-compulsive disorder or epilepsy. The biggest concern with STN DBS surgery under GA for movement disorder is the possibility of diminution of MER signals. A few small-sized retrospective studies have reported that MER obtained from STN, GPi, substantia nigra in STN DBS surgery under GA with both volatile and intravenous anesthetics in PD and dystonia patients showed no significant difference compared with patients awake during the procedure [54,[88][89][90][91]. Notably, the neural activity of typical burst pattern disappeared when higher anesthetic doses were used. However, the results of these studies are controversial given the small sample size and heterogeneity of the anesthetic used. A prospective, double-blinded study is needed to compare the effects of anesthetic agents on MER quality in patients undergoing STN DBS surgery under GA.
## (s9) Intraoperative Imaging vs. MER in STN DBS under GA
(p9.0) Recent meta-analysis reported that no significant difference was found in the improvement of UPDRS III score or LEDD between LA and GA cohort (Tables 2-4) [16,33,46,54,55,107]. Lefaucheur et al. reported that the rate of reduction in UPDRS III axial, gait, postural stability, and rigidity subscores tended to be greater when performed under LA compared to GA, but the difference was not statistically significant [33]. On the other hand, Chen et al. reported that the LA cohort showed greater improvement in posture and walking than the GA cohort (p = 0.054), while the GA cohort showed a significant decrease in cognitive function (p = 0.017) [55].

(p9.1) Some studies have used MER in STN DBS surgery under GA (mean 1.92 ± 0.68) and LA cohort (mean 2.27 ± 1.31) with respect to the maximum error of each read (p = 0.557) despite the varying targets [33,52,55]. Ho et al. reported that there was no significant difference between GA (mean 1.92 ± 0.68) and LA cohort (mean 2.27 ± 1.31) with respect to the maximum error of each lead (p = 0.557), but their study included a variety of targets [16]. The number of lead passes and the incidence of intracranial hemorrhage and infection were lower in STN DBS under GA, but treatment-related side effects based on the UPDRS IV "off" score were lower in DBS under LA (LA cohort 78.4% vs GA cohort 59.7%, p = 0.022) [16,35]. However, other studies showed no difference in the UPDRS IV subscore between the GA and LA groups [24,107]. As for LEDD, some studies reported that the 6-months postoperative LEDD reduction was significantly greater in the LA group, while others showed statistically similar reductions (LA cohort 38.27%, GA cohort 49.27%, p = 0.4447) [26,107]. Tsai et al. reported that symptoms of the patients with PD improved after DTN DBS in both LA and GA cohorts without significant differences in LEDD and UPDRS IV scores [52].
## (s10) SNUH Experience
(p10.0) Our  [114,115], these patients were included for the comparison. After approval by the institutional review board (IRB No. 1904-015-102), we retrospectively reviewed all patient medical records and databases (unpublished data). The scales that evaluated patients were as follows: UPDRS, Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) Staging, Schwab & England ADL, dyskinesia disability, LEDD, Short Form-36 Health Survey (SF-36), and neuropsychological tests. All clinical evaluations were performed before surgery and 6 months after surgery by experienced neurologists. Patients were evaluated in both off-and on-medication states, respectively.

(p10.1) STN DBS under general anesthesia was performed with maintenance of the BIS around 60-70, and MER was administered under general anesthesia. The characteristic discharges of the bilateral STN were identified using MER by LeadPoint (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). The permanent quadripolar electrodes were implanted along the proper trajectory to stimulate more sensorimotor region of the STN. The STNs were localized by a combination of brain MRI and intraoperative MER. We did not use an intraoperative macrostimulation technique [15]. The stereotactic frame was removed and the implantable pulse generators (IPG) (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) were implanted in a subcutaneous pocket below both clavicles under general anesthesia in a single session. Electrical stimulation was started one day after surgery. The patients also took medications but at a reduced dose compared to their previous dose. The medications and stimulation parameters were progressively adjusted using an N vision1programmer (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) according to the clinical status of the patients.

(p10.2) Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (SPSS statistics 18.0; SPSS Inc.). The data for the aforementioned variables were presented as the mean ± standard deviation using unpaired Student t tests. Mann-Whitney U-test and the Wilcoxon signed-ranked test were used for categorical data comparisons as appropriate. p values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Table 5 represents the patient characteristics and clinical scales of LA and GA cohort before DBS surgery. At baseline before surgery, the GA cohort showed higher LEDD, Beck's Depression Inventory (BDI), and Short Form-36 (SF-36), and lower Beck Depression Inventory than the LA cohort. Table 6 shows the comparison between baseline and 6 months after DBS for each scale in LA and GA cohort. Total UPDRS and UPDRS III showed significant improvement after 6 months compared to baseline, except for LA cohort in on-medication state. H&Y stage and ADL score showed no significant change in the on-medication state in both GA and LA, and significantly decreased in the off-medication state. Dyskinesia disability and LEDD were significantly decreased in both GA and LA cohort. There was no significant change in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and BDI after surgery in both groups. Physical health measured by SF-36 increased in both LA and GA cohort, and mental health showed no statistically significant increase. When analyzing the difference between the LA and GA cohort in the baseline of each item and the change after 6 months, only LEDD showed a significant difference (p < 0.0001). As shown in Figure 1, the degree of reduction in LEDD was greater in the GA cohort than in the LA cohort. We plotted the electrode location in each group based on the plotted position of the electrode in the axial view which is 3.  1, 1.1%). There was a significant difference in the electrode location on both sides between the two groups (p = 0.001). Compared to the LA cohort (Figure 2A), the GA cohort ( Figure 2B) showed a higher tendency for the electrode to be located within the STN. However, it should be interpreted in consideration of the fact that our group performed DBS surgery under LA in the early days, and under GA after more experienced. As intra-or postoperative complications, one revision and one infection occurred in LA cohort. One patient required revision surgery after 2 months due to inappropriate lead location. The other patient had IPG site infection, which improved after antibiotics treatment. In our center, postoperative MRI was taken 1 month after electrode implantation, so we cannot find post-electrode edema (PEE) in most cases. As recent studies have revealed that PEE is not simply a complication due to venous congestion and has no significant relationship with the number of tracks, further studies on the occurrence pattern of PEE under GA would be required [116][117][118][119].     
## (s11) Future Direction
(p11.0) Studies published to date have shown that the rationale and technology of STN DBS surgery performed under GA are accurate, and they presented similar clinical results compared to STN DBS under LA cohort. A large-scale prospective randomized controlled trial is in progress to assess the degree of the improvement of non-motor symptoms in PD patients [120].

(p11.1) Care should be taken when interpreting and applying the conclusion, since the STN DBS surgery under GA data reported to date have been published in large centers with considerable experiences. In general, STN DBS surgery should be performed in the most convenient way for the surgeons and center to provide the best results to the patients. Traditionally, factors, such as claustrophobia, severe off-medication symptoms, or nonspecific fear of waking during surgery, made patients choose GA. However, based on the increasingly cumulative data showing similar or better results compared to LA, a surgeon may choose STN DBS surgery under GA.

(p11.2) Adaptive DBS is a promising technology because it can provide more selective stimulation trigger/parameter and reduce stimulation-induced dyskinesia by suppressing beta activity when it exceeds a certain threshold level [121,122]. There is still little literature on adaptive DBS implemented under general anesthesia, and further studies for application of adaptive DBS under general anesthesia should be conducted.

(p11.3) There are patients who cannot undergo STN DBS surgery due to various reasons or may not benefit from STN DBS surgery. Non-invasive lesion-based therapies, such as focused ultrasound and Gamma Knife radiosurgery (GKRS), have been proposed as alternatives to DBS because of their effectiveness and safety [123][124][125][126]. The further innovative refinement of noninvasive methods of Gamma Knife radiosurgery (GKRS) and focused ultrasound may allow advanced PD patients to receive surgical treatment more conveniently and efficiently in the near future.
