# Genetics and voice production in childhood and adolescence e a review

CorpusID: 233886872 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/640b1a37c8b3b9cf4c7d2a13080e19d783831d04)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s6) Specific results in humans
(p6.0) Day F et al. [30] recognizes the biological genetic mechanisms and timing of puberty as important. In the recent large-scale genome wide female developmental study, 389 statistically independent signals were found distributed across all 23 chromosome pairs. According to Hollis et al. [31], in a male study, 76 independent genetic signals for male puberty was described. The authors found that genetically the voice break in boys was related to menarche in girls. Day et al. [32] also found 2 genes reportedly disrupted in rare disorders of puberty: LEPR and KAL1. A cluster of imprinted genes on human chromosomes 15 and 14, genetic variants in DLK1 are associated with menarche timing in girls and voice break in boys and pathology thereof.

(p6.1) The genetic and epigenetic approach to puberty is probably important for future aspects as examples in twins have shown for specific hormonal disorders e.g. SOX3 [33,34]. Schriberg et al. [35] have updated overview of percentages of neurodevelopmental disorders of speech/motor-speech.

(p6.2) Interesting is a study from Sato et al. [36] showing that the vocal fold mucosa, unphonetic, without voice, two cerebral palsy children (7 and 12 years old) did not have a vocal ligament, lamina propria appeared as a uniform structure, vocal fold stellate cells synthesized fewer extracellular matrix substances such as fibrous protein and glycosaminoglycan.

(p6.3) Aguiar-Oliveira et al. [37] present a study on humans with IGHG gene-type 18 owing to a mutation of GnRHr with severe reduction of growth hormone which resulted in voices that were highpitched. Valenca [38] and their group also found in untreated isolated growth deficiencies that most voices had higher formant frequencies than normal, with a prepubertal acoustical structure. De Andrade [39] and their group showed that voice problems in patients with growth deficiency could be improved with the voice therapy of semi occluded vocal tract training.
