# Molecular Sciences Metabolomic Approaches to Investigate the Effect of Metformin: An Overview

CorpusID: 238740897 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdab80b29b635fa8d4470544d5f7136fa69fae58](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdab80b29b635fa8d4470544d5f7136fa69fae58)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Metformin (N,N-dimethyl biguanide) is a first-line anti-hyperglycemic medication for the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), particularly in overweight or obese patients, by lowering the glucose levels and improving insulin sensitivity [1]. Clinically, metformin treatment reduces body weight and adiposity, and positively affects glucose homeostasis in T2DM patients [2].
## (s1) Metabolomics
(p1.0) Metabolomics is the large-scale identification and quantification study of all targeted metabolites within cells, biofluids, tissues, or organisms under specific conditions or diseases [35]. These metabolites are small molecules within a mass range of 50 to 1500 Daltons, and their interaction within a biological system are known as the metabolome, which is defined as the collection of the metabolites as well. Endogenous metabolites such as sugars, lipids, amino acids, fatty acids, nucleic acids, or organic acids are typically produced from the metabolism and considered as targets of metabolomics study. In the central dogma of biology, metabolites are the downstream summation of DNA, RNA, and proteins, which means any change in these molecules affects the metabolomes, as well as the changes in environment such as diet, exercise, mental stress, and disease [36]. In other words, metabolic profiling is to take a snapshot of the physiologic status of a biological system, and the metabolome changes inferred the relation between the genome (DNA), transcriptome (RNA), proteome (proteins) and biological phenotypes such as drug response or side effects [37].
## (s2) Metabolomics
(p2.0) Metabolomics is the large-scale identification and quantification study of all targeted metabolites within cells, biofluids, tissues, or organisms under specific conditions or diseases [35]. These metabolites are small molecules within a mass range of 50 to 1500 Daltons, and their interaction within a biological system are known as the metabolome, which is defined as the collection of the metabolites as well. Endogenous metabolites such as sugars, lipids, amino acids, fatty acids, nucleic acids, or organic acids are typically produced from the metabolism and considered as targets of metabolomics study. In the central dogma of biology, metabolites are the downstream summation of DNA, RNA, and proteins, which means any change in these molecules affects the metabolomes, as well as the changes in environment such as diet, exercise, mental stress, and disease [36]. In other words, metabolic profiling is to take a snapshot of the physiologic status of a biological system, and the metabolome changes inferred the relation between the genome (DNA), transcriptome (RNA), proteome (proteins) and biological phenotypes such as drug response or side effects [37].
## (s4) Effect of Metformin Treatment in Non-Diabetic Condition
(p4.0) Metformin treatment in non-diabetic status influenced the various metabolite levels in blood. Cai et al. [54]. performed a one-self control study with a metformin tablet of 500 mg twice daily and compared the plasma metabolite profiling in 20 healthy volunteers before and after metformin treatment for 7 days, showing significant difference in endogenous metabolite profiles using LC-MS. The levels of four lysophosphatidylcholines (LPCs) including 16:0 LPC, 18:0 LPC, 18:1 LPC, and 18:2 LPC of metformin treatment groups were obviously decreased compared with the control group, which indicated metformin regulates LPC levels in plasma and improves lipid metabolism. Dahabiyeh et al. [55] performed an MS-based untargeted metabolomics approach to investigate the metabolic changes associated with the administration of a single dose of metformin (500 mg) in 26 healthy subjects. Among the endogenous metabolites, 5-aminopentanoic acid, propi-onic acid, hydroxymethyl uracil, and ethyl phenyl sulphate significantly increased, and metabolites involved in arachidonic and linoleic acid metabolisms, glycerophospholipids, and eicosanoids decreased. Their results pointed out that the roles of metformin could be associated with fundamental biochemical processes such as lipid network signaling, energy homeostasis, DNA repairing, and gut microbiota.
## (s6) Urinary Metabolome and Metformin Treatment
(p6.0) Urine is the most commonly used specimen in metabolomics with its ease of collection and sampling [74]. It is plausible that metabolites in the urine are end products of the biological system and are linked to biological phenotypes. Identification, quantification, and following analysis of urinary metabolites have been studied for diagnosis, health monitoring, and drug metabolism [75]. Urine sampling is non-invasive and requires less pre-treatment than other biofluids due to its low protein content and less chemical complexity. However, sample collection should be performed in a consistent manner because the individual metabolite pattern in urine can be highly affected by various preanalytical factors, including day and time of collection, physical activity, fasting/feeding, and many other factors [76]. According to the HMDB database, over 2600 metabolites have been identified or quantified from urine, and new biomarkers or metabolites have been discovered by the improvement in analytical technology.
## (s7) Effect of Metformin Treatment in Insuline-Resistant In Vivo Models
(p7.0) According to Pelantová et al. [77], urinary metabolomic profiles in mice with obesity and T2DM changed after treatment with metformin (250 mg/kg daily), in which significant changes in several amino and aliphatic acid derivatives were detected by analysis of 1 H, 1 H-1 H COSY, and 1 H-13 C HSQC NMR experiments. Among the metabolites, N-carbamoylβ-alanine level was significantly decreased by metformin and its decrease indicated the efficacy of the metformin therapy in an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Dong et al. [78] carried out a urinary metabolomic profiling study in Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats in response to metformin (200 mg/kg/day), glimepiride (5 mg/kg/day), and their combination using LC-MS analysis. From partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) of urine metabolic profiles between control, ZDF model, and ZDF-metformin groups, three metabolites, including citric acid, sphingosine, and succinoadenosine, were found significantly reverted to normal levels after metformin therapy. Pan et al. [79] reported the LC-MS-based urinary metabolomics study of the hypoglycemic decoction and metformin (100 mg/kg/day) in a T2DM rat model, revealing the reduction in tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle-associated metabolites, including citrate, isocitrate, and cortisol, and the elevation of phenylalanine and 1-methylhistamine. The other urinary metabolomics research reported similar results, where metformin treatment significantly influenced the suppression of TCA cycle metabolism. According to the NMR-based metabolomics study of Maulidiani et al. [80], four metabolites, citrate, alpha-ketoglutarate, succinate, and fumarate, decreased in T2DM rats, and their concentration levels were further reduced after metformin treatment (300 mg/kg/day), which meant metformin suppressed the TCA cycle. Zhu et al. [81] reported the significant reduction in pantothenic acid and malic acid in metformin-treated mice (250 mg/kg/day) by using LC-MS analysis, meaning the suppression of the TCA cycle. Metformin treatment also improved the glucose (decreasing D-glucose) and nucleotide metabolism (decreasing 1-methylnicotinamide). Gut microbiota-produced metabolites including trimethylamine (TMA), phenylacetylglycine (PAG) and indoxyl sulfate levels were observed in the urine, revealing the increased growth or activity of gut microbiota by metformin treatment. Mediani et al. [82] performed NMR-based untargeted metabolomic analysis to understand the biochemical changes in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced, normal-, and obese-diabetic rates with metformin treatment (150 mg/kg/day), suggesting that metformin may provide better improvement for T2DM complications and insulin sensitivity for obese diabetes rather than normal diabetes. Lee et al. [83] also carried out an LC-MS-based untargeted urinary metabolomics study in diabetes and prediabetes rat models, revealing the alteration of urine metabolomes. For prediabetic rats, metformin treatment (250 mg/kg/day) altered the urinary metabolite profile to be more like that of healthy rats (Table 3). 
## (s8) Effect of Metformin Treatment on Human Urine Metabolome
(p8.0) Cho et al. [84] studied the metabolomic changes in 14 healthy volunteers in response to single-dose metformin treatment (1000 mg). In particular, four metabolites, including cortisol, retinyl β-glucuronide, betaine, and cholic acid glucuronide, were identified and quantified by LC-MS analysis in this study. Among them, cortisol and its metabolite hydroxycortisol were significantly decreased after metformin administration. According to Park et al. [85], the response to metformin in early-phase T2DM patients could be predicted by their urine metabolomic profiles acquired from GC-MS, which showed significantly different metabolites as markers of metformin response. In particular, citric acid and hippuric acid were higher and myoinositol was lower in the metformin responder group than the non-responder group. These results suggested that metabolic differences enabled them to discriminate between the metformin responder and non-responder groups efficiently.
## (s10) Conclusions
(p10.0) Metformin is widely studied for its therapeutic potentials as well as the treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The metabolic profiles associated with various metabolisms and pathways were significantly influenced by metformin treatment, regardless of metabolic condition, organism, or biospecimen, but the changes were not identical to each other. As shown in Figure 3, metformin treatment is associated with TCA cycle, urea cycle, glucose metabolism, lipid metabolism, or gut microbiota metabolism, but metabolic changes differed by organism, condition, and biospecimen. For example, the changes in BCAA levels were different in T2DM patients and animal models. Metabolomic research with metformin treatment rose in the early 2010s and has increased during the last 10 years, but the number of publications, especially based on clinical research, is still not enough to obtain robust results. Nevertheless, the observation of metabolic changes and the effort to explain those alterations are anticipated to be helpful to understand a mechanism of metformin and provide a better therapeutic usage of metformin. other hand, phosphoenolpyruvate levels significantly decreased in liver tissue. Hao et al. [97] investigated metabolism disturbances induced by corticosterone (CORT) and determined that metformin can reverse these effects. In their metabolomic approach, metformin treatment altered several metabolites involved in the pathway of the TCA cycle (isocitrate, citrate, alpha-ketoglutarate, oxaloacetate, malic acid, succinate, and fumarate) and the pathway of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis (3-phospho-D-glycerate, fructose 6-phosphate, glucose 6-phosphate, and pyruvate) in liver tissue. CORT-induced depression-like behaviors were also attenuated by metformin treatment. According to Li et al. [98], metformin improved locomotor function, but attenuated cognitive function in normoglycemic male mice. Brain metabolisms in normoglycemic mice are altered with the elevation of dimethylglycine, histidine, and choline and the reduction in malic acid, thymidine, dihydroxyacetone-phosphate (DHAP), and myo-inositol, revealing the inhibition of mitochondrial glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (mGPDH), reduced oxidative phosphorylation, and increased glycolysis.
