# minerals Common Problems and Pitfalls in Fluid Inclusion Study: A Review and Discussion

CorpusID: 234372937 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5da5498faff66bc4a16bc758b7a93f8ff0eb98af](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5da5498faff66bc4a16bc758b7a93f8ff0eb98af)

Fields: Geology, Computer Science

## (s2) Problem #1: Study of Fluid Inclusions without Determining the Paragenetic Position of the Host Mineral
(p2.0) In order to conduct a meaningful study of fluid inclusions, it is essential to know the relative timing of the minerals that host the fluid inclusions, or the paragenetic positions of the minerals in the rocks being studied [3,10]. Unfortunately, it is not uncommon to see beginners jump to study fluid inclusions in a sample without knowing the paragenesis of the minerals. For example, when given an ore sample that contains both ore minerals and quartz, an unexperienced student may go straight to study fluid inclusions in the quartz with an aim to characterize the ore-forming fluid, even though the quartz may have been formed before or after the ore minerals and therefore is unrelated to the ore-forming fluid. Therefore, it is essential to establish the paragenetic sequence based on detailed observations in the field and on hand samples as well as petrographic work of thin sections, before any fluid inclusion work is conducted. This is particularly important if the purpose of the fluid inclusion study is to evaluate the evolution of the fluid system before, during and after mineralization. For example, in the sample shown in Figure 1, bladed calcite cementing limestone fragments was formed before mineralization, and sphalerite cementing fragments that have already been cemented by bladed calcite represents an ore-stage product, whereas the anhedral calcite filling residual pore left by sphalerite was likely formed after mineralization. A systematic 
## (s15) Problem #10: Assigning Solid Phases in Fluid Inclusions as Daughter Minerals without Justification
(p15.0) Many fluid inclusions contain one or more solid particles, which may have precipitated from the fluid after it was entrapped in the inclusions, i.e., as "daughter" minerals, or have been entrapped together with the fluid at the moment when the fluid inclusion was formed, i.e., "accidently entrapped" minerals [3]. The former is generally thought to be the case for relatively soluble minerals such as halite and sylvite, which melt during heating runs, whereas the latter is usually suspected to be the case when the solid does not dissolve in heating runs, such as calcite and many opaque minerals. However, it has been demonstrated that whether the solids within fluid inclusions melt during heating should not be used as a criterion for determining if the solids are daughter minerals or not. For example, the non-dissolution of chalcopyrite in some fluid inclusions was found to be due to post-entrapment loss of H2 and therefore it does not necessarily mean that chalcopyrite is not a daughter mineral [44]. On the other hand, halite can also have been accidently entrapped [45][46][47]. The ultimate way to prove if a solid in a fluid inclusion is a daughter mineral or not, however, is to use the FIA approach. If all the inclusions within an FIA contain the same solid in similar relative proportions to the other phases, then the solid is likely a daughter mineral. If dissolution of such minerals is feasible, then they will all dissolve at approximately the same temperature. If the phase proportions vary within the assemblage (often some inclusions do not contain the solid at all), then they are likely to be accidently entrapped solids.

(p15.1) Entrapment of solid with fluid is a kind of heterogeneous trapping, just like entrapment of liquid with vapor, as discussed in the previous problem. Failure to recognize this heterogeneous trapping, i.e., misidentifying accidently entrapped solids as daughter minerals, has significant consequences for the validity of microthermometric data and their interpretation. If an accidently entrapped salt crystal in the inclusion is misinterpreted as a daughter mineral, then the salinity of the fluid inclusion, which is calculated from the melting temperature of the solid, will be overestimated. If the melting temperature of an accidently entrapped solid is higher than the vapor disappearance temperature and if it is misinterpreted as representing the minimum temperature based on the assumption of homogeneous trapping, then the trapping temperature and pressure may be significantly 
## (s16) Problem #10: Assigning Solid Phases in Fluid Inclusions as Daughter Minerals without Justification
(p16.0) Many fluid inclusions contain one or more solid particles, which may have precipitated from the fluid after it was entrapped in the inclusions, i.e., as "daughter" minerals, or have been entrapped together with the fluid at the moment when the fluid inclusion was formed, i.e., "accidently entrapped" minerals [3]. The former is generally thought to be the case for relatively soluble minerals such as halite and sylvite, which melt during heating runs, whereas the latter is usually suspected to be the case when the solid does not dissolve in heating runs, such as calcite and many opaque minerals. However, it has been demonstrated that whether the solids within fluid inclusions melt during heating should not be used as a criterion for determining if the solids are daughter minerals or not. For example, the non-dissolution of chalcopyrite in some fluid inclusions was found to be due to post-entrapment loss of H 2 and therefore it does not necessarily mean that chalcopyrite is not a daughter mineral [44]. On the other hand, halite can also have been accidently entrapped [45][46][47]. The ultimate way to prove if a solid in a fluid inclusion is a daughter mineral or not, however, is to use the FIA approach. If all the inclusions within an FIA contain the same solid in similar relative proportions to the other phases, then the solid is likely a daughter mineral. If dissolution of such minerals is feasible, then they will all dissolve at approximately the same temperature. If the phase proportions vary within the assemblage (often some inclusions do not contain the solid at all), then they are likely to be accidently entrapped solids.

(p16.1) Entrapment of solid with fluid is a kind of heterogeneous trapping, just like entrapment of liquid with vapor, as discussed in the previous problem. Failure to recognize this heterogeneous trapping, i.e., misidentifying accidently entrapped solids as daughter minerals, has significant consequences for the validity of microthermometric data and their interpretation. If an accidently entrapped salt crystal in the inclusion is misinterpreted as a daughter mineral, then the salinity of the fluid inclusion, which is calculated from the melting temperature of the solid, will be overestimated. If the melting temperature of an accidently entrapped solid is higher than the vapor disappearance temperature and if it is misinterpreted as representing the minimum temperature based on the assumption of homogeneous trapping, then the trapping temperature and pressure may be significantly overestimated [46,47]. Therefore, treating solids in fluid inclusions as daughter minerals without justification (e.g., with the FIA method) is not just a problem of terminology (daughter mineral versus accidently trapped solid), but has major implications on fluid composition and P-T conditions.
## (s17) Problems Related to Fluid Temperature and Pressure Calculation and Interpretation
(p17.0) The main purpose of studying fluid inclusions is to estimate the composition and pressure-temperature conditions of the paleofluids. The temperature and pressure conditions are not always directly measured, but are calculated or constrained from the pressure-temperature-volume-composition (PVTX) relationships of the fluids in the fluid inclusions [48]. Many uncertainties are involved in this calculation procedure and significant errors may be introduced if potential problems are not recognized. Some of the most common pitfalls are discussed here.
