# GAMIFICATION IN COMPUTER SCIENCE COURSES: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 239636412 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/200f25c0f2722d12377b20dc5b31d4de184783ab](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/200f25c0f2722d12377b20dc5b31d4de184783ab)

Fields: Education, Computer Science

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) A literature review was carried out to achieve the aim of the study. It is an academic article that discusses scientific understanding through empirical results and theoretical and methodological approaches to a specific subject. They are secondary sources that will not mention any original or new research (Oztemel and Gursev, 2020). In this study, the term gamification in computer science education is used as an initial search criterion; this paper's review is limited to work published in the journals earlier during 2014 as the start of gamification in computer science education search 2020. The choice to restrict the analysis to this time is focusing on the question regarding the relevance. The search will carry out using the following preferred electronic sources to obtain a global perspective. It is preferable because most of the papers connected to the university library, through the library, the largest and most popular online databases, and search engines are available: IEEE Xplore publishing many conferences and journals, Web of science, science direct, SpringerLink, and Scopus to provide a detailed explanation of the research results on Gamification in Computer Science Education; all data are collected using the following keywords; "Gamification," "Gamification in education," "Gamification in computer science education," "Gamification elements used in computer science education." The initial resources were chosen via papers relevant to the topic, checked the study's abstracts, and determined if the information was pertinent to the parameters.
## (s5) 
(p5.0) Gamification allows learners to develop an activity plan as well as to select the top-ranked activities and also to earn further marks first. It makes students feeling recognized enough for their most robust efforts (Zahedi, 2019).

(p5.1)  Learners tried to cope stronger: human contact among learners by talking, listening, and effectively debating ideas arises while learners become presented with a question, proposing answers, supporting one another in the event of challenges (Rahman, 2018;Elshiekh and Butgerit, 2017).  Improvement of behaviors; Learners may acquire unhealthy habits throughout computer programming, like stealing and sometimes hack (Butler and Ahmed, 2016). Pedagogical games will direct learners in their career and academic growth to understand certain behaviors. Many results may be accomplished through gaming but are not specifically applicable to computer science education: movement abilities, behavioral and mental results, and physiological outcomes (Borna and Rad, 2018).

(p5.2)  Learners liked playing the game: learners are supposed to appreciate gamification lessons increasingly. It offers various feelings, including inquisitiveness to anger, happiness, and beneficial psychological experiences, just like hope or confidence (Ibanez et al., 2014). It focuses on learners' passion, unrelenting motivation, which students love and are fantastic about (Permana et al., 2018).

(p5.3)  Gamification offers an excellent opportunity for timid learners to show themselves, so both learners mark themselves overtly. It provides learners with optional barriers and allows them to use their abilities and participate in the course. It changes a standard guidance process within computer science classes (Morreale et al., 2019).
## (s6) Disadvantages of Gamification in Computer Science Education
(p6.0) The use of gamification in learning Computer Science has demonstrated beneficial effects. Many research types showed that the gamification dimension would inspire and involve the learner during computer science education. Through academics, successfully applied gamification to boost a learner's awareness, the interest, and ability of a learner with gamification computer programming training have been enhanced. While they are beneficial, pedagogical games may have drawbacks that impact either emotionally and physically learners (Mejias et al., 2015).

(p6.1) For both learners and educators, gamification has a few adverse effects, such as:  Gamification will create unsanitary competition and unneeded conflict between learners. That may be a detrimental and inappropriate gamification impact via course action (Ortiz Rojas et al., 2017;Schulz et al., 2015).
## (s7) Most Used Gamification Elements in Computer Science Education
(p7.0) Gamification is often characterized as utilization throughout the non-game background of gamification components, which increases the learners' encouragement and motivation, as it does in computer science education, there are many gamification elements used (Rahman, 2018). Depending on the primary research findings, a most popular feature of gamification used during computer science classes were badges, leaderboards, score, level as well as feedbacks, and they were the most commonly known feature of the game throughout learning at computer science (Rojas-López and Rincón-Flores, 2018; Koivisto and Hamari, 2014). Badges and Leader boards have become the critical ability to improve training performance (Falkner and Falkner, 2014). Gamification elements that are most commonly seen in computer science training is as follows:

(p7.1) Points: Some researches explored the effect from points showed the good effects throughout computer science education since the point offered immediate feedback and made the participant engaged or inspired with computer science teaching (Sprint and Cook, 2015;Oktaviati and Jaharadak, 2018;.

(p7.2) Badges: According to Smiderle et al. (2019); Oktaviati and Jaharadak (2018) and Rahman, (2018), badges highlighted good effects that could inspire or include learners during computer science learning; it will inspire learners to provide enjoyable learning experiences and therefore can assess the skill of the individual, learners feel encouraged to complete the assignment and enjoy the extra acknowledgment will gain as they receive the badges. Badges may improve the learner's interest or involvement in studying computer science, but perhaps the main crucial thing has become an effective structure; it will be more straightforward or more challenging for the learner to obtain (Baxter et al., 2016). There will be variations of learning trends among learners with the information stage; learners of poor performance may be most motivated for engaging, whereas learners of higher motivation become provided hon abilities badges (Falkner and Falkner, 2014).
## (s8) Effects of Gamification Elements on Student's Motivations in Computer Science Courses
(p8.0) Motivation is the step to continue the action and even to direct it. Learning motivation may be described as the willingness of the student to encountering (Lister, 2015). Gamification's main goal was to improve motivation and success by structured elements targeting various activities and ability creation. It gives rise to numerous theoretical frameworks, often using motivational templates (Frącz, 2015). The philosophy of selfdetermination speaks of two main types: internal and external motivation.
