# Genetic Identification: A Review on Autosomal Single Nucleotide Polymorphism's as Diagnostic Tool for Identifying Human

CorpusID: 234039669 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a681aaae08c9e4fa912883e9fff6516fb0d49040)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s4) APPEARANCE OF A PERSON
(p4.0) Considerable amount of information is not present regarding the extent to which the genetic factors determine the appearance of an individual. An insight into the genes which are responsible for the provision of traits to provide information regarding the characteristics such as color of skin, color of hair, traits related to pigmentation such as stature, morphology of hair, and freckles have been recently provided by the genome-wide association studies. The characteristics involved in the incidence of various diseases that are genetically determined such as baldness in male, autosomal dominant woolly hair, and non-syndromic cleft lip can provide information about the genetic fields that are responsible for the variations in appearance of the individuals despite the fact that these traits are not significant for application in forensic investigation. The prediction of a phenotype from a genotype is determined by the extent of genetic effect of SNP on a phenotype and the number of the SNPs that are contributing independently along with the influences that are not related to the genetics. Eye color is the most accurately determined trait from all the traits that have been studied so far [10].
## (s5) PREDICTION OF EYE COLOR
(p5.0) Another limitation with the applicability of DNA for the prediction of various traits that particularly includes the color of eye is dependent on the conceptual understanding of the individuals. For example, there could be assigning of same eye to the categories of different eye color. This could mislead the investigators during the investigation as they could begin searching for the wrong person based on this misleading categorization of the eye color. In order to overcome this issue a study has investigated the quantitative variations in the color of eye that are based on genetics. This study has observed that the there are three eye color genes which are new and the quantitative variation in about 50% of the genes can also be demonstrated through the use data provide by the SNPs [11]. The development of color charts from these data can be of significant value for avoiding the uncertainties that are caused in the prediction of eye color [12].
## (s6) PREDICTION OF HAIR COLOR
(p6.0) Single Nucleotide polymorphism have also been used for the prediction of hair color with particular emphasis on the prediction of red hair color. This hair color is strongly determined by a single gene which provides significant information regarding red hair color when determined through SNPs. The studies that investigated the application of these types of the predictions in forensics have been performed several years ago. In the investigation of 45 SNPs which were obtained from 12 genes has observed an accuracy of 0.87, 0.93, 0.81, and 0.82 for the prediction of black, red, blond, and brown hairs respectively. It has also enabled to distinguish between the categories of the same hair colors. The dependency of age related to the hair color change might be responsible for the lowest accuracy of prediction of the SNPs for blond hair color [13]. The complete variation in the melanin of hair has been observed to be governed by three SNPs. These SNPs were responsible for 76% of these variations. Recently, two of these SNPs have been confirmed to be highly predictive of the hair color. The third gene, among these observed genes, has been recently examined to be related with the biogeoraphical ancestry instead to be responsible for the prediction of hair color [13].
## (s7) PREDICTION OF SKIN COLOR
(p7.0) There is limited availability of the GWA studies for the investigation of the color of human skin. Several genes have been highlighted by these studies but the information related to the determination of skin color based on genes is limited so far. It has been demonstrated by a study performed recently that three SNPs obtained from three genes which are responsible for pigmentation, are accountable for 46% of the variations that are related to color of skin. There is a significant difference in the level of variation caused by the SNPs for the hair color and color of eye with that of the skin color [14]. This is related with a lowered level of variation of the color of skin in the same individuals. It is not possible to recover the variations of full traits by utilizing the GWA studies for the mapping of genes responsible for imparting skin color to the individuals. This limitation can be determined through GWA studies which utilize the samples from the entire world including various continents to predict the variations in the color of skin based on the differences in the SNPs with regards to different continents [15]. Another study has observed 82% variation in the color of skin by identifying five SNPs responsible for the variation in skin color among the population of the world. It has been considered that these markers would be useful for the prediction of skin colors of various individuals [16].
## (s8) PREDICTION OF HEIGHT AND AGE
(p8.0) Height of the human body has also been predicted through the application of SNPs. However, the accuracy of prediction from these SNPs is significantly low which has limited the application of most of the SNPs that are responsible for the prediction of height in forensics. In a recent GWA study that consisted of 180,000 people provided results which identified 180 loci that are responsible for the height of an individual. These studies have provided several SNPs which can be utilized in future studies for identifying their predictive value [17].

(p8.1) Age of an individual can also be predicted through DNA testing. The shrinkage of telomeres and the deletion of mitochondrial DNA related with the process of ageing have found applicability in forensics for the prediction of age of an individual. However, there are certain limitations in their value of practicality. The predictive markers for age related identification of the individuals can be provided through the GWA studies which examine the gene expression related to ageing and patterns of DNA methylation [18].
## (s11) DISCUSSION
(p11.0) There are several studies which have demonstrated the applicability of SNPs in forensic investigations for identifying the humans at crime scene [28]. Several effective and efficient technological systems have been developed by the researchers which are capable of performing analysis of biological samples containing degraded DNA because SNPs can be obtained from these samples. Physical characteristics of the individuals can be predicted through the analysis of SNPs. This can provide significant information about the color of eye, hair and skin of the individuals involved in crime.

(p11.1) There are certain challenges that are presented by autosomal SNPs which results in their resistance of the application in the field of forensics. SNPs do not provide significant information for the analysis in cases where they are collected from the samples that are present in the form of mixture from samples of various individuals. This limitation can be compensated by the use of SNPs that are higher in number and relative to the STRs. It can also be overcome by the utilization of tri-allelic SNPs in combination with the technologies of multiplex genotyping [29]. The identification of male individuals can also be performed through the utilization of Y-SNPs. A phylogentic tree has been developed for this purpose which has also founded implication in forensic for identifying the criminals and victims through the analysis of the samples which have been obtained from the crime scene. The Y-SNPs could be useful for the identification of male criminals [30]. They can be used for the identification of paternal ancestry which can provide significant information to the forensic investigators regarding the paternal lineage of the criminal or the victim present at the crime scene. This would also be beneficial to reach the criminal by identifying the paternal ancestry of the suspect [31]. SNPs are being used extensively for the determination of biogeographical ancestry of the individuals. Recently, it has also found application in the identification of the humans present at crime scene by predicting their phenotypic characteristics and ancestral lineage. Several proficient systems have been designed for performing the analysis of SNPs. This has aided in the identification of criminals and victims at the crime scene.
## (s12) CONCLUSION
(p12.0) At present implication of SNPs are being explored in various aspects of forensic sciences for performing the identification of the humans at the crime scene. SNPs have proven to be efficient for predicting the color of eye and hair of the individuals along with the color of skin [32]. This can provide enormous information about the criminal or victim present at the crime scene. This information can be used for identifying the person.
