# Computer vision-based wood identification and its expansion and contribution potentials in wood science: A review

CorpusID: 233433541 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92a9827a923979bc724e929ddaac76e1aab4d31e)

Fields: Medicine, Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Every tree has clues that can help with its identification. Leaves, needles, barks, fruits, flowers, and twigs are important features for tree identification. However, most of these features are lost in harvested logs and processed lumber, so anatomical features are used as clues for wood identification. Fortunately, the International Association of Wood Anatomists (IAWA) has published lists of microscopic features for wood identification [1,2]. These lists are the fruits of the work of wood anatomists and are well established, so they can be used with confidence to identify wood.
## (s3) Image acquisition
(p3.0) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p3.1) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.

(p3.2) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p3.3) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.
## (s5) Databases
(p5.0) A good identification ML model can be built only from a good reference image collection. Wood image data should contain the specific features of each species and provide sufficient scale for the features to be observed. A quantitatively rich database is required so that the ML model can learn the various biological variations that occur within a species.

(p5.1) Published wood image databases constructed for CVbased wood identification are listed in Table 1. CAIRO and FRIM, which contain stereogram images of commercial hardwood species in Malaysia, were among the first to be constructed and are still regularly updated [27,82]. LignoIndo, which also contains stereogram images, was constructed for the development of a portable wood identification system [83]. It contains images of Indonesian commercial hardwood species.
## (s11) Texture feature
(p11.0) Texture is the visual pattern of an image and it is expressed by the combination and arrangement of image elements. That is, texture is information about the spatial arrangement of pixel intensities in an image, and this information is quantified to obtain the texture feature. Early studies generally approached wood identification as a matter of texture classification because cross sections of wood represent different anatomical arrangements, namely different patterns, depending on the species [20,26,82,101,110]. Textures are the image features that were most preferred in published studies, and this is closely related to the finding that stereograms and macroscopic images were preferred for developing fielddeployable systems [21,49,57,69].
## (s12) Local feature
(p12.0) Local features are distinct structural elements such as points, corners, and edges in an image, vs. textures. The biggest difference between local features and textures is that textures are descriptors that describe an image as a whole, whereas local features describe interesting or important local regions called keypoints. That is, the texture feature is an image descriptor and the local feature is a keypoint descriptor. Local feature extraction thus consists of two major processes, feature detection and feature description. In general, local features are better at handling image rotation, scale, and affine changes [18,19].

(p12.1) Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) developed by Lowe in 2004 [18], is a local feature extraction algorithm that has been the benchmark for local feature collection in CV since its introduction. SIFT detects blobs, corners, and edges as keypoints in an image and represents local regions of the image as 128-dimensional vectors calculated based on the gradient orientations of the pixels around each keypoint.
## (s13) Other features
(p13.0) In addition to the features described above, other feature types such as color and anatomical statistic features have been used for hardwood identification. Such features were used mainly in combination with other types of features because their discriminative power as a single feature set was relatively inadequate, and multiple feature set strategies that combined different types of features produced improved results for identification accuracy [58,62,77].

(p13.1) Color is the most intuitive feature for human vision, but it is unstable as a feature. Wood color is not only variable by environmental factors such as tree growth conditions and atmospheric exposure time, but also by variability in an individual tree such as heartwood and sapwood, and earlywood and latewood. Wood identification has been carried out based on color differences between species, but large intra-species color variations are a big obstacle. Zhao et al. [63,78] proposed novel color recognition systems that efficiently distinguished between intra-and inter-species color variations using an improved snake model [132] and an active shape model [133] with a two-dimensional image measurement machine. They also built a classification model that outperformed their previous models using a fusion scheme of color, texture, and spectral features [116]. Color features have primarily been used in combination with textures as part of macro level multi-feature sets to improve discrimination [58,62,77,134].

(p13.2) Using image segmentation techniques, anatomical statistical features such as the shape, size, number, and distribution of specific wood cells can be extracted from a cross-sectional image. The vessel is the most characteristic anatomical element in macroscale images, so it was particularly preferred for statistical feature extraction. Yusof et al. [28,59] extracted the statistical properties of pore distribution (SPPD) from the FRIM database and used them as features. Pre-classification of the SPPD features based on fuzzy logic [135] improved the accuracy of the identification system and reduced the processing time. Other similar studies have successfully used statistical features to identify wood [61,80,103].

(p13.3) In addition to the features described above, other feature types such as color and anatomical statistic features have been used for hardwood identification. Such features were used mainly in combination with other types of features because their discriminative power as a single feature set was relatively inadequate, and multiple feature set strategies that combined different types of features produced improved results for identification accuracy [58,62,77].

(p13.4) Color is the most intuitive feature for human vision, but it is unstable as a feature. Wood color is not only variable by environmental factors such as tree growth conditions and atmospheric exposure time, but also by variability in an individual tree such as heartwood and sapwood, and earlywood and latewood. Wood identification has been carried out based on color differences between species, but large intra-species color variations are a big obstacle. Zhao et al. [63,78] proposed novel color recognition systems that efficiently distinguished between intra-and inter-species color variations using an improved snake model [132] and an active shape model [133] with a two-dimensional image measurement machine. They also built a classification model that outperformed their previous models using a fusion scheme of color, texture, and spectral features [116]. Color features have primarily been used in combination with textures as part of macro level multi-feature sets to improve discrimination [58,62,77,134].

(p13.5) Using image segmentation techniques, anatomical statistical features such as the shape, size, number, and distribution of specific wood cells can be extracted from a cross-sectional image. The vessel is the most characteristic anatomical element in macroscale images, so it was particularly preferred for statistical feature extraction. Yusof et al. [28,59] extracted the statistical properties of pore distribution (SPPD) from the FRIM database and used them as features. Pre-classification of the SPPD features based on fuzzy logic [135] improved the accuracy of the identification system and reduced the processing time. Other similar studies have successfully used statistical features to identify wood [61,80,103].
## (s15) Classification
(p15.0) Classifiers create classification models by learning the features extracted from a training set and establishing classification rules. The training phase ends with the implementation of the classification model. In the test phase, image features are extracted from the test set through the same processes as the training set. The features are then entered into the classification model and the model classifies each image, which completes the classification of the test set.

(p15.1) The three most preferred classifiers in the wood identification studies were k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [140], support vector machine (SVM) [141], and artificial neural network (ANN) [142,143]. k-NN is the simplest ML algorithm, which simply stored the training data and focuses on classifying query data. To classify query data, the algorithm finds k data points closest to the target data point in the training dataset based on the Euclidean distance [140]. Minimum distance-based classifiers [140,144] such as k-NN work best on small datasets because the amount of required system space increases exponentially as the number of input features increases [145].
## (s19) Field-deployable wood identification systems
(p19.0) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p19.1) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].

(p19.2) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p19.3) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].
## (s21) Feature-based anatomical approaches
(p21.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p21.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p21.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p21.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
## (s23) Cell segmentation using deep learning
(p23.0) The anatomical composition of wood cells reflects environmental changes during the growth period of the tree [178,179], therefore analysis of cell variability, that is, quantitative wood anatomy, helps answer questions related to tree functioning, growth, and environment [180]. The laborious and tedious task of identifying and measuring hundreds of thousands of wood cells is a major obstacle to do it. Several studies have been reported for automated segmentation of wood cells using classical image processing techniques [75,179,181], but the results were highly dependent on image quality and manual editing by the operator.
## (s37) Background
(p37.0) Every tree has clues that can help with its identification. Leaves, needles, barks, fruits, flowers, and twigs are important features for tree identification. However, most of these features are lost in harvested logs and processed lumber, so anatomical features are used as clues for wood identification. Fortunately, the International Association of Wood Anatomists (IAWA) has published lists of microscopic features for wood identification [1,2]. These lists are the fruits of the work of wood anatomists and are well established, so they can be used with confidence to identify wood.
## (s40) Image acquisition
(p40.0) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p40.1) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.

(p40.2) CV-based wood identification starts with image acquisition. It takes a considerable amount of time and effort to get enough wood samples to build a new dataset. For this reason, most studies have used Xylarium collections [26,[47][48][49][50][51][52]. Most studies only captured cross-sectional images of wood blocks except for a few studies using lumber surface [53] or three orthogonal sections [54,55]. The surfaces of the blocks are cut with a knife or sanded with sandpapers to clearly reveal the anatomical characteristics. Macroscale images can be captured directly from the wood blocks using a digital camera or stereo microscope. To capture microscale images, meanwhile, microscope slides of wood samples must be prepared through standard procedures leading to softening, cutting, staining, dehydration, and mounting [56].

(p40.3) In image capturing, the quality of the obtained images can vary depending on lighting conditions. Imaging modules equipped with optical systems have been used to control the lighting uniformly [21,51,57], and image processing techniques such as filtering were applied to normalize the brightness of the captured images [58][59][60][61]. Digital image processing is to be covered in section preprocessing.
## (s42) Databases
(p42.0) A good identification ML model can be built only from a good reference image collection. Wood image data should contain the specific features of each species and provide sufficient scale for the features to be observed. A quantitatively rich database is required so that the ML model can learn the various biological variations that occur within a species.

(p42.1) Published wood image databases constructed for CVbased wood identification are listed in Table 1. CAIRO and FRIM, which contain stereogram images of commercial hardwood species in Malaysia, were among the first to be constructed and are still regularly updated [27,82]. LignoIndo, which also contains stereogram images, was constructed for the development of a portable wood identification system [83]. It contains images of Indonesian commercial hardwood species.
## (s48) Texture feature
(p48.0) Texture is the visual pattern of an image and it is expressed by the combination and arrangement of image elements. That is, texture is information about the spatial arrangement of pixel intensities in an image, and this information is quantified to obtain the texture feature. Early studies generally approached wood identification as a matter of texture classification because cross sections of wood represent different anatomical arrangements, namely different patterns, depending on the species [20,26,82,101,110]. Textures are the image features that were most preferred in published studies, and this is closely related to the finding that stereograms and macroscopic images were preferred for developing fielddeployable systems [21,49,57,69].
## (s49) Local feature
(p49.0) Local features are distinct structural elements such as points, corners, and edges in an image, vs. textures. The biggest difference between local features and textures is that textures are descriptors that describe an image as a whole, whereas local features describe interesting or important local regions called keypoints. That is, the texture feature is an image descriptor and the local feature is a keypoint descriptor. Local feature extraction thus consists of two major processes, feature detection and feature description. In general, local features are better at handling image rotation, scale, and affine changes [18,19].

(p49.1) Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) developed by Lowe in 2004 [18], is a local feature extraction algorithm that has been the benchmark for local feature collection in CV since its introduction. SIFT detects blobs, corners, and edges as keypoints in an image and represents local regions of the image as 128-dimensional vectors calculated based on the gradient orientations of the pixels around each keypoint.
## (s50) Other features
(p50.0) In addition to the features described above, other feature types such as color and anatomical statistic features have been used for hardwood identification. Such features were used mainly in combination with other types of features because their discriminative power as a single feature set was relatively inadequate, and multiple feature set strategies that combined different types of features produced improved results for identification accuracy [58,62,77].

(p50.1) Color is the most intuitive feature for human vision, but it is unstable as a feature. Wood color is not only variable by environmental factors such as tree growth conditions and atmospheric exposure time, but also by variability in an individual tree such as heartwood and sapwood, and earlywood and latewood. Wood identification has been carried out based on color differences between species, but large intra-species color variations are a big obstacle. Zhao et al. [63,78] proposed novel color recognition systems that efficiently distinguished between intra-and inter-species color variations using an improved snake model [132] and an active shape model [133] with a two-dimensional image measurement machine. They also built a classification model that outperformed their previous models using a fusion scheme of color, texture, and spectral features [116]. Color features have primarily been used in combination with textures as part of macro level multi-feature sets to improve discrimination [58,62,77,134].

(p50.2) Using image segmentation techniques, anatomical statistical features such as the shape, size, number, and distribution of specific wood cells can be extracted from a cross-sectional image. The vessel is the most characteristic anatomical element in macroscale images, so it was particularly preferred for statistical feature extraction. Yusof et al. [28,59] extracted the statistical properties of pore distribution (SPPD) from the FRIM database and used them as features. Pre-classification of the SPPD features based on fuzzy logic [135] improved the accuracy of the identification system and reduced the processing time. Other similar studies have successfully used statistical features to identify wood [61,80,103].

(p50.3) In addition to the features described above, other feature types such as color and anatomical statistic features have been used for hardwood identification. Such features were used mainly in combination with other types of features because their discriminative power as a single feature set was relatively inadequate, and multiple feature set strategies that combined different types of features produced improved results for identification accuracy [58,62,77].

(p50.4) Color is the most intuitive feature for human vision, but it is unstable as a feature. Wood color is not only variable by environmental factors such as tree growth conditions and atmospheric exposure time, but also by variability in an individual tree such as heartwood and sapwood, and earlywood and latewood. Wood identification has been carried out based on color differences between species, but large intra-species color variations are a big obstacle. Zhao et al. [63,78] proposed novel color recognition systems that efficiently distinguished between intra-and inter-species color variations using an improved snake model [132] and an active shape model [133] with a two-dimensional image measurement machine. They also built a classification model that outperformed their previous models using a fusion scheme of color, texture, and spectral features [116]. Color features have primarily been used in combination with textures as part of macro level multi-feature sets to improve discrimination [58,62,77,134].

(p50.5) Using image segmentation techniques, anatomical statistical features such as the shape, size, number, and distribution of specific wood cells can be extracted from a cross-sectional image. The vessel is the most characteristic anatomical element in macroscale images, so it was particularly preferred for statistical feature extraction. Yusof et al. [28,59] extracted the statistical properties of pore distribution (SPPD) from the FRIM database and used them as features. Pre-classification of the SPPD features based on fuzzy logic [135] improved the accuracy of the identification system and reduced the processing time. Other similar studies have successfully used statistical features to identify wood [61,80,103].
## (s52) Classification
(p52.0) Classifiers create classification models by learning the features extracted from a training set and establishing classification rules. The training phase ends with the implementation of the classification model. In the test phase, image features are extracted from the test set through the same processes as the training set. The features are then entered into the classification model and the model classifies each image, which completes the classification of the test set.

(p52.1) The three most preferred classifiers in the wood identification studies were k-nearest neighbors (k-NN) [140], support vector machine (SVM) [141], and artificial neural network (ANN) [142,143]. k-NN is the simplest ML algorithm, which simply stored the training data and focuses on classifying query data. To classify query data, the algorithm finds k data points closest to the target data point in the training dataset based on the Euclidean distance [140]. Minimum distance-based classifiers [140,144] such as k-NN work best on small datasets because the amount of required system space increases exponentially as the number of input features increases [145].
## (s56) Field-deployable wood identification systems
(p56.0) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p56.1) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].

(p56.2) Many studies have aimed to develop CV-based automated wood identification systems, and some have been realized as field-deployable systems [21,49,51,69]. Xylo-Tron, developed by the Forest Products Laboratory, US Department of Agriculture, is a CNN-based wood identification system using ResNet34 backbone [21]. This is the only system to report actual field use in real-time and showed higher species and genus identification performance for the family Meliaceae than the mass spectrometry-based model [21].

(p56.3) Recently, smartphone-based systems have been developed that require minimal components. MyWood-ID can identify 100 Malaysian woods [49], and another smartphone-based system, AIKO, can identify major Indonesian commercial woods [83]. XyloPhone, a smartphone-based imaging platform, has been introduced as a field-use identification tool that is more affordable and scalable than other commercial products [57]. All the field-deployable systems are based on stereogram datasets [21,49,51,57,69,83].
## (s58) Feature-based anatomical approaches
(p58.0) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.1) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.2) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 

(p58.3) Kobayashi et al. [99] conducted PCA on GLCM features extracted from hardwood stereograms to investigate the relationship between anatomical structures and texture features. From principal component loadings and analysis of macroscopic patterns of wood they found that each Haralick texture feature correlated with different anatomical structures such as vessel population, ray-to-ray spacing, and tylosis abundance.

(p58.4) A k-means clustering [167] analysis of local features extracted from micrographs suggested the possibility of matching feature clusters with anatomical elements [73]. This idea was extended to quantify anatomical elements by encoding local features into codewords. The BOF framework effectively visualized and assigned local feature-based codewords to anatomical elements of wood, and codeword histograms provided an indirect means of quantitative wood anatomy [74]. The finding that local features are the vehicles for access to CV from an anatomical point of view is the main reason that much attention is being paid to the applications of informatics in the wood science field.

(p58.5) Hierarchical clustering of a Fagaceae micrograph dataset with SIFT features confirmed that the clustering basically coincided with wood porosity. Moreover, the relationship of species groups that contradicted wood porosity was consistent with evolution based on molecular phylogeny [48]. An unexpected finding was that the subgenera Cerris (ring porous wood) and Ilex (diffuse porous wood) had common characteristics in the arrangement of the latewood vessels as predicted by a CV-based analysis (Fig. 6). 
## (s60) Cell segmentation using deep learning
(p60.0) The anatomical composition of wood cells reflects environmental changes during the growth period of the tree [178,179], therefore analysis of cell variability, that is, quantitative wood anatomy, helps answer questions related to tree functioning, growth, and environment [180]. The laborious and tedious task of identifying and measuring hundreds of thousands of wood cells is a major obstacle to do it. Several studies have been reported for automated segmentation of wood cells using classical image processing techniques [75,179,181], but the results were highly dependent on image quality and manual editing by the operator.
