# "Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review" Commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations: a comparative systematic literature review

CorpusID: 233689379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81c5b5b844e86c08dd2afb098197a8726abf18cd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81c5b5b844e86c08dd2afb098197a8726abf18cd)

Fields: Business, Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) From investors' point of view, there is a discussion about the advantages of integrating sustainability criteria in the investment decision-making process, as well as the profitability degree of such integration (Clark et al., 2014). In a research review by Camilleri (2017), some authors failed to prove the existence of a positive relationship between the practice of sustainability-oriented innovation and the economic performance of a firm. Some studies conversely prove the existence of a positive relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and company's efficiency (Bekmezci, 2015;Kneipp et al., 2019; Aguilera-Caracuel & Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013). Thus, the existing scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, as well as the lack of a comparative analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, caused the need for a comparative review and analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of these two kinds of innovations.
## (s1) LITERATURE REVIEW
(p1.0) As part of this study, a citation-based systematic literature review was conducted on the efficiency of commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The literature review was guided by the methodological approach applied in Ahmad et al. (2020).
## (s25) INTRODUCTION
(p25.0) From investors' point of view, there is a discussion about the advantages of integrating sustainability criteria in the investment decision-making process, as well as the profitability degree of such integration (Clark et al., 2014). In a research review by Camilleri (2017), some authors failed to prove the existence of a positive relationship between the practice of sustainability-oriented innovation and the economic performance of a firm. Some studies conversely prove the existence of a positive relationship between sustainability-oriented innovation and company's efficiency (Bekmezci, 2015;Kneipp et al., 2019; Aguilera-Caracuel & Ortiz-de-Mandojana, 2013). Thus, the existing scientific debate about the possibility of effective commercialization of sustainability-oriented innovations, as well as the lack of a comparative analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations, caused the need for a comparative review and analysis of research on the commercialization efficiency of these two kinds of innovations.
## (s26) LITERATURE REVIEW
(p26.0) As part of this study, a citation-based systematic literature review was conducted on the efficiency of commercialization of conventional and sustainability-oriented innovations. The literature review was guided by the methodological approach applied in Ahmad et al. (2020).
