# Detecting Phishing Sites -An Overview

CorpusID: 232335391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b61c914195c6eb785793749c0c4887c61d306dcd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b61c914195c6eb785793749c0c4887c61d306dcd)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s16) Black-Listing
(p16.0) In this technique, the URL's which are considered as phished sites are stored in database so when a new URL is entered it compares with the URLs in the database and if it matches it is blocked by the browser and is stored in the database for future purpose. The limitation of this technique is that detection of zerohour phishing attacks is not possible [42].
## (s17) White-Listing
(p17.0) In this technique the legitimate URLs are stored in the database and are used for checking new URLs. In this technique when a new URL is entered, first they check for that URL in the database, if there is no record of that URL then the entire information of that URL is checked such as domain names, age, SSL certificates, hyper-links connected to the website and then they are stored in the database. The drawback in case of whitelisting technique is, are the websites registered as legitimate are really legitimate or they present themselves as legitimate. The limitation of listing techniques is they require large amount of space [42].
## (s18) Heuristic Oriented Detection
(p18.0) It is extension of listing technique. In this technique, features of the websites are extracted such as URL's, content and they are used for comparison among different sites. If they match then those new websites are considered as phishing sites. These are better than listing techniques and their results gives more accuracy but their response time is low [5] [42][43] [12]. A different approach for detection of zero-hour phishing attack is discussed in [37].
## (s20) Content-based
(p20.0) In this, the content of the websites are compared with the legitimate websites to determine whether the sites are legitimate or not [12]. But there are many websites which doesn't have much content then this detection strategy fails . Now-a-days website contents are replaced by images [36].
## (s21) Visual Similarity
(p21.0) In this technique screenshots of web pages are taken and are stored in the databases. Then if there are look alike websites then the screenshots of both the webpages are compared to detect if it is phishing website or not. The limitations of this technique are it consumes a longer execution time leading to be unrealistic. It requires large storage space for storing the screenshots of websites. When multiple websites with same URL appear the first one to appear is considered as legitimate. But there can be any chance that the first to appear can be a phishing site [27] 
## (s22) Machine learning
(p22.0) Based on different datasets obtained from the different features of the websites, machine learning trains model from those datasets and tests them with different machine learning classifiers such as Random forest classifier, Support vector machine, Decision Tree, Naive Bayes, Logistic regression and so on [32]. These classifiers help in predicting the websites even before they are created, thus machine learning solves the problem of zero-hour phishing attacks. The classifier's accuracy varies depending on the size of the dataset and type of features used [2][26] [45] [48]. Frameworks are also developed to detect phishing attacks [51][53].
## (s24) Random Forest
(p24.0) Random Forest is an ensemble classifier used for classification and regression. It constructs decision trees based on randomly selected sets in training samples and then aggregate decisions from these trees by averaging or majority voting. It improves accuracy and also reduces over-fitting [4][9] [16].
## (s27) K-Nearest Neighbour
(p27.0) KNN is a non-parametric algorithm used in both classification and regression. Its classification works on unknown data closest to k in the training feature space. Closest points are selected using distance functions such as Hamming, Euclidian and Minkowski. KNN works slow if the data size is large [16].
## (s28) Logistic Regresssion
(p28.0) Logistic regression is a discriminative probabilistic model mainly used in which the output is binary. Logistic regression performs better than Naive Bayes model when training size is close to infinity [16][52].
## (s29) AdaBoost
(p29.0) AdaBoost (Adaptive Boosting) works as a conjunction algorithm because it is used to classify by training different weak learning algorithms to form a strong one i.e. to improve performance. The output of weak classifiers are combined by setting correct weights for final decision. Since AdaBoost is sensitive to outliers and focuses on hard-to-classify samples, it is less resistant to overfitting [21][46][52].
## (s31) Deep Neural Network
(p31.0) Deep neural network represents the type of machine learning when the system uses many layers of nodes to derive high-level functions from input information. It means transforming the data into a more creative and abstract component [25][77]. To detect the problem of over-fitting, a new method has been proposed namely, OFS-NN, an effective phishing websites detection model based on the optimal feature selection method and neural network. The proposed algorithm is able to alleviate the over-fitting problem of the underlying neural network to a large extent [40].
## (s34) Radial basis Function
(p34.0) Radial Basis Function(RBF) is a type of feed forward neural network that has been used broadly for classification and regression problems because of its simplest architecture and effective results for numerical data [20].
## (s36) Recurrent Neural Networks
(p36.0) A class of artificial neural networks where connections between nodes form a directed graph along a temporal sequence is recurrent neural network (RNN). This allows it to exhibit temporal dynamic behavior. Derived from feedforward neural networks, RNNs can use their internal state (memory) to process variable length sequences of inputs [15][18] [41][72].
## (s38) Capsule Neural Network
(p38.0) The machine learning system that is a type of artificial neural network (ANN) that can be used to better model hierarchical relationships is Capsule Neural Network (CapsNet). Add structures to a convolution neural network (CNN) called "capsules" and to reuse output from some of those capsules to form more stable representations for higher capsules is their idea. The output is a vector consisting of the likelihood of an observation and a pose for that observation [31][73]
## (s39) Deep Belief Network
(p39.0) Deep Belief Network(DBN) is a generative graphical model composed of multiple hidden layers with connection between layers and, there is no connection between units within each layer. DBN involves two steps that is, training in unsupervised way and training in supervised way. In unsupervised way, DBN learns to probabilistically reconstruct to input, this layer is called feature detectors on input. In supervised way, DBN works as classifier and does classification. DBN extracts the deep hierarchical representation (knowledge) and learns from this knowledge to make best model [29].
## (s40) Auto-encoder
(p40.0) Auto-Encoder(AE) is an unsupervised deep learning method. The basic framework of AE comprises an input layer, an output layer, and a hidden layer. Therein, the input layer and the output layer have the same structure, and when the input is equal to the output, the hidden layer represents potential structure and characteristics of the input. The aim of AE is to transform inputs into outputs with the least possible amount of deviation [30].
