# An Overview of the Biological Activity of Pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine Derivatives

CorpusID: 233397232 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a58088dacc8d3b810a40cc5ec7abaaeb5dd25a37](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a58088dacc8d3b810a40cc5ec7abaaeb5dd25a37)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s6) Antiviral Activity of Pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine Derivatives
(p6.0) HIV-1 integrase (IN) catalyzes the incorporation of HIV-1 cDNA into host DNA through a process involving two steps: processing of the HIV DNA 3 ends (3 -P) and strand transfer (ST). Due to the emergence of raltegravir (an IN inhibitor) resistance, it is imperative to develop second-generation inhibitors that will remain effective against clinically significant IN mutants.

(p6.1) Researchers under Zhao [12] developed a series of new IN inhibitors containing the pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine scaffold. Tricyclic compounds 10 (N-benzyl-7-hydroxy-pyrrolo[3,4c]pyridine-1,3,6-trione nucleus condensed with a ring ranging in size from five to eight members) ( Figure 6) demonstrated low micromolar inhibitory potency in IN assays in vitro (inhibition potency slightly increased with ring size), good selectivity (for the ST step relative to the 3 -P step), and reduced cytotoxicity ( Figure 6). These analogs 10a-c were less sensitive than raltegravir to resistance induced by mutations in integrase.
## (s10) Antibacterial and Antifungal Activity of Pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine Derivatives
(p10.0) Mannich bases 17a-b ( Figure 12) of 4-methyl-6-phenylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine-1,3dione obtained by Wojcicka et al. [20] exhibited moderate activity against Staphylococcus aureus. Compound 17a also reduced the growth of Candida albicans in a statistically significant manner.  
## (s12) Antibacterial and Antifungal Activity of Pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine Derivatives
(p12.0) Mannich bases 17a-b ( Figure 12) of 4-methyl-6-phenylpyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine-1,3dione obtained by Wojcicka et al. [20] exhibited moderate activity against Staphylococcus aureus. Compound 17a also reduced the growth of Candida albicans in a statistically significant manner. 
## (s17) Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine Derivatives
(p17.0) Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are zinc-dependent proteolytic enzymes involved in the degradation and regeneration of the extracellular matrix. High levels of MMPs may cause a variety of pathologies, including metastatic cancer and arthritis, and therefore inhibition of these enzymes is considered an important therapeutic target.

(p17.1) Chollet et al. c]pyridin-3-one derivatives 22 as SYK inhibitors (Figure 17). The 4-(3-methylanilino)substituted compounds exhibited good enzymatic and cellular potency. It turned out that the 7-fluoro substitution had a significant effect on the activity. Replacing methylaniline with a methylpyrazole ring increased the activity of the 4-fluoro derivative. The methylpyrazole derivative 22a showed the best in vitro profile and was selective for kinases (it was potent toward both SYK and FLT3). Compound 22a showed inhibition toward an SYK-dependent and FLT3-dependent cell line in a cell proliferation assay. It demonstrated strong tumor growth inhibition (TGI) after 20 days of treatment. This derivative blocked anti-IgD stimulated expression of CD86 in murine peripheral B cells in vivo. Compound 22a named TAK-659 has been used in clinical trials to treat advanced solid tumors and lymphoma malignancies [24]. 
