# materials Degradation Mechanisms of Metal-Supported Solid Oxide Cells and Countermeasures: A Review

CorpusID: 235436948 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67f0d43d66a41cfe29102f5b4a28f9938c73fcd0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67f0d43d66a41cfe29102f5b4a28f9938c73fcd0)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Solid oxide cells (SOCs) are electrochemical devices, including functional metal oxides operating either as fuel cells or electrolysers at high temperatures. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are energy conversion devices that convert a fuel's chemical energy into electricity through a series of electrochemical reactions. A typical structure and the operating principle of SOFCs are shown in Figure 1a. The three main components are a dense electrolyte, a porous anode, and a porous cathode, which make up a single SOFC. According to the type of conductor, it can be divided into oxide-conducting and proton-conducting SOFCs. The electrical efficiency can typically reach 60% when hydrogen is used as fuel [1]. Such a performance is higher compared to other commercially viable fuel cells such as phosphoric acid fuel cells (PAFC; 40-45%) and proton exchange membrane fuel cells-(PEMFC; 40-50%) [2]. Among several advantages, the all-solid structure of SOFCs prevents the risk of electrolyte leakage. The heat produced during the operation can be reused, increasing the total efficiency to more than 80%. SOFCs are commended further, from that, relatively high operating temperatures compared with PEMFC allows inexpensive metals such as nickel and copper to become catalysts, meanwhile, the high ionic conductivity of the electrolyte can be achieved at these temperatures [3][4][5][6]. Furthermore, it can be changed from SOFC to SOEC (solid oxide electrolysis cell) mode with almost no adjustment other than the water steam be filled in. The operating process of SOEC is shown in Figure 1b. Higher efficiencies around 90% can be achieved in SOEC mode compared to conventional low-temperature electrolysers (75%) [7,8].
## (s2) The Degradation of the Anode
(p2.0) The anode of MSCs can be divided into the functional layer and supporting layer. The porous functional layer provides triple-phase boundaries (TPB), i.e., the collection of the sites where the electron-(such as nickel), ion-(such as YSZ), and gas (pore)-conducting phases meet for the electrochemical reaction. Phase connectivity is required to maintain the gas diffusion and the conduction of electrons and ions, keeping TPBs active and cells working. For the supporting layer, providing mechanical support, conducting gas, and electricity are its main functions. Therefore, all the changes that make TPBs and the metal support ineffective constitute the anode's degradation mechanisms. . Two-dimensional slices from a spatially registered sub-dataset at identical locations in the electrode in the pristine (a), annealed for 3 h (b) and 8 h (c) states. Three different grey levels are present: black (pore), grey (YSZ), and white (nickel). (d) The nickel particle morphology at the same position before and after the annealing (in dry hydrogen at 850 • C). Reproduced with permission from Ref. [40].
## (s4) . Carbon Deposition and Sulfur Poisoning
(p4.0) Hydrogen has been considered an ideal fuel for SOFCs as the product is only water steam and no adverse reaction that damages cells' performance and lifetime. Compared with hydrogen, carbon-based fuels such as methane and CO can still be an alternative because they are more compatible with existing infrastructures (transportation and storage), reducing industrial application costs. However, when carbon-based fuels are used, the carbon deposition (coking) often happens in the anode, which decreases the performance and lifetime of cells. The following chemical reactions show the mechanism of carbon deposition formation [41]:
## (s5) The Degradation of Cell Stacks
(p5.0) A cell stack consists of single cells and cell stack components (mainly including interconnects and sealants). Cell stacks' degradation mechanisms can be concluded as the microstructural degradation of single cells and structural failure of stacks' components. Single-cell issues have been discussed in Section 2, while structural failure caused by high temperature and thermal stress will be discussed as follows.

(p5.1) Thermal stress during the cell stack operation is mainly caused by the gradient temperature (G) from the fuel gas outlet (low temperature) to the inlet (high temperature) [138]. G can reach around 200 K in a plane-type ceramic-supported cell stack [139,140], 
## (s7) Thin-Film Electrolyte Metal-Supported SOCs and Issues
(p7.0) Reducing the operating temperature is widely regarded as an effective way to mitigate the oxidation of metal supports. According to oxidation mass gain data of ferritic stainless steel by Molin et al. (2008) [92], a stable K P of 0% 2 /h can be achieved at 400 • C in humid H 2 , while the value is 0.029% 2 /h at 800 • C.

(p7.1) The application of advanced technologies such as PLD, ALD, and SPS makes it possible to reduce the thickness of electrolytes to 2 µm and even less than 1 µm [19][20][21][22]. Then, thin-film electrolyte metal-supported SOCs (TF-MSCs) with operating temperatures of below 600 • C have gradually garnered increasing amounts of attention from researchers, especially after 2010 [17,19,20,151]. In 2015, Kim et al. [19] fabricated the TF-MSC with an electrolyte thickness of 2 µm and an active area of about 3 mm 2 based on the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method, the structure is shown in Figure 15. The substrate is LSTN-YSZ (40 µm)/porous stainless steel (380 µm) fabricated by tape casting. NiO-YSZ anode, YSZ electrolyte, and LSC cathode were deposited on the substrate in sequence. A peak power density of 560 mW/cm 2 can be achieved in moist hydrogen at 550 • C while no degradation was observed in both 13-h operation and over 10 thermal cycles. These excellent performances show the promise of this TF-MSC for portable electronic devices that require high power-density and fast thermal cycling. At the same time, the small active area limits further application. from researchers, especially after 2010 [17,19,20,151]. In 2015, Kim et al. [19] fabricated the TF-MSC with an electrolyte thickness of 2μm and an active area of about 3 mm 2 based on the pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method, the structure is shown in Figure 15. The substrate is LSTN-YSZ (40μm)/porous stainless steel (380μm) fabricated by tape casting. NiO-YSZ anode, YSZ electrolyte, and LSC cathode were deposited on the substrate in sequence. A peak power density of 560 mW/cm 2 can be achieved in moist hydrogen at 550 °C while no degradation was observed in both 13-h operation and over 10 thermal cycles. These excellent performances show the promise of this TF-MSC for portable electronic devices that require high power-density and fast thermal cycling. At the same time, the small active area limits further application. In 2018, Reolon et al. [17] increased the active area of TF-MSC to 38 mm 2 and further decreased the electrolyte thickness to 890 nm, also based on the PLD method. NiO/ScYSZ anode was deposited on the porous metal support, then YSZ and CGO (GDC) electrolytes with a total thickness of about 890 nm was deposited on the anode successively. Although a peak power density of 400 mW/cm 2 can be achieved, a significant degradation rate of 10-15%/hour appeared over 20 h test. Degradations are mainly caused by the cracking of the electrolyte and gas leakage. On the one hand, further decreasing the electrolyte thickness will reduce the mechanical strength, resulting in a decrease in thermal stress tolerance [22]. On the other hand, the decrease in the electrolyte thickness will challenge the sealing, increasing the risk of gas leakage [151].

(p7.2) Therefore, while reducing the thickness of the electrolyte, the strength of the electrolyte and the sealing issue should also be taken into account. The balance between the size and the thickness of the film should be concerned. Although the operating temperature has been significantly reduced by using thin-film electrolytes, long-term test data are in shortage.
## (s9) R&D Opportunities and Recommendations
(p9.0) Infiltrated electrodes and thin-film electrolytes have been used to improve the performance and durability of MSCs in the past decade. However, the structure of the metal support of MSCs has barely changed in the past two decades. Conventional powder metallurgy methods fabricate typical random-distributed pores and curved gas channels. Such a traditional structure seems to have been unable to meet the needs of highperformance MSCs of the future that requires excellent dynamic performance and longterm stability. Three aspects should be considered to optimize the metal support structure ( Figure 16): A. high-efficiency gas diffusion channels; B. gradient-size pores; C. avoiding corrosion-sensitive small necking between metal particles of the support. Firstly, recent work by Nielsen et al. (2018) [81] achieved more than 40% improvement in power density of the MS-SOFC by using the metal support with straight fuel gas channels, which attributed to the higher gas diffusion efficiency of the straight channels ( Figure 16A). The effective diffusion coefficient D eff can be represented by the following equation [153]:

(p9.1) where D is the bulk diffusion coefficient, ε is the porosity, τ is the tortuosity. Thus, a larger D eff can be obtained by decreasing τ and increasing ε. Secondly, achieving the gradient-size pores of the anode (including metal support) is also an effective way to improve cell performance [152,154,155]. Smaller pore sizes in the anode's functional layer help improve the catalytic efficiency as the larger specific surface area can be provided. In comparison, larger pore sizes in the support layer will facilitate gas diffusion. Chen et al. (2014) [152] showed an increase of over 20% in peak power density could be obtained when a gradient-porosity anode is used. Moreover, if small sintering necks (see Section 2.1.2) can be avoided, the degradation of metal support caused by oxidation can be mitigated.
