# Sewage Sludge Thermal Treatment Technologies with a Focus on Phosphorus Recovery: A Review

CorpusID: 233888918 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/31bc893776b5c39765fd5b2bc37994a13bb90446](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/31bc893776b5c39765fd5b2bc37994a13bb90446)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Phosphorus (P) is a limited, non-renewable resource, but is a vital nutrient for the growth of organisms, and cannot be replaced by other elements [1]. Nowadays it is generally applied to soils and is fortified in foods in quantities vastly in excess what can be uptaken so is largely wasted although it is a limited resource on Earth. This was confirmed by European Commission (EC) which added the phosphate rock to its list of critical raw materials in 2014 (EC website). Demand for P fertilizer has increased with an increase of population. The intensity of global fertiliser application amounts on average to 10 kg P/ha/year but this varies significantly between regions and countries. In 2017, 1.34 million tonnes of phosphorus fertilizer was used in EU agriculture, which is 34% higher compared to year 2009, presented in the Fig. 1.
## (s7) Gasification
(p7.0) Gasification at high temperatures converts carbonaceous materials by partial oxidation in some cases in the presence of steam to synthesis gas (syngas), ash and eventually char [98]. This process offers a sustainable method for SS management that takes into account the concept of a circular economy (CE) [45]. Gasification of SS has not been as widely applied as combustion, due to the complexity of the technology and its higher investment and operational costs [99]. Nevertheless, it can be assuming that this process is a successful solution for P recovery, since due to reductive atmosphere during the process, inorganic compounds are moved into the solid phase, which presents a promising source of phosphorus [45]. Gasification can operate with SS with 75% moisture content [16]. The solid fraction obtained from the gasification of SS contains around 20 wt% P 2 O 5 [100]. Furthermore, direct application of the gasification char as a fertilizer is limited due to presence of heavy metals, as well as due to the low plant availability of the P. For these reasons, the investigation of P recovery from gasification char has increased in importance [101]. Among the different reactors that exist for gasification of SS, fixed and fluidized bed are mainly used. Fixed bed gasifiers have simple construction and show good thermal efficiency. With fluidized bed reactors, higher gasification efficiency can be achieved compared to fixed bed, due to better mass and heat transfer, but on the other hand sintering of SS and bed material can occur [102]. Atienza et al. [103] studied the extraction of P from SS char combustion and char gasification ash by means of acid leaching. 90% of the P present in char combustion ash and in char gasification ash can be recovered using sulphuric and oxalic acid. P recovery rate using oxalic acid is higher compared to sulphuric acid, especially for char combustion ash obtained at 600 °C to 750 °C. When using sulphuric acid, P recovery from char combustion ash obtained at 900 °C is higher than from ash obtained at lower temperature, under the same extraction conditions. Viader et al. [104] carried out a comparative analysis between an ISSA from sludge combustion in fluidized bed combustor (FBC) and a SSA from gasification in low-temperature fluidized bed gasifier. They reported that the content of P was little higher in gasification ash compared to that produced from the incineration process.
