# microorganisms Capripoxvirus Infections in Ruminants: A Review

CorpusID: 233459726 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a787003928f63ed8f8e36bffc66f25382fb7c22](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2a787003928f63ed8f8e36bffc66f25382fb7c22)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Importance
(p1.0) The three diseases of the Capripoxvirus genus are economically important and classified by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as notifiable diseases because of their rapid spread and the significant economic losses they can cause. The three viruses also present obstacles to genetic improvement in small ruminants and cattle breeding.

(p1.1) Sheeppox and goatpox cause annual losses associated with a decrease in milk production and weight gain, damage to wool and hides, and high mortalities in lambs and kids [3,25]). In a study conducted in India, Garner et al. (2000) estimated income losses up to 30-43% of the total annual revenue and reported that the recovery of a herd from an epidemic may take up to six years [26].
## (s2) Importance
(p2.0) The three diseases of the Capripoxvirus genus are economically important and classified by the World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as notifiable diseases because of their rapid spread and the significant economic losses they can cause. The three viruses also present obstacles to genetic improvement in small ruminants and cattle breeding.

(p2.1) Sheeppox and goatpox cause annual losses associated with a decrease in milk production and weight gain, damage to wool and hides, and high mortalities in lambs and kids [3,25]). In a study conducted in India, Garner et al. (2000) estimated income losses up to 30-43% of the total annual revenue and reported that the recovery of a herd from an epidemic may take up to six years [26].
## (s4) Clinical Signs
(p4.0) The incubation period is 4 to 8 days for SPV and 4 to 15 days for GPV and LSD. After its entry into the host, the virus replicates in the tissues. It is localised in the lymph nodes three to four days after a primary viraemia. The virus then spreads throughout the body and affects the liver, lungs, and spleen. Nodules appear 7 to 19 days post-infection. After the appearance of skin lesions in affected animals, they may develop conjunctivitis, rhinitis, and lymphadenopathy, in the prescapular lymph nodes. Excessive salivation can occur after an infection [17].
## (s5) Immunity
(p5.0) The immune response to an infectious agent is characterised by the coexistence of innate and adaptive immunity and is particularly complex in poxvirus infections. Each component of the immune system plays a vital role in the segregation and elimination of the virus [60].
