# Detecting Fall Risk and Frailty in Elders with Inertial Motion Sensors: A Survey of Significant Gait Parameters

CorpusID: 239485947 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb8aac53d08e71b7ddab1156cddfda41a22a2e42)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Conditions
(p1.0) Definition Value Traditionally, frailty has been diagnosed using the Fried criteria or other frailty scales or functional tests performed in the doctor's office, such as gait speed test, the Timed Up and Go test (TUG) [4], or the Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) [5]. Currently, technological advances are providing more accurate gait analysis methods to detect frailty and fall risk in elderly people. Moreover, these methods allow more unbiased and realistic tests to be carried out (in the presence of a doctor, the patients tend to outperform) [6]. These advanced methods for gait analysis can be divided into wearable and nonwearable systems, and an overview of them is carried out in [7]. Nonwearable systems are based on image processing or floor sensors. Image processing systems are usually formed by an array of cameras that capture human movements; however, these systems can be made up of other types of optical sensors such as laser range scanners or infrared sensors. Floor sensors consist of a set of pressure sensors located on force platforms, which capture the human gait by measuring the force exerted by the subject's feet during the gait. Alternatively, wearable systems are sensors located on different parts of the body, such as the feet, legs, back, or chest. There are several sensors: force sensors, which are located under the foot and measure the ground reaction force; electromyography, measuring the electric signal caused by contracting muscles with surface electrodes; inertial sensors or Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs), able to capture the acceleration and angular rate and from them estimate velocities, angles, or gait cycle ratios.

(p1.1) The advantages and disadvantages of wearable and nonwearable systems are determined by their characteristics and goal applications. Nonwearable systems are nonintrusive and highly precise and have a large measurement capacity; however, they are limited by a controlled environment, so tests must be carried out in laboratories, it being impossible to monitor real life outside, and have a high cost. Because of these reasons, wearable sensors are most commonly used in research, and some of their advantages are: the low cost and the possibility of measuring in any place without needing controlled environments. Their limitations must be taken into account: battery duration is limited, so very long time tests (e.g., several days) cannot be performed, and in some cases, complex algorithms to process the data and remove the noise effects (drifts) are needed.

(p1.2) A review that analyzed the available methodologies for gait phase detection [8] showed an increase in the use of IMUs due to their advantages over other type of sensors. There are several studies that supported the use of inertial sensors in medical gait analysis, representing a new approach that improves the classical methods. A comparison review between traditional systems and inertial sensors for gait analysis in healthy and pathological adults was carried out by [9]. It showed a good concordance between both systems and supported the use of inertial sensors as a portable solution for gait analysis in clinical and laboratory settings, as well as in outdoor spaces in real-life conditions, with good reliability.

(p1.3) Studying the relationship between frailty and gait analysis in the literature, we found 10 different reviews related to these topics. Table 2 contains a summary of these works, arranged by the following column fields: author, year, patient's medical condition, gait analysis technology, number of papers (M) included in each review, and relevant conclusions in the review. Frailty is closely related to fall risk, so reviews that focused on fall risk in older people are also included in this table. Some reviews studied a large number of technologies [10][11][12][13][14][15], whereas [16][17][18] focused on the use of inertial sensors. These studies supported the use of gait analysis systems for the evaluation of frailty or fall risk in elderly patients; some of them identified a few gait parameters related to frailty status or fall risk, as the stride length, the double support time, the reduction of some parameters (cadence, gait velocity), or the gait variability, as well as the sensor locations, the lower trunk being the most common body location among the studies.

(p1.4) By analyzing these revisions, we detected a variety of parameters to be measured, with different sensor body locations and a large variety of patient studies. However, we did not find any review that analyzed in depth which are the most relevant parameters for the diagnosis of frailty using inertial sensors. We detected some limitations in these reviews with respect to our goal. Most of them did not include studies with frail patients [8,9,11,12,16,17,19,20], and those focused on frailty did not emphasize the use of inertial sensors or, specifically, the significance of gait parameters to identify which are the most relevant gait parameters related to frailty [10,13,21]. For these reason and to give a response to this problem, in this work, we carried out a review of the state-of-the-art that highlights the significance of gait parameters that others studies have already quantified using inertial sensors and present them in an integrated way, so that an engineer can use it as a guide to design a gait analysis tool with IMUs by estimating in advance the most promising parameters from inertial measurements to identify the frailty status and fall risk.

(p1.5) The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives the background knowledge on and definitions of frailty, what scoring tests are available, and the used gait cycle terminology (e.g., phase events and periods). You can skip this section if proficient in this field. Section 3 describes the methodology used and inclusion criteria for the literature search, selection, and data synthesis. Section 4 describes the results: a brief description of each study included, the tabulation of the most important characteristic of each study such as the number of sensors, location, or type of patients and the tabulation of the gait parameters and their significance. Section 5 contains the discussion, including some limitations detected, and finally, Section 6 ends the paper with the most relevant conclusions. Postural transitions, number of steps, and percentage of time in DPA and intensity of DPA together were the most frequently measured parameters followed closely by gait speed. All but one study demonstrated an association between PA and level of frailty.
## (s3) Frailty Definition and Scoring Tests
(p3.0) Frailty is a syndrome (set of symptoms) associated with aging and represent a decline in different functional abilities [22]. According to Fried et al. [3], a frailty condition is met when three (or more) out of five energy-related criteria are satisfied, as shown in Table 1. Alternatively, frailty has been determined as a risk index by counting the number of deficits accumulated over time (termed "Frailty Index (FI)") [22] including disability, diseases, physical and cognitive impairments, and geriatric syndromes (e.g., falls). However, the fivecomponent phenotype proposed by Fried et al. [3] is easier to use and more practical in a clinical setting, compared to the FI that typically contains thirty to seventy items.

(p3.1) It is commonly accepted that there exist three frailty-related states: robust, prefrail (when one or two above-cited criteria are present), and frail (three or more conditions). Several studies for long periods (about 5 y) [22] showed that more than 50% of the elderly population in nursing homes had at least one transition between any two of the three frailty states. According to Fried et al. [3], in a study for 65+ y persons, 46% did not present any conditions, 32% 1 condition, 15% 2 conditions, and only 6%, 1%, and 0.2% for 3, 4, and 5 conditions simultaneously. The most frequent condition were, in order, low activity (22% of the cases), slow walk and grip strength (20% both), exhaustion (17%), and weight loss (6%).

(p3.2) The evolution of frailty is heterogeneous, complex, and unknown; there is evidence that a genetic basis exists; in addition, medical diseases and life habits determine its further development. The early detection of these functional changes or deficits at the physiologic level is important for preventing or reversing the development of frailty, before reaching disability.

(p3.3) Many frailty conditions are related to the motion of a person. From the five conditions established by Fried et al. [3] for frailty condition, three of them, low energy, slow waking speed, and low physical activity, could be measured with motion sensors (e.g., inertial). Weight loss and grip strength conditions would need to be assessed with other sensors. Regarding low grip strength, in most of the cases, it is a consequence of general weakness, so we could also assess it with a hand-held dynamometer, from the time needed to perform strength-related activities, such as getting up/down from a chair, which could also be measured from inertial sensors.

(p3.4) While relative motion is important, the absolute movement of a person within his/her living area is also relevant. The low physical activity can be measured by his/her spatial mobility, defined as the trajectory's length that a person moves on purpose during daily routines, as well as the frequency of mobility within a specific time frame.
## (s4) Frailty Scoring Tests
(p4.0) Walking speed is the most common objective test of functional limitation in the literature, and it is one of the components of Fried's frailty phenotype. The speed threshold (cut point) with the best predictive value for frailty diagnosis is 0.8 m/s. The most commonly used tests are those that calculate the normal walking speed at traveled distances between 4 m and 6 m [23]. There are more complex walking tests, called dual-task tests, in which the patient walks while performing another task, such as counting from one to one-hundred. These dual-task tests are also used to detect cognitive decline or fall risk.

(p4.1) The Timed Up and Go Test (TUG) was specifically designed to quantify mobility and has proven to be a good predictor of deteriorating health status [4]. It contains a walking speed test, with a 180 • turn, in combination with an initial get up from a chair and a final sit down. Normal time is considered less than 10 s; times longer than 15 s are related to a high risk of falls; above 20 s is related to a high risk of disability.

(p4.2) Other tests focus on the action of sitting down and getting up from a chair. The 30-s Chair Stand Test (30-s CST) [24] consists of counting how many times the patient is able to sit down and stand up for 30 s, whereas the Five-Times Sit to Stand (FTSS), quantifies the total time to do it five times [25].

(p4.3) The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) [5] is one of the most validated and reliable tests for detecting frailty and predicting disability, in a scale from zero to twelve points. It is also known as the Guralnik test: (1) balance (with different foot positions); (2) speed (time in 4 m path); (3) sitting and standing five times (time needed). Each part is scored from 0-4, and the sum of the total score provides a classification: 0-3 = severe functional limitation (dependent subject), 4-6 = moderate functional limitation (subject with frailty), 7-9 = low functional limitation (prefrail subject), and 10-12 = absent functional limitation (robust subject).
## (s5) Gait Analysis Definitions
(p5.0) Gait analysis is one of the most commonly used methods to detect frailty and fall risk in elderly people [16]. It consists of identifying the different phases of the gait cycle and extracting their characteristic parameters. As mentioned above, frailty is directly related to changes in gait, namely slower gait speed. As frailty increases, mobility capacity decreases and gait changes become more evident. Through gait analysis and quantification of the gait parameters, differences can be found between robust, prefrail, and frail patients. These differences allow discriminating between patient groups, to diagnose frailty, and to provide early medical attention.
## (s15) Patients
(p15.0) Patients included in the studies were older adults (over 60 y); the number of participant in each study varies from 17 to 718, the median being 121 patients per study. The percentage of healthy subjects included in the studies was from 23% to 62%, with a median value equal to 45%.

(p15.1) The studies included patients with frailty, fall risk, both, or other diseases: 11 studies were focused on patients with frailty [15,24,[26][27][28][29]31,35,36,41,42], 6 studies patients with fall risk [6,18,30,33,37,39], and 2 studies combining frailty and fall risk: [25,38]. Two studies included patients with frailty plus mind and peripheral artery disease [32,40], respectively; and one study [34] included patients with fall risk and Parkinson's.
## (s16) Inertial Sensor: Number and Location
(p16.0) All studies selected employed inertial sensors (some studies used other systems as well, but these systems were not considered in this work). The number of IMUs used ranged from 1-6. A large part of the studies used a single sensor, usually located on the back (lower back, L3 or L5 vertebrae) [24,27,30,37,39,42], or in some cases on the sternum [29,41], chest [32], or foot [6]. Three studies employed two IMUs, which were located on the same part of the body: feet [26], shins [35], and heels [36]. Studies that employed 3 IMUs [18,33], 5 IMUS [15,25,31,38,40], or 6 IMUs [28,34] 
## (s17) Motion Test
(p17.0) The most frequently repeated tests consisted of simply walking a fixed distance or time, normally between 3 and m 7 m or 0.5 min and 30 min [6,26,30,31,[33][34][35][36][37][38]42]. Some studies realized more complex walking tests, in which the subject was performing another task such as counting (dual-task tests) [15,18,40].

(p17.1) Some studies used the IMUs to record data during the classical frailty test to extract the kinematic parameters. For example: Reference [24] analyzed the 30-s Chair Stand Test; Reference [41] captured the 10 m expanded Timed Up to Go test; Reference [25] used three physical assessments: TUG, Five-Times Sit To Stand, and quiet standing.

(p17.2) There were six studies that captured Daily Physical Activity (DPA) for long periods of time (days) to analyze the walking periods and parameters as total steps/day, walking percentage/day, or time in bed [15,27,29,31,32,39].
## (s18) Gait Parameters
(p18.0) Authors studied the significance of gait parameters by applying different statistical methods and a few of them classification methods based on artificial intelligence. Some of them used common statistical analysis tests such as ANOVA (ANalysis Of VAriance), t-Student test, or Spearman correlation, among others, [6,18,27,34,36,41]. A large number of the studies used conventional multivariable models: linear regression or logistic regression models [15,16,28,29,31,33,38,40]. Other methods such as partial least-squares discriminant analysis were applied by [37,39], and decision tree models were used by [24,32,42]. Moreover, there were studies that supported the use of new machine learning techniques such as neural network models [26,35] or support vector machine methods [25].

(p18.1) A large number of gait parameters were identified in the articles studied. These parameters are summarized in tables in order to analyze the number of times that each parameter was studied, as well as the number of times that a parameter was considered as significant to discriminate between patient groups. Tables 4 and 5 contain the gait parameters related to frailty and fall risk, respectively, where the columns represent the articles included and a code number between 0 and 2, with the following meaning: 0 is nonsignificant; 1 is included the study (more or less significant); 2 is significant. The last three columns are the total number of occurrences of each parameter (T), the significant cases (Sig, code = 2), and the nonsignificant cases (NSig, code = 0) of each gait parameter.

(p18.2) In the case of gait parameters related to frailty, they were grouped into: general parameters, the variability of general parameters, temporal parameters, spatial parameters, toe-specific parameters, specific gait phases' speeds, daily physical activity parameters, and parameters from classical tests, as shown in Table 4.

(p18.3) From the fall risk studies, we identified a lower number of parameters, some of them repeated in frailty studies. They were divided into general and temporal parameters, variability, DPA parameters, and parameters related to trunk and corporal stability, as shown in Table 5.

(p18.4) Note that for a correct interpretation of the last two columns in Tables 4 and 5, the ideal situation for a significant parameter is to find a high number in Sig and a zero or low number in NSig. The larger T, the larger the confidence level on that interpretation.
## (s26) Gait Parameters Related to Fall Risk
(p26.0) In the case of fall risk, Tables 5 and 8 indicate that trunk accelerations are important to predict or identify fall risk. This parameter appeared two times, and both considered it as as relevant; moreover, we can include the trunk stability, the trunk control, the dynamic stability, or the center of pressure deviations in this category (they appeared only one time, but all were considered significant in their respective studies, while neither as nonsignificant). From this, we can assume that when it comes to fall risk, the most relevant parameters are those related to stability and trunk movements.

(p26.1) Gait speed, stride length, and stride time have inconsistencies. By analyzing them in depth, we found that stride time, stride length, double-support time, gait symmetry, and gait speed, were considered as nonsignificant in [38]. The authors indicated that the results were inconsistent with previous reports, and this could be due to the nonfrail patient characteristics. The results suggested that balance (stability) and DPA parameters were predictive of fall risk in frail and prefrail adults. However, gait parameters were not able to discriminate between patient groups. In addition, they did not observe an increased risk of falling with increasing frailty status. In [33], gait speed and stride time also did not differ between patient groups. The relationship between frailty and the risk of falling is certain, and gait speed was considered as a relevant parameter in classic tests such as TUG, SPPB, or Fried's scale.

(p26.2) Therefore, fall risk would also be related to a slower walking speed and stride time, but the discrepancies between different authors did not allow obtaining clear conclusions. In short, we can find a relationship between fall risk and trunk stability.
