# Service Level Agreements for 5G and Beyond: Overview, Challenges and Enablers of 5G-Healthcare Systems

CorpusID: 230997642 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/913199fb607ffd1c4770413b8e639cf34f84940c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/913199fb607ffd1c4770413b8e639cf34f84940c)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s7) C. SLA TYPES
(p7.0) The types of SLAs can be organized into the groups illustrated in Fig. 2, which outlines the types that share a common theme. Considering the customer type, SLAs can be customerbased involving individual customers and covering all the services they use, service-based when offered to all customers that use the same services, corporate-based when covering all generic services for an organization, or internal when all the concerned parties are internal to a certain entity. However, a single SLA regarding a specific service could include multiple levels in the same frame (i.e., multi-level SLA) to address the service, customer, and corporate levels.

(p7.1) SLAs can also be categorized relevant to the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) protocol layers. For example, a horizontal SLA can be established between peers in the same tier (e.g., SLA between two internet protocol (IP) domains or two optical transport network domains). Conversely, a vertical SLA describes the use of the underlying network layer (e.g., SLA between the core multiprotocol label switching network and an optical network) [18].

(p7.2) In Fig. 2, we term the SLAs that allow pre-establishment flexibility as negotiable or bilateral SLAs. These include negotiations during the SLA development stage. In contrast, off-the-shelf SLAs, non-negotiable SLAs, or unilateral SLAs are standard SLAs that can be commonly downloaded from the service provider's website [60]. In this case, the customer's role is to agree or reject the SLA. Accordingly, the lack of flexibility is not conducive to address the specific needs of mission-critical and time-sensitive applications [61].

(p7.3) Dynamic SLAs offer post-establishment flexibility to adapt the service level requirements and metrics in real-time. By continuously evaluating the SLA compliance at run time, the system using the service can quickly adapt to changes in its operating parameters [62]. The opposite is a static SLA, in which all components are predefined in agreement between the customer and service provider and neither party can change the service requirements for the duration of the agreement.
## (s20) b: LACK OF APPLICATION METRICS INFORMATION MODEL AND MAPPING TO NETWORK METRICS:
(p20.0) Considering the application side, information models or templates might not exist to identify the communication performance metrics and other technical details that are needed to fulfill the intended functionality of the plethora of 5G service types and applications. Such templates help the stakeholders to cooperate and negotiate tradeoffs to facilitate service delivery. On the network side, choosing a configuration of network parameters to meet the desired application performance can benefit from a mapping between the SLA metrics and 5G network parameters that highlights the sensitivity of desired performance to the change in network configuration. This can be accomplished by leveraging domain knowledge in both the service application area and 5G network management, which exceeds in complexity compared to the legacy networks because of the increase in the number of network parameters and their complex interdependencies. The work in [18] attempts to map ten services to ten network technology independent parameters by considering four performance classes: 1) very high performance, 2) high performance, 3) default performance, and 4) indifferent. However, this work does not consider 5G applications and metrics.

(p20.1) (e.g., generalized multi-protocol label switching) with a generic policy manager or a third party can help automate the SLA monitoring tasks. However, this will include the added burden of mapping the SLA requirements of each SLA to the technical configurations of network equipment used by the service provider and the specification of tools to generate SLA performance metrics [18].

(p20.2) Another challenge is the data volume resulting from data collection for SLA monitoring. Service quality metrics are specified based on detailed infrastructure-based measurements that can generate large volumes of data, which is challenging for customers to analyze and determine the service consistency with the SLA terms. To alleviate the burden of analyzing large data volumes, the stakeholders can identify the most important and relevant data stream and only gather the associated technical reports for assessment. Although this approach can reduce the administrative burden on the SLA stakeholders, there can be cases where the customer requires detailed data collection for traceability and compliance with external reporting commitments. The importance of SLA monitoring automation is further highlighted by the large number of technical counters in heterogenous 5G and beyond networks, the use of vendor-specific monitoring tools by network operators, and the lack of unified data format for collected data. Accordingly, a gap in the existing methods is the lack of automated SLA monitoring methods that are capable of efficiently addressing the SLA monitoring tasks of 5G and beyond networks. Automated, scalable, and transparent data collection and aggregation helps build trust between SLA stakeholders and promotes efficient use of resources to achieve the customer desired application.
## (s23) a: COMPLEX CUSTOMER ENTERPRISE STRUCTURE:
(p23.0) In complex company structures, it is challenging to correlate the quality of services in terms of business value creation. With growing enterprise complexity, the number of internal customer entities increases along with their inter-dependencies and potentially conflicting requirements. When a value model for the procured services is absent, the sensitivity of the business value of a desired application to service changes is not easily predictable.

(p23.1) b: EVOLVING TECHNOLOGY OFFERING: Customers might attempt to improve their connected applications to remain competitive (e.g., serve more subscribers, increase access speed to medical imaging data). However, there is no financial incentive for the service providers to offer technical capabilities beyond what is needed to meet the established SLA terms. Accordingly, evolving the technology offered by the service providers can be regarded as a challenge since such investment in service quality can impact the provider's cost structures. Customers wishing to expand their access to improved technology should initiate a new negotiation process with the service provider [85]. Therefore, the customer should maintain up-to-date technology landscaping efforts in the evolving 5G and beyond networks to be aware of what can be done with improved communication capabilities. On the other hand, the service providers can benefit from the targeted marketing of their communication service offerings to industry verticals.

(p23.2) c: RISK-SHARING MODELS: Business costs and success can be perceived differently by the SLA stakeholders, which extends to the associated risk to that success. Accordingly, the SLA stakeholders should determine if and how to consider risk-sharing of the end-to-end service provided to the end-user. Unique industry verticals can approach this topic according to their unique needs. We expand on the risk management of 5G-enabled medical devices in Section IV.
## (s25) e: RESOURCE ALLOCATION REQUEST HANDLING AND MANAGEMENT:
(p25.0) In 5G and beyond use cases, provisions like spectrum sharing and infrastructure sharing complicate the resource allocation in SLA management. For example, short-term services requested through signaling can be challenging to meet by the service provider because of the complexity of managing the network resource reservation while balancing the overall services offered to all customers and maximizing resource utilization [36]. Bandwidth adaptation in 5G and beyond networks and how it can impact the desired application should also be considered and documented in the SLA.

(p25.1) Managing spectrum sharing scenarios would be a challenge as well. If used, spectrum sharing practices should be addressed in the SLA, whereby some service providers might consider the temporary transfer of some or all their spectrum access rights. Furthermore, the optional use of unlicensed spectrum bands is commonly best-effort and lacks service guarantees due to the lack of interference protection in unlicensed spectrum, which raises concerns for wireless coexistence. For example, the coexistence impact of LTE-Licensed Assisted Access (LAA) on users of unlicensed spectrum including wireless medical devices was investigated in [86]. Authors in [87] address the problem of modeling and evaluating the coexistence of LTE LAA in the unlicensed band. Accordingly, considerations of wireless coexistence should be addressed in the SLA if applicable to the offered service.

(p25.2) Another SLA consideration is the network physical resource sharing and its impact on the offered service. Often, a customer does not need a high QoS at all times. For example, in the case of connected ambulance facilitating patient treatment by a remote physician while in transport, the service level needed to operate the associated connectivity would only be needed while the patient is on the way to hospital.

(p25.3) Once the patient reaches the hospital, that communication service is no longer needed. For such applications, customers can request on-demand services that are charged on a pay-as-you-use basis, which might be an incentive for the provider to share the network resources between users to achieve profitability [85].
## (s29) b: FORECAST FUNCTION:
(p29.0) An open research question is the development of continuous network forecasting and optimization techniques to optimize a set of desired network aspects (e.g., coverage, energy efficiency, spectral efficiency) based on variable inputs (e.g., traffic, environmental factors). Although there are reports on advancements in this area, it is unclear what the optimal mapping is between the proposed forecasting techniques and network parameters [18]. However, in dynamic 5G and beyond networks, forecast functions are central to the deployment of features like network slicing, where the network resources are dynamically optimized between slices to improve utilization while meeting the SLA service levels [37]. Hence, the challenge is to develop, deploy, and document a forecast function that meets the optimization objectives and constraints for every network slice with the available input streams.

(p29.1) c: MANUAL PROBLEM RESOLUTION: With increasing complexity and heterogeneity of 5G and beyond networks, the lack of automatic problem resolution is challenging. To facilitate efficient service problem resolution, automated tools can be useful in root cause analysis, trouble ticketing, and traffic forecasting.
## (s33) 1) METRICS:
(p33.0) Cybersecurity metrics contribute to building the 5G network reliability and trustworthiness [99], [107]- [109]. Any network, wired or wireless used to transfer information should provide some degree of safety. In case of 5G network catering healthcare-related traffic and data of great significance, this aspect becomes essential. Examples relevant for consideration in SLAs of 5G-enabled medical devices (some of which are also very important in 4G applications) include:
## (s44) 2) ONGOING ASSESSMENT AND MAINTENANCE:
(p44.0) As an extension to the stakeholders' roles identified in the SLA, cybersecurity aspects can be considered to identify those responsible for the ongoing threat assessment of the 5G service enabling a healthcare application, mitigation strategies, and implementing response actions when applicable. Given the wide range of possible applications, overseeing the overall system cybersecurity can be shared between the SLA stakeholders including the end-users (e.g., patients, hospitals, healthcare professionals), network service providers, and third parties tasked with network security assurance. Addressing cybersecurity in the SLA promotes transparency, facilitates communication between the involved stakeholders, including their internal entities (e.g., teams for network planning and network monitoring), establishes consensus practices to solidify the overall system security, and expands the scope of considerations that a customer can review when planning to procure the 5G service.

(p44.1) The SLA terms for security management and maintenance can include plans to mitigate known threats (e.g., mitigating DoS attacks by using redundant communication links for the offered service) and respond to future threats (e.g., upgrading network firewalls to limit the potential for data theft, considerations to push remote updates to the medical device software and firmware). Innovative methods can be considered, where applicable, for encryption key management (e.g., electrocardiography-based key generation), probabilistic framework for risk assessment [110], and using artificial intelligence for anomaly detection to prevent service disruption, eavesdropping, and signal jamming [111]. The impact of the SLA cybersecurity terms on the healthcare application should also be considered. Examples include the device resource constraints (e.g., energy consumption and computing power) to meet given network access requirements (e.g., secret key storage and signaling).
