# Survey and Comparison of Optimization-Based Aggregation Methods for the Determination of the Flexibility Potentials at Vertical System Interconnections

CorpusID: 234092235 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a09b90825f4a462ab10c80cfac764571ef6e61a9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a09b90825f4a462ab10c80cfac764571ef6e61a9)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s7) Determination of Initial Sampling Points
(p7.0) The solution of the optimization problem, defined by Equation (1), results in only one point on the edge of the FOR for a specific constellation of the sampling factors α and β. The sampling factors specified in Equation (15) guarantee the identification of the outermost edges of the FOR (see yellow area in Figure 3), which shall be sampled. In Figure 3, an example for the resulting FOR based on the connection of these initial sampling points is shown. Already at the deviations of the schematic representation, it becomes clear that a sampling based on these initial points is not sufficient and detailed enough. For example, the edge between the initial points (1,0) and (1,−1) is overvalued and the edge between (0,1) and (1,1) undervalued. While an undervalued edge represents only a loss of flexibility potentials for the higher-level system operator an overvalued edge corresponds to flexibility potentials that are not existent due to limitations of the FPU or technical constraints of the lower-level grid. The premise of the FOR is the representation of guaranteed flexibility potentials and therefore an exact sampling of these non-convexities is necessary. For an appropriate sampling of the FOR, suitable sampling strategies are introduced in the following. Figure 4 displays four sampling strategies, differing in their respective approach to determine the FOR. The sampling strategies can be classified as angle-based (a and b) and set-point-based approaches (c and d). Each sampling strategy (except of a) is based on the previous determination of the initial sampling points by Equations (1) and (15). The sampling strategies in Figure 4 are just schematic and illustrate the general idea of the approaches and the expected results of the FOR. In order to select an appropriate sampling strategy, the four sampling strategies presented in Section 3 are compared in Section 8 regarding the quality of the results and the computation time.
## (s11) Formulation of FOR Determination as Sequential Linear Constrained Quadratic Programming
(p11.0) Linear constrained linear programming is identified in Section 1.2 as one of the main optimization methods for the determination of the FOR. This approach achieves a fast solution by solving a linearized model of the power system under consideration of linear constraints. By approximating non-linear equations with a linear approach, inaccuracies result, which need to be taken into account, especially for a small apparent power flow within the system [38]. Considering these inaccuracies of linear constrained approaches the optimization problem is formulated as quadratically constrained linear program (see [38,39]). This optimization problem will be addressed sequentially to counteract remaining inaccuracies.
## (s21) Benchmark System and Comparison Scenario
(p21.0) The investigations in Sections 7-9 regarding the modifications of PSO-based FOR determination (see Section 5.3), sampling strategies (see Section 3) and optimization methods (see Sections 4 and 5) are based on a modified version of the Cigré MV benchmark grid. This grid represents a typical European distribution system and is often used as a test grid for studies and publications in the field of DER integration. The grid variant used in the following (see Figure A1 for details) is based on the original 14-bus version [45], which is reduced by the second branch and extended by an low voltage (LV) grid level. This increases the difficulty in determining the FOR using stochastic and metaheuristic methods, since several independent operational degrees of freedom at the LV grid level influence the state variables of a single MV bus. The line lengths are extended (see Figure A1) and the tap option of the transformer at the high voltage (HV) and MV system interconnection is neglected. Thereby, the utilization of a certain amount of flexibilities of decentralized FPU may lead to operating points, violating the voltage constraints and limiting the FOR. The Cigré grid is modified regarding a high integration of converter coupled, flexible wind turbines at the MV grid level and of photovoltaic (PV) units at the LV grid level (see Figure A1). The load has no voltage dependency and was reduced as well as relocated to the LV buses. The general bus information and the results of the initial power flow results for a slack voltage of V i=1 = 110 kV e j0 • at the high voltage side of the HV/MV transformer are summarized in Table A3.
## (s23) Comparison of FOR Sampling Strategies
(p23.0) A scattered polygonal area of 5000 FOR sampling points (y max = 1250, see Equation (21) serves as a basis for the comparison. The area A sp,5000 is the result of the NLP solved in GAMS. The quality of the results is evaluated under consideration of the area factor ∆A in Equation (66) and the sampling of non-convexities. Thereby, the convex hull of the FOR (see red dotted line in Figure 6a) is used for the determination of non-convexities. The nonconvexities occur in regions where the FOR is not limited by the constraints of the operational degrees of freedom but by violations of the voltage limits (cf. Figure 5b,c).

(p23.1) The sampling of the FOR becomes more detailed with an increasing number of sampling points. Thereby, the deviations of the individual FOR from A sp,5000 decreases and the area factor ∆A increases (see Figure 6b). The set-point sampling strategies approximate A sp,5000 already with 100 samples (see green course in Figure 6b). A more detailed sampling of the non-convexities leads to a reduction of the FOR while the other edges are simultaneously sampled in more detail, which results in an enlargement of the FOR. Thereby, a significant reduction of the deviation takes a high number of samples. The advantage of the iterative set-point sampling strategy is the consideration of the convergence criterium in Equation (19), which leads to appropriate results and a reduction of the computation time, independent from the investigated grid scenario. The convergence criterium (here: d max = 0.001) is reached after 128 samples, which results in a suitable FOR determination with an area factor of ∆A = 0.03 %. The angle-based approaches do not identify the non-convexities of the FOR. The area of the angle-based sampling strategy A a,500 for a number of 500 samples corresponds to the convex hull in Figure 6a. The identification of non-convexities occurs rarely and only with a high sampling resolution g max . This leads to a smaller area factor ∆A at the angle-based approach comparing the FOR areas for a number of 500 and 1000 samples. The iterative set-point-based sampling strategy of Figure 4 d with a d max equal to 0.001 is used in the following for the comparison of the optimization methods.
