# Plant Feed Additives as Natural Alternatives to the Use of Synthetic Antioxidant Vitamins in Livestock Animal Products Yield, Quality, and Oxidative Status: A Review

CorpusID: 235229529 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa4d974f3bd110a5d67f1a5b9094e5793195a7ca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fa4d974f3bd110a5d67f1a5b9094e5793195a7ca)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s4) Slaughter and Meat Traits
(p4.0) Only few studies exist on PFA effects on slaughter and meat traits in monogastrics. The dietary inclusion of vitamin E (VitE, 200 mg/kg) and oregano essential oil (OEO; 0.025% of the diet) for 28 days before slaughter decreased the pH measured 45 min post-mortem (by 3.6% and 4.0%, respectively) of the Longissimus thoracis et lumborum muscle in pigs exposed to a 5 h transport stress without reaching the pH (6.63) of the unsupplemented and unstressed animals. These differences in the meat pH were not observed at 24 h post-mortem [21]. Moreover, the stress during transportation increased drip loss 24 h post-mortem (by 49.6%) compared with the control group. However, the OEO, and not the VitE, was able to counteract the increase in drip loss related to the transportation. Other meat quality parameters, such as meat color, electrical conductivity, and intramuscular fat, were not affected by transport stress or dietary supplementation [21] ( Table 1).

(p4.1) The dietary addition of OEO and Quercetin (QU) during a 28 days trial in finishing pigs also affected some meat traits after 5 h of transportation [22]. In more detail, cold carcass weight and dressing out were higher in OEO than in unsupplemented (8.3% and 8.2%, respectively) and VitE (7.1% and 6.9%, respectively) fed animals [22]. The pH (45 min post-mortem) increased in OEO (by 5.6%) and QU (by 4.9%) groups only compared to the control group, whereas pH (24 h post-mortem) was greater only in QU (by 3.2%) fed pigs. The dietary inclusion of OEO and QU improved meat color (measured by Opto-star color tester) at 24 h post-mortem, in both PFA groups (by 16.9% and 10.8%, respectively), compared with the negative control. Drip loss (at 24 h post-mortem) was also reduced in OEO (by 35.3%) and QU (by 35.9%) compared with the control group. Furthermore, OEO and QU were as effective as VitE in ameliorating the antioxidant status in the pigs' muscles. The dietary supplementation with OEO and QU, compared with the basal diet, reduced reactive oxygen species (ROS; by 18.0% and 21.0%, respectively) and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS; by 19.4% and 20.4%, respectively; Table 1) [22]. Those results suggest that the dietary supplementation with OEO is more effective than VitE in mitigating the consequences of transport stress in finishing pigs.

(p4.2) No significant differences in lipid oxidation (malondialdehyde, MDA) of cooked and raw pig meat were observed when different antioxidant additives (40 mg/kg of rosemary extract (RE), 40 mg/kg of RE plus 2 mg/kg of gallic acid (REG), 40 mg/kg of RE plus 40 mg/kg of VitE (REE), compared with VitE alone (40 mg/kg), were included in a linseed oil-rich diet [23]. Only in raw meat, TBARS values were higher in REG (by 67.6%) than in the negative control group, and in RE (by 129.3%) and REG (by 190.2%) than in the VitE group. No significant effects were reported on some slaughter traits and on the fatty acid composition of the Longissimus thoracis muscle of pigs [17].

(p4.3) In another study, pigs were allocated into six different dietary treatments during the weaning (21 days post-weaning until 35 kg of live weight) and finishing (up to 105 kg of live weight) periods [24]. More specifically, the control group was fed a high energy diet without grass meal (GM) in both periods, while the other groups were fed as follow: (i) GM105: pigs fed low-energy diets with GM (100 g GM/kg-weaner, 200 g GM/kgfinisher) from weaning to slaughter; (ii) GM50: pigs fed low-energy diets with GM up to 50 kg of live weight and then a high energy diet from 50 kg to slaughter; (iii) GM80: pigs fed concentrate diet with GM up to 80 kg of live weight and a high nutrient dense finisher diet from 80 kg to slaughter; (iv) VitE: pigs fed concentrate diets with GM up to 80 kg of live weight and then a VitE enriched diet (200 mg/kg) with rapeseed oil (50 g/kg) from 80 kg to slaughter; (v) GTC (green tea catechins), pigs fed concentrate diets with GM up to 80 kg of live weight and then a GTC enriched diet (200 mg tea extracts/kg) with rapeseed oil (50 g/kg) from 80 kg to slaughter. Significant effects were reported on some slaughter traits. The kill-out (carcass weight/slaughter weight) was lower in GTC group than the control (by 1.0%), but higher compared to the GM105 group (by 1.1%), whereas no differences were found compared to the other groups. In addition, the GTC fed animals had higher kill-out (by 10.4%) in comparison with the GM105 ones. The pH 24 h post-mortem of GTC carcasses was lower (by 4.9%) than the GM50 one, whereas fat depth in the shoulder and ham was higher in GTC than GM80 group (by 38.0% and 58.3%, respectively). The chemical composition of the Longissimus dorsi (LD) muscle was unaffected by dietary treatments. In GTC-fed animals, a greater ash (by 14.8%) and a lower alpha-tocopherol (by 29.0%) content compared with those consuming GM50 and VitE, respectively, were found. Lipid oxidation of LD muscle was not affected at all under anaerobic conditions. However, lower TBARS values on LD muscle of GTC compared with GM105-fed animals (by 76.9%) were found in modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) after 2 days of storage, and compared with GM105 (by 41.2%) and GM50 (by 44.4%) after 4 days of storage. Nevertheless, neither GTC nor VitE was able to delay lipid oxidation of the LD muscle of pigs after 10 days of storage [24]. The meat fatty acid profile (saturated fatty acids, SFA; monounsaturated fatty acid, MUFA; polyunsaturated fatty acids, PUFA) of LD meat was not modified by GTC and VitE dietary inclusion [24]. Regarding the color, lightness was increased by the dietary inclusion of GTC (on average by 4.7%) but only compared with GM105 and VitE groups and after 2 days of aerobic packaging [24] (Table 1).

(p4.4) It should be highlighted here that great attention is devoted from consumers to the fatty acid composition of meat for its implications in human health. In fact, a reduction in SFA and an increase in PUFA consumption is of great interest; in particular, the n-3 series exerts beneficial effects in atherosclerosis and other diseases [25]. An increase of n-3 PUFA content in pork meat can be achieved by the dietary supplementation with marine lipid sources such as fish oil, which is rich in eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), or plant lipid sources such as linseed meal/oil, which are rich in α-linolenic acid [26,27]. Olive leaves (OL, 0.5% and 1% of the diet) when added in linseed oil-enriched diets affected the fatty acid profile of LD muscle in pigs, only compared with a sunflower oil-rich ration [28]. The OL supplementation in a linseed oil-enriched diet, compared with a sunflower oil-enriched diet, increased the proportion of SFA (on average by 6.8%), but that increase was not observed when compared with a linseed oil VitE-enriched ration. On the other hand, the proportions of MUFA were decreased in the LD muscle of OL compared with sunflower oil-fed pigs (from 3.2% to 2.4%). A decrease n-6:n-3 ratio (by an average value of 84.5%) was observed in the OL compared with sunflower oil-fed animals. Moreover, effects were observed on the fatty acid composition between OL and VitE groups. Due to the high content of linseed oil in n-3 fatty acid, the authors also investigated its impact on meat lipid peroxidation throughout 9 days of storage. Feeding OL led to a decrease in MDA content in LD muscle, both in comparison with sunflower and linseed oil-fed animals, whereas VitE supplementation was more effective than OL in delaying lipid oxidation. Conversely, protein oxidation was affected neither in raw nor cooked meat of pigs fed with linseed oil. Positive effects were also found in OL and VitE groups regarding sensory meat qualities [28] ( Table 1).

(p4.5) The dietary supplementation with antioxidant extract (synthetic VitE; natural VitE; flavonoid extract-enriched diet (Flav); and phenolic compound-enriched diet (Phen)) [23] did not affect the fatty acid composition but had an impact on lipid oxidation of pigs LD. More specifically, the TBARS values in Phen-and Flav-fed animals were higher than in the other groups and only similar to those consuming the basal diet [29] ( Table 1).

(p4.6) The chemical composition (moisture, protein, lipids, ash, and cholesterol) of rabbit's LD muscle did not differ when the standard diet (50 mg/kg of VitE) was supplemented with VitE (150 mg/kg), oregano extract (OE, 0.2% of the diet), RE (0.2% of the diet), or oregano and rosemary extract simultaneously (0.1% OE + 0.1% RE of the diet, ORE) [30]. Lower moisture (by 2.0%) and higher protein (by 5.8%) levels were observed in meat from animals consuming VitE compared with OE enriched diets, whereas ORE had only a higher moisture content than VitE fed animals (by 2.0%). Ash content was lower after OE and ORE compared with VitE supplementation (by 8.1%), whereas the rosemary addition lead to intermediate values. However, dietary supplementation with VitE, OE, and RE does not affect the chemical and mineral composition of rabbits' hind leg meat. Only TBARs values of rabbits' LD muscle were reduced by dietary supplements. The oxidative stability of raw meat was better preserved (lower TBARS) when VitE or OE, compared with rosemary extract alone or combined with oregano, were added in rabbits' rations. Dietary supplementation also affected rabbits' bone traits of the hind leg. Bones of the OE compared with VitE fed animals were heavier, probably because of a heavier femur weight [30] ( Table 1). The other groups presented intermediate values for bone weight. The resistance of the femur to fracture and the percentage of meat on the hind leg were the same in all groups [24]. The OEO (0.1% or 0.2% of the diet) compared with VitE (200 mg/kg) had similar antioxidant action in both raw and thermally treated muscle of rabbits [31]. In fact, the dietary supplementation with OEO lowered the MDA values compared with the basal (by 53%), but not to VitE (greater by 44.02%), enriched diet in the LD of rabbits [31] ( Table 1). Those results confirm that in rabbits' tissues, antioxidant activity was improved by the OEO dietary addition. Abbreviations: color components (L*, lightness; a*, green-red; b *, blue-yellow); GPx, glutathione peroxidase; MAP, modified atmosphere packaging; MDA, malondialdehyde; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids; NS, not significant; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TBARS, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances; SFA, saturated fatty acids; SOD, total superoxide-dismutase.
## (s7) Milk and Fatty Acids Profile
(p7.0) The VitE (7.238 IU) supplementation in the extruded fed cows had no effect on milk yield, milk fat, or protein percentage, but resulted in a moderate effect on milk fatty acids profile [43]. On the other hand, a slight increase in the percentages of C6:0, C18:0, C20:0, and MUFA, and a decrease in C16:0, C22:5n-3, and SFA in the milk fat of extruded fed cows were found when supplemented with plants extracts (191 g) rich in polyphenols, compared with VitE [43]. Thus, the simultaneous supplementation of extruded linseed-fed cows with plant extracts and VitE tented to reduce the impact of VitE alone on the milk's fatty acids profile, although it had no effect on dairy performance [42]. The milk's oxidative reducing power increased while both the protein and solids percentages reduced significantly in Yerba mate-fed cows (30 g/kg DM) compared with those fed with (375IU VitE/Kg DM) or without VitE [44] (Table 2).   [38,39] Cooking losses Ovine Grape pomace Milk Milk yield, composition ↓ ↑ [33] Abbreviations: color components (L*, lightness; a*, green-red; b *, blue-yellow; C* brightness; H*, hue); MDA, malondialdehyde; MUFA, monounsaturated fatty acids; NS, not significant; PFA, plant feed additives; PUFA, polyunsaturated fatty acids; SFA, saturated fatty acids; TBARs, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances.

(p7.1) The addition of either GP (5 or 10 g/100 g diet DM) or VitE (500 mg/100 g diet DM) in a total mixed ration diet, which had a vitamin premix, did not cause remarkable changes in the milk fatty acids profile of ewes. However, the proportions of SFA increased while those of MUFA decreased significantly in the milk of ewes fed with the extra VitE compared with those consuming the other dietary treatments [45].
