# Survey and Performance Analysis of Deep Learning Based Object Detection in Challenging Environments

CorpusID: 236950954 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50400b478dda3eebb966f71e8d8f90718a0e2854)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) YOLO
(p5.0) You Only Look Once (YOLO) [24] has been widely applied to develop real-time object detection systems in various domains [45][46][47]. Unlike region-based convolutional neural networks, YOLO only takes a single look and divides the image into S × S grid of cells. For each object that exists on the image, one grid cell is supposed to be responsible for having that object at its center. Figure 9 illustrates the main idea of YOLO. This section covers the techniques that have exploited YOLO to detect objects in a complex environment.
## (s6) RFB-Net
(p6.0) Currently, existing state-of-the-art detection algorithms use pre-trained backbones based on Feature Pyramid Network (FPN) to extract low-level and high-level features. Instead of relying on a pre-trained backbone, RFB-Net is inspired by the Receptive Fields (RFs) structure in the human visual system. RFB-Net considers the relationship between size and eccentricity of RFs to enhance features. Figure 10 illustrates the main building block of RFB-Net. Figure 10. The explained architecture of RFB [56]. RFB is inspired by Receptive Fields (RFs) in human visual system. RFB considers the relationship between the size and eccentricity of receptive fields into account to enhance the features. (a) RFB is identical to Inception, responsible for simulating the RFs of multiple sizes, and (b) part reproduces the relation between the RF size and eccentricity in the human visual system by using smaller kernels. Reprinted from [56].

(p6.1) Existing state-of-the-art generic object detection algorithms do not perform well on images captured at low light because most low-level features are merged with the background. To tackle this problem, Yuxuan et al. [57] fused contextual information in the backbone to avoid loss of low-level contextual features. Lower spatial feature maps with higher spatial feature maps are fused to preserve low-level features, maximizing pre-trained channel information.

(p6.2) The second problem with images captured in low light is that when these images are passed through conventional hierarchical convolutions, the resulting edges and features are not very rich with information. Therefore context fusion is incorporated in the backbone part of the network. The aim is to compensate for the information loss during the lower to higher-level convolution process. Low-level feature maps of the network are selected and interpolated to the identical shape of its successive feature maps. The resulting feature map is rich in contextual information, combining high-level features and low-level features. The authors merged RFB-Net [56] as a base architecture with the proposed modifications.
## (s16) Deep IOU with EM-Merger
(p16.0) In a challenging environment, generic object detectors predict multiple bounding boxes for a single object. To address this issue, Eran et al. [63] proposed a Soft-IOU layer for estimating Jackkard distance as a quality detector between the predicted bounding box and the ground truth. The presented approach aims to minimize overlap regions between multiple detections. Once the network predicts the bounding boxes for the input image, the predictions are treated as a clustering problem. The method applies a custom EM-Merger layer to group similar predictions to form a single detection.

(p16.1) Although conventional non-max suppression can remove overlapping detection, the authors argued that non-max suppression does not provide a satisfactory result in densely packed situations. This work empirically established that it is better to use the EM-Merger layer to combine extra detections. Their proposed approach achieved better results than the state-of-the-art object detection-based algorithm on SKU-110K benchmark dataset [63].
## (s18) Deep Saliency Networks
(p18.0) In 2019, Ghose et al. [65] proposed the combination of saliency maps with thermal images to detect pedestrians in poor lighting conditions. This work suggested that instead of relying on thermal and RGB images, the addition of saliency map information to thermal images facilitates the network to identify the objects. At first, the method augments the thermal images by replacing one duplicate channel with a corresponding saliency map. This combination helps illuminate salient parts of the image while preserving textural information. To extract saliency maps, the authors experimented with two state-of-the-art deep saliency networks (PiCA-Net [85] and R3Net [86]).

(p18.1) PiCA-Net generates an attention map for each pixel in an image and employs Long Short Term Memory (LSTM) [87] to scan the image and obtain global context. U-Net [88] is then applied to detect salient objects from the generated attention maps. R3Net [86] uses residual refinement block to learn residuals between the ground truth and saliency maps. To assess the performance of the proposed method, the authors exploited KAIST multispectral pedestrian dataset [59].
## (s19) ShuffleSeg
(p19.0) Following the concept of applying image segmentation [65], Rashed et al. [66] proposed an FCN-based architecture for moving object detection by concatenating spatial information with LiDAR sensors. The presented work employed three encoders to handle RGB, rgbFlow, and lidarFlow information separately. The whole network follows encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder extracts the latent features while the decoder up-samples them to generate the final image. To analyze the capabilities of the proposed approach, the authors used KITTI dataset [89] and a custom-made Dark-KITTI dataset to simulate a low-light environment. The proposed method achieved a 4.25% improvement on standard KITTI and 10.1% relative improvement on the Dark-KITTI dataset.
## (s24) ExDARK
(p24.0) One of the very few publicly available low-light datasets is the ExDARK (https: //github.com/cs-chan/Exclusively-Dark-Image-Dataset accessed on 22 June 2021) dataset. Patil et al. [97] published this dataset in 2020. The dataset contains 7363 real-life low-light pictures from different low-light environments, such as indoors and at night-time. There are a total of 12 classes in the dataset. All the images in the dataset were manually collected, and afterwards, different image enhancement techniques such as de-hazing and blurring are applied to them. The classes of this dataset are table, cat, people, motorbike, dog, cup, chair, bicycle, boat, bottle, bus, car, and cat. As highlighted in Table 2, this dataset only contains information for the boundaries of objects. Figure 15a exhibits a few samples from this dataset. We have exploited this dataset to evaluate the performance of current state-of-the-art object detection algorithms on this dataset.
## (s25) CURE-TSD
(p25.0) CURE-TSD [92] (https://github.com/olivesgatech/CURE-TSD accessed on 22 June 2021) is a large-scale publicly available dataset for the task of traffic sign detection. The dataset contains video sequences manually gathered by driving a car around different areas at different times of the day to capture diverse scenarios. Furthermore, the manually collected images are augmented to provide different kinds of occlusions such as rainy weather, decolorization, blur, darkening, dirty lens, exposure, codex error, snow, and haze. The authors of this dataset have suggested 34 videos for training, whereas 15 videos are allocated for testing purposes. Given five different levels of challenges to each type of occlusions, there is a total of 1.72 million frames. There are 14 types of traffic signs in this dataset labeled as speed limit, goods vehicles, no overtaking, no stopping, no parking, stop, bicycle, hump, no left, no right, priority to, no entry, yield, parking. Figure 15c illustrates few samples of this dataset. We have included this dataset in our benchmarking experiments.
## (s27) SKU-110K
(p27.0) SKU-100K (https://github.com/eg4000/SKU110K_CVPR19 accessed on 22 June 2021) is a new dataset collected by authors of the approach "Precise Detection in Densely Packed Scenes [63]" where they have explained that for challenging scenarios, overlapping detections can occur. The publishers of this dataset collected data from supermarkets and stores worldwide using cell cameras. The dataset only contains bounding box annotations for each image. The dataset contains 11,762 images. For training, the authors have suggested 8233 images, 588 images for validation, and 2941 images for testing. To ensure the same shop does not appear in more than one set, the authors recommended random selection of the sample images for training, validation, and testing. A few samples from the SKU-110K dataset are visible in Figure 15g.
## (s28) UNIRI-TID
(p28.0) UNIRI-TID [55] (https://ieee-dataport.org/open-access/thermal-image-dataset-persondetection-uniri-tid accessed on 22 June 2021) is a novel dataset published in [54] for the task of detecting human/non-human objects in difficult weather. The dataset contains thermal images collected manually using the thermal camera in different weather conditions. The dataset was created to provide a balanced ratio of images for each kind of difficult weather such as rainy, fog, clear, and hazy. Furthermore, the creators of this dataset applied custom augmentation such as grayscale to increase the number of images. The dataset has a total of 35,974 images with 2663 images for clear weather, 2313 for rainy weather, 1135 for foggy weather, 18,333 are grayscale images, and the remaining 6111 images contain a mix of all possible weather conditions. Figure 15f illustrates a few samples of this dataset. Table 2. Important statistics of challenging object detection datasets. OD denotes object detection, SOD represents salient object detection, and COD is for category specific object detection.    
## (s30) DFG Traffic Sign Dataset
(p30.0) DFG traffic sign dataset [82] (http://www.vicos.si/Downloads/DFGTSD accessed on 22 June 2021) is another dataset that provides ground truth for both traffic sign detection and recognition tasks. There is a total of seven thousand images collected with 200 different traffic signs. The complete dataset is divided into a training set with 5254 images and a test set with 1703 images. There is also an extended version of the dataset available with artificially augmented traffic signs. The extended version contains 15K traffic signs in natural images. Figure 15j exhibits a few examples of this dataset.
## (s32) Wider Face
(p32.0) Wider face dataset [72] (http://shuoyang1213.me/WIDERFACE/ accessed on 22 June 2021) is another dataset curated for detecting faces in complex scenarios. The dataset contains 32,203 images with high variance in scales, poses, and occlusions. Due to several tiny faces in the images, this dataset is one of the most challenging datasets for face detection. A few samples are visible in Figure 15h.
## (s33) UFDD
(p33.0) UFDD [60] is a new face detection dataset that captures real issues not present in other datasets. The dataset contains images captured in different weather scenarios with rain, snow, and haze weather. Motion blur and focus blur have been manually added to images to increase the total number of images in the datasets. There is a total of 6452 images with 10,897 annotations.
## (s34) See in the Dark
(p34.0) Another dataset that operates under low light is published by Chen et al. [53]. The dataset contains 5094 raw short-exposure images of both indoor and outdoor scenarios. Outdoor images are taken at night-time to add further complications. There are only bounding box annotations in the dataset. Therefore, it is an ideal dataset to employ object detection-based approaches. Figure 15l explains the dataset visually.  
## (s35) VOT-2018
(p35.0) VOT-2018 [95] is a publicly available dataset for tracking challenges. The dataset has 60 sequences captured with the help of a camera. The data captured in the dataset present various challenges such as occlusion, illumination change, motion change, size change, and camera motion. The dataset facilitates the researchers to perform object detection and instance segmentation as well. A few instances from the dataset are shown in Figure 15i.
## (s36) Kitti
(p36.0) KITTI [89] (http://www.cvlibs.net/datasets/kitti/index.php accessed on 22 June 2021) is one of the largest publicly available datasets. KITTI consists of several sub-datasets that perform various tasks such as image segmentation, 2D object detection, and 3D object detection. The data are collected with the help of LiDAR and various cameras mounted on vehicles and driving around the mid-size city of Karlsruhe, in rural areas, and on highways. More or less, each image has 20 annotated objects. There is a total of eight object classes. Figure 15d depicts few instances of this dataset.
## (s42) Ground truth area in predicted region
(p42.0) Total area of ground truth region = TP TP + FN (2) where TP is true positives and FN represents false negatives. Figure 16. The image explains the visual difference between precise and imprecise prediction in object detection. The green color represents the ground truth, and the red color depicts the predicted boundary. Considering the IOU threshold value equals 0.5, the left prediction is not precise because the IOU between the ground truth and the inferred bounding box is less than 0.5. The bounding box prediction on the right side is precise because it covers almost the complete ground truth area.
## (s44) Intersection Over Union
(p44.0) Intersection Over Union (IOU) [104] is one of the most important evaluation metrics that is regularly employed to determine the performance of object detection algorithms. It is the measure of how much the predicted region is overlapping with the actual ground truth region. IOU is defined as follows:
## (s48) Evaluations for Object Detection in a Challenging Environment
(p48.0) Object detection in a challenging environment is used to distinguish objects from the background and regress their boundaries. Tables 3 and 4 summarize the performance comparison of various methodologies that are explained in Section 3. Different approaches have reported results on specific evaluation metrics. Therefore, we have placed a "-" on the unused metric. By looking at Table 2, apart from [54,65], all the methods have reported results on separate datasets and utilized distinctive evaluation metrics. Therefore, the results summarized in these tables are not directly comparable to each other. Nonetheless, it is evident that there is still much room for improvement in all employed datasets. For instance, the method presented in [63] achieves the AP of 0.49 on SKU-110K dataset. Owing to the challenges present in the dataset (see Section 4.4), the method could only detect objects present in front of the camera or classify multiple objects with a single class. The approach introduced in [57] obtain the AP of 0.34 on the ExDark dataset, which contains dark indoor scenes make object detection even more challenging. Similarly, methods in [54,65] report mAPs of 0.35 and 0.68 on the KAIST dataset, which includes pair of thermal and RGB images taken at night-time or in harsh weather conditions (See Section 4.6). Table 3. Object detection performance analysis in challenging environments. IOU represents intersection over union threshold, whereas mAP and AP denote mean average precision and average precision, respectively. FPS represents frames per second calculated at inference time.
## (s49) Literature
(p49.0) Year that converts night-time images to day time prior to object detection reaches a mAP of 0.82, and the approach from Kamal et al. [67] accomplish AP of 0.94 on the CURE-TSD dataset, which is explained in Section 4.2. For the sake of readability, we have presented the results of [61,72] in a separate table (Table 4) because they reported results on their own introduced evaluation metrics. It is critical to emphasize that, apart from the five methods [62][63][64]66,68], all other approaches have not discussed their computational performances. Along with the quantitative analysis, we examined a few of the discussed approaches by paying attention to their failure cases. In Figure 17, we observed that from the bird's-eye view, the method proposed by [54] fails to detect people. Similarly, the work of [58] gets confused with non-living human-like objects in images as exhibited in Figure 18.

(p49.1) The system of Kamal et al. [67] is vulnerable to detect traffic signs that are not close to the camera. A visual illustration is visible in Figure 19. Another approach presented by Wang et al. [68] is unable to detect objects in motion blur images. On top of that, the work tends to produce false positives on the images where no object is present. Figure 20 exhibits an example of such cases.  [54]. Fails at detecting persons from the bird's-eye view. Reprinted from [54].   
## (s52) Conclusions
(p52.0) With the rapid computational advances, noticeable improvements have been observed by employing deep learning-based object detection algorithms in challenging environments. This paper comprehensively reviews the relevant approaches that have attempted to identify objects under challenging scenarios through deep neural networks and provides an empirical performance analysis of currently employed object detection algorithms. Moreover, the advantages and limitations of all explained techniques are provided. Furthermore, this work describes all the relevant datasets currently exploited to resolve the problem of object detection under challenging environments. This work discusses the well-known evaluation criteria and presents a performance analysis of explained methodologies and object detection algorithms by benchmarking recent object detection algorithms on challenging datasets of ExDark [97], CURE-TSD [92], and Reside [98]. In the end, we highlight the current open issues and present future direction that can enhance the research of object detection under challenging environments. 
