# Overview of Veno-Arterial Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (VA-ECMO) Support for the Management of Cardiogenic Shock

CorpusID: 235748324 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fa886970ec37080f698bcd65f1f26c5397e8bd6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0fa886970ec37080f698bcd65f1f26c5397e8bd6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) INTRODUCTION TO VA-ECMO
(p4.0) VA-ECMO is a temporary mechanical circulatory support system that enables complete and immediate cardiopulmonary support in the setting of cardiogenic shock and cardiac arrest (53). It consists of a centrifugal pump capable of propelling up to 8 L/min of blood and venous drainage and arterial return cannulas. A hollow fiber membrane oxygenator is spliced into the circuit that not only provides blood oxygenation but also carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) clearance via sweep gas flow. This latter function is a critical distinguishing feature from other MCS strategies, such as IABP and pVADs. VA-ECMO may also be placed surgically, especially in the post-cardiotomy setting, when oxygenated blood is returned directly into the ascending aorta (central cannulation technique). However, this review focuses primarily on the use of peripherally placed VA-ECMO as this is the most common type of support instituted by cardiologists in the setting of cardiac arrest or refractory CS.

(p4.1) The preferred approach for percutaneous VA-ECMO is femoral artery and vein cannulation. In an adult, the tip of an 18-28 Fr cannula draining deoxygenated venous blood is positioned in the mid right atrium (RA) or the superior vena cava-RA junction. After passing through the "membrane lung, " oxygenated blood is returned to the systemic circulation via a 15-19 Fr arterial cannula with its tip typically positioned in the iliac artery. Selecting cannulas with appropriate diameters is critical not only to reduce the risk of vascular injury but also to avoid significant negative inflow (preferably <50 mmHg) and high outflow pressure (<300 mmHg). To mitigate the risk of distal limb ischemia, an 8 Fr distal reperfusion cannula is routinely inserted into the superficial femoral artery in our center and is spliced into the arterial limb of the circuit (2, 54).

(p4.2) Peripheral VA-ECMO is increasingly utilized as a shortterm support strategy to manage patients presenting with cardiac arrest, severe biventricular HF and CS stages C-E, independent of etiology (48). It can be initiated safely in the cardiac catheterization laboratory by experienced interventional cardiologists with very short door to support time, even during ongoing cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) (55, 56). Depending on local institutional policies and the specific clinical scenario, it may also be instituted in the field (mobile ECMO programs), at bedside in the ICU, or in the operating room (57). Full VA-ECMO support not only allows time to perform diagnostic and therapeutic interventions while maintaining appropriate hemodynamics and gas exchange, but also provides time for potential organ recovery. Multiple clinical trials are currently ongoing with the aim to address the potential clinical benefits of early VA-ECMO initiation in various patient populations (4,25).
## (s6) COMMON INDICATIONS FOR VA-ECMO SUPPORT Cardiogenic Shock Complicating Acute Myocardial Infarction
(p6.0) Despite the widespread use of early revascularization strategies, 6-10% of patients with acute coronary syndrome will progress to develop CS, representing 60-80% of all CS cases (12,14,15,71). Myocardial ischemia and necrosis may continue following the index injury as the infarct extends circumferentially and toward the subepicardial regions. This prompts a further decline in cardiac function, increase in filling pressures, and excess oxygen consumption of the healthy residual myocardium. These, combined with reduced coronary perfusion pressure, initiate a vicious cycle until ∼50% of the functional LV mass is lost and CS ensues. Initiating VA-ECMO early in this setting reduces cardiac work, myocardial oxygen consumption and improves coronary blood flow. Therefore, VA-ECMO may limit infarct extension and allow time for the hibernating myocardium to recover (72).

(p6.1) The in-hospital mortality of post-MI patients with CS approaches 70-80% with traditional management, including vasoactive agents and IABP (12,16,17). Several non-randomized trials have demonstrated a clear benefit of VA-ECMO support in this population. As a result, its use has increased over 5fold between 2000 and 2010 in one report (73). In a singlecenter retrospective study of 98 patients with MI, early VA-ECMO cannulation was associated with an all-cause in-hospital mortality of 67.3%. Patients presenting with CS as well as cardiac arrest were included (74). In a single center, retrospective observational study, Pozzi et al. identified 56 post-MI patients who presented with evidence of CS and were supported with VA-ECMO for a mean of 8.7 days. Survival to hospital discharge reached 41.1 and 32.1% were alive after a mean follow-up of 38.0 ± 29.9 months (27). In another single center study from Korea, 20 patients with post-MI CS were initiated on VA-ECMO before proceeding with coronary revascularization. Although CPR was performed in 70% of the cohort before cannulation, the inhospital survival rate reached 50% (75). Multiple other, relatively small studies from around the world have reported similar rates of successful VA-ECMO decannulation and hospital discharge in the setting of post-MI CS (10, 23, 24, 30, 33, 34, 76-78) ( Table 2).

(p6.2) Ventricular septal rupture (VSR) is a rare but dreaded complication of acute STEMI. It typically develops within 1-5 days after the STEMI and confers ∼90% mortality (79) due to the rapid development CS. VA-ECMO may be an effective temporary hemodynamic support strategy to stabilize these patients. It can be instituted promptly and utilized as a bridge to definitive surgical management while allowing the friable myocardium surrounding the rupture site to mature (80,81). A case series of three individuals with post myocardial infarction CS and VSR placed on VA-ECMO showed excellent results with decannulation achieved in all patients and 100% survival (82).
## (s7) Cardiogenic Shock Caused by Acute Fulminant Myocarditis
(p7.0) Acute fulminant myocarditis is a relatively uncommon, but severe condition characterized by the sudden and profound inflammation of the myocardium. Although the exact pathogenesis often remains obscure, myocyte edema and necrosis develop in response to various infectious and noninfectious triggers. The ensuing hypotension may progress to refractory cardiogenic shock within 2 days to 2 weeks of the initial insult. Owing to the profound hemodynamic instability and biventricular failure, escalating doses of vasoactive medications and IABP are often insufficient to maintain sufficient organ perfusion. VA-ECMO is an invaluable asset in the management of these patients. It may limit ongoing myocardial damage by providing prompt and effective circulatory support until the inflammatory storm subsides. Although VA-ECMO may serve as a bridge to durable left ventricular assist device (LVAD) or heart transplantation, full cardiac recovery is common within seven to 10 days in patients with fulminant myocarditis. With the exception of giant cell myocarditis, disease recurrence is uncommon and medical management is effective. The available data also reflect a relatively positive prognosis in this population. In a multicenter, retrospective study of 57 patient with fulminant myocarditis, the mean duration of VA-ECMO support was 9.9 ± 19 days. 71.9% of patients were successfully discharged from the hospital and 5-years survival rate reached 65.2% (84). Another small, single-center study performed in Japan between 1991 and 2001 enrolled 14 patients with fulminant myocarditis requiring percutaneous VA-ECMO support for an average of 6.25 days. 71% of the cohort was weaned successfully and all of these had full cardiac recovery within 6-12 months (85). A study utilizing the ELSO database from 1995 through 2011 included 147 patients with a diagnosis of acute myocarditis who underwent ECMO support and showed a survival to hospital discharge rate of 61% (86). Many other groups have reported similarly high weaning and hospital discharge rates, establishing VA-ECMO as an extremely effective strategy for the management of patients with fulminant myocarditis associated with hemodynamic collapse (87-100) ( Table 2).
## (s8) Acute Pulmonary Embolism/Right Ventricular Failure
(p8.0) The rate of hospital admissions for acute pulmonary embolism (PE) continues to rise and it remains one of the leading causes of cardiovascular death in the US (101,102). Mortality reaches 80% in patients needing mechanical ventilation, 77% in those who require CPR within the first 24 h of admission and 37% in patients with syncope (103). Once the diagnosis is established, immediate risk stratification is critical. High-risk (massive) PE is characterized by: (I) Sustained systemic hypotension (systolic BP < 90 mmHg for at least 15 min or requiring inotropic support with no other identifiable underlying causes, such as arrhythmia, sepsis or hypovolemia); (II) Clinical evidence of shock; III) Pulselessness or profound bradycardia (heart rate <40 BPM) (104,105). Obstruction of 30-50% of the pulmonary vasculature in combination with vasoconstriction caused by thromboxane A 2 and serotonin released from activated platelets lead to an acute increase in pulmonary vascular resistance (106,107). As the unconditioned right ventricle (RV) is rarely able to generate a mean pulmonary artery (PA) pressure >40 mmHg in the acute setting, stroke volume decreases, the ventricle dilates and, ultimately, RV failure develops (108). The associated coronary hypoperfusion and myocardial ischemia lead to a further decline in RV function. These changes are critical as short-term mortality is driven primarily by the RV failure. In addition to the hemodynamic changes, respiratory failure is also common in patients with acute high-risk PE owing to the immediate development of ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch.

(p8.1) Most patients with massive PE and shock die within the first hour of presentation (109). Therefore, it is vital to initiate hemodynamic and respiratory support as early as possible after patient contact. Of the available MCS devices, peripheral VA-ECMO is the only system that can provide both and can be instituted within minutes in experienced centers. It allows rapid patient stabilization and therapeutic interventions to be performed, such as thrombolysis or thrombectomy. VA-ECMO removes blood from the RA in the veno-arterial configuration and, after oxygenation and CO 2 elimination, returns it to the arterial system bypassing the pulmonary circulation. Therefore, it reduces RV strain, stabilizes the PA pressure, increases systemic perfusion and normalizes gas exchange.
## (s9) VA-ECMO Use in the Setting of COVID-19-Associated Cardiogenic Shock
(p9.0) Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) was declared a pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. The causative virus, SARS-CoV-2 is highly infectious with a case fatality rate approaching 5.94% in the United States (119,120). Although relatively rare, the most severe complications include acute respiratory distress syndrome, acute coronary syndrome secondary to coronary thrombosis or microembolism and stressinduced cardiomyopathy (121)(122)(123)(124)(125)(126)(127). SARS-CoV-2 affects most, if not all organs in the human body and the heart is no exception. In a series of 138 patients admitted with COVID-19 infection, the rate of acute cardiac injury was 7.2% (128). Another, smaller study documented an even higher rate of 17% (129). In both series, cardiac injury was defined by elevation of cardiac biomarker levels >99th percentile or the presence of new abnormalities on electrocardiography or echocardiography.

(p9.1) Given the prior use of VA-ECMO in patients with H1N1associated myocarditis, several centers implemented VA-ECMO support for COVID-19-related CS. Given the extreme number of infections and limited resources, the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) has released guidelines on the contraindications for VA-ECMO use in this population (126,130). These include, but are not limited to: advanced age, presence of any terminal disease, severe central nervous system injury, significant underlying comorbidities (such a dementia, liver failure, metastatic malignancy), severe multiorgan failure, severe peripheral vascular disease, "do not resuscitate" status, clinical frailty scale category ≥3, contraindications to anticoagulation, inability to accept blood products and ongoing CPR. The decision to proceed with VA-ECMO initiation should be made on a case by case basis after discussion with family and using a multidisciplinary team approach (131).
## (s11) Other, Rare Indications for VA-ECMO Use in the Setting of Cardiogenic Shock
(p11.0) Other indications for VA-ECMO use include (I) Sepsis in the setting of underlying cardiomyopathy. Hemodynamic collapse may develop as the left ventricle is unable to augment cardiac output to counteract the severe vasodilation. Limited data has shown a benefit for VA-ECMO use in selected patients (6, 7, 156) ( Table 2); (II) Primary graft dysfunction following orthotopic heart transplantation. Several studies have shown significantly improved outcomes when VA-ECMO is initiated early in this setting (11,20,157,158) (Table 2); (III) Obstructive shock. Large intracardiac mass lesions, most commonly metastases, may limit blood flow across the cardiac valves. This may lead to severe hypotension and, ultimately, obstructive shock. Of the available MCS devices, VA-ECMO is the only option to support hemodynamics in this setting.
## (s14) Vascular Complications
(p14.0) The rate of access site complications is reported at around 20% and are mostly related to the urgent need to establish large-bore peripheral vascular accesses (5,171). The spectrum of complications includes posterior vascular wall perforation, vessel dissection, pseudoaneurysm development, and thrombosis/embolic events. Patients are prone to large hematoma formation (intramuscular, retroperitoneal) even in the setting of minor vascular injury owing to the systemic anticoagulation employed for the VA-ECMO circuit. Most of these complications may be managed conservatively, while others warrant urgent endovascular or open surgical repair. The presence of peripheral artery disease poses an increased risk. The routine use of ultrasound and/or fluoroscopic x-ray guidance is recommended while obtaining vascular access as it allows precise target vessel visualization reducing the risk of injury (56).
## (s15) North-South (Harlequin) Syndrome
(p15.0) North-South Syndrome is a complication unique to peripheral VA-ECMO (178). It may develop under circumstances when native cardiac function recovers pulsatility, yet pulmonary function remains inadequate. Unless the lungs are able to perform appropriate gas exchange, deoxygenated blood travels through the pulmonary circulation and into the LV. Given the native LV contractility, the deoxygenated blood is then ejected into the ascending aorta. As a result, a mixing cloud forms between the anterograde flowing deoxygenated blood and the fully oxygenated retrograde flow provided by the circuit (179) (Figure 1). The location of the mixing cloud depends on the native cardiac function and the level of competing ECMO flow. FIGURE 1 | Veno-arterial extracorporeal cardio-membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) circuit and North South syndrome. A venous cannula is inserted into the superior vena cava/right atrium to drain deoxygenated blood by the extracorporeal pump (1). After passing through the "membrane lung (2)," oxygenated blood is returned into the iliac artery through the arterial cannula. Proximal (venous) and distal (arterial) sensors monitor circuit flow (3). A continuous hemodialysis machine may be spliced into the venous limb of the circuit if needed to provide renal replacement therapy (4). In situations when the left ventricle recovers pulsatility yet the pulmonary gas exchange remains inadequate, deoxygenated blood may be ejected into the ascending aorta. As the fully oxygenated retrograde flow provided by the ECMO circuit collides with the deoxygenated blood in the aorta, a mixing cloud forms (*). Its location is determined by the native cardiac function and the level of competing ECMO support. If undetected, ischemia of the organs perfused by the anterograde flow may develop.

(p15.1) All organs perfused by the anterograde flow are at risk for ischemia, including the myocardium and the brain. Therefore, arterial oxygen saturation and blood gases should always be monitored using samples obtained from the right radial artery as the innominate artery is the first branch to receive deoxygenated blood from the proximal aortic arch. Further, near-infrared spectroscopy is a non-invasive tool developed recently to detect changes in regional tissue oxygenation and perfusion. Its routine use in patients supported with VA-ECMO may reduce the risk of hypoxic brain injury. If the differential cyanosis cannot be resolved by increasing the circuit flow, an additional cannula may be placed into the right internal jugular vein to achieve a hybrid configuration [veno-arterial-venous ECMO (VAV-ECMO)]. In this case oxygenated blood will be directed toward the right atrium by incorporating a "Y" connector into the arterial limb of the ECMO circuit. The oxygen rich blood will cross the pulmonary circulation thereby improving saturation in the proximal branches of the aorta (180).
## (s17) Infections
(p17.0) Infections are one of the most common complications in patients supported with VA-ECMO with a reported prevalence between 9 and 65% (185)(186)(187)(188). Access site infections are common and might be related, at least in part, to the challenges maintaining a sterile field during emergency cannulation while patient is critically ill, and possibly, receiving cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Other common infectious sources include the urinary tract in the setting of prolonged indwelling catheter use, the respiratory system and surgical wounds. Several investigators described a strong correlation between the duration of VA-ECMO support and the development of infections (188)(189)(190). In addition, recent evidence suggests that VA-ECMO use is associated with alterations in the innate and adaptive immune systems, further increasing the risk (191). Common pathogens include Staphylococcus Aureus (often methicillin resistant), nonlactose fermenting gram-negative bacilli and Candida (187,189). Infections, especially when severe, are associated with a significantly increased mortality, morbidity, delay in weaning and circuit failure (187,189,192,193). In addition to prevention, close monitoring for signs of infection is critical in all patients, as these may be subtle or masked by the effects of the ECMO circuit, hematologic, or metabolic changes.
## (s22) DISCUSSION
(p22.0) The stagnant in-hospital mortality rates for CS over the past several decades has highlighted the need to develop increasingly granular risk stratification models and to introduce novel MCS strategies to improve outcomes for these patients.

(p22.1) In response to these critical needs, multiple steps have been taken. SCAI has published a novel classification schema for CS (Stage A-E) in 2019 (35). It was proved to be reproducible and to predict in-hospital mortality as well as 30days patient survival with medical therapy alone and with a variety of MCS interventions (31, [202][203][204][205]. Additionally, VA-ECMO has evolved to the point where it can be initiated within minutes by experienced clinicians and provides full cardiorespiratory support for several days. Therefore, this strategy enables the transfer of the sickest patients to experienced centers where additional diagnostic/therapeutic procedures may be performed while stable cardiorespiratory status is maintained by the VA-ECMO device. However, in times of global health crisis, such as during the COVID-19 pandemic, rationing the use of highly resource intensive therapies, like VA-ECMO, has to be considered. Complex clinical and ethical decisions must be made following the recommendation of multi-disciplinary triage committees that work alongside clinicians to facilitate effective and equitable allocation of scarce resources (206).
