# Isometric Mid-Thigh Pull Performance in Rugby Players: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 230572535 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a824a45038c2eb61199a7923df357d6ff9be0e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a824a45038c2eb61199a7923df357d6ff9be0e82)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) The Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines were followed in performing this search and synthesis [22]. The protocol for this review was registered with PROSPERO (CRD42018089371). Searches were executed per the search strategy contained in Figure 1. The final date of search was 24 January 2018. All results returned were copied into a shared spreadsheet. The spreadsheet included a code to indicate which search was being done (database and terms used), the title of every article returned in that search, and a hyperlink to each article returned for further review. Once all results were input into the spreadsheet, the sheet was sorted by article title and duplicates removed. Three copies of the list of all articles were made to allow each investigator to independently screen all titles and abstracts for inclusion based on the criteria of interest ( Figure 1). Articles considered for exclusion were highlighted to indicate potential removal. Initial screening selections between EAM and GKB were compared for discrepancies and resolved by consensus. The full-text articles of all remaining studies were retrieved and screened one last time for inclusion by all researchers simultaneously. Bibliographies of review articles identified at any time during the search and of the full-text articles included for extraction were read to identify any further articles that may need to be included. The final flow of articles included can be seen in Figure 2. 
## (s3) Results
(p3.0) The search strategy identified 24 research publications: 20 peer-reviewed journal articles, three dissertations/theses, and one conference poster. Two pairs of journal articles reported data on the same sample [18,25], but because they reported different outcomes, all studies were kept and used for data extraction. Eleven studies were in professional-or Olympic-level rugby players (or a mix of professional and academy players from the same club), two studies in exclusively academy players, four in university players, four in amateur players, and three in adolescent players. Over half the studies (n = 13) were conducted on players in the United Kingdom; four studies were conducted in the United States of America, three in New Zealand, and one each in Australia, France, and Portugal (Table 3).   Twenty-three of the 24 studies reported peak force, but only eight reported rate of force development and only one reported impulse. One study [29] did not provide any of the force production variables of interest for data extraction; however, upon enquiry, the authors provided peak force and rate of force production means and standard deviations from that research. Additionally, upon enquiry, Dos'Santos et al. [30] (reference reflects amended manuscript) indicated that the results they originally reported needed to be amended, and they sent updated data for use in this review. Reported mean peak force from the IMTP can be seen in Figure 3. While most studies reported force in N, some reported it in kg. Note that for Figure 3, any peak force results reported in anything besides N were converted to make comparable data in the graph; for example, if the article reported peak force in kg, then it was multiplied by 9.81. Additionally, there was a lot of variance in reporting if peak force was inclusive of body weight or not, and it could not always be determined which was the case-ambiguous peak forces in the figure are reported without distinction of if they were gross or net force. Across studies, only 12 reports of force normalized for athletes' body mass were given, and they are summarized in Figure 4. Means and 95% confidence intervals of reported instantaneous force and mean rate of force development at standard time points was summarized in forest plots (Figures 5 and 6).

(p3.1) Rating scores from the QAT can be seen in Table 4. Major strengths of most studies included well-defined samples, high participation rates of players within a team, and citing a prior procedural use of the IMTP. None of the studies reported a sample size calculation, though in the context of research on a sports team this is usually not practical to do a priori, because potential sample size is low compared to clinical trials (for example, there may only be 25 players total on a team from which to draw a sample). However, only 52% of studies calculated effect size, which more studies should do to provide additional context to null hypothesis significance tests, which generally suffer from low sample size. None of the assessors were blinded to the exposure status of participants; again, this criteria may not be feasible to meet in studies of athletes, even using samples at different playing levels. Based on the QAT criteria, studies averaged a quality score of 73.2%, indicating moderate quality of reporting.          Rating scores from the QAT can be seen in Table 4. Major strengths of most studies included well-defined samples, high participation rates of players within a team, and citing a prior procedural use of the IMTP. None of the studies reported a sample size calculation, though in the context of research on a sports team this is usually not practical to do a priori, because potential sample size is   [29] Y Notes: a : these two papers come from the same study; b these two papers come from the same study; c : thesis or dissertation; d : conference abstract. NA = not applicable.
## (s5) Conclusions
(p5.0) In conclusion, the IMTP test is a popular tool for evaluating full-body force production and has significant strengths, making it a worthwhile tool for evaluating rugby players. However, standardization of methodology is a critical aspect of ensuring that data collected using this test are accurate, valid, and allow for comparison between studies. Across the literature, there is broad variation in the methods used and reported, making it difficult to make accurate conclusions about rugby players across different playing levels. Going forward, there is a great need for extensive standardization across studies to maximize the usefulness of this test and the data obtained from its use. Therefore, we strongly recommend that future coaches and researchers, within rugby or any other population, follow the procedures outlined by Comfort et al. [15] and, in order to improve reporting of IMTP methods, use the rating tool included in this paper as a guide for reporting study methods.
