# Applications of MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x ) in photocatalysis: a review

CorpusID: 234171137 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/41f191c3a037831d4677d9dabb1b014186516436](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/41f191c3a037831d4677d9dabb1b014186516436)

Fields: Chemistry, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Photocatalysis is an environment-friendly technology developed in the 20th century. When light is absorbed by some special semiconductors, namely ''photocatalysts'', electrons (e À ) originally in the valence band (VB) are excited to the conduction band (CB) and holes (h + ) are formed in the initial position. Free electrons with strong reducibility can reduce the valence state of some elements in compounds (such as carbon in CO 2 and nitrogen in N 2 ) when regular methods are not useful or cost too much. Thus far, photocatalysis has shown its huge application prospects in clean energy, environmental remediation, and many other fields; currently, researchers are heading towards new photocatalyst development and reaction mechanisms. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), CO 2 reduction reaction (CO 2 RR), and photocatalytic degradation reaction represent the three main aspects of photocatalysis.

(p0.1) Photocatalytic nanomaterials have an extensive number of potential applications. When their particle size is below a certain value, the Fermi level of the electronic energy levels morphs from continuous to discrete levels and the energy gap grows wider. These semiconductors are, therefore, more susceptible to photon excitation, which improves their photocatalytic activity. 1 Nanomaterials can be divided into four categories, according to the dimensions of their structural scale: (1) zero-dimensional materials, e.g., groups of nanostructure clusters; (2) onedimensional nanomaterials, e.g., fibrous nanotubes, nanowires, nanoribbons, or other related structures; (3) two-dimensional nanomaterials, e.g., layered nanomaterials, quantum wells, superlattices, and other structures; (4) three-dimensional nanomaterials, e.g., composite structures consisting of one or more zero-dimensional, one-dimensional, or two-dimensional nanomaterials. The first three are collectively known as low Vannami materials. In low Vannami materials, two-dimensional nanomaterials show significant changes in the surface, electron energy levels, state density, and other aspects compared with three-dimensional materials. This due to the fact that their thickness is greatly reduced compared to other two-dimensional materials; thus, these possess unique optical and electronic characteristics, which make them a hot topic in catalysis. 2,3 MXenes are two-dimensional nanomaterials and have a general material formula of M n+1 X n T x . In this formula, M represents nitrogen or carbon, X is generally a transition metal element, and T represents the functional groups. MXenes typically consist of transition metal carbides, nitrides, or carbides that are several Cite this: Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1570 a State Key Laboratory of Oil and Gas Reservoir Geology and Exploitation, School of atomic layers thick. It was first reported in 2011 4 that MXene materials have comparable conductivity towards transition metal carbides due to the presence of hydroxy groups or terminal oxygen species on their surfaces. The most important feature of this range of materials is that, unlike conventional battery materials, they provide more channels for ions to move through, thus dramatically increasing their speed.

(p0.2) Ti 3 C 2 T x was the first discovered MXene material and is also the most widely used MXene material in the field of photocatalysis. [5][6][7] It was first obtained by etching the Al layer of Ti 3 AlC 2 with hydrofluoric acid. In this paper, the application of Ti 3 C 2 T x as a photocatalyst and approaches to improve its catalytic performance are summarized.

(p0.3) 2 MXene 2.1 From MAX to MXene. MXenes are a type of twodimensional nanomaterials with covalent bonds formed between the early transition elements and nitrogen or carbon elements. This furnishes an intramolecular skeleton in which the layers are connected by hydrogen bonds. Since the first Mxene, Ti 3 C 2 T x , was discovered in 2011, more than 20 kinds of MXene materials including M 2 X, M 3 X 2 , and M 4 X 3 have been successively prepared. 7,8 Due to their unique structure and properties, MXenes have been widely favored for use in battery applications.

(p0.4) The preparation of MXenes can be divided into two approaches, namely, bottom-up and top-down. Presently, the top-down etching method is commonly employed. This is due to the MAX phase 9,10 (commonly, M means early transition metal elements such as Ti and Nb; A represents the Al or Si layer; X represents C or N elements) as M is mainly composed of metallic bonds between the atoms, which are connected to A. The chemical properties are largely dictated by A. By using certain concentrations of hydrofluoric acid or LiF/HCl 11 to etch the MAX phase of Ti 3 AlC 2 , ternary carbides within the titanium carbon layers become closer to each other. In this process, the Al layer is etched away gradually, resulting in a greater carbontitanium interlayer spacing in the Ti 3 C 2 T x product. In order to obtain Ti 3 AlC 2 with a graphene-like structure consisting of only a few or single layers, mechanical or chemical intercalation dissection is required. However, when chemical intercalation is used for stripping, some organic molecules may occupy the active sites exposed on the surface, which is unfavorable for photocatalytic reactions.

(p0.5) Etching is a slow process, as shown in Fig. 1(a). In this process, Al layers are gradually peeled off, while the Ti-C skeleton layers are not damaged because of their strong ionic bonding. 12 Free groups such as -OH and some H 2 O molecules enter into the framework of Ti-C and become inter-connected by hydrogen bonds, which expands the layer spacing of Ti 3 C 2 T x . This permits ions with a large radius to enter the layer spacing, 13 providing an operating space for the ion intercalation method to peel-off few layers of Ti 3 C 2 T x . The number of -OH groups and H 2 O molecules within the interlayer space accounts for the large electrical capacity of Ti 3 C 2 T x .

(p0.6) Ti 3 C 2 T x obtained by direct etching with hydrofluoric acid possesses a different morphology to Ti 3 C 2 T x obtained by etching with LiF/HCl. Furthermore, NMR spectroscopy revealed a greater number of -OH and -F functional groups on the surface of Ti 3 C 2 T x etched by hydrofluoric acid, while LiF/HCl etching furnished a material with predominantly -O functional groups.
