# The Recent Advancement in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Tracking Antenna: A Review

CorpusID: 237341074 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d50ed15c243c1730775eaaa9c7d3abc4bc303d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/28d50ed15c243c1730775eaaa9c7d3abc4bc303d)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s4) Communication Link
(p4.0) Communication link uses a radio-frequency (RF) medium to transmit and receive information packet to and from the UAV. There are various frequencies currently deployed. The deployed frequencies are based on UAV brand as well as functionality of the UAV. As seen in certain UAVs, frequencies, such as 433 MHz and 915 MHz, are used for telemetry, while 1.2 GHz and 2.4 GHz are used for video transmission [10,15]. The 433 MHz and 915 MHz are used because of their longer transmitting range capability. However, they suffer from low bandwidth and, hence, are not ideal to transmit video signals. The major disadvantage of using 1.2 GHz and 2.4 GHz is that they are simply designed for short range. 
## (s5) Communication Link
(p5.0) Communication link uses a radio-frequency (RF) medium to transmit and receive information packet to and from the UAV. There are various frequencies currently deployed. The deployed frequencies are based on UAV brand as well as functionality of the UAV. As seen in certain UAVs, frequencies, such as 433 MHz and 915 MHz, are used for telemetry, while 1.2 GHz and 2.4 GHz are used for video transmission [10,15]. The 433 MHz and 915 MHz are used because of their longer transmitting range capability. However, they suffer from low bandwidth and, hence, are not ideal to transmit video signals. The major disadvantage of using 1.2 GHz and 2.4 GHz is that they are simply designed for short range.
## (s9) Antenna Overview
(p9.0) Antennas deployed in a UAV tracking system must conform to either as a steering beam (SB) or an array antenna (AA) format. The SB configuration involves just only one antenna unit, such as parabolic dish. However, the AA entails the fusion of many micro antenna elements to functions as an antenna structure. In this section, we present a brief overview on the different antenna and antenna arrays suitable for deployment as a UAV antenna tracking system. Some of the examples of the notable antennas are classified, as shown in Figure 3 and discussed hereafter. is the simplest and most reliable algorithm, it suffers from a lack of stringent pointing accuracy and, hence, cannot be used to control large antennas. This limitation can be overcome by the use of a LQG algorithm. LQG is equipped with a shorter response time and turbulence rejection attributes. The LQG can be further enhanced by the use of H∞. The H∞ algorithm is noted for acceleration limits because of the existing motor drives and gear system. This limitation can be addressed by the use of command pre-processor in software that modifies antenna commands. Reference [38] implemented an antenna control system using a step algorithm method around H∞ control algorithm. Results indicate that the algorithm was able to overcome significant torque disturbances from wind pressures and gusts on the antenna structures, as well as bearing and aerodynamic frictions. Reference [39] presented an overview on the development and application of antenna control systems, while [40] presented performance analysis of PID and LQG control algorithms for antenna position control system.
## (s11) Wire Antenna
(p11.0) Wire antenna is a radio antenna with a long wire suspended above the ground. Although ground terminal is very crucial in antenna transmission range, in this specific design, the ground plays a dominant role. The length of the wire has no effect on the wavelength of the radio used, but for convenience instead [41,42]. The wire can be straight or strung forth and back between walls and trees. This type of antenna is not as effective as those antennas whose length are adjustable to resonate to the wavelength intended.
## (s13) Wire Antenna
(p13.0) Wire antenna is a radio antenna with a long wire suspended above the ground. Although ground terminal is very crucial in antenna transmission range, in this specific design, the ground plays a dominant role. The length of the wire has no effect on the wavelength of the radio used, but for convenience instead [41,42]. The wire can be straight or strung forth and back between walls and trees. This type of antenna is not as effective as those antennas whose length are adjustable to resonate to the wavelength intended.
## (s15) Left Handed Dipole Antenna
(p15.0) The left-handed dipole antenna is a new kind of antenna. Its name derives from its left-handed mode of transmission [45,46]. The design of this antenna is fundamentally built on shunt inductors and capacitors. The capacitor is placed by the line that prompts current of different amplitude on either side. This current does not totally cross out in the far-field, thus, it transmits.
## (s16) Folded Dipole Antenna
(p16.0) The folded dipole antenna is one of the simplest and cheapest antenna extensively deployed in wireless transmission. It is compact and can be easily manufactured and installed. The design is based on the wires folded but with open ends. The folded dipole antennas are wide loop in nature. The radiation pattern of a folded dipole antenna is the same as that of a dipole antenna [47][48][49]. These antennas attributes help the antenna to gain traction, as dipole antennas are known to have high directivity and high gain.
## (s17) Travelling Antenna
(p17.0) The primary radiating mechanism of the travelling antenna is based on a travelling wave in the form of a guiding structure. A travelling antenna is different from others because the radio waves are generated by the radio frequency current in a single direction [50,51]. They are non-resonant and, as such, their bandwidth is wider than their resonant antennas counterpart [52]. Some of the examples of a travelling antenna are explained below.
## (s19) Left Handed Dipole Antenna
(p19.0) The left-handed dipole antenna is a new kind of antenna. Its name derives from its left-handed mode of transmission [45,46]. The design of this antenna is fundamentally built on shunt inductors and capacitors. The capacitor is placed by the line that prompts current of different amplitude on either side. This current does not totally cross out in the far-field, thus, it transmits.
## (s20) Folded Dipole Antenna
(p20.0) The folded dipole antenna is one of the simplest and cheapest antenna extensively deployed in wireless transmission. It is compact and can be easily manufactured and installed. The design is based on the wires folded but with open ends. The folded dipole antennas are wide loop in nature. The radiation pattern of a folded dipole antenna is the same as that of a dipole antenna [47][48][49]. These antennas attributes help the antenna to gain traction, as dipole antennas are known to have high directivity and high gain.
## (s21) Travelling Antenna
(p21.0) The primary radiating mechanism of the travelling antenna is based on a travelling wave in the form of a guiding structure. A travelling antenna is different from others because the radio waves are generated by the radio frequency current in a single direction [50,51]. They are non-resonant and, as such, their bandwidth is wider than their resonant antennas counterpart [52]. Some of the examples of a travelling antenna are explained below.
## (s23) Helical Antenna
(p23.0) A helical antenna has one or more conducting wires wound in such a way that the shape looks like a helix and hence the name. Helical antenna has been extensively used in practice for many years because of the practical emission and how easy it is to use [56,57]. 
## (s28) Reflector Antenna
(p28.0) The reflector antenna simply modifies the radiation pattern of an antenna by redirecting the received electromagnetic energy in the range of the electromagnetic spectrum wavelength, thereby increasing the gain in a particular direction. The antenna arrangement prohibits radiation in backwards and sideways direction and, as such, they are more directional [61,62]. A prototype of reconfigurable corner reflector using PIN-diode-switched frequency selective surfaces (FSS) has been developed [63]. A reflector aperture angle of 45° is prototyped for application at 4 GHz, and its pattern characteristics are altered by on-off state biasing of the PIN diodes. Readers interested in the theory of corner reflectors with tilted dipole can consult [64].

(p28.1) The parabolic reflector antenna has two types. The first is the right cylinder while the second one is paraboloid. The cylinder type uses linear array, linear dipole, and slotted The antenna arrangement prohibits radiation in backwards and sideways direction and, as such, they are more directional [61,62]. A prototype of reconfigurable corner reflector using PIN-diode-switched frequency selective surfaces (FSS) has been developed [63]. A reflector aperture angle of 45 • is prototyped for application at 4 GHz, and its pattern characteristics are altered by on-off state biasing of the PIN diodes. Readers interested in the theory of corner reflectors with tilted dipole can consult [64]. The parabolic reflector antenna has two types. The first is the right cylinder while the second one is paraboloid. The cylinder type uses linear array, linear dipole, and slotted wavelength to feed. The paraboloid, on the other hand, uses pyramidal or paraboloid conical to feed. The radiation pattern of this antenna is strongly determined by the radiation pattern of the feeder used as well as the reflector measurements and material [65,66]. An evaluation study on the desirability of defocusing a large-sized multi-beam hybrid parabolic antenna (MBHPA) has been performed [67]. Defocusing means displacement of the AA from the focus, in the interests of rarefaction of the AA. Results indicate that the idea of defocusing, which is tempting at first glance, does not benefit in the gain factor of the beams in comparison with un-displaced AA with the same spacing of the array elements.
## (s30) Bowtie Antenna
(p30.0) The demand for low-cost, effective, and less-weight antennas in the communication network and multi-band application has brought about the design of this antenna. Recently, communication network requires light, easy working, and moveable antennas. Due to its structure, it is known as a butterfly antenna. There are different types of bowtie antenna: the bowtie slot antenna, the double-sided triangular bowtie antenna, the bowtie antenna microstrip fed, the slotted bowtie patch antenna, and the CPW fed curved bow tie slot antenna. The bow tie antenna has two mirrors placed on a rectangular patch. The output of this design is limited by distance and the alignment of the mirrors. This type of antennas are widely used in mobile communication networks and wireless systems [68,69]. Figure 8 demonstrates the bowtie antenna. 
## (s31) Log-Periodic Dipole Array Antenna
(p31.0) This antenna is always very handy in cases where there are wideband applications. It operates in a VHF range from 30 MHz to 300 MHz. The bandwidth of the antenna is usually greater than 10:1, and they are referred to as independent antenna. The features of this antenna, such as gain, input impedance, and radiation, changes periodically with respect to the logarithm of the frequency space. This is referred to as a log-periodic array [70,71]. Figure 9 demonstrates the structure of the log-periodic dipole array antenna. to the logarithm of the frequency space. This is referred to as a log-periodic array [70,71]. Figure 9 demonstrates the structure of the log-periodic dipole array antenna. 
## (s32) Log-Periodic Dipole Array Antenna
(p32.0) This antenna is always very handy in cases where there are wideband applications. It operates in a VHF range from 30 MHz to 300 MHz. The bandwidth of the antenna is usually greater than 10:1, and they are referred to as independent antenna. The features of this antenna, such as gain, input impedance, and radiation, changes periodically with respect to the logarithm of the frequency space. This is referred to as a log-periodic array [70,71]. Figure 9 demonstrates the structure of the log-periodic dipole array antenna. 
## (s34) Aperture Antenna
(p34.0) Aperture antennas are one of the most popular type of antennas; they emit electromagnetic waves through an opening also referred to as an aperture. The transmitted and received electromagnetic waves are obtained from waveguide into space. The directivity of this type of antenna is low and, as such, they are preferred design in frequencies, such as microwave frequency and UHF. Some examples are:

(p34.1) The appetite for an inverted F antenna surged with an increased demand for lightweight and simple yet effective antennas in many commercial modern communication networks. The Bluetooth technology uses the inverted-F antenna. The pattern of radiation of the inverted-F antenna is omnidirectional in nature with a bandwidth of 250 MHz. Another good use of this type of antenna is its effectiveness for indoor communication [73][74][75]. The inverted-F arrays can be easily fabricated using microstrip materials in which conductors usually copper can be etched out using a suitable machine. Since the antenna is domiciled in the omnidirectional domain, it may not be suitable for highly directional UAV tracking antennas with long-range communication.
## (s35) Vivaldi Antenna
(p35.0) The low cost, simplicity, and high band operation of Vivaldi antenna has brought about its wide application and usage in many devices [76]. These antennas are used in radar application and are also used in microwave imaging [77]. The antenna has received attention as a suitable candidate for emerging technologies, such as 5G [78], wideband communication using image theory technique [79] and high-gain antenna using optical lens [80]. Figure 10 illustrate a design example of Vivaldi antenna [81].
## (s36) Vivaldi Antenna
(p36.0) The low cost, simplicity, and high band operation of Vivaldi antenna has brought about its wide application and usage in many devices [76]. These antennas are used in radar application and are also used in microwave imaging [77]. The antenna has received attention as a suitable candidate for emerging technologies, such as 5G [78], wideband communication using image theory technique [79] and high-gain antenna using optical lens [80]. Figure 10 illustrate a design example of Vivaldi antenna [81]. 
## (s37) Array Antenna Model
(p37.0) Imagine an arbitrary array antenna consisting of several radiating elements M separated by a distance d. Arrays are primarily used as directors to align the incident and reflected signals to a desired beamwidth. Thus, the array factor (AF) of the incoming signal is modelled as [82,83]:

(p37.1) where array phase function Φ = + and the propagation constant = 2 ⁄ , denotes the wavelength, is the phase angle between the elements, is the desired angle of arrival (AoA) of the incoming signal. The propagation constant is a measure of changes in a sinusoidal electromagnetic wave in terms of amplitude and phase, while propagating through a medium. denotes a control parameter which steers the antenna between the broad side and the end-fire. In other words, it is responsible for cancelling out the interference, resulting from the various antenna elements. When = 0 , then = 90 . This configuration is known as the end-fire condition and the received signal is maximum. On the contrary, when = 180 , then = 180 , then broadside occurs, signifying the worst received signal strength. Increasing the array elements results in high directivity, high gain, and low beam width, as shown in Table 1. Thus, having a higher number 
## (s38) Array Antenna Model
(p38.0) Imagine an arbitrary array antenna consisting of several radiating elements M separated by a distance d. Arrays are primarily used as directors to align the incident and reflected signals to a desired beamwidth. Thus, the array factor (AF) of the incoming signal is modelled as [82,83]: AF(θ) = 1 + e jΦ + e 2jΦ + · · · + e (M−1)jΦ (1) where array phase function (Φ) = kdsin(θ) + β and the propagation constant (k) = 2π/λ, λ denotes the wavelength, β is the phase angle between the elements, θ is the desired angle of arrival (AoA) of the incoming signal. The propagation constant is a measure of changes in a sinusoidal electromagnetic wave in terms of amplitude and phase, while propagating through a medium. β denotes a control parameter which steers the antenna between the broad side and the end-fire. In other words, it is responsible for cancelling out the interference, resulting from the various antenna elements. When β = 0 • , then θ = 90 • . This configuration is known as the end-fire condition and the received signal is maximum. On the contrary, when β = 180 • , then θ = 180 • , then broadside occurs, signifying the worst received signal strength. Increasing the array elements results in high directivity, high gain, and low beam width, as shown in Table 1. Thus, having a higher number of array elements, as observed in Yagi, log-periodic, helical antenna results in high gain. The close format of AF is stated as [84]:

(p38.1) Hence, the directivity of such an array is equal to M. It is plausible to derive the beam width of an arbitrary M isotropic elements spaced by a wavelength using this formula [83]: 
## (s40) UAV Tracking Positioning Parameters
(p40.0) The essence of the UAV tracking antenna is to align the signals from the GCS according to the orientation of UAV yaw, pitch, and roll during flight mission. Taking into consideration the position of the celestial bodies. These parameters are important in the absence of or loss of GPS signal. The three notable UAV tracking parameters are: (i) azimuth angle; (ii) elevation angle; and (iii) range, which are all briefly discussed.

(p40.1) The azimuth is the angle between North, measured clockwise referenced by any of the celestial bodies in most cases, and the sun. In the absence of GPS, the azimuth can be obtained using the compass bearing system. The azimuth is deployed to measure the angle ranging from 0-360 • [16,85]. Figure 11 illustrates the azimuth angle. The azimuth generally depicts the antenna directivity and, by extension, the antenna gain. An antenna with a uniform azimuth exhibits omnidirectional property while an antenna with partial azimuth is considered as highly directional. The elevation angle herein refers to the vertical angle distance between the UAV tracking antenna local horizon or, also called, the observer's local plane and the UAV. The angle of elevation can be calculated by knowing the UAV altitude and the horizontal distance. The range is simply the distance along a great circle between the UAV and the tracking system. Great circle is the shortest distance along the earth equator. In a clear line of sight scenario, the range can be obtained by using a Friis transmission model, ignoring the earth bulge factor [83]. Alternatively, spherical law of cosines equations can be used [31]. The elevation angle herein refers to the vertical angle distance between the UAV tracking antenna local horizon or, also called, the observer's local plane and the UAV. The angle of elevation can be calculated by knowing the UAV altitude and the horizontal distance. The range is simply the distance along a great circle between the UAV and the tracking system. Great circle is the shortest distance along the earth equator. In a clear line of sight scenario, the range can be obtained by using a Friis transmission model, ignoring the earth bulge factor [83]. Alternatively, spherical law of cosines equations can be used [31].
## (s43) Ground-to-Air Tracking Antenna
(p43.0) Ground-to-air antenna tracking systems relies on the determination, measurement, and comparison of signal strength gradient from the GCS to the airborne platform. This scheme motivates the search for the optimal elevation and azimuth angle between the two antennas involved [86,87]. The ground-to-air tracking antenna system is a very simple and efficient approach of tracking a target without knowledge of the air vehicle attitudes. The use of a circularly polarized microstrip antenna array to increase the bandwidth in S-band for UAV ground to air transmission has been explored [88]. The simulation results of the array element showed that its relative bandwidth is 21.7% with gain greater than 5 dBi and VSWR ≤ 1.25. Similarly, reference [31] built an antenna tracker using GPS and a 32-bit microcontroller, which is of two degrees of freedom. The system took into consideration the altitude of the vehicle and was able to provide an azimuth angle of 360 degrees and a pitch angle of 90 degrees. This approach will be ideal for a UAV case, considering the fact that airborne platform is constrained by weight, size and power (swap).
## (s44) Air-to-Ground Tracking Antenna
(p44.0) This technique is not as popular as the ground-to-air type of tracking systems. In this design, the tracking is performed by the airborne platform. For the case of the UAV, the UAV uses a directional antenna to send the signal while an omnidirectional antenna is solely for the tracking antenna. The directional antenna on the UAV is desirable because it reduces the burden of detecting the angle of arrival (AoA) of the arrived signal. Despite its challenges, some authors have deployed this scheme [89,90]. Their result shows that the tracking antenna continuously keeps track of and aligns with the base station and GCS, respectively, with the minimum error possible. However, this design is limited to ground based vehicles provided there is an available LoS between the sender and receiver. Reference [91] presented a brief overview of waveforms for UAV air-to-ground communication systems. The researchers broadly divided the modulation schemes into single carrier and multicarrier. The single carrier modulation are: QPSK, APSK, OFDM, MQAM, GMSK, MSK, SOQPSK, SC-FDE. However, the multicarrier is the OFDM. Additionally, [92] conducted air-to-ground UAV tracking although using a MIMO beam-forming technique which showed promising results.
## (s51) Multiple Input Multiple Output Technology
(p51.0) The multiple input multiple output (MIMO) technology is a promising technology capable of addressing the some of the conventional UAV tracking limitations in terms of design complexity, cost, energy efficiency, and deployment speed. Figure 13 shows the MIMO classification. In this section, we present an overview of MIMO classification and proposed a sectorized beam-forming technique as a scheme that can be adapted for UAV tracking antenna technology. The deployment of MIMO technology will only be maximized in a fading channel where there are channel multi-paths. [130] raherz massive MIMO system, where a linear motion is adopted to derive angles of the incident signals and then the complex gains are estimated by pilots.
## (s55) Transmit Diversity
(p55.0) Transmit diversity is the reverse of the receive diversity. In transmit diversity, the transmitter is equipped with multiple antennas at the transmitter to introduce diversity by transmitting redundant versions of the same signal. The Alamouti technique is a popular algorithm among the transmit diversity techniques [138]. There are various versions of transmit diversity, such as space-time block coding (STBC) and space-frequency block coding (SFBC). With STBC [139,140], signals are mapped as space and time to exploit the diversity present in the time domain. SFBC is operationally different from STBC because 
## (s56) Transmit Diversity
(p56.0) Transmit diversity is the reverse of the receive diversity. In transmit diversity, the transmitter is equipped with multiple antennas at the transmitter to introduce diversity by transmitting redundant versions of the same signal. The Alamouti technique is a popular algorithm among the transmit diversity techniques [138]. There are various versions of transmit diversity, such as space-time block coding (STBC) and space-frequency block coding (SFBC). With STBC [139,140], signals are mapped as space and time to exploit the diversity present in the time domain. SFBC is operationally different from STBC because it exploits the antenna spacing and frequency domains encoding in the antenna [141,142]. Just like in receive diversity, transmit diversity does not increase UAV tracking antenna data rates. However, the scheme can enhance link reliability which is the primary goal of the UAV tracking antenna system. Both STBC and SFBC signals can be received using appropriate finite filter design.
## (s57) Spatial Multiplexing
(p57.0) Spatial multiplexing involves the transmission of independent parallel information streams to boast the data rate and enhance spectrum efficiency. Spatial multiplexing allows the system designer to use a different modulation code to modulate information bits and send them to various antenna ports [143,144]. The two most notable spatial multiplexing receiver algorithms are zero forcing (ZF) [145,146] and minimum meansquare error (MMSE) [147,148]. A schematic diagram of spatial multiplexing is depicted in Figure 15. Spatial multiplexing in MIMO are of two variants namely, single-user MIMO (SU-MIMO) and multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO). In SU-MIMO design configuration, all the elements of the signal vector ⃗ belong to a single user in this case, and perhaps for one UAV receiver array antenna. While, in MU-MIMO, the data streams of different users are multiplexed on different antenna and transmitted over the wireless channel coefficient ℎ. In the context of UAV tracking antenna, this might involve transmitting the tracking parameters and information signals simultaneously.
## (s59) MIMO Beam Forming
(p59.0) MIMO beam-forming is an antenna technology in which multiple antenna arrays are deployed at the transmitter side to align the overall antenna radiation to the desired angle. The various antenna arrays produce the different signal beams which are responsible for the overall antenna gain (azimuth-wise) in the direction of the target herein the airborne platform. As could be in Figure 16, a transmit beam forming technique is the reverse of receive diversity. The depicted diagram could be construed as MISO because of the many input and single output. The signal at the receiver which is the airborne platform is stated as in multi-paths, x is the information symbol that the UAV GCS intends to transmits to the airborne platform, and n is the noise vector normally denoted as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN). The sum of independent links present at the receiver is stated y = y 1 + y 2 + y 3 + · · · + y L (5) {y 1 , · · · y L } represent the various received independent complex wireless signals. Instead of making use of selection combining (SC), a maximum ratio-combining (MRC) algorithm will be used as it is more appropriate herein. By using the MRC algorithm, the aggregate sum of the links is stated as:

(p59.1) ω * 1 connotes the beam weight complex transpose conjugate. The beam weight is synonymous to θ which is the desired angle of arrival (AoA) of the incoming signal of Equation (1). The AoA is the mechanical version of the beam weight complex which is the electronic version of AoA. Equation (6) leads to the derivation of the beam-forming stated as ω H y. Note that ω H is the Hermittian weight of the beamforming. ω H is also known as the beamformer. The beamformer output is mathematically derived as:

(p59.2) From Equation (7), it could be seen that beamformer output consists of signal component ω H hx and the noise component ω H n. The second line of from Equation (7) simply expanded the first line of the equation. By applying some advanced signal-processing techniques, in the absence of interference, the noise component reduces to:

(p59.3) is the norm of the vector and σ 2 is the variance. It could be seen that the problem of beam-forming reduces to that of obtaining a close-form expression of the weight vector stated as ω = Ch
## (s64) i.
(p64.0) Energy Efficiency: Generally, UAVs suffer from the problem of reduced size, weight, and power (SWaP). Energy efficiency is crucial to UAV antenna tracking, especially when mechanical beam steering tracking is involved [164,165]. Energy efficiency will also become critical if MU-MIMO is adopted as the core of UAV antenna tracking. Hence, more system modelling and energy efficiency is needed. ii.

(p64.1) Wireless Channel Model: There is a need for adequate UAV wireless channel modelling, considering the fact that UAV is generally regarded as a LoS communication system. This assumption might not be feasible considering that there are lots UAV hobbist in crowded urban areas [166,167]. Secondly, the transmission range of UAVs varies according to the equipped transceiver pairs. It is plausible that the dynamic channel model will be develop to cater for this variation. iii.

(p64.2) Performance of UAV Tracking Antenna in Poor Channel: Studies on the performance of UAV tracking antenna in poor channels are yet to be fully comprehended [168]. Most significantly, this study is imperative to avoid crashing the UAVs when the UAV is in critical mission. Therefore, a model must be developed to analyze this performance, in the absence of first person view (FPV) module. iv.
