# Working memory, attention and their relationship: A theoretical overview Effrosyni Angelopoulou Athanasios Drigas

CorpusID: 236588151 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5765045d4f1d99c091e5627b0faf247de4f56d74](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5765045d4f1d99c091e5627b0faf247de4f56d74)

Fields: Psychology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) "How many times have you been trying to keep in mind your goal to find some milk while being in a grocery store or to hold specific directions in mind as you plan a driving route?" Without the concept of working memory, none of these actions could have been done. In particular, working memory refers to our ability to maintain and manipulate information, necessary for an action, for short periods of time in the order of seconds. It also helps us to bridge temporal gaps between stimuli and actions with internal representations of the information (Bhandari & Badre, 2016).
## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) The present article is based on literature review, which is an effective method to summarize and present an overview of knowledge derived from a body of literature (Aromataris & Pearson, 2014). We conducted this literature review in order to present general knowledge as well as the history of the development of knowledge about the concepts of working memory and attention and identify their relationship from existing studies (Aromataris et al., 2014). We used the following web databases to find the articles: Google Scholar, Springer, PubMed. Our research was carried out using keywords such as working memory, attention, relationship between working memory and attention. We made an attempt to use recent articles published in scientific journals. These articles were evaluated and compared thoroughly. Both the authors of the present article contributed to the conduct of this literature review.
## (s2) Working Memory
(p2.0) Working memory is a brain system responsible for the temporary storage and manipulation of the information necessary for language comprehension, learning, and reasoning, which are complex cognitive tasks (Baddeley, 1992(Baddeley, , 2010.
## (s3) Baddeley and Hitch's working memory model
(p3.0) The Baddeley & Hitch's multicomponent working memory model arose from the inability of the Atkinson and Shiffrin's model to explain neuropsychological data that emerged in the 1970s (Baddeley, 2010), such as patients with neurological impairments, who even though had short-term memory deficits they could store information in long-term memory (Shallice & Warrington, 1970). To address this weakness, therefore, Baddeley and Hitch proposed this model, where working memory is presented as a control system with limited information storage and processing capabilities (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974).
