# Learning health systems: A review of key topic areas and bibliometric trends

CorpusID: 233685186 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a58a4da87431feebb7bb6b7e3a20053505e426e2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a58a4da87431feebb7bb6b7e3a20053505e426e2)

Fields: Education, Sociology, Medicine

## (s1) | Review methods and eligibility criteria
(p1.0) We carried out a scoping review of LHS literature published between January 2016 and May 2020. A scoping review synthesises and maps the research on a particular topic to identify key concepts and gaps in the literature. 14 Searches were carried out in two online databases (PubMed and Scopus) using the term "learning health* system*". Publications were downloaded into EndNote and duplicates were removed.

(p1.1) The review team (CP, ZM, AV, LAE, GK, CLS) screened retrieved publications in full to determine their inclusion. Publications were included if they were (a) in the English-language, (b) peer-reviewed publications (journal articles, review articles, journal commentaries, editorials, books, or book chapters), and (c) had a key focus on LHS. Publications containing no substantive discussion of the LHS concept (eg, only superficially used the term in the abstract, conclusion, or among the keywords) were excluded. Five percent of retrieved publications were independently screened by the entire review team to ensure consistent inclusion. Disagreements about the eligibility of publications for inclusion were resolved through review team consultation, with YZ and JB resolving any outstanding disagreements.
## (s7) | Key topic areas
(p7.0) Among the 272 included publications, 1067 unique keywords were identified. Of these, 69 were used at least five times. Co-occurrence of keywords (ie, keywords used together on a publication) is visually depicted in the network of co-occurring keywords (Figure 2). In this network, each circle represents a keyword and each line indicates co- Oncology's CancerLinQ initiative. 22 CancerLinQ is a large database that collects information from electronic health records of cancer patients to foster an oncology learning community across the United States; it has been described as a rapid LHS. 23 This example demonstrates the inherent need for integrated data platforms to support the adoption of LHSs and the importance of rapid implementation and implementation science in this sphere. 24 As to strengths and limitations, this study highlighted key topic reviews. There is a need to capture research written in languages other than English to obtain a more widespread view of the LHS concept and its potential. This is particularly important given the divide between high-, middle-, and low-income countries when it comes to big data and personalised medicine, 25 which are key components of LHSs.
