# agronomy Crop Management with the IoT: An Interdisciplinary Survey

CorpusID: 234205981 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a18c2abe8be05f1332c938e7fcd18f39857782](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a18c2abe8be05f1332c938e7fcd18f39857782)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s4) Network Layer
(p4.0) The network layer is responsible for the transmission of data through the IoT system; it routes raw data from/to the perception layer to/from the service layer. This layer moves data using communication technologies and protocols from the internet, which can connect any thing at any time from any place [34]. While the internet involves a plethora of protocols, we only mention those involved in IoT systems. According to AlFuqaha et al. [35], IoT protocols can be categorized into application, service discovery, and infrastructure.
## (s5) •
(p5.0) Infrastructure protocols The radio networks mentioned above, besides an electric interface, also have a logic interface corresponding to the code of signal transmitted/received. Their standards, namely, IEEE 802.15.4 (WiFi), BLE (Bluetooth Low Energy), LTE-A, Z-Wave, etc. [35], include details about frequency range and modulation, the coding of data (packets, frames, datagrams), and features affecting the velocity of a network (see Table 2). The greatest difference in such sense is the connection procedure: in a traditional mobile network (such as GSM-Global System for Mobile communication) the device could take a (relatively) long time to access a radio network, and usually send long data packets (expensive handshakes, headers, etc.). LoRa, and especially Sigfox, on the other hand, allow Low-Power devices to wake-up, send a message, and sleep again in less than 1 s. • Application protocols-They allow the exchange of chunks of data [35,36]. The most known of them is the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP), a foundation of communication for the World Wide Web. Though not specific for IoT applications, it is still used for traditional approaches. On the other hand, one of the most popular IoT protocols is represented by Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT). The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is a web-based protocol that is used in constrained nodes and constrained networks. Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP) is based on exchanges of XML (eXtensible Markup Language) messages in real-time that are defined to connect devices to servers. Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP) is a queuing system designed to connect servers. Data Distribution Service (DDS) is a fast data bus for integrating devices and systems optimized for direct device communication (noncentralized). The main differences between them can be identified on the basis of publish and subscribe mechanisms, request/response interaction, security level, supported quality of services (QoS) mechanisms, and payload size [35].

(p5.1) Other characteristics of network transport protocols are reported in Table 3. Other popular protocols oriented to low-power devices as LoRa (Long Range) and Sigfox, are optimized for specific connection requirements (e.g., uni-directional) and topologies and (e.g., decentralized). • Service discovery-This class of protocols is used to detect devices and services offered through a network, reducing the effort to manage dynamic IoT systems without the need for human intervention. A well-known discovery architecture is the Domain Name System (DNS, which maps an IP address to a human-friendly name), which is extended by multicast DNS (mDNS) and DNS Service Directory (DNS-SD) to discover services by type and properties [37] in zero-configuration networks. In mDNS, resolution information is stored locally on each device, and each device directly answers incoming name resolution queries (each device acts both as a server and a client). DNS-SD defines how a client queries DNS servers to discover services within a domain using the service type as a selection criterion; a client gathers the descriptions of all services and selects the most appropriate. This reduces the scalability of the protocol in large networks [38].
## (s7) IoT in Crop Management
(p7.0) Cropping systems are characterized by ecological, economic, and social aspects, and a farmer needs to keep all of them under control. Though recently policies, labor, and market are relevant aspects, ecological control represents the dominant tasks of a farmer, and it is pursued in different stages. In the setup phase of a production system, control means choosing a cropping technology, a long-term decision determined from landscape (e.g., terrace cultivation), climate (e.g., rain-fed crops), social aspects, resource availability, and market organization, the combination of which generated a multitude of different scenarios [3].

(p7.1) In the management practices of everyday cropping systems, adopted technologies determine relevant differences in the ability to control the environment. The main difference in cropping systems can be identified between indoor and outdoor, investigated by Navarro et al. [63]. In indoor systems, almost all production factors are under control: relevant environmental variables are regulated by hydro-electro-mechanical systems that timely supply the proper lighting, openings, fans, water, and nutrients. Only partial control can be performed in tunnels (temperature and humidity are conditioned by openings) and nets (used to prevent the spreading of insects, bird flights, and hail). In field crops, chances to control environmental factors are less available. Farmers are often unarmed in front of weather, pests, and diseases.
## (s13) •
(p13.0) Devices for field monitoring, of the soil-plant-atmosphere system. In the majority of cases, continuous monitoring is not required, therefore, the "perception layer" is conceived as a network of low-power devices that sleep for most of the time, supported by a radio network with an easy connection protocol. Additionally, they would mainly be for metering purposes and bi-directional communication, though facilitating reconfiguration, could prove unnecessary. The payload is expected to be reduced and messages are allowed to have a high-latency, though with a high QoS (quality of service). Low-power networks such as Sigfox and LoRa could be a good choice, though most recent networks (WiFi-halow, NB-IoT, CAT-M1) reduce constraints and allows both usage of protocols to be managed (MQTT) and messages to be digested (FIWARE) more easily. Such solutions can be adopted by almost every board of class "Arduino" that, together with deep-sleep mode, includes easily configurable electrical interfaces (e.g., I2C), together with a wide availability of shields (e.g., Real-Time Clock and SD card). •

(p13.1) Power devices, such as actuators and cameras require a different approach, and devices with embedded computing could be required, based on nano-or single-board computers (e.g., Raspberry Pi), already adopted in the "wired" agriculture (e.g., hydroponics). They allow for continuous monitoring (and surveillance) of plants, actuators, and intrusions (including animals) and need low-latency/real-time response/alerts to be sent to a supervisor (farmer). In these cases, a reliable wireless connection is required, which, if properly optimized, can profit from networking technologies mentioned in the previous point. Nanocomputers include LAN connectors and common wireless connection interfaces and are robust enough to be set in the outer environment, but need to be adequately power supplied (Photovoltaic systems and high-duration batteries). Their use in UV/AV enhances the spectrum of application of IoT for decision support [99] allowing the collection of vehicle data, failure events, and actions performed by tools.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) We finally may answer the foremost questions set above. IoT is going to improve crop management in terms of accessibility due to the reduction of costs and efficiency due to the timeliness of interventions, and IoT is increasingly offering solutions to crop management problems, most of which are yet unsolved, by the means of AI-driven "prescriptive analytics" implemented in CC systems.

(p14.1) In fact, from the literature analysis, IoT appears as a set of enabling technologies, allowing for a vast combination of architectures (e.g., [36]) and acting as a glue between FMISs, Smart Farming, and Precision Farming.
