# LITERATURE REVIEW Association between apolipoprotein B and dietary fibers

CorpusID: 237633856 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0e8b50be33f30e6166d082c132dc10ed78f2cdd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Definition and classification of fibers
(p4.0) Dietary fiber was originally defined as a nondigestable constituents of the cell wall of the plant. 23 Later on, dietary fiber was determined as any component of plant that resistant to hydrolysis by human digestive enzymes. 24 In 2000, American Association of Cereal Chemists (AACC) defined dietary fibre as the edible parts of plant or analogous carbohydrates that are resistant to digestion and absorption in the human small intestine with complete or partial fermentation in the large intestine. Dietary fiber includes cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, pectins, gums, bglucan, resistant starch, fructans, chitosan and chitin.

(p4.1) Fibers can be classified according to their type and solubility. Based on the type, fiber is divided into dietary fiber and functional fiber. Dietary fibers include cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, lignin, gum, fructan and resistance starch; while functional fibers include cellulose, pectin, lignin, gum, fructan, b-glucan, and psyllium. Fiber can also be classified based on its solubility into soluble fiber and insoluble fiber. Soluble fibers include hemicellulose, pectin, gum, b-glucan, and psyllium; while insoluble fibers include lignin, cellulose, fructans, and polyols. 24 Dietary fiber can be obtained from daily food ingredients such as vegetables, nuts, fruit, and cereals. The amount and composition of fibers vary between food. The fiber content of different food sources is listed in Table 1 . 24
## (s5) Recommended daily intake for dietary fibers
(p5.0) Current dietary guidance recommends that Americans consume 14 g of fiber per 1,000 kcal. Recommendations for fiber intake for adults and children are shown in Table 2. However, most Americans only consume about 15 g of fiber per day. 25 Meanwhile, in Indonesia, recommended fiber requirements based on the Nutrition Adequacy Rate (AKG) is 30-38 g/day depend on the age and gender of the individual. At 19-29 years of age, it is recommended that men consume 37 grams of fiber/per day while woman is 32 grams/day. At the age of 30-49, 36 grams per day are recommended for men while for woman is 30 grams per day. Regardless, the Indonesian population consumes fiber 10.5 g/day generally. 33
## (s7) Structure of the apolipoproteins
(p7.0) The complete amino acid sequence of the ApoB100 consists of 4536 amino acids with a molecular weight of 550 kDa. 26 The mature ApoB100 is the 27 amino acids N-terminal truncated version of the premature ApoB100 with the molecular mass of 513 kDa. 27 ApoB100 has a globular amino terminal domain, which reacts with microsomal triglyceride transfer proteins. The apoB gene is located on the short arm of chromosome 2. Study have identified one hundred twenty-three genetic variants in the apoB gene. The apoB100-3,500Arg-Gln affects its receptor binding and causes a disorder known as familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB). 28 ApoB100 is synthesized in hepatocytes and it could be degraded under certain conditions. 29 ApoB is an atherogenic component found in VLDL, IDL, and Lpa. Therefore, apoB represents the circulating atherogenic lipoprotein particles.

(p7.1) ApoB48 consists of 2152 amino acids with a molecular mass of 264 kDa. ApoB100 and apoB48 are produced from a single gene. ApoB48 is generated by cell-specific RNA editing of a CAA codon to a premature UAA termination codon and is identical to the N-terminal 48% of apoB100. 30 ApoB48 is synthesized by enterocytes, secreted in chylomicrons and stored in chylomicron remnant. Since one molecule of apoB48 is present in each chylomicron particle, it can be used as a marker for the chylomicrons. 31 Particles smaller than 70-80 nm can penetrate blood vessel walls. Therefore, chylomicron remains, but not nascent chylomicrons, are considered to be atherogenic. Chylomicron waste is enriched with ester cholesterol by exchange with HDL. 32
## (s12) Age and gender
(p12.0) Research conducted by Anagnostis et al. 46 showed that advancing age is positively associated with increased levels of apolipoprotein B. Those study also explains that at the age of 50-55 years, men generally have a higher average apolipoprotein B than women.
## (s14) Physical activity
(p14.0) Study revealed that months of aerobic exercise decreased apoB concentration in hypercholesterolemic men. 48 In contrast, another study by reported that aerobic exercise for 20 weeks did not affect the concentration of apoB. Others found no change in apoB concentrations during either long or short aerobic exercise. Some factors must result in these various outcomes such as age. 49 
