# Circulation: Cardiovascular Interventions 751 Transcatheter Aortic Valve Replacement for Bicuspid Aortic Valve Stenosis A Practical Operative Overview

CorpusID: 235448883 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad437bdc17c6c1ebead468f988b3ef747b8b1cc2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad437bdc17c6c1ebead468f988b3ef747b8b1cc2)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) B
(p0.0) icuspid aortic valve (BAV) patients were systematically excluded from pivotal randomized trials comparing transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR) and surgical AVR due to its unique unfavorable morphological features, for example, heavy and extreme asymmetry of valve calcifications, asymmetrical cusps' size, commissural fusion (raphe), and associated aortopathy. 1 Consequently, BAV was found in >20% of elderly (>80 years) and high-risk surgical AVR patients, 2 who at present would have been referred to TAVR.

(p0.1) Early TAVR experiences with first-generation transcatheter heart valves (THVs) in high-risk bicuspid aortic stenosis (AS) patients were complicated by increased rates of paravalvular leak (PVL), new permanent pacemaker implantation, prosthesis embolization, aortic injury, and conversion to open surgery. 3,4 Procedural outcomes improved with the refinement of imaging techniques, better understanding of BAV anatomy, new iterations of THVs, and growing experience of TAVR operators. [5][6][7] However, in the absence of randomized trials and rigorous evidence, there is still no consensus on how to approach transcatheter treatment of bicuspid AS, especially regarding the optimal THV sizing (annular versus supraannular) and implantation strategy, leading to wide variability across different centers and operators.
## (s1) BAV Morphology Characterization
(p1.0) The characterization of BAV phenotypes by multislice computed tomography (CT) plays a key role in TAVR planning. As BAV includes a variety of morphological abnormalities (eg, undeveloped cusp, cusp fusion by raphe, acquired commissural fusion, etc), 1 it is recommended to obtain a dynamic full cardiac cycle acquisition for accurate aortic valve evaluation. Different classification systems of BAV exist. The most widely used is that of Sievers and Schmidtke, 8 which describes 3 types of BAV (0, 1, and 2) based on the number of raphes, with associated subcategories (Figure 2A). More recently, a TAVR-specific classification was suggested by Jilaihawi et al, 4 depicting 3 BAV phenotypes based on the presence or absence of raphe and the number of commissures ( Figure 2B): bicommissural nonraphe type (like Sievers type 0); bicommissural raphe-type (equivalent to Sievers type 1); and tricommissural BAV, a morphology with some anatomic features similar to Sievers type 1 and others similar to tricuspid aortic valve (TAV), often described as acquired (indeterminate Sievers class). This classification values the pathological substrate (presence of raphe and number of commissures) impacting the interaction between the THVs and BAV ( Figure IA in the Data Supplement). In particular, the distinction between the bicommissural raphe type and tricommissural BAV has important operative functional implications, as a congenital raphe may oppose a higher resistance to adequate prosthesis expansion than an acquired commissural fusion ( Figure IB in the Data Supplement). Outcomes of TAVR in bicuspid patients are strictly related to the BAV phenotype. Jilaihawi et al 4 first reported higher rates of PVL and new permanent pacemaker implantation in bicommissural raphe-type and tricommissural BAV patients as compared to TAV group. More recently, a large-scale study showed that the presence or absence of severe calcification of both raphe and leaflets in raphe-type BAVs clearly stratify the outcomes with newgeneration devices, in terms of increased risk of aortic injury, PVL, and overall mortality. 9 Thus, the detection of high-risk BAV phenotypes should guide the decisionmaking process when evaluating TAVR for low surgical risk and younger bicuspid patients.
## (s2) Virtual Basal Ring (Annular) Evaluation
(p2.0) In tricuspid AS, the so-called virtual basal ring (VBR) is the tightest part of the aortic root, where the THV will anchor and seal. 10 Hence, this virtual structure, bounded by 3 anatomic hinge points at the nadir of each of the aortic cusp insertions, represents the appropriate reference plane for prosthesis sizing and implantation height. 10 However, in BAV, the anatomic definition of the VBR may be more difficult:

(p2.1) 1. In BAV without raphe, the definition of a 3-dimensional structure (ie, the VBR) is challenging because of the presence of only 2 anatomic hinge points. Manual multislice CT assessment of annulus should be chosen over automatic detection since it is more accurate in alignment of the cusps ( Figure II in the Data Supplement). 11 2. In bicommissural raphe-type and in tricommissural BAV, the VBR definition is more accurate as 3 cusps are easily recognizable. Nevertheless, the detection of the cusps nadir might be difficult because of their typical unequal size (fused versus nonfused cusp). 1 Multislice CT-based measures of VBR should include both area and perimeter (with respective derived mean diameters) for standard annular prosthesis sizing, as well as major and minor diameters for annular eccentricity assessment ( Figure 3A).
## (s4) Aortoventricular Complex Assessment
(p4.0) As in tricuspid AS, a comprehensive evaluation of the aortoventricular complex should include additional anatomic features, such as left ventricle outflow tract sizes and calcification, sinuses of Valsalva dimensions, coronary ostia height, and spatial relationship with respect to raphe orientation, sinotubular junction width, and ascending aorta diameter and angulation. 10,18 Combining these data with the morphological features of BAV may help to select the most appropriate THV, as well as to foresee procedural pitfalls ( Figure (3) Raphe or VRR-dominant, when VRR is smaller than VBR ( Figure 4C). In the first 2 scenarios, a conventional annular-based THV sizing can be safely applied, whereas in the third pattern a supraannular sizing strategy (aimed at the VRR) should be considered in selected cases (eg, severely calcific raphe) to avoid significant under expansion of the (oversized if annular based) prosthesis. 9,19 Notably, the prevalence of these 3 configurations varies according to the BAV type:
## (s7) Prosthesis Implantation Technique
(p7.0) According to the 3 aortic root configurations for THV sizing, the operator can aim for one of 2 different landing zones ( Figure 6): (1) in codominant and VBR-dominant scenarios, the VBR is the proper landing zone (Figure 6A) and (2) in VRR-dominant pattern, a supraannular landing zone is advisable based on raphe characteristics ( Figure 6B). When the VRR is the selected landing zone, THV implantation height should be targeted for optimal supraannular sealing ( Figure VI in the Data Supplement). 12,31 Although a higher prosthesis implant may theoretically reduce the risk of conduction disorders (by reducing the interaction with the conduction pathway), 5 this approach might carry some pitfalls (eg, device migration and coronary obstruction) based on aortic root anatomy. It is important to note that determining the optimal angiographic projection for THV deployment may be complex in BAV, as the leaflets appear irregular at fluoroscopy. Therefore, correct coaxial alignment of the THV frame should be based on the combination of CTderived orthogonal view and orientation of the valve at fluoroscopy. 
