# Silkworm and spider silk electrospinning: a review

CorpusID: 230422101 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf078f4d4d227923d3ca911d1e508c9637d60c93](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf078f4d4d227923d3ca911d1e508c9637d60c93)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Textile industry is one of the most demanding industry in water (Varadarajan and Venkatachalam 2016). But wastewater is not the only waste occurring from textile industry, indeed microplastics originating from the textile industries are pointed out as a major problem (Herbort et al. 2018;Padervand et al. 2020). Recent development due to COVID-19 disease, further increased this problematic. Indeed the usage of protection mask and gloves, strongly reduce the numerous effort that several country were engaged in to reduce the usage of throwaway plastics (Gorrasi et al. 2020). In this context, why not coming back to the origin of textile and the usage of bio-sourced and therefore bio degradable material.
## (s2) Origin of silk in animal phylae
(p2.0) Silk, according to the different contexts it is used in, has many definitions. Back to its most universal, and natural 1 3 approach, it is defined as a structural protein fiber synthetized by an organism for an external use (Holland et al. 2019). It is produced by a variety of animals in nature, all part of the phylum of arthropods. All organisms producing silk originally benefited from the same genetic innovation, as the ancestral gene appeared about 400 million years ago (Chen et al. 2006) and diversifying ever since. This led to the variety of silk structures and properties observed nowadays. Modern species producing silk include silkworms, from the Insecta class, spiders and pseudoscorpions, from the Arachnida class and other species from the Myriapoda class (Craig 1997). Ecologically, the silk has diverse applications, depending on the considered taxon. The chemical structure of the silk depends on its final purpose, in a form-to-function relationship (Tokareva et al. 2014). Hence, different types of silk are observed within the different species, different individuals and different contexts. Silk therefore displays a range of mechanical properties, from adhesion to high strength, or elasticity. Nonetheless, in all organisms producing this biomaterial, the proteins are synthetized in the silk glands organs, whose walls are made of epithelial cells that release of the proto silk in the lumen under its liquid form. The polymer is then stretched, being spun out of the body through the spinnerets or spigots (Altman et al. 2003) (Fig. 1). These glands, originally derived from the digestive tract and secreting primitive fibrous compounds, are located at different positions depending on the type of animal (Craig 1997).
## (s5) Spider's silk
(p5.0) The Arachnida class also produces silk, sharing a common ancestor with Bombyx, living 240 million years ago (according to the silk genes analysis) (Garb et al. 2010;Blackledge et al. 2012). 37,000 species of spiders produce silk, and, unlike silkworms, their silk is designed in several declinations depending on their final utilization. Indeed, spiders such as Aranea diadematus, or Nephila clavipes, two wellstudied model species, possess not one but seven types of silk glands in their posterior abdomen. Each is responsible for the synthesis of a specific silk compound, with diverse chemical compositions and structures (Tokareva et al. 2014). The synthesis of silk in these glands is a complex process. In the fore part of the gland, the tail, the columnar epithelial cells secrete the proteins of spider fibroin (spidroin). The proteins gather in small micelles, which avoid their aggregation before spinning because of high glandular concentrations. The micelles then migrate to the lumen, or duct, a tight S-shaped corridor in which they are elongated. The proteins are gradually organized into crystalline beta-sheets regions and amorphous chains. All along this path, the formation of the crystal sheets is facilitated by ions exchanges, and water is recapture. The elongation forces applied on the proteins also induce the solidification of the fiber, which is ready to be spun at the end of the duct (Eisoldt et al. 2011;Tokareva et al. 2014). In the late stages of the polymer synthesis, the microfibers are secreted outside of the body by external microtubules ( Fig. 1) present in the spinneret. Fibroinsecreting microtubules are numerous and about 20 nm in diameter and synthetize the core of the fiber. This core of microfibers is then coated by the glycoproteins and lipids ( Fig. 2) (Romer et al. 2008;Nentwig 2012). The whole fiber then emerges from the spinneret and is pulled out by the rear legs of the spider (He et al. 2008). Properties of spider threads are mentioned in Table 2.
## (s10) Evolution, selection and form-to-function relationship
(p10.0) As previously mentioned, unlike modern materials, silk is not a synthetic product. The fiber appeared in the arthropod phylum about 400 million years ago (Craig and Brunetta 2010) as a primitive secretion. The silk in the Araneae family (or in primitive Araneomorphae) started to gain its specific features, such as supercontraction, around 200 million years ago (Boutry and Blackledge 2010). The divergence of the types of silk, namely in the spiders' family, is due to the motor of evolution: genetic lottery conferred the spun silk a variety of molecular structures that are adaptative. Not only the final structure is fit to a defined use, such as wrapping, stopping insects or suspension, but the building blocks used for its synthesis can be modulated depending on what is available in the environment. The environment and context also play roles on the final fiber obtained, which adds to the potential of the biomaterial. Humidity, building blocks, speed, substrate and orientation of spinning are all parameters that control the mechanical behavior of the thread (Swanson et al. 2009). Even further, spiders are believed to be capable of tailoring their filaments by post-spinning adjustments (Eisoldt et al. 2011). The characterization and quantification of these features highlight the potential of a smart material in an identified context, an opportunity for engineering. In opposition with synthetic polymers that do not attempt to recreate the shape-to-function relationship of silk, this last is strong of millions of years of adaptations and experiences a significant modularity in its features.
## (s11) Sustainability, degradability and life cycle
(p11.0) Silk is a natural polymer, its composition is basically amino acids, rich in nitrogen and carbon (Andersen 1970). If the degradability of silk is relatively low and the material is classified like resilient against degradation, as it starts to lose its initial properties after a period varying between 60 days and 2 years depending on the context (Altman et al. 2003). If worn silk is not recycled into a new product or if its lysis is necessary in some application, it is possible to degrade silk using organic processes, in a circular way. Some proteases, like chymotrypsin (Li et al. 2003), can break down the fibroin core into smaller compounds whose reintegration in other building blocks will be done naturally like it is in nature. As silk is employed for regenerative medicine, its controllable and non-toxic degradation matters. Müller-Herrmann and Scheibel studied the degradation of spider silk by two bacterial proteases, with conclusive results for biomedical purposes (Müller-Herrmann and Scheibel 2015). Whether degradation is studied in order to break down cell scaffolds after tissue regeneration or to prove the biodegradability of silk for other applications, the biomaterial has the advantage of natural recyclability. In terms of green chemistry, silks, including spider silks, can replace a part of the petrol-based materials thanks to their properties, with a life cycle assessment proving its sustainability. During its synthesis process, silk is considered as an aquamelt, which means that it can be turned from a polymeric dope to a crystallized polymer in ambient temperature and water, whereas regular polymers need some heat input to do so. As so, the spinning of silk in artificial conditions saves up to 90% of the energy necessary for its shearing to reach fibrillation, last step before the final crystallization (Holland et al. 2012). A particular example is about domestic air filters made from spider silk instead of regular synthetic fibers, which could save 9 kg of CO 2 per house and year (Lauterbach and Scheibel 2015).
## (s12) Silk obtention and preparation obstacles
(p12.0) Industrial alternatives to plastics involving silks have been explored. However, the difficulty of its production, particularly for spidroins, do not allow the complete switch from synthetic material to biopolymer in the future; the applications remain extremely specific and too rare and expensive (raw material and production) for a broad use in our consuming lifestyle (Karthik and Rathinamoorthy 2017). Only a material mimicking the structure, the molecular interactions that result in the outstanding properties of silk could be competitive, not the natural material itself. Nevertheless, biotechnological alternatives for obtention of the silk proteins in higher quantities exist and have been thriving these last decades.
## (s15) Spider silk, a good compromise
(p15.0) We demonstrated that silk, although being a strong fiber, does not surpass synthetic filaments. However, the interest of silk and mostly of spider silk, resides in its versatility (Fig. 6). Where other materials possess either one strong feature or another, it is possible for silk to have both a resistant and elastic (or plastic) behavior (Huang et al. 2018). This is a characteristic of biopolymers, that results of the chemical bonds between the chains and their structure (see Sect. 1.2): the very developed network of hydrogen bonds between amino acids in the relaxed thread and the covalent bonds between proteins in the nanocrystalline regions as a safety backup when stretched (Nova et al. 2010). The ratio between resistance and elasticity for silk and mostly spider silk, is unique to considered materials (Fig. 6).
## (s16) Torsion and shape memory
(p16.0) Although common understanding around shape memory suggests the implication of metallic alloys (Huang et al. 2010), which are mostly concerned by this property as they return to an original state after a thermal deformation, some polymers also behave as so. When twisted, the spider thread goes back to its original position, as do most of fibers like Kevlar ® or copper. But unlike these materials, who have a pendulum like movement before returning to their original equilibrium, spider silk returns to its pristine shape without oscillations thanks to its high damping coefficient. After a first torsional stress, the fiber shows a major energy dissipation (about 75%) (Liu et al. 2017 Peculiar torsion dynamical response of spider dragline silk). This absence of swinging reduces the risks of dislocations and ruptures inside the protein chains; hence, the spider thread keeps its integrity after torsion and can even endure several torsional stresses without losing its mechanical properties. Recent studies even suggest a fatigueless and superelastic behavior, where the original nanostructure and detorsion capacities remain unchanged after thousands of twisting spins per cm of thread . Number of twisting cycles at breaking point is the highest in spiral threads, followed by dragline (Kumar et al. 2020). With this ability, spider silk can return to its original shape without any temperature modifications (Emile et al. 2006) (Fig. 7).
## (s20) Thermal conductivity
(p20.0) Unlike most of comparable polymers, silk also shows a remarkably high thermal conductivity. As this parameter depends on the alignment of the protein chains, it also increases when the fiber is stretched, going from 349 in the relaxed state (3.9% of elongation) to 416 W m −1 K −1 (19.7% of elongation) in Nephila clavipes dragline (Huang et al. 2012). In terms of thermal properties, spider silk hence differs from other polymers, even from silkworm's silk, who has a low thermal conductivity about 4.7 W m −1 K −1 in optimal conditions (Huang et al. 2012), Kevlar ® (0.04 W m −1 K −1 ), or Nylon 6 (0.25 W m −1 K −1 ) (King et al. 2004). Only carbon nanotubes possess a largely higher thermal conductivity, reaching 6000 W m −1 K −1 (Collins and Avouris 2000).
## (s22) Electrical conductivity
(p22.0) Silk by itself is a relatively poor conductor for electricity and can only provide scaffold fibers for other conductors (Steven et al. 2013). The conductivity of such an hybrid structure however depends on the relative humidity of the context, from 40% of humidity, the conductivity of the fiber will increase linearly (Steven et al. 2011). Conductivity also depends on the coating of the thread, studies so far describe threads coated with iodine, carbon nanotubes or gold, giving possibilities for the hybrids material to ally spider silk mechanic characteristics and conductivity of well-known superconductors (Steven et al. 2011). Both spider and Bombyx silk have been hybridized with other materials, respectively, carbon nanotubes and BEDT-TTF (based organic molecular conductor) and shown the unique properties of the silks topping the conductivity of these materials (supercontraction, elasticity, resistance, thermic properties) (Steven et al. 2014). Spider silk's fibroin has also been used in the conception of electronical devices (memristor) for its biodegradable features and ease of preparation (Sun et al. 2015).
## (s23) Piezoelectrical properties
(p23.0) Silk fibroin, as a semi-crystalline biomaterial, shows shear piezoelectricity, at a level of about 1 pC/N, 0.36 pC/N for spider fibroin (Karan et al. 2018). For comparison, quartz shows the similar behavior with 2 pC/N (Yucel et al. 2011) and currently leading piezoelectrical material LZT or PZT (lead/plumb zirconate titanate) 100 to 1300 pC/N. Yucel et al. (Yucel et al. 2011) established that the abundance of crystalline structures in beta-sheets of fibroin was correlated with its piezoelectrical activity. Despite its relatively low range, silk could find applications in several domains. It figures among the several non-toxic, biodegradable and biocompatible materials that are currently used for biomedicine, like cellulose paper, PVDF (polyvinylidene difluoride) and aluminum nitride (Sappati and Bhadra 2018). Aluminum nitride films on PET's piezoelectric response has been reported by Akiyama et al. to reach 0.7 pC/N, with application for pressure sensors, namely human pulse (Akiyama et al. 2006). With a comparable activity and similar fits for such applications, silk could stand as an alternative: in 2018, Karan et al. worked on another type of application for spider silk: self-charging devices. The conversion of mechanical energy into electrical power through the piezoelectric behavior of spidroins has been described as remarkable and could lead to the design of nano-generator using the body natural motion to function (Karan et al. 2018).
## (s26) Electrospinning advantages
(p26.0) Electrospinning, unlike weaving methods, allows the obtention of large specific surface of nonwoven textile with a very thin scale, down to tens of nanometers (Bognitzki et al. 2001). It is a technic that compiles ease of use and possibility of large-scale production. The interest of such a small level of design is that determination of porosity (and size of pores), morphology (alignment, diameter) of fibers and other emergent properties (integration of sensors) is potentially very precise (Li and Xia 2004;Agarwal et al. 2008). Interestingly, modifying the setup of the electrospinning apparatus lead to different types of fibers, where the optical, magnetic, electronic and biological properties vary. It is even possible to use specific spinnerets to create a range of secondary structures, like hollow fibers, or cores coated with a different polymer. The electromagnetic fields that apply on the projected fiber not only reduce its diameter, but can also determine a targeted area for the textile to be locally thickened (Li and Xia 2004;Zhang and Chang 2008). The electrospun scaffolds usually share a compatibility with biological tissues, and can even mimic histological structures, even though its applications do not stop to biopolymers (Nune et al. 2017). Hybrid spinning dopes have already been successfully electrospun, optimizing the properties of both polymers, like bicomposites of organic and synthetic compounds (Stankus et al. 2008).
## (s27) Electrospinning basics
(p27.0) Electrospinning is a spinning technique using an electrical input to create a fiber from a polymer solution. Unlike regular spinning processes, this method allows the creation of scaffolds and mats with a nanometric scale (fibers and pores) (Leach et al. 2011), regularity of the texture, outstanding surface properties and thinness of the produced material (Knapczyk-Korczak et al. 2020).

(p27.1) The universal setup for electrospinning includes, as illustrated in Fig. 8, a syringe filled with a polymer solution. The injection pump presses the solution at a defined speed, forming a droplet at the tip of the needle. A source of power creates an electrical field between the needle and the collector screen, surpassing the surface tension of the liquid droplet. This results in the formation of the Taylor cone and the projection of a nanometric fiber through the air. The fiber eventually lands in a random order on the collector (Mitchell and Tojeira;Shin et al. 2012). While the polymer fiber is projected in the air towards the collector, the solvent that kept it in a liquid phase evaporates, reducing the diameter of the fiber to the nanometric level (Sukigara et al. 2004). The collector can be rotated all along the process, to create the mesh on a larger surface. External parameters while operating electrospinning influence the quality of the final spun sample. The humidity of the air and the temperature must be kept constant and monitored, thus, a confined experimental area is recommended. A flow cabinet also prevents the inhalation of toxic fumes (from the solvents) during the process (Lang et al. 2013).
## (s28) Obtention of silk proteins
(p28.0) Before electrospinning, the spinning dope must be prepared out of fibroin proteins. The obtention of these proteins varies depending on the sources (Fig. 9). Most of silk electrospinning protocols work with Bombyx mori silk. The polymer is directly extracted from insects' cocoons. The pupas can be bought from life sciences and The high-voltage input creates a cone of Taylor at the tip of the needle. The stream jet is propelled through the air in a random manner and stacks in a nonwoven canvas on the collector biotechnology companies, or from sericulture farms. In the case of spidroins, protocols including web harvests from live animals exist, but are rather rare (Zarkoob et al. 2003;Zhou et al. 2008), due to the difficult production of necessary quantities as spiders do not naturally live in groups. Most of studies make use of recombinant spider fibroin, like ADF-3, ADF-4, pNSR16, MaSp1 (Peng et al. 2016) and MaSp2, that call for hosts as feedstock for silk protein production (Xu et al. 2018). These are the proteins issued from the expression of Nephila clavipes' genes regulating the fibroin production. These genes have been transferred into silkworms' genomes so that they could synthetize their cocoon out of a silk that would have the qualities of spider silk. This recent technique, allowed by the improvement of biotechnologies and the possible combination between silkworm and spider's fibroin, is among the most efficient with more than 30% of the produced silk being spidroin (Xu et al. 2018). Also, as the obtained product resembles a natural silkworm's cocoon, further manipulations can follow well-described protocols for Bombyx silk. However, other groups have worked with proteins issued from different vectors, like genetically modified E.coli (Leal-Egaña et al. (2011);Lang et al. 2013;Peng et al. 2016), or other prokaryotic vectors (Zhao et al. 2017), goat milk (Kandas et al. 2018), yeasts or plant vectors (Vendrely and Scheibel 2007;Xu et al. 2018), with various applications (Table 3) and (respectively decreasing) yields (Fig. 9).
## (s30) Degumming the silk
(p30.0) The first step in the electrospinning of a polymer, is the preparation of the spinning dope. Electrospinning of silk of Bombyx mori has been described in several studies these last decades, for the fabrication of nonwoven mats with applications in filtration or biomedicine (Vepari and Kaplan 2007). Working from scratches, with silkworms' cocoons, the first step consists of degumming the silk, removing the sericin coating from the fibroin core. This is necessary to reach the maximal resistance features and also provides the final material more luster and softness. Degumming can be achieved through several processes, with soap (Marseille soap (Ohgo et al. 2003)) and water, using proteases, or alkaline solution (Gulrajani 1992), but most recent studies advise a simple boiling, at 90 °C in water for 60 min (Altman et al. 2003). Works on Antheraea pernyi, another silkworm, suggest the use of 2.5 g/L aqueous solution of NaCO 3 , to boil three separate times the silk cocoons during 30 to 45 min (100 g of cocoons for 5L of solution) (Tao et al. 2007). Degummed silk fibers must be dialyzed overnight in demineralized water and dried under a flow until lyophilization (possibly heated to 60 °C) (Tao et al. 2007).
## (s34) Choice of solvents
(p34.0) Regarding the possible applications of silk non-woven mats, a majority of them being in biomedical and regenerative medicine domains, it is important to choose solvents that are life friendly. Not only saving some detoxifying stages from the protocols, a green solvent is also safer for the user during manipulation. Some of the mentioned solvents for degumming and dissolution are mildly irritating for human skin because of their basicity and detergent potential, such as NaCO 3 or Marseille soap, or SDS, but not dangerous for environment. De Simone et al. recommended in their experiments the use of Tris/HCl buffer and PEO400 instead of hexafluoroisopropanol, because of the relative safety of manipulation of this aqueous protocol and compatibility with organic tissues without further post treatments (Desai et al. 2019;DeSimone et al. 2020;Salehi et al. 2020). It is worth mentioning that although the use of PEO allows more stability in the viscosity parameter during the electrospinning process, its employ requires its elimination as a post treatment, through heating the mat to 100 °C, hence increasing the energy input of this protocol (Jin et al. 2004). Also, the use of a setup such as bubble electrospinning (He et al. 2008) instead of traditional electrospinning can fix some issues in this viscosity stability. Finally, formic acid, used in most of protocols as a final solvent for the spinning dope, must be used with precautions as it is corrosive for lungs, skin, eyes, etc.
## (s36) Bombyx silk's mats
(p36.0) Electrospun mats of Bombyx mori were successfully synthetized in literature. Reported ultimate tensile strength and strain at break were, respectively, between 13.6 and 14 MPa and between 4 and 40% (Table 4) (Ohgo et al. 2003). Studies led on electrospun Bombyx mori's silk reveal that the numerous spinning parameters are affecting the final mat's features. Molecular weight of the spinning dope, solvents used, and post-spinning treatments highly influence the mechanical properties such as ultimate tensile strength and strain at break (Zhang et al. 2012). Postspinning dipping in methanol under heating contributes to shrink the fibers and hence reduce the overall porosity of the mat, which rises to 68% (Min et al. 2004). Parameters of electrospinning influence the final result: distance of spinning, concentration of the dope, voltage, and flow rate affect the morphology of the fibers, including its diameter. A low concentration leads to fibers bearing beads, poorly smooth, whereas a high concentration creates continuous and uniform fibers (Min et al. 2004;Zhang et al. 2012). Characterization of mats has not been described Fig. 9 Protocols for solubilization of silk proteins from silkworms (left) and spidroins (right). Degumming and dissolution of silk are necessary for silkworm cocoons, and very rarely observed in spider think electrospinning, as the proteins are obtained from recombinant spider silk instead of natural fibers (Table 3). Degumming consists of washing the sericin off the silkworm's silk often achieved in an alkaline detergent solution, sericin being a glue-like protein with little biocompatibility (Altman et al. 2003). Solvents used for preparation of the spinning dope vary depending on the type of silk: for silkworm's silk, the solvent can be formic acid or HFIP (Table 3), but biomedical applications prefer water, for spider's silk, the organic solvent HFIP is the most used, but DeSimone et al. suggested an aqueous spinning dope based on the use of Tris/HCl (DeSimone et al. 2020). Post-treatments include vaporization or bath of methanol, water or ethanol (Min et al. 2004;Lang et al. 2013), ◂ extensively, no more than their comparison with pristine silk's mechanical properties. Most of the studies rather focused on the efficiency of the mats in their respective applications, such as biocompatibility for example. Although natural spider silk is composed of thinner threads than Bombyx mori's cocoons, literature suggests that the minimal diameter observed in electrospun mats rises to 8 nm (Zarkoob et al. 2003) and can reach more than 1000 nm in certain spinning conditions (Table 5) (Zhou et al. 2008). Here again, spinning parameters affect the fibers' final topography and therefore the few obtained results might not be the full possible spectrum. Tests realized on aligned electrospun fibers of recombinant spider's fibroin (known as MaSp1) indicate an ultimate tensile strength of 9.6 MPa, and an strain at break of 14.3% of the obtained mats. Most of studies led on electrospun spider silk actually concern composites, as engineers aims to compile the mechanical advantages of a certain material (like extremely resistant carbon nanotubes) and the diverse features of spider silk (see Sect. 2). Just like for silkworm's silk mats, mechanical characterization values have barely been reported so far.
## (s42) Tissue engineering
(p42.0) The peculiar versatility of spider silk is used in several experiments as a strong and elastic prosthesis to replace fascia, in hernia repair. When compared with commercial synthetic homologues, the Nephila's silk woven mat has shown a remarkable integration in the organic tissues, with a lower inflammatory response, better durability of mechanical properties, and complete degradation observed after the healing of the wound (Schafer-Nolte et al. 2014). Even though applications with non-woven mats are not yet a reality, the biocompatibility results of spider silk is encouraging, while prospecting for potential non-woven meshes applications. Bombyx mori's silk, however, has already been used as an electrospun matrix to reconstruct damaged organic structures, such as blood vessels. Tubular scaffolds mimicking arteries with mechanical properties overtaking original models were successfully conceived by Soffer et al. (Soffer et al. 2008) and others (Steiner et al. 2019). With an ultimate tensile strength reaching up to 125% of an artery's potential and an average burst pressure of 811 mmHg, far over the biological standard of 100 mmHg (Guyton 1991), these materials are very promising. Growth of endothelial and muscle cells have been observed to proliferate on the tubular scaffold. It makes it in an efficient support for grafts (Soffer et al. 2008). Bone tissues have also been grown on Bombyx fibroin electrospun mats, with a significantly higher proliferation of the osteoblasts on these scaffolds than on PLA synthetic homologues, which should contribute to the techniques of bone damage repairs and bone defect regeneration in future medical practices (Kim et al. 2005). These last years, Pawar et al. have been working on nerve guidance conduits made out of electrospun spider silk and collagen hybrid tubes. The peripheric tissues have shown excellent compatibility with cell growth and differentiation, the cells being able to achieve functional neuronal activity. Recombinant spider silk provided the anti-inflammatory barrier to the collagen compounds, while allowing the passage of nutrients and gas exchanges (Pawar et al. 2019;Salehi et al. 2020).
## (s43) Drug delivery
(p43.0) Drug delivery is a complex process, as the efficiency of the drug depends on the accuracy of the targeted organic structure, and the diffusion rate of the medication. Recent 1 3 advances in this domain have aimed to embed drug compounds in vector-like entities, based on the chemistry and kinetics of their degradation. Fibroin proteins have the capacity to retain a chemical compound and release it in the targeted organ at a controllable rate, which depends on its degree of crystallinity. The drug, sequestrated into the chains of the silk proteins, is only available for diffusion after their degradation. A higher crystallinity of the fiber implies a slower degradation by body enzymes, which releases the drugs embedded in the amorphous zones of the silk at a slower rate. Since the crystallization of silk fibers in electrospun mats can be largely controlled by vapor treatment, the delivery rate can therefore be defined (Pignatelli et al. 2018 
## (s46) Support scaffolds for polymers
(p46.0) In some applications, electrospun silk scaffolds are used for their relative strength and elasticity, potentially conserved at the nanometric scale. Their implementation into composites constitutes the support structure for other polymers with different (and often complementary) properties. Lately, mixing (not necessarily electrospun) silk and carbon nanotubes has offered a variety of applications for e-textiles and sensors. Ye et al., for example, have proofed that such a composite yarn conserved the properties of silk, previously described and of carbon nanotubes. Fabrics made out of this material are sensitive to their environmental parameters, such as electrical conductivity, thermal variations, or mechanical forces (Ye et al. 2019). This trend and its applications were explored using electrospinning. Studies led by Ayutsede et al. (Ayutsede et al. 2006) suggest the combination of the extreme strength of carbon nanotubes and Bombyx mori's silk fibers through electrospinning, to increase the Young's modulus of the carbon nanostructure. In another work on the same type of silk, scaffolds of silk fibroin coated with polypyrrole, an organic polymer used for its electrical conductivity, showed the same conductivity as free-standing polypyrrole, for an enhanced strain at break and rupture strength, an opportunity for their use in regenerative medicine (Aznar-Cervantes et al. 2012). Unlike with spinning methods, these electrospun scaffolds benefit from a greater precision and uniformity in their design for applications at a lower and more delicate scale, like biomedicine.
## (s47) UV-related applications in textile
(p47.0) As for drug delivery or particles embedment, electrospun silk scaffolds can be implemented with a variety of compounds. These compounds often possess a specific activity that is the core of the considered application, however, without the support of the fibroin fibers, this activity could not be displayed in certain environments or on long-term. This is the case in textiles, for example, some compounds with reactions of interest under UV light cannot be implemented in regular fabrics or their activity maintained; however, the function is preserved in electrospun silk mats. Among these applications, the embedment of TiO 2 and SiO 2 in textiles is well-known to protect the fibers from UV, and accelerate the photodegradation of staining compounds such as wine or coffee on fabrics (Kirstein 2013). A self-cleaning composite of electrospun silkworm's fibroin, polyvynil alcohol (PVA) and titanium dioxide has been designed by Wu et al. (2018). In another work, Pang et al. 2019 have successfully electrospun silkworm's fibroin and three different fluorescent dyes in three blends. Using rhodamine, acridine orange or fluorescent sodium solubilized in the fibroin dope, they created samples of silk with applications as strips or icons shining under UV lights, for implementation on textiles.

(p47.1) Obtained fluorescent colors ranged from the dark red to the bright yellow-green, depending on the concentration and the type of dye (Pang et al. 2019). Kandas et al. pursued the same goal in 2018 and created a spider silk electrospun mat embedded with cerium oxide, metallic nanoparticles with fluorescent properties. After exposure under UV, the mat emitted a green light, and its electrical conductivity behavior changed depending on the humidity conditions and surrounding media, which grants the material potential applications in intelligent textiles (Kandas et al. 2018).
