# A Review of Data Analysis Techniques Used in Near-Infrared Spectroscopy

CorpusID: 236517634 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aacaf653a2d4e34d7d2f2881b0d7796df0a884c3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aacaf653a2d4e34d7d2f2881b0d7796df0a884c3)

Fields: Mathematics, Physics

## (s3) Pre-processing Methods
(p3.0) As mentioned above, NIRS data are acquired through photodiode-based sensors. These sensors generally output as analog signals and are transferred to the computer with the help of analog-digital converter circuits [17]. For this reason, deviations in the signal, called noise, which negatively affects the data analysis, occur during both the measurement phase and the conversion phase. Therefore, the pre-processing of spectral data is the most crucial step before analyzing it.

(p3.1) Pre-processing spectral data before using it, does not always mean that it will positively affect model success. Zhu and Tian [18] applied Savitzky-Golay (SG), standard normal variate (SNV), multiplicative scatter correction (MSC), normalization, 1st derivative and 2nd derivative pre-processing methods to determine the sugar content of Fuji apples, and it was observed that these methods did not give better results than the non-preprocessed condition. Sampaio et al. [19] used different preprocessing methods with PLS, iPLS, siPLS, and mwPLS regression models to determine amylose content in rice. For siPLS, the highest determination coefficient (Rp) was obtained with non-pre-processed spectral data.

(p3.2) In 2009, Rinnan et al. [20] conducted a literature review on pre-processing techniques in NIRS. In this section, the most used pre-processing methods among 35 studies are discussed in more detail. spectral data. MSC is a row-oriented method, and the new value of one data is affected by its horizontal neighbors [22]. First, the mean value is calculated for each data point. The coefficients of the best-fitting curve for each sample's spectrum to this mean value are calculated using the least-squares method [23]. The MSC-treated spectrum data is obtained with the following equation:
## (s5) Savitzky-Golay Filter
(p5.0) Savitzky and Golay [36] have developed a type of digital smoothing filter known by their name in 1964. In this type of filter, the data set is fitted to a polynomial degree using the leastsquares method with the help of convolution. Convolution coefficients to be used in the Savitsky-Golay (SG) filter are predetermined according to the differentiation order and polynomial degree. Luo et al. [37] improved the SG filter to be used for even-numbered data.
## (s8) Another version of MLR modeling is
(p8.0) Step-Wise Multiple Linear Regression (SMLR). In SMLR, MLR is applied to the data set multiple times. The least correlated input variable is removed each time. In this way, it continues until the highest R 2 value is achieved [51]. In Shen et al., SMLR method was employed to establish aflatoxin quantification models [56].
## (s10) Principal Component Regression
(p10.0) Although PLSR is a suitable modeling method for many spectral data, especially if the independent variables have a high correlation with each other, this negatively affects the regression coefficients [67]. This situation is called the collinearity problem. One method that gives more successful results in such datasets is Principal Component Regression (PCR) [68]. The PCR method is formed by the application of PCA and LSR methods together. First of all, the principal components of the spectral data are extracted with the PCA method. The ones that show the most variance in data are selected among these principal components, and the regression model is created using these principal components.
## (s17) Spectrum Range Analysis
(p17.0) The spectrum ranges of the 35 studies are combined and given in figure 4. Only wavelengths between 300nm and 2500nm are included when forming the figure. When figure 4 is examined, it is seen that approximately 85% of the studies included 1000-1650 nm wavelengths, and approximately 65% of them included 1650-2500 nm wavelengths. Although analyzing in a wider spectrum increases the success rate as it contains more information, instrumentation costs are also increasing. In the SWNIR region (750-1100nm), Si photodiodes are used as a detector, much more affordable than InGaAs photodiodes. However, as shown in figure 4, only 45% of the studies were carried out in the SWNIR region. The main reason for this can be said that the atomic bonds that makeup food products generally have meaningful data around 1400, 1600, 1750, and 2300 nm [10].
