# diagnostics Minimally Invasive Intracerebral Hemorrhage Evacuation Techniques: A Review

CorpusID: 232405186 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/825aac49dd5d05559aa1ea04336e7087ce1552d6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/825aac49dd5d05559aa1ea04336e7087ce1552d6)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) accounts for up to 20% of all strokes with 40,000 to 67,000 cases per year in the US [1,2]. Despite rapid and accurate diagnostic imaging techniques, the associated morbidity and mortality following ICH remains quite high. It has been estimated that only 20% of patients will ever regain full function and 40% die within one month [1,2]. Classically, ICH was been treated with medical management or craniotomy. Craniotomy intervention had been limited to those with superficial lobar or cerebellar bleeds causing significant neurological impairment [3]. The International Surgical Trial in Intracerebral Hemorrhage (STICH I) and STICH II trials compared surgical intervention to medical management, but could not definitively clarify surgery resulted in improved outcomes [3][4][5]. Research into the pathophysiologic mechanisms of ICH has demonstrated that ICH causes damage in two distinct and temporally separate mechanisms. First, the collection of blood within the brain causes mass effects leading to mechanical distortion and increased intracranial pressure (ICP). Elevated ICP leads to mitochondrial injury and aberrant neurotransmitter release. Second, the release of thrombin leads to infiltration of mesenchymal cells, microglia, and inflammatory cells resulting in significant perihematomal edema (PHE) [1]. PHE can cause additional neurological insult and some research asserts that PHE expansion accurately predicts ICH morbidity and mortality, but the true implications of PHE on outcomes remains controversial [6]. Nevertheless, improving ICH outcomes likely requires rapid removal of blood from the parenchyma and restraining edema formation while also limiting further neuronal damage due to the surgical intervention. Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) approaches promise to provide these benefits and, for this reason, have become alluring options for management of ICH. However, the results of rigorous clinical trials of MIS ICH methods over the past decade have been mixed. In addition to describing current methods of ICH diagnosis and past decade have been mixed. In addition to describing current methods of ICH diagnosis and prognosis, this article reviews the minimally invasive ICH evacuation methods and the literature describing each of their efficacies.
## (s1) Intracerebral Hemorrhage (ICH) Diagnosis and Imaging
(p1.0) Similar to acute ischemic stroke patients, patients with ICH often present with rapid onset of impaired neurological function [1]. Accompanying symptoms can include headaches, seizures, elevated blood pressure, vomiting, and altered level of consciousness. A non-contrast head computed tomography (CT) is the standard neuroimaging technique that provides fast and accurate evaluation for the presence of ICH [2]. Once the diagnosis of ICH is made, clinicians may search for an underlying cause. CT angiography (CTA) is often ordered along with the non-contrast CT to evaluate for vascular pathologies [1].
## (s4) Craniopuncture
(p4.0) Craniopuncture is the standard of care for treating ICH in China [30]. Craniopuncture uses a YL-1 needle which consists of a 3 mm-diameter hollow cannula containing the puncture needle. The puncture needle is drilled through the skull and into the hematoma before the cannula is fixed to the skull and the hematoma is aspirated. Following initial aspiration, a lysis fluid containing urokinase or recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) is injected to facilitate further aspiration. The thrombolytic agent is reintroduced into the hematoma every 6-12 h. A follow-up CT scan is performed 1-3 days after initial drainage to measure the amount of blood remaining. The drainage needle remains in the brain for 3-5 days [30][31][32].

(p4.1) The landmark paper for craniopuncture was published in 2009 by Wang et al. [31]. They compared outcomes between craniopuncture and conservative medical management in 377 patients with basal ganglia hemorrhages (25-40 mL in volume) in China (Table 1). The results showed significantly improved neurological function in the craniopuncture group by two weeks with no difference in the rate of rebleeding (9.7% vs. 5.0%). After three months, the percentage of patients with a modified Rankin Score (mRS) > 2 was significantly smaller for those undergoing craniopuncture [31]. However, there was no significant difference in mortality. The following year, Sun and colleagues (2010) published a study demonstrating that craniopuncture also improved outcomes over traditional craniotomy [33]. However, different outcomes were found to be improved. Specifically, there was no improvement in neurological function at three months, but there was a significant decrease in the fatality rate and the rebleed rate (8.8% vs. 21.4%) at 90 days for the craniopuncture. In 2011, Zhou et al. investigated differences between craniopuncture and traditional craniotomy and found no difference in the rebleed rate (10% vs. 15.4%), or fatality rate at one year, but did show improvement across Glasgow Outcome 
## (s6) Craniopuncture
(p6.0) Craniopuncture is the standard of care for treating ICH in China [30]. Craniopuncture uses a YL-1 needle which consists of a 3 mm-diameter hollow cannula containing the puncture needle. The puncture needle is drilled through the skull and into the hematoma before the cannula is fixed to the skull and the hematoma is aspirated. Following initial aspiration, a lysis fluid containing urokinase or recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA) is injected to facilitate further aspiration. The thrombolytic agent is reintroduced into the hematoma every 6-12 h. A follow-up CT scan is performed 1-3 days after initial drainage to measure the amount of blood remaining. The drainage needle remains in the brain for 3-5 days [30][31][32].

(p6.1) The landmark paper for craniopuncture was published in 2009 by Wang et al. [31]. They compared outcomes between craniopuncture and conservative medical management in 377 patients with basal ganglia hemorrhages (25-40 mL in volume) in China ( Table 1). The results showed significantly improved neurological function in the craniopuncture group by two weeks with no difference in the rate of rebleeding (9.7% vs. 5.0%). After three months, the percentage of patients with a modified Rankin Score (mRS) > 2 was significantly smaller for those undergoing craniopuncture [31]. However, there was no significant difference in mortality. The following year, Sun and colleagues (2010) published a study demonstrating that craniopuncture also improved outcomes over traditional craniotomy [33]. However, different outcomes were found to be improved. Specifically, there was no improvement in neurological function at three months, but there was a significant decrease in the fatality rate and the rebleed rate (8.8% vs. 21.4%) at 90 days for the craniopuncture. In 2011, Zhou et al. investigated differences between craniopuncture and traditional craniotomy and found no difference in the rebleed rate (10% vs. 15.4%), or fatality rate at one year, but did show improvement across Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS), mRS, and Barthel Index (BI) [34]. Thus, all three studies demonstrated a benefit of the craniopuncture, although whether the craniopuncture improves neurologic outcomes, mortality outcomes, or both, is less clear. Regardless, these results have led to the craniopuncture becoming the standard of care in China and craniopuncture techniques are now being tested in other hemorrhagic diseases such as chronic subdural and epidural hematomas [35,36]. Recently, the craniopuncture was also tested in an early intervention paradigm, defined as surgical intervention within six hours of symptom onset. Intriguingly, it was found that craniopuncture had worse rebleeding rates (40% vs. 19%) and functional outcomes compared to craniotomy in the presence of the spot sign on CT. However, for patients without the spot sign, craniopuncture was equally efficacious as craniotomy had similar a rebleeding rate (12% vs. 17%) [37]. However, there have been no clinical trials for craniopuncture in the US or Europe and thus craniopuncture is not commonly used in these regions. The most common thrombolytic MIS for ICH intervention used in the US is stereotactic aspiration with thrombolysis. 
## (s10) Endoscope-Assisted Evacuation
(p10.0) The endoscope-assisted evacuation technique combines an endoscope with a multifunctional aspiration cannula working side by side through an access sheath. The endoscope provides visualization while the cannula allows the surgeon to aspirate the clot, irrigate the cavity, and cauterize blood vessels. These two tools are utilized together, often through a 10 mm diameter sheath. The procedure requires a craniectomy of 15-20 mm in diameter. The sheath is then inserted into the clot and the surgeon applies continuous suction while performing multiple rounds of irrigation and cauterizing blood vessels as necessary. The instruments and sheath are removed at the end of the procedure. At times, a drainage catheter is left in place and tunneled away from the incision [30,32,53].
## (s13) Conclusions
(p13.0) ICH remains a devastating disease and analysis of mortality outcomes form 2000-2010 showed no decline in case fatality rates [67]. This highlights the need for improved interventions and MIS for ICH evacuation techniques remain the most likely candidate to achieve improved mortality outcomes. However, despite many reports of the benefits of various MIS for ICH evacuation methods, the exact nature of the benefit often differs between studies. Moreover, the largest clinical trials have yet to demonstrate definitive effects of surgical intervention on mortality and functional outcomes. Thus, there is a significant need for further innovation for ICH treatment and the multiple ongoing trials including ENRICH, INVEST, and MIND promise to better clarify the potential of the newer, non-thrombolytic MIS techniques. 
