# Is Innovation Redesigning District Heating? A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 234091430 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bba06e7b5c9c66cb58b0901f92d76e1ce50f2c47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bba06e7b5c9c66cb58b0901f92d76e1ce50f2c47)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Environmental Science

## (s4) Method of Analysis
(p4.0) A systematic literature review following the methodology outlined in [16] is applied to summarize and synthesize the prior research. Such reviews are used to compare and analyze empirical findings, models and explanations. To understand innovation in DH, we focus on the core processes that are heat-distribution and transfer. There is a risk of limiting the findings by focusing only on these areas; thus, other aspects, including fuel, heat supply and impact/output of DH (e.g., the DH value chain), were investigated.

(p4.1) We used the "Scopus" database as it extensively covers both the refereed journals and conferences where DH information is featured. More than 19,000 publications appear for the search term "district heating". As a second source of information, we used "Ei Compendex" on "Engineering Village". We focused on peer-reviewed journal publications and new conference papers. The selection means that there are publications that we do not capture, for instance, reports from national technical programs in China, Germany and Sweden and reports related to specific European programs. To avoid bias, the search was not broadened beyond peer-reviewed publications.

(p4.2) The derived search string was based on an exploratory literature review to identify the key concepts and core papers. Different search strings were tested iteratively. To ensure extensive coverage, five searches were performed, where the findings were combined, and duplicates were removed.
## (s13) Group 2: Heat Supply
(p13.0) Heat supply refers to plants that produce hot water. Traditionally this heat comes By grouping keywords, seven sub-clusters were revealed (in falling order): cogeneration and combined heat and power (CHP), optimization and demand forecasting, heat storage, waste heat recovery, geothermal energy, heat and absorption pumps, solar energy, renewable energy and biomass. Regardless of the precise focus, two types of articles  By grouping keywords, seven sub-clusters were revealed (in falling order): cogeneration and combined heat and power (CHP), optimization and demand forecasting, heat storage, waste heat recovery, geothermal energy, heat and absorption pumps, solar energy, renewable energy and biomass. Regardless of the precise focus, two types of articles dominate.

(p13.1) The first type refers to articles that explore the feasibility and potential of specific supply and storage technologies from a system's perspective. The foci are on the systems analysis of plants and the supply of heat (production). One important aspect refers to a major challenge in all formerly centrally planned countries, and in some other countries too, to overcome the massive system defect of having two parallel energy systems: one for an electric power supply (using condensing power plants, with 30% fuel-to-power efficiency) and one for centralized boilers or boilers per building.

(p13.2) The second type refers to articles that develop supply and demand models for forecasting and supply optimization from a system perspective. The focus is on modeling the heat demand, which is balanced by the supply of heat. There are several commercial solutions for forecasting and optimization in this area.

(p13.3) Articles in this group are focused on the system level. The papers contribute to new insights about potential assessments, with few articles focusing on the process of innovation (The articles in the supply group have 2487 unique keywords. A scan, looking for specific keywords that indicate an innovation process, gave 222 such keywords that can be related to innovation. Analyzing the keywords indicated that there were few articles on specific heat and power technologies at the module and component levels [21].).
## (s14) Group 3: Distribution
(p14.0) Heat distribution is the hot water distribution network, including pipes, pumps, valves, instrumentation and automation. Heat distribution is at the core of a DH system as it consists of the pipelines connecting heat supply plants with customers' heat transfer units. Typically, half of the capital employed for a DH company/organization consists of the distribution network. Based on experience (The cost to replace old pipelines varies from 300-10,000 euros per meter, with an approximative average of 1000EUR per meter. A pipe length of 500 km in a city gives a reinvestment cost of 500 million EUR.), and on [5], the reinvestment expense of the distribution network in a city with 100,000 inhabitants can be 500 million euros. Currently, European cities are facing billion of euros reinvestments to upgrade their aging DH infrastructure, built in the 1950s and onward.

(p14.1) The significant costs stand in stark contrast with a limited number of publications: it is the smallest group and holds 42 articles (4.7%). Where there is a potential for large cost savings, especially capital costs, there should be large incentives for innovation; hence the low number of articles is notable. Few articles in the distribution group are among the most-cited publications (search 1), indicating a limited scholarly interest.

(p14.2) The top ten keywords are listed in Figure 7. The keywords indicate that the publications are system-oriented or focused on the policy level, regarding energy efficiency, energy conservation and heat losses rather than on operational innovation.
## (s24) Group 8: Business/Social Science
(p24.0) Articles in this group look at DH from a business or financial perspective, not from a technical, engineering or natural sciences perspective. There were 71 articles (8% of all) that were coded into the business, economics and other social science segments.

(p24.1) The top ten keywords are listed in Figure 16. Economics and policies are the dominant themes that are observed after grouping the keywords. Only a few articles in this group are among the most cited.

(p24.2) Of the 71 articles, 19 focus on innovation. The remaining articles focus on policy in- Economics and policies are the dominant themes that are observed after grouping the keywords. Only a few articles in this group are among the most cited.

(p24.3) Of the 71 articles, 19 focus on innovation. The remaining articles focus on policy instruments or finance/investment. Among the 19 innovation articles, there is one article that looked at innovation ecosystems [55], eight articles focused on large technical systems, transition, diffusion and adoption of new energy systems in terms of actors' collaboration [56]. Four articles focused on business model innovation [57], and six articles focused on new product/service development.
## (s25) Results in Summary: All Groups
(p25.0) By summarizing the ten most common keywords from all nine groups listed above, we get a weighted result, which favors the small group keywords, see Figure 17. Economics and policies are the dominant themes that are observed after grouping the keywords. Only a few articles in this group are among the most cited.

(p25.1) Of the 71 articles, 19 focus on innovation. The remaining articles focus on policy instruments or finance/investment. Among the 19 innovation articles, there is one article that looked at innovation ecosystems [55], eight articles focused on large technical systems, transition, diffusion and adoption of new energy systems in terms of actors' collaboration [56]. Four articles focused on business model innovation [57], and six articles focused on new product/service development.
