# Big Data: Survey, Technologies, Opportunities, and Challenges

CorpusID: 2398835 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/87f0cf8e576831bad356c80bbe9225cdded38c1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/87f0cf8e576831bad356c80bbe9225cdded38c1f)

Fields: Engineering, Business, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s11) Collection/Filtering/Classification. Data collection or
(p11.0) generation is generally the first stage of any data life cycle. Large amounts of data are created in the forms of log file data and data from sensors, mobile equipment, satellites, laboratories, supercomputers, searching entries, chat records, posts on Internet forums, and microblog messages. In data collection, special techniques are utilized to acquire raw data from a specific environment. A significant factor in the management of scientific data is the capture of data with respect to the transition of raw to published data processes. Data generation is closely associated with the daily lives of people. These data are also similarly of low density and high value. Normally, Internet data may not have value; however, users can exploit accumulated Big Data through useful information, including user habits and hobbies. Thus, behavior and emotions can be forecasted. The problem of scientific data is one that must be considered by Scientific Data Infrastructure (SDI) providers [58,59] . In the following paragraphs, we explain five common methods of data collection, along with their technologies and techniques.

(p11.1) (i) Log Files. This method is commonly used to collect data by automatically recording files through a data source system.  Log files are utilized in nearly all digital equipment; that is, web servers note the number of visits, clicks, click rates, and other property records of web users in log files [61].

(p11.2) In web sites and servers, user activity is captured in three log file formats (all are in ASCII): (i) public log file format (NCSA); (ii) expanded log format (W3C); and (iii) IIS log format (Microsoft). To increase query efficiency in massive log stores, log information is occasionally stored in databases rather than text files [62,63]. Other log files that collect data are stock indicators in financial applications and files that determine operating status in network monitoring and traffic management.

(p11.3) (ii) Sensing. Sensors are often used to measure physical quantities, which are then converted into understandable digital signals for processing and storage. Sensory data may be categorized as sound wave, vibration, voice, chemical, automobile, current, pressure, weather, and temperature. Sensed data or information is transferred to a collection point through wired or wireless networks. The wired sensor network obtains related information conveniently for easy deployment and is suitable for management applications, such as video surveillance system [64].

(p11.4) When position is inaccurate, when a specific phenomenon is unknown, and when power and communication have not been set up in the environment, wireless communication can enable data transmission within limited capabilities. Currently, the wireless sensor network (WSN) has gained significant attention and has been applied in many fields, including environmental research [65,66], the monitoring of water quality [67], civil engineering [68,69], and the tracking of wildlife habit [70]. The data through any application is assembled in various sensor nodes and sent back to the base location for further handling. Sensed data have been discussed by [71] in detail.

(p11.5) (iii) Methods of Network Data Capture. Network data is captured by combining systems of web crawler, task, word segmentation, and index. In search engines, web crawler is a component that downloads and stores web pages [72]. It obtains access to other linked pages through the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) of a web page and it stores and organizes all of the retrieved URLs. Web crawler typically acquires data through various applications based on web pages, including web caching and search engines. Traditional tools for web page extraction generate numerous high-quality and efficient solutions, which have been examined extensively. Choudhary et al. [73] have also proposed numerous extraction strategies to address rich Internet applications.

(p11.6) (iv) Technology to Capture Zero-Copy (ZC) Packets. In ZC, nodes do not produce copies that are not produced between internal memories during packet receiving and sending. During sending, direct data packets originate from the user buffer of applications, pass through network interfaces, and then reach an external network. During receiving, the network interfaces send data packets to the user buffer directly. ZC reduces the number of times data is copied, the number of system calls, and CPU load as datagrams are transmitted from network devices to user program space. To directly communicate network datagrams to an address space preallocated by the system kernel, ZC initially utilizes the technology of direct memory access. As a result, the CPU is not utilized. The number of system calls is reduced by accessing the internal memory through a detection program.

(p11.7) (v) Mobile Equipment. The functions of mobile devices have strengthened gradually as their usage rapidly increases. As the features of such devices are complicated and as means of data acquisition are enhanced, various data types are produced. Mobile devices and various technologies may obtain information on geographical location information through positioning systems; collect audio information with microphones; capture videos, pictures, streetscapes, and other multimedia information using cameras; and assemble user gestures and body language information via touch screens and gravity sensors. In terms of service quality and level, mobile Internet has been improved by wireless technologies, which capture, analyze, and store such information. For instance, the iPhone is a "Mobile Spy" that collects wireless data and geographical positioning information without the knowledge of the user. It sends such information back to Apple Inc. for processing; similarly, Google's Android (an operating system for smart phones) and phones running Microsoft Windows also gather such data.

(p11.8) Aside from the aforementioned methods, which utilize technologies and techniques for Big Data, other methods, technologies, techniques, and/or systems of data collection have been developed. In scientific experiments, for instance, many special tools and techniques can acquire experimental data, including magnetic spectrometers and radio telescopes.
## (s12) Data Analysis.
(p12.0) Data analysis enables an organization to handle abundant information that can affect the business. However, data analysis is challenging for various applications because of the complexity of the data that must be analyzed and the scalability of the underlying algorithms that support such processes [74]. Data analysis has two main objectives: to understand the relationships among features and to develop effective methods of data mining that can accurately predict future observations [75]. Various devices currently generate increasing amounts of data. Accordingly, the speed of the access and mining of both structured and unstructured data has increased over time [76]. Thus, techniques that can analyze such large amounts of data are necessary. Available analytical techniques include data mining, visualization, statistical analysis, and machine learning. For instance, data mining can automatically discover useful patterns in a large dataset.

(p12.1) Data mining is widely used in fields such as science, engineering, medicine, and business. With this technique, previously hidden insights have been unearthed from large amounts of data to benefit the business community [2]. Since the establishment of organizations in the modern era, data mining has been applied in data recording. However, Big Data is composed of not only large amounts of data but also data in different formats. Therefore, high processing speed is necessary [77]. For flexible data analysis, Begoli and Horey [78] proposed three principles: first, architecture should support many analysis methods, such as statistical analysis, machine learning, data mining, and visual analysis. Second, different storage mechanisms should be used because all of the data cannot fit in a single type of storage area. Additionally, the data should be processed differently at various stages. Third, data should be accessed efficiently. To analyze Big Data, data mining algorithms that are computer intensive are utilized. Such algorithms demand high-performance processors. Furthermore, the storage and computing requirements of Big Data analysis are effectively met by cloud computing [79].

(p12.2) To leverage Big Data from microblogging, Lee and Chien [80] introduced an advanced data-driven application. They developed the text-stream clustering of news classification online for real-time monitoring according to density-based clustering models, such as Twitter. This method broadly arranges news in real time to locate global information. Steed et al. [81] presented a system of visual analytics called EDEN to analyze current datasets (earth simulation). EDEN is a solid multivariate framework for visual analysis that encourages interactive visual queries. Its special capabilities include the visual filtering and exploratory analysis of data. To investigate Big Data storage and the challenges in constructing data analysis platforms, Lin and Ryaboy [82] established schemes involving PB data scales. These schemes clarify that these challenges stem from the heterogeneity of the components integrated into production workflow.

(p12.3) Fan and Liu [75] examined prominent statistical methods to generate large covariance matrices that determine correlation structure; to conduct large-scale simultaneous tests that select genes and proteins with significantly different expressions, genetic markers for complex diseases, and inverse covariance matrices for network modeling; and to choose high-dimensional variables that identify important molecules. These variables clarify molecule mechanisms in pharmacogenomics.

(p12.4) Big Data analysis can be applied to special types of data. Nonetheless, many traditional techniques for data analysis may still be used to process Big Data. Some representative methods of traditional data analysis, most of which are related to statistics and computer science, are examined in the following sections.

(p12.5) (i) Data Mining Algorithms. In data mining, hidden but potentially valuable information is extracted from large, incomplete, fuzzy, and noisy data. Ten of the most dominant data mining techniques were identified during the IEEE International Conference on Data Mining [83], including SVM, C4.5, Apriori, k-means, Cart, EM, and Naive Bayes. These algorithms are useful for mining research problems in Big Data and cover classification, regression, clustering, association analysis, statistical learning, and link mining.

(p12.6) (ii) Cluster Analysis. Cluster analysis groups objects statistically according to certain rules and features. It differentiates The Scientific World Journal 11 objects with particular features and distributes them into sets accordingly. For example, objects in the same group are highly heterogeneous, whereas those in another group are highly homogeneous. Cluster analysis is an unsupervised research method that does not use training data [3].

(p12.7) (iii) Correlation Analysis. Correlation analysis determines the law of relations among practical phenomena, including mutual restriction, correlation, and correlative dependence. It then predicts and controls data accordingly. These types of relations can be classified into two categories. (i) Function reflects the strict relation of dependency among phenomena. This relation is called a definitive dependence relationship.

(p12.8) (ii) Correlation corresponds to dependent relations that are uncertain or inexact. The numerical value of a variable may be similar to that of another variable. Thus, such numerical values regularly fluctuate given the surrounding mean values.
## (s13) Heterogeneity.
(p13.0) Data mining algorithms locate unknown patterns and homogeneous formats for analysis in structured formats. However, the analysis of unstructured and/or semistructured formats remains complicated. Therefore, data must be carefully structured prior to analysis. In hospitals, for example, each patient may undergo several procedures, which may necessitate many records from different departments. Furthermore, each patient may have varying test results. Some of this information may not be structured for the relational database. Data variety is considered a characteristic of Big Data that follows the increasing number of different data sources, and these unlimited sources have produced much Big Data, both varied and heterogeneous [86]. Table 5 shows the difference between structured and unstructured data.
## (s14) Scalability.
(p14.0) Challenging issues in data analysis include the management and analysis of large amounts of data and the rapid increase in the size of datasets. Such challenges are mitigated by enhancing processor speed. However, data volume increases at a faster rate than computing resources and CPU speeds. For instance, a single node shares many hardware resources, such as processor memory and caches. As a result, Big Data analysis necessitates tremendously timeconsuming navigation through a gigantic search space to provide guidelines and obtain feedback from users. Thus, Sebepou and Magoutis [87] proposed a scalable system of data streaming with a persistent storage path. This path influences the performance properties of a scalable streaming system slightly.
## (s15) Accuracy.
(p15.0) Data analysis is typically buoyed by relatively accurate data obtained from structured databases with limited sources. Therefore, such analysis results are accurate. However, analysis is adversely affected by the increase in the amount of and the variety in data sources with data volume [2]. In data stream scenarios, high-speed data strongly constrain processing algorithms spatially and temporally. Hence, stream-specific requirements must be fulfilled to process these data [85].
## (s19) Integrity.
(p19.0) Data integrity is critical for collaborative analysis, wherein organizations share information with analysts and decision makers. In this activity, data mining approaches are applied to enhance the efficiency of critical decision-making and of the execution of cooperative tasks.

(p19.1) Data integrity is a particular challenge for large-scale collaborations, in which data changes frequently. This definition matches with the approach proposed by Clark and Wilson to prevent fraud and error [99]. Integrity is also interpreted according to the quality and reliability of data. Previous literature also examines integrity from the viewpoint of inspection mechanisms in DBMS.

(p19.2) Despite the significance of this problem, the currently available solutions remain very restricted. Integrity generally prevents illegal or unauthorized changes in usage, as per the definition presented by Clark and Wilson regarding the prevention of fraud and error [99]. Integrity is also related to the quality and reliability of data, as well as inspection mechanisms in DBMS. At present, DBMS allows users to express a wide range of conditions that must be met. These conditions are often called integrity constraints. These constraints must result in consistent and accurate data. The many-sided concept of integrity is very difficult to address adequately because different approaches consider various definitions. For example, "Clark and Wilson" addressed the amendment of erroneous data through well-formed transactions and the separation of powers. Furthermore, the Biba integrity model prevents data corruption and limits the flow of information between data objects [100].

(p19.3) With respect to large data in cloud platforms, a major concern in data security is the assessment of data integrity in untrusted servers [101]. Given the large size of outsourced data and the capacity of user-bound resources, verifying the accuracy of data in a cloud environment can be daunting and expensive for users. In addition, data detection techniques are often insufficient with regard to data access because lost or damaged data may not be recovered in time. To address the problem of data integrity evaluation, many programs have been established in different models and security systems, including tag-based, data replication-based, data-dependent, and block-dependent programs. Priyadharshini and Parvathi [101] discussed and compared tag-based and data replicationbased verification, data-dependent tag and data-independent tag, and entire data and data block dependent tag.
## (s20) Availability.
(p20.0) In cloud platforms with large data, availability is crucial because of data outsourcing. If the service is not available to the user when required, the QoS is unable to meet service level agreement (SLA). The following threats can induce data unavailability [102].
## (s21) Confidentiality.
(p21.0) Confidentiality refers to distorted data from theft. Insurance can usually be claimed by encryption technology [104]. If the databases contain Big Data, the encryption can then be classified into table, disk, and data encryption.

(p21.1) Data encryption is conducted to minimize the granularity of encryption, as well as for high security, flexibility, and applicability/relevance. Therefore, it is applicable for existing data. However, this technology is limited by the high number of keys and the complexity of key management. Thus far, satisfactory results have been obtained in this field in terms of two general categories: discussion of the security model and of the encryption and calculation methods and the mechanism of distributed keys.
