# R E V I E W Adverse Drug Reactions of Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors in Older People Living with Dementia: A Comprehensive Literature Review

CorpusID: 237478908 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cec67e860db37731824f01580ecd416fda6f59b4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cec67e860db37731824f01580ecd416fda6f59b4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Neurological and Psychological Adverse Effects
(p11.0) Neurological side effects mainly result from excessive activation of nicotinic receptors. Common neurological adverse effects are dizziness, dyskinesia, convulsion, muscle cramps, insomnia, and vivid dream. The epileptic seizure is a very rare neurological adverse effects induced by AChEIs. 160,161 From previous report, patient with mild AD treated with 10 mg donepezil once daily for 3 weeks presented convulsions during the treatment. 160 Moreover, AChEI-induced seizures may result from nutritional and metabolic disorders such as hyponatremia. 161 The vivid dream results from the disorder of brainstem cholinergic systems in processing rapid eye movement sleep. One characteristic of the vivid dream is extremely realistic. Vivid dreams usually appear in patients treated with donepezil in the evening owing to peak plasma concentration at night. 63,162 Psychiatric adverse outcomes in older adults treated with AChEIs may include worsening of hallucination, anxiety, aggression, and confusion. 163, 164 Psychiatric problems are usually presented in dementia patients treated with high doses of AChEIs.
## (s12) Respiratory Adverse Effects
(p12.0) Bronchospasm was presented as a pulmonary side effect after AChEI administration. 165 Therefore, patients with a history of bronchoconstriction should be closely monitored during treatment. 165 Furthermore, nasal problems could be presented among patients treated with AChEI. 165 There is no report of respiratory failure from AChEIs for dementia treatment.
## (s13) Genitourinary Adverse Effects
(p13.0) Urinary incontinence may occur after treatment with AChEIs, in particular for galantamine. 166 The mechanism is related to nicotinic Ach receptor stimulation at the neuromuscular junction, resulting in an increased peripheral ACh.
## (s15) Factors Associated with Adverse Drug Reactions of Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors in Older Adults with Dementia
(p15.0) In geriatric patients with dementia, changes in PK and PD are major risk factors of ADRs. In terms of PK, hepatic and renal functions usually decline in these patients, resulting in decreased drug elimination. Older patients are vulnerable to get an uneventful ADRs from these medications according to their sensitivity to the pharmacodynamic effects. 180 Additionally, patients with AD are prone to be sensitive to ADRs as a result of increased BBB permeability and decreased P-gp activity in the brain. 43,101,102,181,182 Polypharmacy is common in aging populations and is an important risk factor for drugrelated problems (DRPs) such as potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs), drug-drug interactions (DDIs), ADRs and poor compliance. 183,184 ADRs derived from DDIs, PIMs or poor compliance are often reported in older patients with dementia. 183,184 ADRs are major causes of hospitalization, morbidity and mortality in older people with dementia. 185,186 Changes in Pharmacokinetics PK is what an individual's body does to a medication after its administration, and refers to absorption, distribution, metabolism and excretion. [42][43][44][45][46][47] In geriatric population, the alteration of absorption does not lead to major adverse effects whereas changes in distribution, metabolism and excretion play important roles in clinical outcomes. The alterations of PK and PD of AChEIs among older people living with dementia were presented in Tables 1 and 2.
## (s19) Changes in the Blood-Brain Barrier
(p19.0) The BBB is a highly selective semipermeable layer of endothelial cells which limits the access of water-soluble and large molecules transporting from blood circulation into the brain parenchyma. Older adults with dementia have changes in the permeability and integrity of the BBB, as presented in Table 2. BBB mechanism includes reabsorption of CSF and efflux pumps for molecules such as p-glycoprotein (P-gp) which assists the maintenance of hemostasis in the brain and in the clearance of betaamyloid. 43,101,102 P-gp is a phosphorylated protein encoded by multidrug resistance gene 1 (MDR1) and belongs to the family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) membrane transporters. 102,212 It is located on the apical surface of endothelial cells and is involved in limiting the transfer of small molecules into the brain. 213,214 With aging process and dementia, levels and activity of P-gp have a tendency to decline. 101,102,181,215 Furthermore, micro-disruption of the BBB is found in patients with dementia, contributing to increased allowance of some medications across BBB around the disruption areas. 181 These changes may lead to increased permission of AChEIs to the brain as a predisposing factor of AChEIinduced ADRs in this population. 43 
## (s20) Changes in Pharmacodynamics
(p20.0) By definition, PD is described as what medication does to the body such as receptor binding and chemical interaction. [42][43][44][45][46][47] The changes of PD are difficult to predict and evaluate in individuals. In the aging process, the sensitive affinity of receptors for particular medications may change. Moreover, the number of receptor sites may alter and may impact on the efficacy of many medications. The geriatric population is more susceptible to certain central nervous system (CNS) adverse outcomes of AChEIs due to increased permeability of the BBB and decreased P-gp activity. 101,102,181,182,215 Furthermore, high sensitivity to cholinergic receptors in the brain and the reduction in homeostasis are found in the older adult population. 45,46,216 These alterations result in an elevated responses to AChEIs and contribute to PNS and CNS cholinergic ADRs, as presented in Table 2 
## (s28) Dovepress
(p28.0) Ruangritchankul et al of donepezil is safe and the use of its doubling dose should be monitored. 264 Galantamine is a daily oral medication ranging from 8 to 24 mg per day, 116 as shown in Supplementary  Table 1. Galantamine doses must be adjusted for people with moderate hepatic impairment. Furthermore, galantamine should not be recommended to patients with severe liver and kidney dysfunction. Rivastigmine may be a good choice for older demented patients exposed to polypharmacy to reduce the incidence of PK drug interactions related to CYP enzymes. Rivastigmine prescriptions start at 1.5 mg and could be gradually increased to 6 mg twice a day, 64 
## (s30) Recommendations for Discontinuation of Acetylcholinesterase Inhibitors
(p30.0) The continuous use of AChEIs should be often weighted the risks and the benefits. According to the Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System database, serious ADRs related to AChEIs were reported, especially in long-term treatment. 135,136,179,213,265,266 Advanced dementia patients may be offered unnecessary treatment that may not provide positive effects, resulting in increased adverse outcomes. 267 Therefore, many studies offered recommendations to discontinue AChEI treatment in particular conditions to optimize medication prescribing. 268 The common reason for deprescribing AChEIs were lack of response, significantly impaired functional status, severe cognitive impairment (MMSE score < 10), and side effects. 268 Besides minimized medication prescribing, the benefits of AChEI discontinuation are improved medication non-adherence, and reduced DDI, medication management burden and cost of medications. 269 The discontinuation of AChEIs should be slowly tapered the dose by halving the previous dose and stepping down to the lowest available dose. 269 The abrupt cessation should be done in patients with experiencing ADRs. After discontinuation, physicians should closely monitor the withdrawal symptoms and the changes of cognitive function, psycho-behavioral symptoms and functional status. 269
