# A Survey of Technologies and Recent Developments for Sustainable Smart Cycling

CorpusID: 233658093 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e3903edff551a59825659c9e99d2d30d56b516c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6e3903edff551a59825659c9e99d2d30d56b516c)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Nowadays, most people live in large or mega cities around the world, which has resulted in a way of living dominated by urban patterns [1]. However, while the benefits of the fast urbanization process in the last hundred of years have been largely praised, a series of problems have also emerged in our increasingly overcrowded cities [2,3]. As a result, modern urban areas have been struggling to deal with complex challenges such as mobility, pollution and sustainable use of resources, with promising initiatives emerging in the last years [4,5].

(p0.1) A major challenge that is recurrent in most large cities is the urban mobility [6]. The impact of inefficient transportation has been extensively discussed, since the hours spent due to heavy traffic can be easily associated to economy losses [7]. Additionally, other issues related to public health like traffic deaths and serious injuries can also be collateral effects from mobility inefficiencies of large cities. However, although these problems could be already enough to trigger the red alarm for better planning and management of the cities, traditional vehicles are also major sources of pollution, directly impacting the air quality in urban areas. The resulting scenario has put mobility issues on the top of the list of urgent problems to be solved, but experience has demonstrated that efficient solutions for such issues are not straightforward [8,9].

(p0.2) One of the most promising trends to relieve traffic jams and all their associated negative impacts is the use of alternative transportation means. Among them, bicycles have been the most successful option, with reasonable efficiency at very affordable costs. In recent decades, some governments have been investing in the construction of bike paths and in the reduction of taxes for the fabrication of bikes, potentially stimulating the use of bicycles at least for short-distance routes [10,11]. In parallel, a new generation of electric bicycles and scooters is getting very popular, but their usage and mobility challenges are quite similar to the ones experienced by conventional bicycles. Actually, when promoting more sustainable mobility, bicycles, electric bicycles, electric scooters, skates and rollerblades are all alternative transportation means that will usually share the same challenges and interests, leading us to collectively call them "bikes" for simplification reasons.
## (s1) On the Use of Bikes in Cities
(p1.0) Generally speaking, sustainable mobility innovations are at the forefront of large urban centers. With increasing challenges resulted from inefficient mobility, air pollution and traffic accidents constantly gaining attention in large cities, new solutions have been sought in different areas and contexts. In fact, for an increasing number of cities, the solution for such challenges has been expected from the adoption of bikes.

(p1.1) Many works have considered the adoption of bikes as an effective way to enhance mobility in urban areas, addressing different aspects of urban cycling. Since there are different particularities according to the way bikes are used on the considered regions, the literature has provided many important insights about the development of smart cycling in different countries. Table 2 summarizes recent works in this sense, indicating important discussions that have driven research efforts.

(p1.2) Actually, there are many challenges related to smart cycling, ranging from political and economical issues to the use of new disruptive technologies. Although all these discussions are relevant, we are particularly concerned with technological innovations that will pave the way for the construction of smart cycling. Among them, we believe that the massive use of smartphones and the adoption of IoT devices will be the core elements to foster bike-centric mobility, with potential benefits that can dramatically change the cities' transportation services [19]. Therefore, this article surveys recent works targeted at innovations that can ultimately support the maturation of smart cycling in cities, contributing with important discussions in this area.

(p1.3) In short, the discussions in this article are centered on three major research trends: smartphone-based cycling, IoT-bikes and connected e-bikes. Figure 2 further depicts the research areas and development initiatives that are surveyed in this work.  Next sections will discuss new technologies and innovative projects targeted at the promotion of more efficient, affordable and safer cycling in cities, highlighting their expected impacts when achieving sustainable urban mobility.

(p1.4) Generally speaking, sustainable mobility innovations are at the forefront of large urban centers. With increasing challenges resulted from inefficient mobility, air pollution and traffic accidents constantly gaining attention in large cities, new solutions have been sought in different areas and contexts. In fact, for an increasing number of cities, the solution for such challenges has been expected from the adoption of bikes.

(p1.5) Many works have considered the adoption of bikes as an effective way to enhance mobility in urban areas, addressing different aspects of urban cycling. Since there are different particularities according to the way bikes are used on the considered regions, the literature has provided many important insights about the development of smart cycling in different countries. Table 2 summarizes recent works in this sense, indicating important discussions that have driven research efforts.

(p1.6) Actually, there are many challenges related to smart cycling, ranging from political and economical issues to the use of new disruptive technologies. Although all these discussions are relevant, we are particularly concerned with technological innovations that will pave the way for the construction of smart cycling. Among them, we believe that the massive use of smartphones and the adoption of IoT devices will be the core elements to foster bike-centric mobility, with potential benefits that can dramatically change the cities' transportation services [19]. Therefore, this article surveys recent works targeted at innovations that can ultimately support the maturation of smart cycling in cities, contributing with important discussions in this area.

(p1.7) In short, the discussions in this article are centered on three major research trends: smartphone-based cycling, IoT-bikes and connected e-bikes. Figure 2 further depicts the research areas and development initiatives that are surveyed in this work.  Next sections will discuss new technologies and innovative projects targeted at the promotion of more efficient, affordable and safer cycling in cities, highlighting their expected impacts when achieving sustainable urban mobility.
## (s2) Bikes in the Age of Apps
(p2.0) The use of smartphones has become essential in modern life. Among other reasons, this is due to the ease of communication that this type of device provides, in addition to the availability of an immensity of smartphone-based applications with different purposes [34]. With the development of more powerful devices at affordable prices, the number of active smartphones has even surpassed the number of traditional computers, signaling an important transformation on the way information has been consumed. Supported by this propitious scenario, it is estimated that over three billion people were using smartphones by the end of 2020, but it is still an actively growing number [35].

(p2.1) This large number of users has been boosted by popular virtual markets for mobile applications, which provide millions of apps for different purposes [34]. For this huge amount of applications, or simply "apps", a particular group has been dedicated to facilitate the use of services related to daily activities, supporting users according to their needs, habits or interests [35]. When coming to the use of bikes in modern cities, such apps have been an important breakthrough for the adoption of sustainable transportation.

(p2.2) Among smartphone apps that seek to facilitate the people's lives, there are applications that can affect the daily mobility in certain spaces. In this context, one of the main purposes of some apps is to solve problems related to urban mobility. Actually, such applications have allowed smartphones to use mobile data (mostly supported by 4G/5G technologies and Wi-Fi networks) and location-based services (GPS) in order to provide real-time information about public transportation systems. In short, such apps have supported route planning according to the user's current position, as well as allowing the identification of more efficient public services and even the indication of nearby rental spots for shared bicycles [16]. In fact, these have been very important transformations in the way people interact with the urban environment.
## (s4) Route Planning
(p4.0) Despite the use of bikes for daily transportation has been much discussed in recent years, most cities around the world do not have adequate infrastructure for efficient cycling [38]. Given the aforementioned circumstances, it is very important to provide valuable information for cyclists concerning available paths, potentially alleviating the already known mobility problems [39].

(p4.1) The issue of routing planning is not new, with many research works proposing efficient solutions to improve mobility efficiency [40,41]. In general, the main research effort has been to find the fastest route from the origin to the destination, taking into account the costs of each available path. Among such costs, distance, traffic, accidents rate and tolls are some common parameters that have been processed as cost weights. And this same principle can be leveraged when processing bike paths.

(p4.2) One of the most important information provided by smartphones is the current GPS (Global Positioning System) coordinates of the device. This information has been exploited by different applications, which have used spatial data to provide some important expected services for bike users. Actually, GPS coordinates can also be exploited along with data provided by embedded sensors, enlarging the perception of the users within the modeled system. In practical means, smartphones are able to send and receive spatial information about bike paths to take, guiding cyclists in urban areas [42].
## (s5) Delivery Services
(p5.0) With the unforeseen events of the COVID-19 Pandemic beginning in 2020, important transformations took place in the society. In a very short period of time, social distancing measures were required, impacting different elements of the routine of billions of people. In this new social setting, the use of delivery services, especially for food, has become essential in the lives of many citizens around the world. Smartphone apps aimed at this purpose became even more popular, and new solutions were created. Actually, when bikes were employed to reinforce smartphone-based delivery services, such apps started to be used more often by cyclists [49]. However, the cities are still not adapted to higher demands of delivery services, especially when bikes are being used as a working tool.

(p5.1) Given this particular scenario, there was a significant increase in the demand for companies working in the domestic delivery sector. As an example, the app "Rappi" declared a growth of 30% in deliveries in the Latin America region due to the COVID-19 Pandemic [50]. In parallel to such growth, there was also an increase in the number of registered worker deliverers, who mostly use their own bikes to work. When we associate the inherent risks of cycling in most cities with the delivery demands of this service, it is easy to see how problematic this working configuration can be. Therefore, finding new solutions for this complex scenario should be a major concern of the governments when defining public policies.
## (s6) Bike Sharing
(p6.0) The adoption of bikes as an effective transportation mean does not only depend on the availability of safe bike paths, but also on services that make the use of bikes as pervasive as possible. Generally speaking, this goal can be achieved if bikes are easily accessible, even if the accessed bikes belong to someone else. In order to promote the use of such types of bikes, bike-sharing public services and specialized apps started to be created all over the world, bringing an important boost for smart cycling.

(p6.1) Public Bike Systems (PBS), or simply bike-sharing systems, have been strongly promoted in recent years. This type of system, which has existed for decades but exploiting different supportive technologies, is becoming more popular today due to greater incentives to adopt more sustainable and healthy transportation [11]. Additionally, the wide dissemination of smartphones has also created a common platform for interactions between the users and the public bike systems, further supporting this type of service.

(p6.2) The idea behind the existence of bike sharing systems consists of making bikes available to be used for any purpose without compromising ownership, defining a new mobility service that is acquired only when and for as long as necessary [11]. In fact, the actual use of the shared bikes is not a concern of the systems, since they may be used for mobility efficiency but also for leisure. Figure 4 presents an example of a bike-sharing station in a large city. Usually, bike-sharing systems are based on a well-defined structure exploiting the use of a stock of robust and low-maintenance bicycles integrated in a network of parking stations. Such stations have space to store 10 to 100 bicycles in an automated way, using stations known as "docks" that are supported by some station control unit [52]. Thus, the registered users through mobile applications can take any bike at any station, returning it at the end of their path in a network of virtual or physical stations.

(p6.3) Many works have proposed promising solutions for efficient bike-sharing systems based on docks. In [53] a case study was conducted based on the "OV-fiets", a bike-sharing system with docks launched in the Netherlands in 2003. It provides thousands of bikes in hundreds of docks close to railway stations and urban public transport stops, promoting first and/or last mile trips. Also in the Netherlands, a bicycle-lease system is available, referred as the Swapfiets [54]. Founded in 2014, it allows users to rent bikes for a day and pick them up at a physical station, represented by stores rather than docks. This way, users get different options to use bikes for mobility, but the reality in countries as the Netherlands is far away from most of the low-income countries.

(p6.4) Another study focused on docked bike-sharing system is present in [55]. It was based on the quantitative analysis of some data related to trips made on Divvy, a Chicago platform created in 2013 with 300 initial stations and about 3000 bicycles. This data is related to information such as source and destination stations, duration of travel and type of platform server. Then, important decisions can be made when such data is available for a city.

(p6.5) Unlike bike-sharing systems with the use of docks, another model of PBS has been widely used, the "dockless". This is a new bike sharing service that does not have a parking network concept in its structure, allowing users to freely park the rented bike almost anywhere. This is different from the docked model, which determines parking stations for the bikes [56]. Among the benefits of such services, it is expected an important reduction of the deployment costs of the system, which is now strongly based on smartphone apps. Additionally, users acquire some level of flexibility when taking and returning bikes, which ultimately benefit the use of bikes for urban mobility.

(p6.6) Some works have proposed optimizations for dockless bike-sharing systems in recent years. In [54], a case study was developed using "Mobike" as an example of a dockless bike-sharing system. That application was launched in 2017 using shared smart bikes that can be parked in the areas defined by the company. These bikes use an IoT module with GPS and embedded wireless communication to allow users to find bikes in the app and use them. Following this trend, authors in [57] investigated this concept of smart bikes in Singapore. They considered "Ofo" as a PBS platform, which has been active in China since 2015. Such bike platform is focused on the IoT-based bike-sharing paradigm, allowing users to find bicycles in the app through an integrated sensor module, unlocking the chosen bike by reading a QRcode and starting using it. Actually, this bike-sharing model has rapidly spread as a viable solution.

(p6.7) Another way to unlock bikes that are inserted into a dockless bike-sharing system is through Bluetooth communication between a bike and the cyclist's smartphone. This type of authentication has also the potential to become quite popular. In [58], a dockless bikesharing system is described, an initiative to use Bluetooth to unlock bikes in Poland.

(p6.8) Regardless of the type of the employed bike sharing system, it is highly expected a series of related benefits when supporting wider uses of bikes. In first place, when the barriers of ownership are removed, bikes can be considered as a highly available and practical transportation alternative. Actually, since bike parking may be an issue in large cities, it may discourage the adoption of bikes for some routes, demanding new solutions. Secondly, the acquisition and maintenance costs for bike owners may be prohibitive in some cases. In fact, when bike sharing systems become more present in our cities, governments could provide vouchers to stimulate even more the adoption of bikes for transportation, enhancing the construction of a smart cycling atmosphere.

(p6.9) The adoption of bikes as an effective transportation mean does not only depend on the availability of safe bike paths, but also on services that make the use of bikes as pervasive as possible. Generally speaking, this goal can be achieved if bikes are easily accessible, even if the accessed bikes belong to someone else. In order to promote the use of such types of bikes, bike-sharing public services and specialized apps started to be created all over the world, bringing an important boost for smart cycling.

(p6.10) Public Bike Systems (PBS), or simply bike-sharing systems, have been strongly promoted in recent years. This type of system, which has existed for decades but exploiting different supportive technologies, is becoming more popular today due to greater incentives to adopt more sustainable and healthy transportation [11]. Additionally, the wide dissemination of smartphones has also created a common platform for interactions between the users and the public bike systems, further supporting this type of service.

(p6.11) The idea behind the existence of bike sharing systems consists of making bikes available to be used for any purpose without compromising ownership, defining a new mobility service that is acquired only when and for as long as necessary [11]. In fact, the actual use of the shared bikes is not a concern of the systems, since they may be used for mobility efficiency but also for leisure. Figure 4 presents an example of a bike-sharing station in a large city. Usually, bike-sharing systems are based on a well-defined structure exploiting the use of a stock of robust and low-maintenance bicycles integrated in a network of parking stations. Such stations have space to store 10 to 100 bicycles in an automated way, using stations known as "docks" that are supported by some station control unit [52]. Thus, the registered users through mobile applications can take any bike at any station, returning it at the end of their path in a network of virtual or physical stations.

(p6.12) Many works have proposed promising solutions for efficient bike-sharing systems based on docks. In [53] a case study was conducted based on the "OV-fiets", a bike-sharing system with docks launched in the Netherlands in 2003. It provides thousands of bikes in hundreds of docks close to railway stations and urban public transport stops, promoting first and/or last mile trips. Also in the Netherlands, a bicycle-lease system is available, referred as the Swapfiets [54]. Founded in 2014, it allows users to rent bikes for a day and pick them up at a physical station, represented by stores rather than docks. This way, users get different options to use bikes for mobility, but the reality in countries as the Netherlands is far away from most of the low-income countries.

(p6.13) Another study focused on docked bike-sharing system is present in [55]. It was based on the quantitative analysis of some data related to trips made on Divvy, a Chicago platform created in 2013 with 300 initial stations and about 3000 bicycles. This data is related to information such as source and destination stations, duration of travel and type of platform server. Then, important decisions can be made when such data is available for a city.

(p6.14) Unlike bike-sharing systems with the use of docks, another model of PBS has been widely used, the "dockless". This is a new bike sharing service that does not have a parking network concept in its structure, allowing users to freely park the rented bike almost anywhere. This is different from the docked model, which determines parking stations for the bikes [56]. Among the benefits of such services, it is expected an important reduction of the deployment costs of the system, which is now strongly based on smartphone apps. Additionally, users acquire some level of flexibility when taking and returning bikes, which ultimately benefit the use of bikes for urban mobility.

(p6.15) Some works have proposed optimizations for dockless bike-sharing systems in recent years. In [54], a case study was developed using "Mobike" as an example of a dockless bike-sharing system. That application was launched in 2017 using shared smart bikes that can be parked in the areas defined by the company. These bikes use an IoT module with GPS and embedded wireless communication to allow users to find bikes in the app and use them. Following this trend, authors in [57] investigated this concept of smart bikes in Singapore. They considered "Ofo" as a PBS platform, which has been active in China since 2015. Such bike platform is focused on the IoT-based bike-sharing paradigm, allowing users to find bicycles in the app through an integrated sensor module, unlocking the chosen bike by reading a QRcode and starting using it. Actually, this bike-sharing model has rapidly spread as a viable solution.

(p6.16) Another way to unlock bikes that are inserted into a dockless bike-sharing system is through Bluetooth communication between a bike and the cyclist's smartphone. This type of authentication has also the potential to become quite popular. In [58], a dockless bikesharing system is described, an initiative to use Bluetooth to unlock bikes in Poland.

(p6.17) Regardless of the type of the employed bike sharing system, it is highly expected a series of related benefits when supporting wider uses of bikes. In first place, when the barriers of ownership are removed, bikes can be considered as a highly available and practical transportation alternative. Actually, since bike parking may be an issue in large cities, it may discourage the adoption of bikes for some routes, demanding new solutions. Secondly, the acquisition and maintenance costs for bike owners may be prohibitive in some cases. In fact, when bike sharing systems become more present in our cities, governments could provide vouchers to stimulate even more the adoption of bikes for transportation, enhancing the construction of a smart cycling atmosphere.
## (s8) Sustainability and Environmental Monitoring
(p8.0) When applying the concepts of IoT in the context of bikes, it is possible to develop new solutions that can expand the possibilities when concerning urban mobility. For example, among recent solutions in this sense, bike sharing has became possible with the dissemination of smartphones, but it is the IoT revolution that can further enhance the benefits of this service. Actually, bikes are great "last mile" solutions for mobility because they are affordable and can reach places that public transports can not [66]. Thus, if intelligent bikes are everywhere, the possibilities are tremendous [67].

(p8.1) The use of sensors, actuators and GPS receivers can allow bikes to perceive their environment, collecting important information [68]. Since a sensor is capable to retrieve data about some particular physical variable, such as temperature, pressure, humidity and luminosity, a bike becomes a mobile monitoring station. In this scenario, with mobile bikes gathering data from different parts of a city, a lot of important information can be extracted, supporting multiple urban services. In fact, the construction of smart cities demands the processing of data from different sources; since bikes can be used as a distributed data source, with complex mobility patterns, this group of data can support a new class of applications [5,18].

(p8.2) Some recent works have proposed the use of sensors attached to bikes for different types of monitoring. In [69], authors attached a camera to a bike to allow visual data processing of the road. Images are captured by bikes and transmitted toward the Cloud. Then, exploiting deep learning techniques, the quality of the road is identified, potentially supporting the evaluation of bike paths. Still considering the quality of the used roads, the work in [39] exploits data from sensor devices attached to bikes to evaluate the quality of bike paths, assigning quality levels based on Fuzzy logic rules. The idea in [39] is to balance different data related to the quality of the bike paths, which may even be useful to support route planning applications. For the work in [70], sensors are attached to bikes in order to allow the monitoring of the air quality, using for that smartphones to transmit the collected data. In all these works, sensors are attached to bikes to allow the monitoring of environmental variables or to collect images of the bike paths, enlarging the perceptions about the cities.

(p8.3) Generally speaking, environmental monitoring is an important activity to support sustainability. In fact, to achieve the sustainability of a system, it is necessary to make use of resources in a way that guarantees the continuity of this system in the long term. By monitoring environmental resources, it is possible to determine objectively if their use is being made in order to guarantee subsistence or if it is affecting the balance of the ecosystem. Therefore, environmental monitoring based on IoT bikes can play an important role in this scenario.
## (s10) Promoting Health through Connected Bikes
(p10.0) Cycling is a well-known physical activity that has many health benefits for cyclists. Among them, cardio-respiratory fitness and reduced risk of developing diseases such as morbid obesity are some few examples [83]. Even in the cases when cyclists are exposed to harmful air pollution conditions-as discussed in the last section-the benefits of cycling may overlap the problems that inhaling polluted air can cause, excepting on extreme conditions of pollutants concentrations [84]. Promoting health habits by the use of bikes is a trending topic.

(p10.1) It is common among those who practice cycling as an exercise to monitor their activity in order to measure their progresses. Some cyclists usually make use of wearable devices like smartwatches or smartbands together with smartphones to measure vital signs, traveled distance and the amount of time taken to complete the ride. Although already benefiting, such configuration can be considerably enhanced when IoT is exploited, turning bikes into sensing and processing stations. For the new generation of smart cycling solutions being created, health monitoring and assistance may become a pervasive service.

(p10.2) Some works have already proposed the use of sensors attached directly into bikes to make health-related measurements. In [85], multiple sensors are used to measure the heart rate of the cyclist, traveled distance and the speed of the bicycle. Information is gathered and processed by an Arduino board, allowing combination of the retrieved data. For [86], data of the cyclist in terms of health condition and cyclist's performance are provided by sensors, being available for processing. That approach uses a heart rate sensor and a pulse oximetry sensor (to measure the oxygen saturation inside the cyclist's body), besides sensors directly attached to the bike. In both cases, the wearable sensors can directly connect to any processing unit (e.g., a specific hardware board or a smartphone) in order to make sensed data available, which is a common approach when employing wearable sensors [87].

(p10.3) In addition to the use of sensors to monitor the cyclist's vital and health signs, other sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes can be used to detect falls and other types of accidents and then trigger emergency services as in the Accident Detection System proposed in [88]. In parallel, some authors have proposed the development of a system capable of preventing accidents instead of just detecting them, which favors preventive actions over responsive ones. The work developed in [89] proposed a system similar to the direction arrows already used in motor vehicles such as cars, motorcycles and buses to indicate the intention to perform a conversion to some direction, in addition to using a sonar type sensor to assess whether it is safe or not for the cyclist to perform a maneuver.

(p10.4) Cycling is a well-known physical activity that has many health benefits for cyclists. Among them, cardio-respiratory fitness and reduced risk of developing diseases such as morbid obesity are some few examples [83]. Even in the cases when cyclists are exposed to harmful air pollution conditions-as discussed in the last section-the benefits of cycling may overlap the problems that inhaling polluted air can cause, excepting on extreme conditions of pollutants concentrations [84]. Promoting health habits by the use of bikes is a trending topic.

(p10.5) It is common among those who practice cycling as an exercise to monitor their activity in order to measure their progresses. Some cyclists usually make use of wearable devices like smartwatches or smartbands together with smartphones to measure vital signs, traveled distance and the amount of time taken to complete the ride. Although already benefiting, such configuration can be considerably enhanced when IoT is exploited, turning bikes into sensing and processing stations. For the new generation of smart cycling solutions being created, health monitoring and assistance may become a pervasive service.

(p10.6) Some works have already proposed the use of sensors attached directly into bikes to make health-related measurements. In [85], multiple sensors are used to measure the heart rate of the cyclist, traveled distance and the speed of the bicycle. Information is gathered and processed by an Arduino board, allowing combination of the retrieved data. For [86], data of the cyclist in terms of health condition and cyclist's performance are provided by sensors, being available for processing. That approach uses a heart rate sensor and a pulse oximetry sensor (to measure the oxygen saturation inside the cyclist's body), besides sensors directly attached to the bike. In both cases, the wearable sensors can directly connect to any processing unit (e.g., a specific hardware board or a smartphone) in order to make sensed data available, which is a common approach when employing wearable sensors [87].

(p10.7) In addition to the use of sensors to monitor the cyclist's vital and health signs, other sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes can be used to detect falls and other types of accidents and then trigger emergency services as in the Accident Detection System proposed in [88]. In parallel, some authors have proposed the development of a system capable of preventing accidents instead of just detecting them, which favors preventive actions over responsive ones. The work developed in [89] proposed a system similar to the direction arrows already used in motor vehicles such as cars, motorcycles and buses to indicate the intention to perform a conversion to some direction, in addition to using a sonar type sensor to assess whether it is safe or not for the cyclist to perform a maneuver.
## (s11) Internet of Bikes
(p11.0) The use of sensors, actuators and processing units can put smart cycling in a prominent place, providing and consuming multiple data in different scenarios. However, while the processing of sensed data retrieved from bikes can support useful applications, the breakthrough is expected when bikes communicate with each other. In short, connected bikes will be able to transmit and receive data dynamically, for example adjusting routes and avoiding risky areas. With connectable bikes, we take a bigger step toward sustainable and smart cities.

(p11.1) The idea of the Internet of Bikes (IoB) is taking shape through incremental developments in the area, with promising solutions emerging in recent years. An obvious movement in this direction has been done when creating bike-sharing systems, since connected bikes that does not depend on the cyclists' smartphones are safer and better monitored [66]. For that, some works have discussed communication issues that could impact such services. In [90], a protocol is proposed to support bike-centric communications target at bike sharing, assuming that IoT bikes will have inherent processing, memory and networking constraints. The proposed delay-tolerant protocol is based on the storecarry-and-forward principle, which allows temporal storage of packets by the network in order to better adapt to the constraints and mobility pattern of the bikes. Variations of this protocol are discussed in [91].

(p11.2) Other concerns may arise when connecting bikes. If all elements associated to the urban mobility are connected and integrated, much better decisions can be taken in a real-time basis. Actually, the evolution of autonomous vehicles in recent years has raised questions about safety in general, both for the people inside the vehicles and for those around them. In this context, bikes will often share space with these vehicles, but an IoT bike can dynamically respond to smart vehicles, potentially reducing accidents and optimizing traffic. It has been observed the importance of addressing the challenges of this dynamic scenario in order to ensure the safety and well-being of the cyclists, who are on the weaker side of this scale. In [92], a survey was conducted about the implications of autonomous vehicles in relation to bicycles and on the policies that must be adopted to guarantee a harmonious coexistence between these transportation means. For an IoT world, such discussions should remain relevant.
## (s12) The Rise of E-Bikes
(p12.0) From New York to Bangkok to Natal, urban bikes usage is on a steady rise. As citizens of the world's greatest cities seek alternative transportation methods-less expensive and less harmful than cars or public transit systems-the popularity and importance of bikes has become clearer and more urgent [93]. In this propitious scenario, a new trend is becoming quite popular, giving an additional boost for smart cycling. This new trend has been driven by e-bikes.

(p12.1) An electrical bicycle (e-bike) has a motor assisted pedal with a rechargeable battery, facilitating its use as a daily transportation option. Similarly, electrical scooters are also based on an assistant motor connected to a rechargeable battery, being also referred as ebikes for simplification. In practical means, less effort is required in both cases, making their use more comfortable and accessible for elderly and disabled people. In general, the same innovations that can foster smart cycling for traditional bikes are also available for e-bikes, since the same cycling challenges are faced by them.
## (s13) The E-Bike Market
(p13.0) E-bikes have spread, especially among the most industrialized countries. As illustrated in Figure 6, the market for electric bicycles (bicycles, tricycles and quadricycles, with pedal assistance, with an auxiliary electric motor with a continuous rated power less than or equal to 250 W) within the European Union, both for imports and exports, was growing before the COVID-19 Pandemic. In 2019, these trades surpassed the mark of 2 million units each one. With regard to exchanges between EU and the rest of the world, they are less significant, especially in relation to exports, showing the potential of the consumer and e-bike producer market in the region. But as previously explained, it does not represent benefits only, but important challenges for urban mobility.

(p13.1) Generally speaking, the ubiquity of power sockets-and the relative ease and quickness with which e-bike batteries can be charged-is possibly the most appealing predictor preferring their gradual adoption [96]. A typical e-bike can be recharged in a garage, at the office, or in the middle of a campground [97]. No longer it needs to stress about running out of charge-not to mention, the portability factor is convenient.

(p13.2) Besides contributions related to personal mobility in urban areas, e-bikes can also bring other promising benefits. The use of electric cargo bikes might yet become an inevitable solution for last-mile delivery in cities. They have zero carbon emissions and occupy less road space than cars when in use or parked [98]. Logistics companies can collect comparative data to determine when using e-cargo bikes will improve delivery times and reduce costs. Actually, the perspectives for an increasing use of e-bikes are tremendous. 

(p13.3) E-bikes have spread, especially among the most industrialized countries. As illustrated in Figure 6, the market for electric bicycles (bicycles, tricycles and quadricycles, with pedal assistance, with an auxiliary electric motor with a continuous rated power less than or equal to 250 W) within the European Union, both for imports and exports, was growing before the COVID-19 Pandemic. In 2019, these trades surpassed the mark of 2 million units each one. With regard to exchanges between EU and the rest of the world, they are less significant, especially in relation to exports, showing the potential of the consumer and e-bike producer market in the region. But as previously explained, it does not represent benefits only, but important challenges for urban mobility.

(p13.4) Generally speaking, the ubiquity of power sockets-and the relative ease and quickness with which e-bike batteries can be charged-is possibly the most appealing predictor preferring their gradual adoption [96]. A typical e-bike can be recharged in a garage, at the office, or in the middle of a campground [97]. No longer it needs to stress about running out of charge-not to mention, the portability factor is convenient.

(p13.5) Besides contributions related to personal mobility in urban areas, e-bikes can also bring other promising benefits. The use of electric cargo bikes might yet become an inevitable solution for last-mile delivery in cities. They have zero carbon emissions and occupy less road space than cars when in use or parked [98]. Logistics companies can collect comparative data to determine when using e-cargo bikes will improve delivery times and reduce costs. Actually, the perspectives for an increasing use of e-bikes are tremendous. 
## (s15) Things
(p15.0) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 

(p15.1) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 
## (s20) The Post-Pandemic World
(p20.0) The dramatic events related to the COVID-19 Pandemic have deeply changed some perspectives about how smart cities should be created and managed [151]. Although there are already some research works assessing and trying to adapt the use of bikes to the postpandemic world [49,152,153], the construction of smart cycling initiatives should be strongly influenced by the health and social measures adopted to restrict the surge and spread of outbreaks. In fact, new highly contagious diseases may surge anytime and anywhere, and it is natural to expect that new solutions will be already adapted to eventual restriction measures.
## (s35) Introduction
(p35.0) Nowadays, most people live in large or mega cities around the world, which has resulted in a way of living dominated by urban patterns [1]. However, while the benefits of the fast urbanization process in the last hundred of years have been largely praised, a series of problems have also emerged in our increasingly overcrowded cities [2,3]. As a result, modern urban areas have been struggling to deal with complex challenges such as mobility, pollution and sustainable use of resources, with promising initiatives emerging in the last years [4,5].

(p35.1) A major challenge that is recurrent in most large cities is the urban mobility [6]. The impact of inefficient transportation has been extensively discussed, since the hours spent due to heavy traffic can be easily associated to economy losses [7]. Additionally, other issues related to public health like traffic deaths and serious injuries can also be collateral effects from mobility inefficiencies of large cities. However, although these problems could be already enough to trigger the red alarm for better planning and management of the cities, traditional vehicles are also major sources of pollution, directly impacting the air quality in urban areas. The resulting scenario has put mobility issues on the top of the list of urgent problems to be solved, but experience has demonstrated that efficient solutions for such issues are not straightforward [8,9].

(p35.2) One of the most promising trends to relieve traffic jams and all their associated negative impacts is the use of alternative transportation means. Among them, bicycles have been the most successful option, with reasonable efficiency at very affordable costs. In recent decades, some governments have been investing in the construction of bike paths and in the reduction of taxes for the fabrication of bikes, potentially stimulating the use of bicycles at least for short-distance routes [10,11]. In parallel, a new generation of electric bicycles and scooters is getting very popular, but their usage and mobility challenges are quite similar to the ones experienced by conventional bicycles. Actually, when promoting more sustainable mobility, bicycles, electric bicycles, electric scooters, skates and rollerblades are all alternative transportation means that will usually share the same challenges and interests, leading us to collectively call them "bikes" for simplification reasons.
## (s36) On the Use of Bikes in Cities
(p36.0) Generally speaking, sustainable mobility innovations are at the forefront of large urban centers. With increasing challenges resulted from inefficient mobility, air pollution and traffic accidents constantly gaining attention in large cities, new solutions have been sought in different areas and contexts. In fact, for an increasing number of cities, the solution for such challenges has been expected from the adoption of bikes.

(p36.1) Many works have considered the adoption of bikes as an effective way to enhance mobility in urban areas, addressing different aspects of urban cycling. Since there are different particularities according to the way bikes are used on the considered regions, the literature has provided many important insights about the development of smart cycling in different countries. Table 2 summarizes recent works in this sense, indicating important discussions that have driven research efforts.

(p36.2) Actually, there are many challenges related to smart cycling, ranging from political and economical issues to the use of new disruptive technologies. Although all these discussions are relevant, we are particularly concerned with technological innovations that will pave the way for the construction of smart cycling. Among them, we believe that the massive use of smartphones and the adoption of IoT devices will be the core elements to foster bike-centric mobility, with potential benefits that can dramatically change the cities' transportation services [19]. Therefore, this article surveys recent works targeted at innovations that can ultimately support the maturation of smart cycling in cities, contributing with important discussions in this area.

(p36.3) In short, the discussions in this article are centered on three major research trends: smartphone-based cycling, IoT-bikes and connected e-bikes. Figure 2 further depicts the research areas and development initiatives that are surveyed in this work.  Next sections will discuss new technologies and innovative projects targeted at the promotion of more efficient, affordable and safer cycling in cities, highlighting their expected impacts when achieving sustainable urban mobility.

(p36.4) Generally speaking, sustainable mobility innovations are at the forefront of large urban centers. With increasing challenges resulted from inefficient mobility, air pollution and traffic accidents constantly gaining attention in large cities, new solutions have been sought in different areas and contexts. In fact, for an increasing number of cities, the solution for such challenges has been expected from the adoption of bikes.

(p36.5) Many works have considered the adoption of bikes as an effective way to enhance mobility in urban areas, addressing different aspects of urban cycling. Since there are different particularities according to the way bikes are used on the considered regions, the literature has provided many important insights about the development of smart cycling in different countries. Table 2 summarizes recent works in this sense, indicating important discussions that have driven research efforts.

(p36.6) Actually, there are many challenges related to smart cycling, ranging from political and economical issues to the use of new disruptive technologies. Although all these discussions are relevant, we are particularly concerned with technological innovations that will pave the way for the construction of smart cycling. Among them, we believe that the massive use of smartphones and the adoption of IoT devices will be the core elements to foster bike-centric mobility, with potential benefits that can dramatically change the cities' transportation services [19]. Therefore, this article surveys recent works targeted at innovations that can ultimately support the maturation of smart cycling in cities, contributing with important discussions in this area.

(p36.7) In short, the discussions in this article are centered on three major research trends: smartphone-based cycling, IoT-bikes and connected e-bikes. Figure 2 further depicts the research areas and development initiatives that are surveyed in this work.  Next sections will discuss new technologies and innovative projects targeted at the promotion of more efficient, affordable and safer cycling in cities, highlighting their expected impacts when achieving sustainable urban mobility.
## (s37) Bikes in the Age of Apps
(p37.0) The use of smartphones has become essential in modern life. Among other reasons, this is due to the ease of communication that this type of device provides, in addition to the availability of an immensity of smartphone-based applications with different purposes [34]. With the development of more powerful devices at affordable prices, the number of active smartphones has even surpassed the number of traditional computers, signaling an important transformation on the way information has been consumed. Supported by this propitious scenario, it is estimated that over three billion people were using smartphones by the end of 2020, but it is still an actively growing number [35].

(p37.1) This large number of users has been boosted by popular virtual markets for mobile applications, which provide millions of apps for different purposes [34]. For this huge amount of applications, or simply "apps", a particular group has been dedicated to facilitate the use of services related to daily activities, supporting users according to their needs, habits or interests [35]. When coming to the use of bikes in modern cities, such apps have been an important breakthrough for the adoption of sustainable transportation.

(p37.2) Among smartphone apps that seek to facilitate the people's lives, there are applications that can affect the daily mobility in certain spaces. In this context, one of the main purposes of some apps is to solve problems related to urban mobility. Actually, such applications have allowed smartphones to use mobile data (mostly supported by 4G/5G technologies and Wi-Fi networks) and location-based services (GPS) in order to provide real-time information about public transportation systems. In short, such apps have supported route planning according to the user's current position, as well as allowing the identification of more efficient public services and even the indication of nearby rental spots for shared bicycles [16]. In fact, these have been very important transformations in the way people interact with the urban environment.
## (s39) Route Planning
(p39.0) Despite the use of bikes for daily transportation has been much discussed in recent years, most cities around the world do not have adequate infrastructure for efficient cycling [38]. Given the aforementioned circumstances, it is very important to provide valuable information for cyclists concerning available paths, potentially alleviating the already known mobility problems [39].

(p39.1) The issue of routing planning is not new, with many research works proposing efficient solutions to improve mobility efficiency [40,41]. In general, the main research effort has been to find the fastest route from the origin to the destination, taking into account the costs of each available path. Among such costs, distance, traffic, accidents rate and tolls are some common parameters that have been processed as cost weights. And this same principle can be leveraged when processing bike paths.

(p39.2) One of the most important information provided by smartphones is the current GPS (Global Positioning System) coordinates of the device. This information has been exploited by different applications, which have used spatial data to provide some important expected services for bike users. Actually, GPS coordinates can also be exploited along with data provided by embedded sensors, enlarging the perception of the users within the modeled system. In practical means, smartphones are able to send and receive spatial information about bike paths to take, guiding cyclists in urban areas [42].
## (s40) Delivery Services
(p40.0) With the unforeseen events of the COVID-19 Pandemic beginning in 2020, important transformations took place in the society. In a very short period of time, social distancing measures were required, impacting different elements of the routine of billions of people. In this new social setting, the use of delivery services, especially for food, has become essential in the lives of many citizens around the world. Smartphone apps aimed at this purpose became even more popular, and new solutions were created. Actually, when bikes were employed to reinforce smartphone-based delivery services, such apps started to be used more often by cyclists [49]. However, the cities are still not adapted to higher demands of delivery services, especially when bikes are being used as a working tool.

(p40.1) Given this particular scenario, there was a significant increase in the demand for companies working in the domestic delivery sector. As an example, the app "Rappi" declared a growth of 30% in deliveries in the Latin America region due to the COVID-19 Pandemic [50]. In parallel to such growth, there was also an increase in the number of registered worker deliverers, who mostly use their own bikes to work. When we associate the inherent risks of cycling in most cities with the delivery demands of this service, it is easy to see how problematic this working configuration can be. Therefore, finding new solutions for this complex scenario should be a major concern of the governments when defining public policies.
## (s41) Bike Sharing
(p41.0) The adoption of bikes as an effective transportation mean does not only depend on the availability of safe bike paths, but also on services that make the use of bikes as pervasive as possible. Generally speaking, this goal can be achieved if bikes are easily accessible, even if the accessed bikes belong to someone else. In order to promote the use of such types of bikes, bike-sharing public services and specialized apps started to be created all over the world, bringing an important boost for smart cycling.

(p41.1) Public Bike Systems (PBS), or simply bike-sharing systems, have been strongly promoted in recent years. This type of system, which has existed for decades but exploiting different supportive technologies, is becoming more popular today due to greater incentives to adopt more sustainable and healthy transportation [11]. Additionally, the wide dissemination of smartphones has also created a common platform for interactions between the users and the public bike systems, further supporting this type of service.

(p41.2) The idea behind the existence of bike sharing systems consists of making bikes available to be used for any purpose without compromising ownership, defining a new mobility service that is acquired only when and for as long as necessary [11]. In fact, the actual use of the shared bikes is not a concern of the systems, since they may be used for mobility efficiency but also for leisure. Figure 4 presents an example of a bike-sharing station in a large city. Usually, bike-sharing systems are based on a well-defined structure exploiting the use of a stock of robust and low-maintenance bicycles integrated in a network of parking stations. Such stations have space to store 10 to 100 bicycles in an automated way, using stations known as "docks" that are supported by some station control unit [52]. Thus, the registered users through mobile applications can take any bike at any station, returning it at the end of their path in a network of virtual or physical stations.

(p41.3) Many works have proposed promising solutions for efficient bike-sharing systems based on docks. In [53] a case study was conducted based on the "OV-fiets", a bike-sharing system with docks launched in the Netherlands in 2003. It provides thousands of bikes in hundreds of docks close to railway stations and urban public transport stops, promoting first and/or last mile trips. Also in the Netherlands, a bicycle-lease system is available, referred as the Swapfiets [54]. Founded in 2014, it allows users to rent bikes for a day and pick them up at a physical station, represented by stores rather than docks. This way, users get different options to use bikes for mobility, but the reality in countries as the Netherlands is far away from most of the low-income countries.

(p41.4) Another study focused on docked bike-sharing system is present in [55]. It was based on the quantitative analysis of some data related to trips made on Divvy, a Chicago platform created in 2013 with 300 initial stations and about 3000 bicycles. This data is related to information such as source and destination stations, duration of travel and type of platform server. Then, important decisions can be made when such data is available for a city.

(p41.5) Unlike bike-sharing systems with the use of docks, another model of PBS has been widely used, the "dockless". This is a new bike sharing service that does not have a parking network concept in its structure, allowing users to freely park the rented bike almost anywhere. This is different from the docked model, which determines parking stations for the bikes [56]. Among the benefits of such services, it is expected an important reduction of the deployment costs of the system, which is now strongly based on smartphone apps. Additionally, users acquire some level of flexibility when taking and returning bikes, which ultimately benefit the use of bikes for urban mobility.

(p41.6) Some works have proposed optimizations for dockless bike-sharing systems in recent years. In [54], a case study was developed using "Mobike" as an example of a dockless bike-sharing system. That application was launched in 2017 using shared smart bikes that can be parked in the areas defined by the company. These bikes use an IoT module with GPS and embedded wireless communication to allow users to find bikes in the app and use them. Following this trend, authors in [57] investigated this concept of smart bikes in Singapore. They considered "Ofo" as a PBS platform, which has been active in China since 2015. Such bike platform is focused on the IoT-based bike-sharing paradigm, allowing users to find bicycles in the app through an integrated sensor module, unlocking the chosen bike by reading a QRcode and starting using it. Actually, this bike-sharing model has rapidly spread as a viable solution.

(p41.7) Another way to unlock bikes that are inserted into a dockless bike-sharing system is through Bluetooth communication between a bike and the cyclist's smartphone. This type of authentication has also the potential to become quite popular. In [58], a dockless bikesharing system is described, an initiative to use Bluetooth to unlock bikes in Poland.

(p41.8) Regardless of the type of the employed bike sharing system, it is highly expected a series of related benefits when supporting wider uses of bikes. In first place, when the barriers of ownership are removed, bikes can be considered as a highly available and practical transportation alternative. Actually, since bike parking may be an issue in large cities, it may discourage the adoption of bikes for some routes, demanding new solutions. Secondly, the acquisition and maintenance costs for bike owners may be prohibitive in some cases. In fact, when bike sharing systems become more present in our cities, governments could provide vouchers to stimulate even more the adoption of bikes for transportation, enhancing the construction of a smart cycling atmosphere.

(p41.9) The adoption of bikes as an effective transportation mean does not only depend on the availability of safe bike paths, but also on services that make the use of bikes as pervasive as possible. Generally speaking, this goal can be achieved if bikes are easily accessible, even if the accessed bikes belong to someone else. In order to promote the use of such types of bikes, bike-sharing public services and specialized apps started to be created all over the world, bringing an important boost for smart cycling.

(p41.10) Public Bike Systems (PBS), or simply bike-sharing systems, have been strongly promoted in recent years. This type of system, which has existed for decades but exploiting different supportive technologies, is becoming more popular today due to greater incentives to adopt more sustainable and healthy transportation [11]. Additionally, the wide dissemination of smartphones has also created a common platform for interactions between the users and the public bike systems, further supporting this type of service.

(p41.11) The idea behind the existence of bike sharing systems consists of making bikes available to be used for any purpose without compromising ownership, defining a new mobility service that is acquired only when and for as long as necessary [11]. In fact, the actual use of the shared bikes is not a concern of the systems, since they may be used for mobility efficiency but also for leisure. Figure 4 presents an example of a bike-sharing station in a large city. Usually, bike-sharing systems are based on a well-defined structure exploiting the use of a stock of robust and low-maintenance bicycles integrated in a network of parking stations. Such stations have space to store 10 to 100 bicycles in an automated way, using stations known as "docks" that are supported by some station control unit [52]. Thus, the registered users through mobile applications can take any bike at any station, returning it at the end of their path in a network of virtual or physical stations.

(p41.12) Many works have proposed promising solutions for efficient bike-sharing systems based on docks. In [53] a case study was conducted based on the "OV-fiets", a bike-sharing system with docks launched in the Netherlands in 2003. It provides thousands of bikes in hundreds of docks close to railway stations and urban public transport stops, promoting first and/or last mile trips. Also in the Netherlands, a bicycle-lease system is available, referred as the Swapfiets [54]. Founded in 2014, it allows users to rent bikes for a day and pick them up at a physical station, represented by stores rather than docks. This way, users get different options to use bikes for mobility, but the reality in countries as the Netherlands is far away from most of the low-income countries.

(p41.13) Another study focused on docked bike-sharing system is present in [55]. It was based on the quantitative analysis of some data related to trips made on Divvy, a Chicago platform created in 2013 with 300 initial stations and about 3000 bicycles. This data is related to information such as source and destination stations, duration of travel and type of platform server. Then, important decisions can be made when such data is available for a city.

(p41.14) Unlike bike-sharing systems with the use of docks, another model of PBS has been widely used, the "dockless". This is a new bike sharing service that does not have a parking network concept in its structure, allowing users to freely park the rented bike almost anywhere. This is different from the docked model, which determines parking stations for the bikes [56]. Among the benefits of such services, it is expected an important reduction of the deployment costs of the system, which is now strongly based on smartphone apps. Additionally, users acquire some level of flexibility when taking and returning bikes, which ultimately benefit the use of bikes for urban mobility.

(p41.15) Some works have proposed optimizations for dockless bike-sharing systems in recent years. In [54], a case study was developed using "Mobike" as an example of a dockless bike-sharing system. That application was launched in 2017 using shared smart bikes that can be parked in the areas defined by the company. These bikes use an IoT module with GPS and embedded wireless communication to allow users to find bikes in the app and use them. Following this trend, authors in [57] investigated this concept of smart bikes in Singapore. They considered "Ofo" as a PBS platform, which has been active in China since 2015. Such bike platform is focused on the IoT-based bike-sharing paradigm, allowing users to find bicycles in the app through an integrated sensor module, unlocking the chosen bike by reading a QRcode and starting using it. Actually, this bike-sharing model has rapidly spread as a viable solution.

(p41.16) Another way to unlock bikes that are inserted into a dockless bike-sharing system is through Bluetooth communication between a bike and the cyclist's smartphone. This type of authentication has also the potential to become quite popular. In [58], a dockless bikesharing system is described, an initiative to use Bluetooth to unlock bikes in Poland.

(p41.17) Regardless of the type of the employed bike sharing system, it is highly expected a series of related benefits when supporting wider uses of bikes. In first place, when the barriers of ownership are removed, bikes can be considered as a highly available and practical transportation alternative. Actually, since bike parking may be an issue in large cities, it may discourage the adoption of bikes for some routes, demanding new solutions. Secondly, the acquisition and maintenance costs for bike owners may be prohibitive in some cases. In fact, when bike sharing systems become more present in our cities, governments could provide vouchers to stimulate even more the adoption of bikes for transportation, enhancing the construction of a smart cycling atmosphere.
## (s43) Sustainability and Environmental Monitoring
(p43.0) When applying the concepts of IoT in the context of bikes, it is possible to develop new solutions that can expand the possibilities when concerning urban mobility. For example, among recent solutions in this sense, bike sharing has became possible with the dissemination of smartphones, but it is the IoT revolution that can further enhance the benefits of this service. Actually, bikes are great "last mile" solutions for mobility because they are affordable and can reach places that public transports can not [66]. Thus, if intelligent bikes are everywhere, the possibilities are tremendous [67].

(p43.1) The use of sensors, actuators and GPS receivers can allow bikes to perceive their environment, collecting important information [68]. Since a sensor is capable to retrieve data about some particular physical variable, such as temperature, pressure, humidity and luminosity, a bike becomes a mobile monitoring station. In this scenario, with mobile bikes gathering data from different parts of a city, a lot of important information can be extracted, supporting multiple urban services. In fact, the construction of smart cities demands the processing of data from different sources; since bikes can be used as a distributed data source, with complex mobility patterns, this group of data can support a new class of applications [5,18].

(p43.2) Some recent works have proposed the use of sensors attached to bikes for different types of monitoring. In [69], authors attached a camera to a bike to allow visual data processing of the road. Images are captured by bikes and transmitted toward the Cloud. Then, exploiting deep learning techniques, the quality of the road is identified, potentially supporting the evaluation of bike paths. Still considering the quality of the used roads, the work in [39] exploits data from sensor devices attached to bikes to evaluate the quality of bike paths, assigning quality levels based on Fuzzy logic rules. The idea in [39] is to balance different data related to the quality of the bike paths, which may even be useful to support route planning applications. For the work in [70], sensors are attached to bikes in order to allow the monitoring of the air quality, using for that smartphones to transmit the collected data. In all these works, sensors are attached to bikes to allow the monitoring of environmental variables or to collect images of the bike paths, enlarging the perceptions about the cities.

(p43.3) Generally speaking, environmental monitoring is an important activity to support sustainability. In fact, to achieve the sustainability of a system, it is necessary to make use of resources in a way that guarantees the continuity of this system in the long term. By monitoring environmental resources, it is possible to determine objectively if their use is being made in order to guarantee subsistence or if it is affecting the balance of the ecosystem. Therefore, environmental monitoring based on IoT bikes can play an important role in this scenario.
## (s45) Promoting Health through Connected Bikes
(p45.0) Cycling is a well-known physical activity that has many health benefits for cyclists. Among them, cardio-respiratory fitness and reduced risk of developing diseases such as morbid obesity are some few examples [83]. Even in the cases when cyclists are exposed to harmful air pollution conditions-as discussed in the last section-the benefits of cycling may overlap the problems that inhaling polluted air can cause, excepting on extreme conditions of pollutants concentrations [84]. Promoting health habits by the use of bikes is a trending topic.

(p45.1) It is common among those who practice cycling as an exercise to monitor their activity in order to measure their progresses. Some cyclists usually make use of wearable devices like smartwatches or smartbands together with smartphones to measure vital signs, traveled distance and the amount of time taken to complete the ride. Although already benefiting, such configuration can be considerably enhanced when IoT is exploited, turning bikes into sensing and processing stations. For the new generation of smart cycling solutions being created, health monitoring and assistance may become a pervasive service.

(p45.2) Some works have already proposed the use of sensors attached directly into bikes to make health-related measurements. In [85], multiple sensors are used to measure the heart rate of the cyclist, traveled distance and the speed of the bicycle. Information is gathered and processed by an Arduino board, allowing combination of the retrieved data. For [86], data of the cyclist in terms of health condition and cyclist's performance are provided by sensors, being available for processing. That approach uses a heart rate sensor and a pulse oximetry sensor (to measure the oxygen saturation inside the cyclist's body), besides sensors directly attached to the bike. In both cases, the wearable sensors can directly connect to any processing unit (e.g., a specific hardware board or a smartphone) in order to make sensed data available, which is a common approach when employing wearable sensors [87].

(p45.3) In addition to the use of sensors to monitor the cyclist's vital and health signs, other sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes can be used to detect falls and other types of accidents and then trigger emergency services as in the Accident Detection System proposed in [88]. In parallel, some authors have proposed the development of a system capable of preventing accidents instead of just detecting them, which favors preventive actions over responsive ones. The work developed in [89] proposed a system similar to the direction arrows already used in motor vehicles such as cars, motorcycles and buses to indicate the intention to perform a conversion to some direction, in addition to using a sonar type sensor to assess whether it is safe or not for the cyclist to perform a maneuver.

(p45.4) Cycling is a well-known physical activity that has many health benefits for cyclists. Among them, cardio-respiratory fitness and reduced risk of developing diseases such as morbid obesity are some few examples [83]. Even in the cases when cyclists are exposed to harmful air pollution conditions-as discussed in the last section-the benefits of cycling may overlap the problems that inhaling polluted air can cause, excepting on extreme conditions of pollutants concentrations [84]. Promoting health habits by the use of bikes is a trending topic.

(p45.5) It is common among those who practice cycling as an exercise to monitor their activity in order to measure their progresses. Some cyclists usually make use of wearable devices like smartwatches or smartbands together with smartphones to measure vital signs, traveled distance and the amount of time taken to complete the ride. Although already benefiting, such configuration can be considerably enhanced when IoT is exploited, turning bikes into sensing and processing stations. For the new generation of smart cycling solutions being created, health monitoring and assistance may become a pervasive service.

(p45.6) Some works have already proposed the use of sensors attached directly into bikes to make health-related measurements. In [85], multiple sensors are used to measure the heart rate of the cyclist, traveled distance and the speed of the bicycle. Information is gathered and processed by an Arduino board, allowing combination of the retrieved data. For [86], data of the cyclist in terms of health condition and cyclist's performance are provided by sensors, being available for processing. That approach uses a heart rate sensor and a pulse oximetry sensor (to measure the oxygen saturation inside the cyclist's body), besides sensors directly attached to the bike. In both cases, the wearable sensors can directly connect to any processing unit (e.g., a specific hardware board or a smartphone) in order to make sensed data available, which is a common approach when employing wearable sensors [87].

(p45.7) In addition to the use of sensors to monitor the cyclist's vital and health signs, other sensors such as accelerometers and gyroscopes can be used to detect falls and other types of accidents and then trigger emergency services as in the Accident Detection System proposed in [88]. In parallel, some authors have proposed the development of a system capable of preventing accidents instead of just detecting them, which favors preventive actions over responsive ones. The work developed in [89] proposed a system similar to the direction arrows already used in motor vehicles such as cars, motorcycles and buses to indicate the intention to perform a conversion to some direction, in addition to using a sonar type sensor to assess whether it is safe or not for the cyclist to perform a maneuver.
## (s46) Internet of Bikes
(p46.0) The use of sensors, actuators and processing units can put smart cycling in a prominent place, providing and consuming multiple data in different scenarios. However, while the processing of sensed data retrieved from bikes can support useful applications, the breakthrough is expected when bikes communicate with each other. In short, connected bikes will be able to transmit and receive data dynamically, for example adjusting routes and avoiding risky areas. With connectable bikes, we take a bigger step toward sustainable and smart cities.

(p46.1) The idea of the Internet of Bikes (IoB) is taking shape through incremental developments in the area, with promising solutions emerging in recent years. An obvious movement in this direction has been done when creating bike-sharing systems, since connected bikes that does not depend on the cyclists' smartphones are safer and better monitored [66]. For that, some works have discussed communication issues that could impact such services. In [90], a protocol is proposed to support bike-centric communications target at bike sharing, assuming that IoT bikes will have inherent processing, memory and networking constraints. The proposed delay-tolerant protocol is based on the storecarry-and-forward principle, which allows temporal storage of packets by the network in order to better adapt to the constraints and mobility pattern of the bikes. Variations of this protocol are discussed in [91].

(p46.2) Other concerns may arise when connecting bikes. If all elements associated to the urban mobility are connected and integrated, much better decisions can be taken in a real-time basis. Actually, the evolution of autonomous vehicles in recent years has raised questions about safety in general, both for the people inside the vehicles and for those around them. In this context, bikes will often share space with these vehicles, but an IoT bike can dynamically respond to smart vehicles, potentially reducing accidents and optimizing traffic. It has been observed the importance of addressing the challenges of this dynamic scenario in order to ensure the safety and well-being of the cyclists, who are on the weaker side of this scale. In [92], a survey was conducted about the implications of autonomous vehicles in relation to bicycles and on the policies that must be adopted to guarantee a harmonious coexistence between these transportation means. For an IoT world, such discussions should remain relevant.
## (s47) The Rise of E-Bikes
(p47.0) From New York to Bangkok to Natal, urban bikes usage is on a steady rise. As citizens of the world's greatest cities seek alternative transportation methods-less expensive and less harmful than cars or public transit systems-the popularity and importance of bikes has become clearer and more urgent [93]. In this propitious scenario, a new trend is becoming quite popular, giving an additional boost for smart cycling. This new trend has been driven by e-bikes.

(p47.1) An electrical bicycle (e-bike) has a motor assisted pedal with a rechargeable battery, facilitating its use as a daily transportation option. Similarly, electrical scooters are also based on an assistant motor connected to a rechargeable battery, being also referred as ebikes for simplification. In practical means, less effort is required in both cases, making their use more comfortable and accessible for elderly and disabled people. In general, the same innovations that can foster smart cycling for traditional bikes are also available for e-bikes, since the same cycling challenges are faced by them.
## (s48) The E-Bike Market
(p48.0) E-bikes have spread, especially among the most industrialized countries. As illustrated in Figure 6, the market for electric bicycles (bicycles, tricycles and quadricycles, with pedal assistance, with an auxiliary electric motor with a continuous rated power less than or equal to 250 W) within the European Union, both for imports and exports, was growing before the COVID-19 Pandemic. In 2019, these trades surpassed the mark of 2 million units each one. With regard to exchanges between EU and the rest of the world, they are less significant, especially in relation to exports, showing the potential of the consumer and e-bike producer market in the region. But as previously explained, it does not represent benefits only, but important challenges for urban mobility.

(p48.1) Generally speaking, the ubiquity of power sockets-and the relative ease and quickness with which e-bike batteries can be charged-is possibly the most appealing predictor preferring their gradual adoption [96]. A typical e-bike can be recharged in a garage, at the office, or in the middle of a campground [97]. No longer it needs to stress about running out of charge-not to mention, the portability factor is convenient.

(p48.2) Besides contributions related to personal mobility in urban areas, e-bikes can also bring other promising benefits. The use of electric cargo bikes might yet become an inevitable solution for last-mile delivery in cities. They have zero carbon emissions and occupy less road space than cars when in use or parked [98]. Logistics companies can collect comparative data to determine when using e-cargo bikes will improve delivery times and reduce costs. Actually, the perspectives for an increasing use of e-bikes are tremendous. 

(p48.3) E-bikes have spread, especially among the most industrialized countries. As illustrated in Figure 6, the market for electric bicycles (bicycles, tricycles and quadricycles, with pedal assistance, with an auxiliary electric motor with a continuous rated power less than or equal to 250 W) within the European Union, both for imports and exports, was growing before the COVID-19 Pandemic. In 2019, these trades surpassed the mark of 2 million units each one. With regard to exchanges between EU and the rest of the world, they are less significant, especially in relation to exports, showing the potential of the consumer and e-bike producer market in the region. But as previously explained, it does not represent benefits only, but important challenges for urban mobility.

(p48.4) Generally speaking, the ubiquity of power sockets-and the relative ease and quickness with which e-bike batteries can be charged-is possibly the most appealing predictor preferring their gradual adoption [96]. A typical e-bike can be recharged in a garage, at the office, or in the middle of a campground [97]. No longer it needs to stress about running out of charge-not to mention, the portability factor is convenient.

(p48.5) Besides contributions related to personal mobility in urban areas, e-bikes can also bring other promising benefits. The use of electric cargo bikes might yet become an inevitable solution for last-mile delivery in cities. They have zero carbon emissions and occupy less road space than cars when in use or parked [98]. Logistics companies can collect comparative data to determine when using e-cargo bikes will improve delivery times and reduce costs. Actually, the perspectives for an increasing use of e-bikes are tremendous. 
## (s50) Things
(p50.0) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 

(p50.1) B2S communication is a specific class of BANETs that consists of the exchange of information between a bike and any electronic device that may be embedded in the bike itself. The main focus is related to development of basic instrumentation and communication interfaces (wireless and wired) [121,122]. Lastly, B2X encompasses a communication scenario of the "bike to everything". It is a futurist scenario where all things and smart objects have ubiquitous communication with bikes [104]. Emerging communication protocols such as 5G, LoRa, and LoRaWAN arises with candidates to be adopted as de facto solutions [123]. Challenges and opportunities are related to interoperability between different protocols and new applications, which data stream is a new trend as is the case of multimedia stream applications [124]. Table 5 summarizes the main discussion and challenges related to BANETs, enumerating communication technologies and related topics. 
## (s55) The Post-Pandemic World
(p55.0) The dramatic events related to the COVID-19 Pandemic have deeply changed some perspectives about how smart cities should be created and managed [151]. Although there are already some research works assessing and trying to adapt the use of bikes to the postpandemic world [49,152,153], the construction of smart cycling initiatives should be strongly influenced by the health and social measures adopted to restrict the surge and spread of outbreaks. In fact, new highly contagious diseases may surge anytime and anywhere, and it is natural to expect that new solutions will be already adapted to eventual restriction measures.
