# The Effects of Human Aspects on the Requirements Engineering Process: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 234314375 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/911235b447514e21b2094453e07098ae6ec2dee3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/911235b447514e21b2094453e07098ae6ec2dee3)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s8) Primary and Secondary search process
(p8.0) To identify relevant research papers for the SLR, the searching procedure was conducted in two ways, automatic and manual. Automatic search was performed by using scientific databases' search engines and manual by scanning the list of references of primary studies gained from automatic search ( Table 5). The scientific databases in Table 5 were selected based on having most papers in computer science and SE studies. We also did manual searching via backward and forward snowballing using the retrieved primary studies, which helped us find other relevant studies for our SLR as suggested by Achimugu et al. [43]. We selected 8 highly related papers out of 16 papers we collected from this manual search (Table 9). 
## (s20) What is the current status of the research studies on the effect of human aspects on requirements engineering (RQ2)?
(p20.0) • Human Aspect impacts on RE investigated to date This research question focuses on identifying and categorizing the human aspects that have been investigated to date. From our data extraction and analysis of 74 primary studies, we see that these studies have focused on a range of human aspects. The majority of the studies focused on one human aspect (33 studies), and others considered two, three or up to a maximum of four different human aspects.

(p20.1) For each human aspect, we have considered its definition and grouped similar aspects together. For this we have used definitions that have generally been considered in the SE context and those in the selected primary studies. The final set of human aspects we identified were categorized in to three groupsindividual related human aspects, technical related human aspects and team related human aspects with the purpose of categorizing the broadly different human as- pects studied to date. Furthermore, we used the "technical" related human aspects category combining with individual and team related human aspects to categorize human aspects that we felt are not fully appropriate to individual or team categories. These are summarised in Figure 6. Among our selected primary studies, the highest number of studies were about individual-and team-related human aspects.

(p20.2) Only 7 studies were about technical-related human aspects. As shown in the  [45], creativity is considered as a human value and so we have grouped the 10 studies that have focused on creativity under "human values". Therefore, this 17.6% includes studies of human values including creativity. The rest of studies focused on other individual human aspects like gender (9.5%), attitude (5.4%), physical issues (4.1%), adaptation/negotiation (2.7%). and age (1.4%)

(p20.3) The second highest number of studies were about team related human aspects. 33.8% of the studies were about communication issues . Other aspects considered were geographical distribution (8.1%), knowledge sharing (2.7%), community values (1.4%), team maturity (1.4%) and self-management (1.4%) were considered in far fewer of the selected primary studies. We identified that there were very few studies on technical related human aspects. Among these the majority were about domain knowledge (5.4%), and the rest were about task workload (1.4%), accessibility (1.4%) and human errors (1.4%).

(p20.4) • Methodologies used to identify the effect of human aspects on RE Authors of the selected primary studies have used a variety of research techniques, some of them multiple ones. Among the described techniques, interview (43.24%), questionnaire/surveys (39.19%), case studies (27.03%) and modelling (13.51%) were the most used research techniques. Document    analysis (6.76%), observations (6.76%), experiments (4%) and focus groups (2.70%) were less common. Figure 5 summarises the research techniques used in the reviewed papers. We can see that the majority of the studies (82.43%) have used qualitative techniques whereas 28.38% have conducted the studies quantitatively, and 32% of studies have used a mixed approach.
## (s35) RECOMMENDATIONS
(p35.0) As requirements engineering (RE) is one of the most crucial processes in SE, improvements in the RE process will improve the whole SE process [49]. Hence, it is vital to consider human aspects related to RE which have not yet been paid much attention to in SE research to date. Based on the findings of this SLR, reported future work and identified key research gaps, we have identified several key challenges in the area of studying the impact of human aspects on RE. We frame these below as a set of recommendations to the SE research community for further research in human aspects on RE.

(p35.1) 1. More studies are needed directly focused on the effects of human aspects on RE: Among the selected 74 primary studies, only 35 studies focus on specifically RE, whereas the rest considered the SE process in general, RE being discussed often as a minor part. More RE-focused research on investigating the effects of human aspects is needed.

(p35.2) 2. More practical guidelines and recommendations: Most primary studies to date investigating the impact of human aspects on RE provide theoretical or academic models, strategies or prototypes. Few have focused on providing working models that were trialled in the software industry. Many mention validation of these theoretical solutions as future work. Studies providing a working model, tool or set of guidelines that can be practically used in real-world RE processes by software practitioners would be very helpful.

(p35.3) 3. Real-world, representative evaluations: Many studies used academics and students, and those running industry based trials were mainly restricted to a single team, project, company, or country. New studies should address these limitations by validating their proposed solutions with more representative and larger scale, more diverse situations.

(p35.4) 4. Some human aspects may need more study in terms of their impact on RE: 33 primary studies focused on only one human aspect. Among these, communication issues and personality differences were the two human aspects considered individually. However, communication issues has been studied mostly related to RE, whereas personality has been studied mostly related to SE in general. Only a few other human aspects were studied in more than a couple of studies, including emotions, motivation, human values, geographic and time zone differences. Many human aspects were investigated only in a very few studies, as shown in Figure 9, and their impact on SE generally and not specifically RE or RE phases.

(p35.5) 5. More studies are needed that consider multiple human aspects impacting on RE: Very few primary studies consider more than one human aspect. Only a few combinations of human aspects have been investigated in a single study. We observed that the emotions and motivation combination is the most studied combination -in only three studies. There is an opportunity for more studies on the effects of different combinations of human aspects on RE.

(p35.6) 6. More investigation is needed on what are actually the most influential human aspects on RE, both positively and negatively: All of our primary studies investigated some factor relating to the impact of human aspects on RE. However we could find no study that directly discussed identifying what are the most influential human aspect(s) on RE. Some human aspects may impact RE but not much. Others might have a great influence, in general, in combination, or in certain situations. 7. Investigating which phases of RE are more impacted by human aspects: Only a quarter of the primary studies focused on identifying the most affected RE phase by human aspects, the majority focusing on requirements elicitation. Impact of human aspects on other RE phases are much less investigated. Conducting studies which try and identify the impact of human aspects on different phases of RE, and which phase(s) are more highly affected by which human aspects, would be valuable.

(p35.7) 8. Identification of the relationships between human aspects and their effect on RE: Only 23 (31%) of the primary studies identified that there is a relationship between the different human aspects considered in the studies and conducting RE. These human aspects can positively or negatively impact the RE process. Determining what the effects of different human aspects and combinations of human aspects are on RE is still an emerging area of research. There is a need in future research projects for methods to both capture what these human aspects are, identification of the actual positive and negative effects of these human aspects on RE, and investigation of tangible ways we can improve the RE process by incorporating due consideration of these human aspects.

(p35.8) 9. Investigating the influence of the target application domain, team size, organization size, etc: We have not directly analysed the influence of the domain studied in the primary studies, the team or organisation sizes, etc. Also, we identified that there is lack of sufficient data in many of the primary studies to be able to extract and synthesize all of these within this study. Hence, there is a potential for another study that focuses on the influence of various human aspects based on different software project domains and team and organisational characteristics and their impact on the RE/SE processes.

(p35.9) 10. Need of a more comprehensive and agreed taxonomy of human aspects: When we identified our set of human aspects that have been studied to date, we tried to categorize them into broadly different kinds of human aspects. While doing this, we identified that there is a need for a more comprehensive and agreed taxonomy of human aspects in SE in genera, including wide range of keywords representing these. Building this taxonomy is another broad research area and we have begun a project investigating this aspect which can be incorporated into future studies.
