# Control Strategies and Performance Assessment of Upper-Limb TMR Prostheses: A Review

CorpusID: 232382088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97fe4693f29156a5c8af27a4f7b7500f8a9baf43](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97fe4693f29156a5c8af27a4f7b7500f8a9baf43)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Targeted Muscle Reinnervation
(p1.0) After an upper-extremity amputation, the employment of TMR allows for improving the functionality of myoelectric prostheses: the reinnervation of residual muscles creates additional myoelectric control sites available for obtaining the multi-DoF prosthetic control, without the need of switching between modalities available on the device [20]. In 1995, Kuiken examined muscle recovery and related changes in the motor unit population of "hyper-reinnervated" rats [18]. Only in 2004, the first TMR surgery was performed on one human subject with bilateral shoulder disarticulation amputation [21] Figure 2. In 2006, Kuiken introduced the following requirements to make TMR surgery successful: (i) separate regions of muscles and skin must be reinnervated by multiple donor nerves; (ii) EMG signals must be acquired from each target area; and, (iii) the prosthesis must be able to receive numerous EMG input signals and control several motors [22]. TMR can be performed for three different levels of amputation: shoulder disarticulation, transhumeral, and transradial amputation. The innervation strategies depend on the type of amputation [23]. For the shoulder disarticulated patients Figure 3B, pectoralis muscles are usually denervated and then reinnervated with residual arm peripheral nerves [22]. Afterward, back muscles (if possible) are also reinnervated to have more active sites. For the transhumeral amputees Figure 3A, the median nerve is transferred to the short head of the biceps motor branch to restore the function of hand closing or pronation; the ulnar nerve is transferred to a residual brachialis motor branch to have additional control sites for hand closing; finally, the radial nerve is reinnervated to the lateral head of the triceps motor branch in order to control hand opening or supination [24]. For transradial amputees, the control of multifunctional prosthetic hands can be reached by using additional Targeted Muscle Reinnervation signals for improving the function of intrinsic finger and thumb muscles: the distal median nerve is transferred to the flexor digitorum superficialis, while the ulnar nerve is reinnervated to the flexor carpi ulnaris [25]. When the muscles usually chosen cannot be reinnervated, as in [26], three bundles of the anterior tight muscle are used to obtain three active sites for the prosthetic control. The TMR is also an emerging technique for the treatment and reduction of the phantom limb pain (PLP) and neuroma pain [27], for the osseointegrated prostheses [28], and for the targeted sensory Reinnervation [29] of bidirectional neuroprosthetic devices. Finally, another important outcome is the use of TMR in the oncologic population, due to the potential to reduce pain without the use of opioids [30]. , and radial (red) nerves transfer on biceps brachii (orange), brachialis (violet), and triceps brachii (green) muscles of transhumeral (TH) amputees; (B) Musculocutaneous (black), median (light green), radial (blue), and ulnar (yellow) nerves transfer on pectoralis major (clavicular and sternal head, in red), and pectoralis minor muscles (dark green) of shoulder disarticulation (SD) amputees.
## (s2) Aim of the Study
(p2.0) This paper proposes an in-depth study of the literature on control strategies for prostheses that were developed for amputee subjects who underwent TMR procedure. The scope is to consolidate the current knowledge in this field and delineate the limits of these strategies that, up to now, do not yet allow for natural and simultaneous control of the prosthetic arm DoFs.

(p2.1) Nowadays, according to the literature search, the related review papers on TMR contributed to defining the advantages of using this surgery technique from a medical perspective [23,30] without analyzing the most suitable control strategies and performance evaluation tests that allow exploiting the additional targeted muscle reinnervation sites to improve the multi-DoF prosthesis control.

(p2.2) This work has the twofold purpose of (i) identifying the main issues and advantages of the control strategies that were proposed in the literature in order to address the future research towards the development of prostheses that are functional and able to mimic the lost upper limb behavior, replicating the performance of the human arm, for amputee subjects who have undergone the TMR procedure; and, (ii) suggesting a unified protocol test for the validation of these control strategies and, in the case of PR, in both offline and online mode. The expected added value provided by this work is to complete the current knowledge on the control strategies with more recent papers, by critically evaluating and comparing (when possible) the available results and pointing out inconsistencies and neglected aspects.

(p2.3) The paper is organized, as follows. Section 3 describes the methods that were used to select the reviewed articles. Section 4 introduces the benefits of TMR. Section 5 describes the control strategies (both DC and PR) that were used in the analyzed papers for TMR patients. In Section 6, the performance evaluation methods are reported. Section 7 underlines the principal limits of the current control strategies and suggests a unified protocol for the control performance evaluation. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section 8.
## (s9) Direct Control
(p9.0) The control strategies where EMG signals are directly associated with a specific movement are named direct control strategies, as mentioned in Section 1. Among them, the most used are on/off and proportional techniques. Multiples control techniques can be combined with the joint selection method to control multi-DoF prostheses. Figure 5 shows the DC approach.

(p9.1) In detail, the control techniques indicate the relationship between the value of the input signal and the value of the output. In the on/off technique there are only two possible output signals: a predefined speed value (on) and zero (off). The input signal must exceed the preset threshold in order to generate the output value that is used for motor control. Instead, with the proportional technique, it is possible to create a proportional link between the motor speed (output) and the amplitude of the EMG signal (input). Of course, there is also a threshold below which the output signal is zero; in some cases, there is another threshold, above which the output signal is the maximum possible. Regardless of which control technique is used, when the EMG signals are fewer than the DoFs to be activated, the user can employ muscle co-contraction to choose the DoFs to be controlled with the same EMG signal, as mentioned in Section 1. The introduction of TMR surgery made possible to have more muscle sites to uniquely associate a sEMG signal with a movement and simultaneously control more than one DoF. This procedure is resumed in Figure 6. . Direct Control approach: the EMG signals are the input to the controller unit. Two control techniques (the on/off and the proportional) defined the speed necessary to move the joint when the EMG signal is above a predefined threshold. The joint selection methods allow for the user to switch joints with muscle co-contraction or to select them simultaneously. The following six articles make a clear reference to the use of direct control following a TMR intervention. Particular attention was paid to information regarding the level of amputation, the number of sites reinnervated and adopted for the control, and the used prosthetic devices (when indicated are reported in Figure 7), in order to critically evaluate and compare the performance of each method, and to point out the most functional prosthesis control method.

(p9.2) In Kuiken et al. [21], it was demonstrated that a man with a bilateral shoulder disarticulation (BSD), who underwent for the first time TMR, on the left side, was able to control a 3 DoFs prosthesis by using sEMG sensors placed on the three muscle sites successfully reinnervated. Prosthesis was composed of open/close (O/C) hand: Greifer Terminal (Ottobock); wrist prono/supination (P/S): Wrist rotator (Ottobock); elbow flexion/extension (F/E): Boston digital arm (included forearm); and, shoulder: LTI-Collier shoulder joint. The proportional control was employed, with a simultaneous joint selection strategy for the hand and the elbow, and with co-contraction strategy to switch between hand and wrist. In details, the patient was able to pass to the control of the wrist from the hand by using the co-contraction of the hand open/close signals; while the elbow was controlled directly with the remaining active site, by modulating the contraction (from weak to strong) for flexing the elbow slightly or completely, respectively; therefore, the elbow extension was possible by relaxing the contraction. The same author, in [31], also extended the reported outcomes in [21] on a patient with TH amputation, who received the TMR for only two muscle sites. In this case, a powered hand and the same elbow and wrist prostheses presented in [21] were used to simultaneously control three DoFs, by also considering the wrist rotation with shoulder motion.

(p9.3) In Kuiken et al. [24], a case study of a woman with TH amputation was reported to understand if (i) TMR can improve the prosthesis control and (ii) Targeted Sensory Reinnervation (TSR) can provide a region with "sensory perception", by reinnervating four muscle sites and two sensory sites, respectively. The proportional control with simultaneous selection strategy was used to control a prosthetic device after evaluating, with a grid of 128 monopolar electrodes, the most suitable placements of the sEMG sensors for recording the hand and elbow signals. In this way, the patient was finally able to control a three DoFs prosthesis composed of: a passive shoulder components, motorized elbow (F/E) with a computerised arm controller (LTI), motorized wrist rotator (P/S) (Otto Bock), and motorized hand (O/C) (Otto Bock). To control the wrist, two pressure-sensitive pads were mounted in the patient's socket, but she rarely operated them because the cognitive load of simultaneously controlling all three joints was high.

(p9.4) In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], the proportional control technique was used in order to allow a simultaneous control of the prosthesis composed of the elbow F/E and the hand O/C joints. Three TMR patients with TH amputation were enrolled: only two of them had successful nerve transfers and were able to drive the experimental myoelectric prosthesis. For both of the patients, a total of four control sites was used for prosthetic control: the two reinnervated sites to control the hand and two other residual sites for the elbow.

(p9.5) In Miller et al. [34], a case report of three patients with SD and three with TH amputation are presented. The subjects with TH amputation underwent the reinnervation of two muscles, while, for the SD patient, four muscles were reinnervated. All of the patients were equipped with a prosthesis, including Boston Digital Arm, Ottobock device wrist rotator, and electric terminal device. The only difference among the subjects was the use of a prosthetic hand or a hook as a terminal organ. The prosthesis was equipped with proportional control of the elbow and hand joints through the four reinnervated muscle sites in the case of the SD and the two reinnervated sites plus two residual sites in the case of the TH patients. The wrist joint was controlled by the signal from one or two FSR sensors or a potentiometer. At the end of the trials, all of the subjects appreciated the ability to simultaneously control elbow and hand joints, without changing control with respect to conventional control, thanks to the TMR.

(p9.6) To summarize, in all the papers analyzed in this sub-section, the proportional control was employed, combined with both simultaneous and co-contraction joint selection methods. Prosthesis was composed of three DoFs, which were actuated by the different modules that are shown in Figure 5. Only in [33]; the prosthesis was composed of 2 DoFs.
## (s10) Control via Pattern Recognition
(p10.0) Generally, the pattern recognition strategies applied to the prosthetic control associated the several inputs based on sEMG signals of different movements to several outputs, as limb motions related to specific myoelectric patterns [49].

(p10.1) These PR algorithms consist of a first step that is based on feature extraction, in the time and frequency domain [50], to enhance information about EMG contraction in selected time windows. Subsequently, in the sequential control technique, a single classifier is trained that is based on linear or non-linear decision boundaries; instead, in the simultaneous control technique, multiple classifiers are trained to control multiple joints simultaneously or a single classifier is trained by considering discrete and combined movements as separate classes, as shown in Figure 8. For instance, an extensive analysis can be found in [13] and in [51], where a comparative analysis among Non-linear Logistic Regression (NLR), Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) is proposed: the main difference between these algorithms is the linear and nonlinear shape of the decision boundary; straight line or plane for the LDA algorithm; curved line, or surface, for the NLR, MLP, and SVM algorithms. Additionally, the robustness and reliability of the proposed algorithms are key factors for the online control of the prosthetic device and they depend on their offline performance, complexity, and computational time. In the case of trans-radial amputees, the LDA and NLR obtained statistically similar values in terms of F1 Score performance and computational burden in [51] .
## (s13) Direct Control
(p13.0) Regarding systems with DC strategies, the following performance evaluation methods were taken into account: in the Box and Block Test (BBT) [60], the patient had to move the higher number of standard size cubes from one side of the box to the other in a maximum time of one minute; however, Kuiken modified the test extending the time limit up to 2 min., to use it with amputee patients who had undergone the TMR procedure. In the Clothespin Relocation Test (CRT) [21], the patient is prompted to move three clips from the horizontal bar to the vertical bar; the execution time that is required to complete the task was measured. The test was repeated three times. Instead, the Cubbies test [32] is a cubicle reach and retrieve test (Cubbies) composed of 15 cubicles, containing 15 one-inch (2.5 cm) cubes placed on an adjustable height table; in this test, the subject, without moving his feet, has to reach, grasp, and place the 1-inch cubes on the table from as many cubicles as he is able to reach successfully; the total time to grasp a 1-inch cube, place it on the table, and activate a buzzer is recorded. The score consists of the average time per successful reach and retrieval of all blocks in the work-space. In the Cups test [32], 11 plastic cups must be individually retrieved from an inverted stack and positioned in a prescribed pyramid arrangement; four upside-down cups on the bottom row, until one on the top. The final eleventh cup has to be placed upright on top of the top upside-down cup of the pyramid. The time that is needed to stack and unstack the cups is recorded. Finally, the Miscellaneous ADL consisted of a series of the following activities: cutting meat with a knife and fork; place three objects onto a tray and then transport the tray; place 3 1-lb cans into a bag with handles; open and close a jar of peanut butter; stir a spatula in a big bowl; open an envelope with a tool; wrap a package; pull on both socks; and, remove and put on a long-sleeved shirt.

(p13.1) The following six papers used the BBT (modified up to 2 min.) [21,24,[31][32][33][34] to evaluate the performance of the proposed control strategy. In detail, in Kuiken et al. [21], the comparison of the prosthetic control before and after the TMR surgery has shown an improvement of the new procedure. An increase in performance was present: +8.3 blocks, on average, over three tests. In Kuiken et al. [31], for the patient with TH amputation, the results were: +322% blocks moved with the experimental prosthesis. In Kuiken et al. [24], there was the evidence of an increase in the performance between pre-surgery and postsurgery: the average score over three trials changed from 4.0 ± 1.0 to 15.6 ± 1.5 blocks. In Miller et al. [32,34] and O'Shaughnessy et al. [33] the BBT (modified up to 2 min) was employed. In Miller et al. [32], the patient achieved better performance with the three DoFs arm: he moved, on average, 15.0 ± 0.1 blocks, while wearing the six DoFs prosthesis he only moved 13.7 ± 2.5 blocks. In Miller et al. [34], the improvements ranged from 95% to 271% (with an average of 198%) of the number of blocks moved. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], both of the patients demonstrated an increase in the number of blocks (on average, over three tests) of 611% and 150% for patient 1 and patient 2, respectively.

(p13.2) The CRT was also employed in the following six studies [21,22,[31][32][33][34]. The task execution time of CRT equals -36 seconds in Kuiken et al. [21,22] and −54.24% in Kuiken et al. [31]. In Miller et al. [32], the subject was required to flex the shoulder forward once, and then sequentially activate terminal device, elbow and wrist rotations. This test showed that the subject was faster with the six DoF arm (58.0 ± 9.2 s of task execution time) than the three DoF arm (79.2 ± 14.3 s of task execution time). In Miller et al. [34], the improvement ranged from 31% to 55% (with an average of 45%) reduction in the time to complete the task. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], there was a decrease of the time (in seconds) that is required to move three clothespins from one beam to another: 55% and 41% for patient 1 and for patient 2, respectively.

(p13.3) The AMPS test was employed in the following four papers [24,31,33,34]. In Kuiken et al. [24], it went from the score of 0.30 and 0.90 for motor and process, respectively, to the score of 1.98 in both cases. In O'Shaughnessy et al. [33], a computer-tabulated score was reported, reflecting motor and processing function concerning activities of daily living. For patient 1, there was an increase in the score from 0.5 to 1 regarding the motor function and from 0.3 to 1.1 in the processing function. For patient 2, there was an increase in the score from 0.9 to 1.56 in the motor function and from 1.09 to 1.43 in the processing function.
## (s14) Control via Pattern Recognition
(p14.0) Instead, in systems with PR control strategies, the following performance evaluation methods were taken into account: the offline classification accuracy [28,35,37,38], the offline classification error [28,36,42,43], the mst, mct, and mcr [35], the mean path length error percentages [43], and the score of six tasks rhat were chosen from Action Research Arm Test (ARAT) [41].

(p14.1) In detail, in Kuiken et al. [35] the performance metrics as the mst, mct and mcr were introduced for evaluating the control of a virtual arm in real-time, even if that of a real prosthesis is more challenging. In detail, mst was defined as the time from the onset to the first correct classification (i.e., the time that is taken to successfully select a target movement); mct was the time from movement onset to the 10th correct classification (i.e., the time from the onset to the completion of the intended movement); finally, mcr ("success" rate) was the percentage of successfully completed motions out of the total attempted motions.

(p14.2) In Xu et al. [41], the following six grasping tasks from the ARAT test were performed for assessing the recovery of upper limb function [63]: the grasping of a Block of 2.5, 5.0, and 7.5 cm 3 , of a cricket ball, and a sharpening stone; to pour water from one glass to another; to displace 1 and 2.25 cm alloy tubes from one side of the table to another.

(p14.3) Only in Hargrove et al. [42], the following TAC, SHAP, JTHFT, and ACMC tests and the virtual outcome metrics were employed in order to evaluate the performance of the PR system as following. In particular, three blocks of Target Achievement Control (TAC) test [58] consisted of moving, within a 15-s time frame, a flesh-colored virtual limb to match the 12 postures of a translucent grey-colored virtual target limb % in real-time. For the virtual outcome metrics, the number of postures successfully acquired within their allotted 15-s time frames, and the median completion time required to match the set of postures in a block, were analyzed. Instead, for evaluating the differences between the control of a virtual prosthesis in a virtual environment with respect to that of the physical prosthesis, the following parameters were introduced as physical outcomes: the classification error rate, the completion time, and the failure rate. The classification error rate is defined as the number of incorrect decisions that were divided by the total number of decisions; the completion time was the time from the trial start to the target posture achievement, while the failure rate measured the percentage of trials that were unsuccessfully completed during the TAC tests. These physical outcomes were evaluated by using the following promising tests for assessing the functional effectiveness of a prosthetic system [64]: the Southampton Hand Assessment Procedure (SHAP) test [65], which consists of 12 abstract objects and 14 ADLs, and each task is timed by the participant in order to avoid reliability on the reaction times; Jebsen-Taylor test of Hand Function (JTHFT) [66], which is made up of seven subsets that are writing, simulated page-turning, lifting small objects, simulated feeding, stacking, and lifting large, lightweight, and heavy objects; the Assessment for Capacity of Myoelectric Control (ACMC) [67], which consists of 22 items that are related to capacity for myoelectric control: the need for external support, grip force, coordination of both hands, different positions and in motion (timing), repetitive grasp and release, and the need for visual feedback. It is the only test validated for a good test-retest reliability and interpretation guidelines for evaluating the functionality of upper-limb prostheses [68]; and, BBT and CRT (as described in Section 5).
## (s16) Results and Discussion
(p16.0) A comprehensive literature analysis on the most used prosthetic control strategies for TMR patients was carried out, when considering the amputation level of the enrolled patients, the number of signals of reinnervated sites, the number of controlled DoFs and, when available, the methods for validating the control of a prosthetic device, and the obtained performance. When the prosthesis is controlled with DC strategies (proportional strategy, usually), it is possible to use the simultaneous method for the selection of the joint to be controlled. The number of joints that can be controlled simultaneously depends on the number of input signals available. The reinnervated sites used to acquire EMG signals are usually three [21] or four [31,32,34,44,47] for SD patient, while it can be two [31,33,34,47] or four [24,44,45] for TH amputees. Especially when there are less then two reinnervated sites, additional signals from the residual muscles [21,31,33] can be used to actuate the prosthesis with the myoelectric control. However, patients simultaneously control, at most, two DoFs with the only use of EMG signals, whether from reinnervated sites or residual muscle. Almost all patients have demonstrated that they can control a three DoF prosthesis with F/E elbow, P/S wrist, and O/C hand movements, by switching with the co-contraction joint selection strategy from one of the two DoFs simultaneously controlled (usually elbow or hand) to the third one (wrist) and vice-versa. For patients with more than four reinnervated sites, as one of the TH amputees in [44], the P/S of the wrist can also be controlled simultaneously. In some studies, additional inputs were added to EMG signals, such as those from FSR sensors [32,34] or from switches [24]; these additional inputs allow for simultaneously controlling more than two DoFs, with a hybrid control. However, prostheses with more than three DoFs, as in [32], resulted in being difficult and less intuitive to control.
## (s18) Conclusions
(p18.0) This paper has provided an overview of the main advancements of the state of the art regarding prosthetic control techniques of the upper limb and performance evaluation methods for patients who have undergone TMR surgery.

(p18.1) Twenty papers were analyzed, highlighting that the most commonly used prosthetic control techniques are: in the context of direct Control, the proportional strategy and the method of simultaneous joint selection with co-contraction; in the context of PR methods, the LDA algorithm with various feature selection sets.

(p18.2) The most common performance evaluation methods, both for DC and PR, are BBT and CRT. In the case of prostheses controlled with PR, there is always the offline analysis of accuracy.

(p18.3) The most commonly used myoelectric prostheses are composed of 3 DoFs, for elbow F/E, wrist P/S, and hand O/C. This work further highlighted the presence of a variety of tests that were used for the functional performance evaluation ( Table 2), but there is a lack of standard criteria allowing to define which tests are the most suitable for the evaluation of prosthetic control for TMR patients with a different amputation level. In order to fill this gap, both the Box and Blocks and the Clothespin Relocation seem to be the most promising tests for evaluating the performance of the prosthetic systems.

(p18.4) In addition, we believe that virtual reality can be used to further explore the potentiality of the proposed control approaches, before considering them on a physical prosthesis. In fact, we proposed extending the use of virtual reality performance indexes, defined for PR, like motion selection time, motion completion time, and motion completion ("success") rate also to the DC control in this way: the motion selection time and motion completion time can be modified by considering the time that is required from EMG onset to remain above the threshold, while the success rate does not need to be modified. In this way, a comparative analysis between DC and PR systems can also be done when using a virtual reality system. It has to be noted that only few articles presented results regarding the simultaneous PR control strategy showing improvements in throughputs and path efficiencies when compared to direct control or sequential PR [43,45,47,59,71]. Thus, the possibility of simultaneously controlling the prosthesis still can be improved with simultaneous PR-based controllers.

(p18.5) In conclusion, despite the great progresses in the field of advanced prosthetic control, this paper highlights the necessity to still identify the best PR/DC-based system allowing for robust control when considering more than 2 DoFs and of defining standard evaluation methods of the real-time control strategy performance. 
