# Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review Volume 7 Issue 2 -2020 Diabetes and musculoskeletal disorders-a review 64

CorpusID: 234714655 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7da396122d1a3a12841fea30da5d2a719dc2e006)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Diabetic neuropathy
(p3.0) Diabetic neuropathy has been found to affect over 90% of PWD 24 and is a common complication of both T1DM and T2DM. It has been observed in those who have had the disease for 10 years or longer. One of the main symptoms of diabetic neuropathy is pain. 22 Peripheral neuropathy, retinopathy, autonomic neuropathy or renal failure may be due to the long-term complications of diabetes. 2 Limited joint mobility (LJM) has been found to be more prevalent in patients with diabetic neuropathy. The blood vessels may be affected by autonomic neuropathy, which leads to increased blood flow and cause inflammation and damage to the bones. Autonomic neuropathy has been found in patients with Adhesive capsulitis (AC) often compared to other PWD, which could be an underlying mechanism. 25 Sharp pains, numbness, cramps, burning, tingling or sensory loss have been observed in peripheral neuropathy, 26 which may increase the risk of some forms of OA in PWD. 1
## (s7) Diabetic muscle infarction
(p7.0) Diabetic Muscle Infarction is an uncommon complication of longstanding diabetes. 58,59 with established vasculopathy. The symptoms include sudden pain and inflammation in the lower limbs and it mostly affects the adductor muscles, quadriceps femoris and calf muscles. 18 Out of 114 PWD, it was found to be more common in females (61.53%), 59.1% had T1DM and 23.8% had T2DM. 59 The underlying factors such as vascular endothelial damage and diffuse diabetic microangiopathy may cause diabetic muscle infarction. 60
## (s8) Diabetic amyotrophy
(p8.0) Diabetic Amyotrophy (Diabetic Cachexia) is a disabling and different form of diabetic neuropathy, 61 with an estimated incidence of about 1% amongst PWD. 62 The symptoms commonly include loss of tendon reflexes, pain, muscle wasting and weakness. 18 Diabetic amyotrophy has been found to often occur in older males with T2DM and is linked with weight loss. 62 The underlying factors may be due to a combination of metabolic imbalances, autoimmunity, microvascular inadequacy and oxidative stress. 18
## (s9) Fibromyalgia syndrome
(p9.0) Fibromyalgia or Fibromyalgia syndrome (FMS) is a chronic condition that affects about 2-4% of adult females. 63 The symptoms consist of extensive musculoskeletal pain, stiffness and tenderness along with functional and cognitive impairments, headaches and tiredness. 64 Diabetes may have a role in the development of FMS as it was found to be more common in FMS patients than controls. 64 Peripheral neuropathy has been linked with FMS as it was found in 61.9% of T2DM patients with FMS compared to only 2.5% of T2DM patients without FMS. 64 Other than endocrine and neurological factors, research indicates that environmental and genetic factors may also play a role in the development of FMS. 64
## (s10) Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis
(p10.0) Diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH), Forestier disease or ankylosing hyperostosis mostly affects the neck or spine. 65 In DISH, the tendons and ligaments harden along with the formation of new bones. Stiffness or a decrease in movement has been observed in PWD. 65 DISH commonly occurs in PWD (13-49%) compared to controls (1.6-13%), 18 and another study reported that it was present in 25% amongst 428 PWD. 7 DISH is mostly found in T2DM compared to T1DM and mainly occurs in the elderly. 7,66 DISH affects more males than females and in those with dyslipidaemia, hyperuricaemia or obesity. 66
## (s11) Dupuytren's contracture
(p11.0) Dupuytren's contracture (DC) is a disorder that causes hardening, thickening, tethering and contraction of the fingers, with limited joint movements. 67 It is associated with peripheral neuropathy and diabetes was found to be a significant risk factor (mainly T1DM) for DC. 68 DC occurs more in PWD than in the general population 69,70 and has been reported in 16-42% of PWD. 7,70 A systematic review found an association between DC and diabetes (OR 3.06, 95% CI, 2.69, 3.48). 71 DC is common in patients who have long-standing diabetes and may increase with age and the duration of diabetes. 72 A study reported that the prevalence increased in both T1DM and T2DM compared to controls (35.0 and 30.0% versus 6.7 and 10.0%), both p<0.01 and had a correlation with age (p<0.05). 73
## (s12) Adhesive capsulitis
(p12.0) Frozen shoulder (FS) or adhesive capsulitis (AC), is a disabling and common musculoskeletal disorder. The symptoms include restricted and painful shoulder movements, mainly with abduction and external rotation that causes acute pain, tightening and stiffness in PWD. 22 The prevalence of AC was estimated to be 11-30% in PWD and 2-10% in controls. 74 Another study reported that the estimated prevalence was 10-20% in T1DM, 7-32% in T2DM and 0-10% in controls. 75 In AC, a lower BMD was found in T1DM, whereas patients with T2DM and hyper insulinaemia were found to have a normal/high BMD. 65 In T1DM, AC was found to be related with age and duration of diabetes whereas in T2DM, it was related only with age. 75
## (s14) Diabetic cheiroarthropathy
(p14.0) Diabetic cheiroarthopathy, Diabetic Hand Syndrome or Limited joint mobility (LJM) is a disabling condition that may occur due to vascular insufficiency. 64 In LJM, limitations occur in joint movements due to contractures and skin of the hands become thick, tight and waxy, with deformities and pain in the joints. 78 The prevalence of LJM was found to vary from about 8 to 58% in T1DM, 25 to 76% in T2DM and 1 to 20% in controls. 65 LJM is associated with age and duration of diabetes. 71 Researchers have suggested that the differences in the prevalence estimates in LJM may be due to differences in glycaemic control. 79 The prevalence of LJM in T1DM was found to be related to age (p<0.05) and with duration of diabetes 73 and some studies have suggested that genetic factors could have a role in the development of LJM. 65 A study showed that the prevalence of LJM was 8% in T1DM, 9% in their siblings without diabetes and 2% in controls who were not siblings. 80 In contrast, another study found that genetic factors did not have a role in LJM in patients with T1DM and their first-degree relatives. 81
## (s15) Carpal tunnel syndrome
(p15.0) Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is a neuropathic disorder, which may occur due to diabetic neuropathy and/or compression of the median nerve in the carpal tunnel. 7 CTS causes pain, tingling and numbness in the hands. The prevalence of CTS in adults ranges from about 2.7% to 5.8% 82 while the incidence is about 125 per 100,000 person-years. 61 CTS is more common in females 82 with an incidence of 8% compared to 0.6% in males. 18 Diabetes is commonly associated with CTS and studies have found about 11% in T1DM, 12% in T2DM and 8% in controls. 7 CTS is associated with age and the duration of diabetes. A meta-analysis suggested that both T1DM and T2DM are risk factors for CTS 83 A study found that the prevalence increased in both T1DM and T2DM compared to controls (26.7 and 15.0% versus 3.3 and 5%, p<0.01 and non-significant). 73
## (s18) Hyperglycaemia
(p18.0) Several studies have suggested that hyperglycaemia may play a vital role in musculoskeletal disorders and pain. 24 Diabetes causes a disturbance in insulin metabolism that leads to hyperglycaemia, which commonly leads to other complications. 91 Impaired insulin action on target tissues can be a result of faults in insulin secretion and/or decreased tissue responses to insulin, which may cause abnormalities in carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism. 2 Hyperglycemia may induce chronic inflammation that can lead to systemic changes in body organs. 92 Studies have reported association of diabetes and hyperglycaemia with OA. 93,94 OA was found to have correlations with inadequate glycaemic control and longer duration of diabetes. [11][12][13] Moderate hyperglycaemia has been linked with higher uric acid levels in individuals with gout. 95 Chronic hyperglycaemia may also cause impaired growth and susceptibility to certain infections, such as feet and hand infections, in PWD. 2
