# Acid mine drainage mitigation: A review

CorpusID: 234505652 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e47033632bc6465ff22d05df3a165859eda79520](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e47033632bc6465ff22d05df3a165859eda79520)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Historically, the acidic effluents from active and abandoned mines were called acid mine drainage (AMD). The term acid rock drainage (ARD) was used for the first time during the 1980s and 90s to denote acidic effluents from locations other than mines. In fact, ARD is the more generic name.

(p0.1) Mining-influenced water (MIW) is a term used for any water that has been affected in its chemical composition by mineral processing operations. MIW covers several different types of water such as residual waters, AMD waters, mineral processing waters and marginal waters (Wildeman and Schmiermund, 2004). The amount of AMD depends on several factors such as the mineralogy of the material, oxygen concentration, etc. and AMD occurs on a natural basis. Mining industries are the source of metals and economic activity, and AMD is a big concern for such industries. Mining operations tend to increase the amount of rock surface exposed to the atmospheric elements (air and water).
## (s9) Aeration
(p9.0) According to Ackman and Kleinmann (1984), an in-line system is provided for treating AMD, which basically comprises the combination of a jet pump (or pumps) and a static mixer. The jet pump allows the entrance of air into the acid wastewater using a Venturi effect. Thus, it provides aeration of the wastewater, while further aeration is provided by the helical vanes of the static mixer. A neutralising agent is injected into the suction chamber of the jet pump and the static mixer is formed by plural sections offset by 90 degrees. Conventional AMD treatment processes basically comprise four steps: (1) neutralisation, (2) aeration, (3) settling and disposal of sludge, and (4) effluent discharge.
## (s16) Ion exchange
(p16.0) The potential treatment for AMD has been researched based on the cation exchange process ( figure 8). This technique is based on an ion-exchange resin, which can remove heavy metals (cationic resins) or sulphates, chlorides and sulphate complexes (anionic resins) from MIW. Figure 8 shows the use of weak-base resins (such as Amberlite IRA-68) operated in the bicarbonate cycle (Pollio and Kunin, 1967).  
