# information A Comprehensive Survey of Knowledge Graph-Based Recommender Systems: Technologies, Development, and Contributions

CorpusID: 235826036 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48e2adf2d8d6b24060174c5a262542c885d12149)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s3) Content-Based Filtering
(p3.0) A content-based recommender system learns to recommend items that are similar in terms of content features to those that the user liked in the past [38], i.e., this approach uses items' information to recommend based on user profiles.

(p3.1) Content-based recommenders can be classified into case-based reasoning [39] and attribute-based technique [40]. The case-based reasoning technique recommends items highly correlated with items that the user liked in the past. In contrast, the attribute-based technique recommends items based on matching their attributes with the user's profile.
## (s4) Demographic Filtering
(p4.0) Recommendation systems based on demographic filtering are based on the fact that users with certain common personal attributes (gender, age, country, etc.) also have common preferences [43]. Based on this, these systems can generate recommendations by categorizing users according to demographic attributes. These approaches are especially useful when the amount of item information is limited.
## (s6) Knowledge-Based Filtering
(p6.0) A knowledge-based recommender system suggests items to the user based on domain knowledge about how the items satisfy the user's preferences [48]. According to [38], these systems should employ three types of knowledge: knowledge about the users, knowledge about the items, and knowledge about the correspondence between the item and the user's needs.

(p6.1) Knowledge graphs can provide complementary information to overcome the problems faced by collaborative and content-based filtering approaches [21], since their recommendations are not linked to ratings; instead, they use domain knowledge. However, the main drawback of knowledge-based recommenders is that their creation involves having skills in knowledge engineering [49].
## (s7) Hybrid Filtering
(p7.0) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].
## (s8) Recommender Systems over Knowledge Graphs
(p8.0) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p8.1) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p8.2) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).

(p8.3) Concretely, KG recommendation exploits the connections between entities representing the users, the items to be recommendeded, and their interactions. The connections, explicit or not, are used by the system to identify items that may be interesting or useful to the target user [62]. Thus, relationships provide the KG-based recommender with additional valuable information to apply inference between nodes to discover new connections [63]. On the contrary, in general, classical recommendation methods based on feature vectors overlook such connections, which may result in suboptimal performance, especially when there is data sparsity [25].

(p8.4) The availability of knowledge graphs in different domains has motivated researchers to conduct studies on knowledge graph-based recommendation algorithms. According to [6], current KG-based recommendation approaches can be classified into three categories: ontologies-based recommendation, linked open data-based recommendation, and knowledge graph embeddings-based recommendation. Furthermore, according to [21], KG-based recommendation can be classified into path-based approaches.

(p8.5) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p8.6) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p8.7) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).

(p8.8) Concretely, KG recommendation exploits the connections between entities representing the users, the items to be recommendeded, and their interactions. The connections, explicit or not, are used by the system to identify items that may be interesting or useful to the target user [62]. Thus, relationships provide the KG-based recommender with additional valuable information to apply inference between nodes to discover new connections [63]. On the contrary, in general, classical recommendation methods based on feature vectors overlook such connections, which may result in suboptimal performance, especially when there is data sparsity [25].

(p8.9) The availability of knowledge graphs in different domains has motivated researchers to conduct studies on knowledge graph-based recommendation algorithms. According to [6], current KG-based recommendation approaches can be classified into three categories: ontologies-based recommendation, linked open data-based recommendation, and knowledge graph embeddings-based recommendation. Furthermore, according to [21], KG-based recommendation can be classified into path-based approaches.
## (s10) Linked Open Data (LOD)-Based Recommendation
(p10.0) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].

(p10.1) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].
## (s11) Embedding-Based Recommendation
(p11.0) In recent years, Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) techniques are becoming increasingly popular because they offer a simple and efficient way to generate recommendations [6]. In this case, the KG is transformed by using KGE algorithms; then, a recommendation framework can leverage the learned entity and relationship embeddings to produce a set of results [21].
## (s12) Path-Based Recommendation
(p12.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p12.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s26) Education
(p26.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p26.1) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p26.2) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.

(p26.3) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p26.4) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p26.5) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.
## (s28) Lodging and Tourism
(p28.0) Building KGs for lodging and tourism generally describe users and items (such as hotels, events, tourist attractions, and points of interest) as well as user-user or user-item interactions. Specifically, the KG proposed by [13] captures the logical associations between customer records (historical data on their movements and social communications). Furthermore, Reference [11] showed that, by applying appropriate methods, the graphs can learn personalized weights of each user and the item to recommend, depending on the factors that most influence the customer's decision process. Another feature is that the graph can incorporate and connect heterogeneous information from location-based social networks (LBSN) into a unified representation space.

(p28.1) Another graph that can be highlighted is the Event-centric Tourism Knowledge Graph (ETKG), presented in [15]; the graph models the temporal and spatial dynamics of tourist trips. A relevant feature of ETKG is that it allows for representing dynamic data as activities that tourists can perform during a trip. The graph interconnects events using temporal relations in chronological order. Moreover, some additional features such as spatial information and attributes of journeys are incorporated into ETKG.

(p28.2) Regarding the recommendation, the proposed systems attempt to leverage networks of entities built from several sources. Concretely, the recommendation system proposed by [11] integrates relevant factors and features that influence user check-in behavior. In this study, the authors demonstrate that KG technologies allow for embedding heterogeneous information in unified representation space.

(p28.3) Moreover, KG-based recommendation can leverage weighted users' or items' properties according to their influence on the users' preferences. The method proposed by [16] can distinguish relevant customer's information to recommend hotels using a recurrent neural network and an attention-like mechanism.

(p28.4) In the tourism domain, we found that some works focus on addressing the sparsity of information and cold-start issues. Zhang, Wang, and Luo in [50] proposed the KGE-based collaborative filtering method that uses a deep neural network (DNN) to predict links that represent user-item interactions. Likewise, Reference [16] addresses a similar data completion task to predict user-item interactions. In [14], the authors tried to alleviate the cold-start problem by using the fine-grained restaurant services' features to identify similar users when a new user is coming.

(p28.5) Concerning the performance of the analyzed works, in general, an improvement is observed compared to other recommendation methods taken as a baseline. The RNN-based recommendation model of [16] predicts the interaction between users and hotels better (according to MAP and ROC-AUC) than the other three recommendation models. Likewise, the proposal of [11] is better in accuracy, recall, and MAP against eight different models, considering three evaluation datasets. Another method that improves the recommendation performance is ETKGCN [15], which recommends POIs related to tourist attractions. According to the authors, its performance is better because it integrates information from user reviews, a feature little exploited in other tourism networks.
## (s29) Entertainment
(p29.0) In the entertainment domain, we found some works related to enrichment and link data with external sources. Regarding the enrichment of original data, Reference [69] pro-poses to use data available in linked open data (LOD) datasets. Specifically, Reference [74] proposes to connect the data of sound and musical items with external graphs such as WordNet and DBPedia; thus, the initial data are enriched.
## (s30) E-Commerce, Business, and Financial Sector
(p30.0) In e-commerce, certain items do not receive user feedback or do not have reviews, or there are users without historical data. To solve the lack of data, Reference [70] proposed an ontology as the driver to build users' profiles using multiple dimensions such as user's feedback, reviews, and user's ratings. In this way, the ontological model facilitates understanding the user-specific preferences by modelled from numerous perspectives.

(p30.1) Other works evidencing the use of multiple entities and data dimensions such as (1) Reference [68] present DCDIR, which utilizes a cross-domain mechanism to give personalized recommendations for new users in the insurance domain; (2) the KG built-in [20] incorporates data from supply-demand networks between business services and users, community network structures between users and between services, POIs, and detailed service content; (3) in [20], the KGE method called TransH is used to create dense representations of a KG; TransH facilitated the prediction of underlying relationships between users, POIs, and business services accurately.

(p30.2) On the other hand, for recommending business services, the experimental results of [20] demonstrate that the POIKG RS algorithm performs better than other collaborative filtering methods (Popularity, UserCF, ItemCF, and SPrank), especially when the data is sparse, which corresponds with a practical online scenario. Additionally, the approach can utilize the characteristics of different user groups and their POIs, resulting in better recommendation accuracy. Finally, POIKG RS presented significant online performance, i.e., when a user posts a comment on a service, they receive recommendation services immediately.
## (s33) Interpretability of Recommendations
(p33.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p33.1) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p33.2) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.

(p33.3) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p33.4) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p33.5) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.
## (s34) Explainable Recommendation
(p34.0) Most of the research on explainable recommendations is based on unstructured data, such as text, images, audio, video stills, etc. However, if the recommender system possesses some knowledge about the recommendation domain, it facilitates the generation of personalized recommendations and explanations.

(p34.1) Currently, the advancement of KGE has made it possible to integrate graph embedding learning and recommendation techniques for improving the explanation of recommendations. Thus, the system can make recommendations with some domain knowledge and can tell the user why such items are recommended. For example, in [16], they develop a recommendation method to predict interactions between users and items using a KG and review text; in this case, explanations are generated based on the prediction made from the paths between a user and an item. Likewise, in [94], they use knowledge graphs to explain recommendations to users with items' unstructured textual description data.

(p34.2) Research on KG-based models for explainable recommendation represents one of the future directions for intelligent systems research since they can provide personalized recommendations in many research areas, such as personalized medical care, personalized online education, conversational systems, etc. Moreover, some studies on explainable recommendations [19,95] have demonstrated that explaining recommendations increase trust, transparency, and user acceptance in KG-based recommender system responses.

(p34.3) Most of the research on explainable recommendations is based on unstructured data, such as text, images, audio, video stills, etc. However, if the recommender system possesses some knowledge about the recommendation domain, it facilitates the generation of personalized recommendations and explanations.

(p34.4) Currently, the advancement of KGE has made it possible to integrate graph embedding learning and recommendation techniques for improving the explanation of recommendations. Thus, the system can make recommendations with some domain knowledge and can tell the user why such items are recommended. For example, in [16], they develop a recommendation method to predict interactions between users and items using a KG and review text; in this case, explanations are generated based on the prediction made from the paths between a user and an item. Likewise, in [94], they use knowledge graphs to explain recommendations to users with items' unstructured textual description data.

(p34.5) Research on KG-based models for explainable recommendation represents one of the future directions for intelligent systems research since they can provide personalized recommendations in many research areas, such as personalized medical care, personalized online education, conversational systems, etc. Moreover, some studies on explainable recommendations [19,95] have demonstrated that explaining recommendations increase trust, transparency, and user acceptance in KG-based recommender system responses.
## (s35) KG-Based Dynamic Recommendations
(p35.0) One of the few concerns of current KG-based recommendation algorithms is to make recommendations dynamic. Most KG-based recommender systems are considered static; although they present good accuracy results, very few consider users' dynamic preferences.

(p35.1) Dynamic recommendations are very important in areas such as healthcare where it is necessary to perform an evaluation of a patient's treatment over time [96], and in e-shopping [97] and social networks [98], where a user's interest can be influenced by other users very quickly.

(p35.2) Research that has focused on making recommendations dynamic is largely those based on traditional approaches such as collaborative filtering and/or content-based. Thus, a future direction is to leverage knowledge graphs for dynamic recommendations, for example, by capturing the attention of user's interests that change rapidly over time.

(p35.3) One of the few concerns of current KG-based recommendation algorithms is to make recommendations dynamic. Most KG-based recommender systems are considered static; although they present good accuracy results, very few consider users' dynamic preferences.

(p35.4) Dynamic recommendations are very important in areas such as healthcare where it is necessary to perform an evaluation of a patient's treatment over time [96], and in e-shopping [97] and social networks [98], where a user's interest can be influenced by other users very quickly.

(p35.5) Research that has focused on making recommendations dynamic is largely those based on traditional approaches such as collaborative filtering and/or content-based. Thus, a future direction is to leverage knowledge graphs for dynamic recommendations, for example, by capturing the attention of user's interests that change rapidly over time.
## (s54) Content-Based Filtering
(p54.0) A content-based recommender system learns to recommend items that are similar in terms of content features to those that the user liked in the past [38], i.e., this approach uses items' information to recommend based on user profiles.

(p54.1) Content-based recommenders can be classified into case-based reasoning [39] and attribute-based technique [40]. The case-based reasoning technique recommends items highly correlated with items that the user liked in the past. In contrast, the attribute-based technique recommends items based on matching their attributes with the user's profile.
## (s55) Demographic Filtering
(p55.0) Recommendation systems based on demographic filtering are based on the fact that users with certain common personal attributes (gender, age, country, etc.) also have common preferences [43]. Based on this, these systems can generate recommendations by categorizing users according to demographic attributes. These approaches are especially useful when the amount of item information is limited.
## (s57) Knowledge-Based Filtering
(p57.0) A knowledge-based recommender system suggests items to the user based on domain knowledge about how the items satisfy the user's preferences [48]. According to [38], these systems should employ three types of knowledge: knowledge about the users, knowledge about the items, and knowledge about the correspondence between the item and the user's needs.

(p57.1) Knowledge graphs can provide complementary information to overcome the problems faced by collaborative and content-based filtering approaches [21], since their recommendations are not linked to ratings; instead, they use domain knowledge. However, the main drawback of knowledge-based recommenders is that their creation involves having skills in knowledge engineering [49].
## (s58) Hybrid Filtering
(p58.0) These systems commonly combine collaborative filtering with content-based filtering or collaborative filtering with any other recommendation approach. The goal of combination is to leverage each approach's advantages and to improve the overall system performance [38].
## (s59) Recommender Systems over Knowledge Graphs
(p59.0) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p59.1) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p59.2) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).

(p59.3) Concretely, KG recommendation exploits the connections between entities representing the users, the items to be recommendeded, and their interactions. The connections, explicit or not, are used by the system to identify items that may be interesting or useful to the target user [62]. Thus, relationships provide the KG-based recommender with additional valuable information to apply inference between nodes to discover new connections [63]. On the contrary, in general, classical recommendation methods based on feature vectors overlook such connections, which may result in suboptimal performance, especially when there is data sparsity [25].

(p59.4) The availability of knowledge graphs in different domains has motivated researchers to conduct studies on knowledge graph-based recommendation algorithms. According to [6], current KG-based recommendation approaches can be classified into three categories: ontologies-based recommendation, linked open data-based recommendation, and knowledge graph embeddings-based recommendation. Furthermore, according to [21], KG-based recommendation can be classified into path-based approaches.

(p59.5) In 2012, Google proposed the term knowledge graph to refer to the use of semantic knowledge in web searches. Although the term associated with KG is new, representing pieces of knowledge as interconnected nodes is not a new idea. We can consider current KGs as an evolution of semantic networks, an old concept that emerged from the literature on cognitive science and artificial intelligence.

(p59.6) When Google created its KG, the purpose was to improve the search engine's capability and to enhance users' search experience [21]. Today, several companies and researchers have joined this movement and have created different KGs to describe specific domains. Before the term "knowledge graph" became popular, DBPedia and other linked data (LO) sets were generated thanks to Semantic Web technologies and the Linked Data-Design Issues proposed by Berners-Lee.

(p59.7) A knowledge graph provides machine-readable data organized as a graph; graphdata describes and interconnects entities of an open or a close domain. The data in a KG is accessible through the web and can be consumed automatically; these characteristics have facilitated the creation of applications such as [21] question-answering, recommender systems, information retrieval, domain-specific applications by knowledge area, and other applications (social networks and geoscience).

(p59.8) Concretely, KG recommendation exploits the connections between entities representing the users, the items to be recommendeded, and their interactions. The connections, explicit or not, are used by the system to identify items that may be interesting or useful to the target user [62]. Thus, relationships provide the KG-based recommender with additional valuable information to apply inference between nodes to discover new connections [63]. On the contrary, in general, classical recommendation methods based on feature vectors overlook such connections, which may result in suboptimal performance, especially when there is data sparsity [25].

(p59.9) The availability of knowledge graphs in different domains has motivated researchers to conduct studies on knowledge graph-based recommendation algorithms. According to [6], current KG-based recommendation approaches can be classified into three categories: ontologies-based recommendation, linked open data-based recommendation, and knowledge graph embeddings-based recommendation. Furthermore, according to [21], KG-based recommendation can be classified into path-based approaches.
## (s61) Linked Open Data (LOD)-Based Recommendation
(p61.0) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].

(p61.1) Rich semantic information queryable from LOD data sets can enrich the system information, thus finding similar attributes among items to be recommended. The underlying advantage of doing this is to overcome the problem of data sparsity. On the other hand, as the recommendation process depends on external data, then the integrity of the external data may affect the recommendation results [6].
## (s62) Embedding-Based Recommendation
(p62.0) In recent years, Knowledge Graph Embedding (KGE) techniques are becoming increasingly popular because they offer a simple and efficient way to generate recommendations [6]. In this case, the KG is transformed by using KGE algorithms; then, a recommendation framework can leverage the learned entity and relationship embeddings to produce a set of results [21].
## (s63) Path-Based Recommendation
(p63.0) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].

(p63.1) The path-based recommendation is a natural and intuitive way to use KGs in recommendation processes. The algorithms attempt to explore various patterns of connections between nodes in a KG to retrieve additional information for recommendations. This method relies on hand-crafted designed meta-paths, which are difficult to optimize in practice, and it is not possible to design in some particular scenarios where entities and their relationships are not within a specific domain [21].
## (s77) Education
(p77.0) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p77.1) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p77.2) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.

(p77.3) As a contribution to the education sector, some KGs were created. In [9], a graph describing concepts and terminology of the cybersecurity domain was shown. Additionally, this KG contains information to help instructors and students track individual learning progress.

(p77.4) Interaction data sparsity during recommendation is an issue tackled in some proposals. The lack of rating data is a common scenario that can occur in academia, especially in open and non-formal education. To address this problem, Reference [10] proposed a hybrid model that recommends papers based on the browsing history of students of an academic search engine. Since the users of interest have no previous interactions in the recommender system, the proposed model can learn mappings between users' browsed papers and users' clicks on the recommended items.

(p77.5) Finally, in [5], an improvement in the accuracy of semantic similarity calculation between topics or concepts in a subject area is demonstrated. As the authors argue, the computation of semantic similarity plays a fundamental role in implementing a recommendation service for large educational datasets. According to the authors, current semantic similarity methods focus either on the structure of the semantic graph or only on the conceptual information. Therefore, in [5], a semantic similarity method is proposed, which combines these two methods and uses conceptual information to weigh the shortest path length between concepts. In the experiment, the authors demonstrate that their method has a certain degree of feasibility and credibility in calculating the semantic similarity of topics in KGs.
## (s79) Lodging and Tourism
(p79.0) Building KGs for lodging and tourism generally describe users and items (such as hotels, events, tourist attractions, and points of interest) as well as user-user or user-item interactions. Specifically, the KG proposed by [13] captures the logical associations between customer records (historical data on their movements and social communications). Furthermore, Reference [11] showed that, by applying appropriate methods, the graphs can learn personalized weights of each user and the item to recommend, depending on the factors that most influence the customer's decision process. Another feature is that the graph can incorporate and connect heterogeneous information from location-based social networks (LBSN) into a unified representation space.

(p79.1) Another graph that can be highlighted is the Event-centric Tourism Knowledge Graph (ETKG), presented in [15]; the graph models the temporal and spatial dynamics of tourist trips. A relevant feature of ETKG is that it allows for representing dynamic data as activities that tourists can perform during a trip. The graph interconnects events using temporal relations in chronological order. Moreover, some additional features such as spatial information and attributes of journeys are incorporated into ETKG.

(p79.2) Regarding the recommendation, the proposed systems attempt to leverage networks of entities built from several sources. Concretely, the recommendation system proposed by [11] integrates relevant factors and features that influence user check-in behavior. In this study, the authors demonstrate that KG technologies allow for embedding heterogeneous information in unified representation space.

(p79.3) Moreover, KG-based recommendation can leverage weighted users' or items' properties according to their influence on the users' preferences. The method proposed by [16] can distinguish relevant customer's information to recommend hotels using a recurrent neural network and an attention-like mechanism.

(p79.4) In the tourism domain, we found that some works focus on addressing the sparsity of information and cold-start issues. Zhang, Wang, and Luo in [50] proposed the KGE-based collaborative filtering method that uses a deep neural network (DNN) to predict links that represent user-item interactions. Likewise, Reference [16] addresses a similar data completion task to predict user-item interactions. In [14], the authors tried to alleviate the cold-start problem by using the fine-grained restaurant services' features to identify similar users when a new user is coming.

(p79.5) Concerning the performance of the analyzed works, in general, an improvement is observed compared to other recommendation methods taken as a baseline. The RNN-based recommendation model of [16] predicts the interaction between users and hotels better (according to MAP and ROC-AUC) than the other three recommendation models. Likewise, the proposal of [11] is better in accuracy, recall, and MAP against eight different models, considering three evaluation datasets. Another method that improves the recommendation performance is ETKGCN [15], which recommends POIs related to tourist attractions. According to the authors, its performance is better because it integrates information from user reviews, a feature little exploited in other tourism networks.
## (s80) Entertainment
(p80.0) In the entertainment domain, we found some works related to enrichment and link data with external sources. Regarding the enrichment of original data, Reference [69] pro-poses to use data available in linked open data (LOD) datasets. Specifically, Reference [74] proposes to connect the data of sound and musical items with external graphs such as WordNet and DBPedia; thus, the initial data are enriched.
## (s81) E-Commerce, Business, and Financial Sector
(p81.0) In e-commerce, certain items do not receive user feedback or do not have reviews, or there are users without historical data. To solve the lack of data, Reference [70] proposed an ontology as the driver to build users' profiles using multiple dimensions such as user's feedback, reviews, and user's ratings. In this way, the ontological model facilitates understanding the user-specific preferences by modelled from numerous perspectives.

(p81.1) Other works evidencing the use of multiple entities and data dimensions such as (1) Reference [68] present DCDIR, which utilizes a cross-domain mechanism to give personalized recommendations for new users in the insurance domain; (2) the KG built-in [20] incorporates data from supply-demand networks between business services and users, community network structures between users and between services, POIs, and detailed service content; (3) in [20], the KGE method called TransH is used to create dense representations of a KG; TransH facilitated the prediction of underlying relationships between users, POIs, and business services accurately.

(p81.2) On the other hand, for recommending business services, the experimental results of [20] demonstrate that the POIKG RS algorithm performs better than other collaborative filtering methods (Popularity, UserCF, ItemCF, and SPrank), especially when the data is sparse, which corresponds with a practical online scenario. Additionally, the approach can utilize the characteristics of different user groups and their POIs, resulting in better recommendation accuracy. Finally, POIKG RS presented significant online performance, i.e., when a user posts a comment on a service, they receive recommendation services immediately.
## (s84) Interpretability of Recommendations
(p84.0) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p84.1) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p84.2) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.

(p84.3) Most recommendation models focus on achieving good performance from the point of view of accuracy. However, if the user cannot interpret the results, then the reliability of the system is reduced [3].

(p84.4) In KG-based recommender systems, the relationship between users and items can be easily interpreted from entities and relationships [16]. Furthermore, knowledge graphs contain rich semantic associations between entities, which can be used to strengthen the relationships between recommended items and to provide interpretability during recommendation [6].

(p84.5) In recent years, methods based on knowledge graphs have been proposed to interpret recommendations such as KPUP [92] and entity2rec [93], which in addition to presenting a higher accuracy, make recommendations easily interpretable. Although some works have been developed using knowledge graphs, it is necessary to focus on how to use KG technologies to solve interpretability problems and to design interpretable models that lead to the explainability of the recommendation results.
## (s85) Explainable Recommendation
(p85.0) Most of the research on explainable recommendations is based on unstructured data, such as text, images, audio, video stills, etc. However, if the recommender system possesses some knowledge about the recommendation domain, it facilitates the generation of personalized recommendations and explanations.

(p85.1) Currently, the advancement of KGE has made it possible to integrate graph embedding learning and recommendation techniques for improving the explanation of recommendations. Thus, the system can make recommendations with some domain knowledge and can tell the user why such items are recommended. For example, in [16], they develop a recommendation method to predict interactions between users and items using a KG and review text; in this case, explanations are generated based on the prediction made from the paths between a user and an item. Likewise, in [94], they use knowledge graphs to explain recommendations to users with items' unstructured textual description data.

(p85.2) Research on KG-based models for explainable recommendation represents one of the future directions for intelligent systems research since they can provide personalized recommendations in many research areas, such as personalized medical care, personalized online education, conversational systems, etc. Moreover, some studies on explainable recommendations [19,95] have demonstrated that explaining recommendations increase trust, transparency, and user acceptance in KG-based recommender system responses.

(p85.3) Most of the research on explainable recommendations is based on unstructured data, such as text, images, audio, video stills, etc. However, if the recommender system possesses some knowledge about the recommendation domain, it facilitates the generation of personalized recommendations and explanations.

(p85.4) Currently, the advancement of KGE has made it possible to integrate graph embedding learning and recommendation techniques for improving the explanation of recommendations. Thus, the system can make recommendations with some domain knowledge and can tell the user why such items are recommended. For example, in [16], they develop a recommendation method to predict interactions between users and items using a KG and review text; in this case, explanations are generated based on the prediction made from the paths between a user and an item. Likewise, in [94], they use knowledge graphs to explain recommendations to users with items' unstructured textual description data.

(p85.5) Research on KG-based models for explainable recommendation represents one of the future directions for intelligent systems research since they can provide personalized recommendations in many research areas, such as personalized medical care, personalized online education, conversational systems, etc. Moreover, some studies on explainable recommendations [19,95] have demonstrated that explaining recommendations increase trust, transparency, and user acceptance in KG-based recommender system responses.
## (s86) KG-Based Dynamic Recommendations
(p86.0) One of the few concerns of current KG-based recommendation algorithms is to make recommendations dynamic. Most KG-based recommender systems are considered static; although they present good accuracy results, very few consider users' dynamic preferences.

(p86.1) Dynamic recommendations are very important in areas such as healthcare where it is necessary to perform an evaluation of a patient's treatment over time [96], and in e-shopping [97] and social networks [98], where a user's interest can be influenced by other users very quickly.

(p86.2) Research that has focused on making recommendations dynamic is largely those based on traditional approaches such as collaborative filtering and/or content-based. Thus, a future direction is to leverage knowledge graphs for dynamic recommendations, for example, by capturing the attention of user's interests that change rapidly over time.

(p86.3) One of the few concerns of current KG-based recommendation algorithms is to make recommendations dynamic. Most KG-based recommender systems are considered static; although they present good accuracy results, very few consider users' dynamic preferences.

(p86.4) Dynamic recommendations are very important in areas such as healthcare where it is necessary to perform an evaluation of a patient's treatment over time [96], and in e-shopping [97] and social networks [98], where a user's interest can be influenced by other users very quickly.

(p86.5) Research that has focused on making recommendations dynamic is largely those based on traditional approaches such as collaborative filtering and/or content-based. Thus, a future direction is to leverage knowledge graphs for dynamic recommendations, for example, by capturing the attention of user's interests that change rapidly over time.
