# Clinical Medicine Combination Therapy for Neuropathic Pain: A Review of Recent Evidence

CorpusID: 237331527 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a32844b3348474744027bfb2b2c380729f8bec38)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) Even though this is a new independent review, we followed the previous systematic review methods as closely as possible [27]. We evaluated the efficacy, tolerability, and safety of various drug combinations for the treatment of NP. For that purpose, we identified only RCTs of various drug combinations for NP from different databases. We also hand searched for citations within other reviews and trial registries. The most recent search was performed on 30 April 2021.
## (s14) Risk of Bias
(p14.0) We searched for the following types of bias in all of the studies included for qualitative analysis: random sequence generation and allocation concealment (selection bias), blinding, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other potential sources of bias. We graded all selected studies for quality per the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool [29].
## (s24) Outcomes
(p24.0) Five studies reported the number of patients with a ≥50% pain reduction [38,[42][43][44][45], and in other studies, this number was deduced from the figures [32]. Most of these studies also reported the number of patients with ≥30% pain reduction, except for two studies [38,43]. One study described the proportion of patients reporting ≥50% pain reductions and ≥30% pain reductions, but these proportions were assessed using a secondary analysis producing the overall percentage from all treatment groups on a three-branch crossover study. The number of participants could not be calculated from this percentage or from the diagram of participants included and withdrawn from the study [37]. Other outcomes such as adverse effects and the patient's overall impression of the change in pain relief are shown in a table in the Supplementary Materials (Table S1).
## (s28) Random Sequence Generation and Allocation Concealment (Selection Bias)
(p28.0) Four of the six studies reported the method used to generate the random sequence and to keep the allocation concealed [32,38,42,44]. The other two appropriately reported only one or the other [43,45].
## (s31) Selective Reporting
(p31.0) Although four out of the six selected studies [32,38,42,43] indicated pre-trial registration on a clinical trial registry, all six of them reported on at least one of the outcomes that was considered to be clinically relevant.
## (s32) Other Potential Sources of Bias
(p32.0) We assessed the issue of other bias as being high risk in studies where the follow-up was shorter than twelve weeks [32,38,42] and/or where the study had fewer than 50 participants per arm or period of treatment in parallel or crossover studies, respectively [32,38].     
## (s33) Effect of Interventions
(p33.0) When combining THC/CBD oromucosal spray as an add-on with a pre-existing regimen for central neuropathic pain, the number of responders (≥50% pain reduction from baseline) at week 10 totaled 30% in the THC/CBD spray group compared with 28% in the placebo group (p-value: 0.714). Therefore, there was no difference between treatment groups, mostly due to a similar (high) number of placebo responders [43].

(p33.1) For a 12-week period, in patients who used systemic pain medication, CP8 as an add-on therapy reduced NP in PHN. The number of responders (≥50% pain reduction from baseline) was 29% in the CP8 group and 17% in the placebo group (p-value: 0.048). Likewise, CP8 reduced NP in PHN in patients who did not use systemic medication (36% for CP8 group, 25% for placebo group, p-value: 0.004) [44]. We could not differentiate between concomitant medications. No data in this regard were given.

(p33.2) A combination of dextromethorphan and quinidine was effective, with an acceptable safety profile, for the treatment of PDN pain. The proportion of patients who achieved a 50% rating scale score reduction was 66% (DMQ 45/30 mg twice a day) and 54% (DMQ 30/30 mg twice a day), compared with the placebo group (p-value: 0.001 and 0.006, respectively) [45].

(p33.3) A combination of PGB+DXT showed no significant differences in pain reduction in patients with PDN when compared with either PGB or DXT at high-dose monotherapy. The number of responders (≥50% pain reduction from baseline) was 52% in the "60 mg DLX + 300 mg PGB" group, 51% in the "300 mg PGB + 60 mg DLX" group, 29% in the "60 mg DLX + 60 mg DLX" group, and 47% in the "300 mg PGB + 300 mg PGB" group (p-value: 0.068) [42].

(p33.4) A combination of moderate doses of the tricyclic antidepressant (ATC) imipramine and PGB could be considered an alternative to high-dosage monotherapy for painful polyneuropathy. The percentage of patients who had at least 50% relief with respect to baseline was placebo 6%, PGB 12%, imipramine 20%, and CT 28% [38].

(p33.5) Adding DXT to opioid-PGB therapy might have clinical benefits in alleviating refractory N-CP. The proportion of patients who achieved 30% or more pain reduction was 37.5% in patients eventually receiving PGB and DXT, 60% in those receiving DXT only, 23.1% in those receiving PGB only, and 0.00% (90% CI 0.00-40,96) in those receiving placebo only [32]. However, this effect was assessed only for 10-day therapy. No information was presented for a longer period of treatment.
## (s35) Main Results
(p35.0) We can assume that adding THC/CBD to a pre-existing treatment for NP has no effect and that no difference between a PGB-DXT combination exists against either drug on high-dose monotherapy. However, a combination of an ATC such as imipramine and PGB may be an alternative to high-dose monotherapy. Likewise, adding DXT to a previous opioid-PGB therapy may be beneficial too, and topical CP8 for peripheral NP is effective in reducing NP regardless of the concomitant therapy. Different unusual combinations such as dextromethorphan and quinidine may be another useful treatment option.

(p35.1) For the secondary outcomes, all the selected studies had safety reports, where they differentiated adverse effects and drop-outs due to treatment-emergent adverse effects (only one for the latter) [32]. However, the data on prescribed rescue medication were either not available [42] or not analyzed [42][43][44]. Other pain ratings or sleep interferences were evaluated in some studies. A PGIC was evaluated in three studies [42][43][44], and the BPI was evaluated also in three studies [32,42,43]. Sleep interference was evaluated in four studies [32,42,43,45]. On the other hand, NP symptoms or sensory testing was reported only in one study [38], whereas the data were unclear in another two studies [42,43].
## (s36) Quality of Evidence
(p36.0) In this review, before obtaining any results, we initially intended to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis. At first, we doubted if we should include in our quantitative analysis the studies already previously reviewed. As the NNT has changed, stabilizing after 2010 [10], we thought that a new separate independent and analytical review would be wiser. However, after the screening and selection, we found that a meta-analysis would not be possible. Thus, the quality of evidence has not increased after all these years. Nevertheless, some good-quality studies have demonstrated the superior efficacy of two-drug combinations against a placebo and against monotherapy.
## (s38) Cannabinoids in Combination
(p38.0) One of the results of this review is that adding THC/CBD to a pre-existing treatment for NP did not show any benefits for these patients [43]. On the other hand, a recent review on only nabiximol (THC/CBD) for NP found that it was superior to the placebo but with a small effect size [49]. This small effect size alone may be the reason why it is not useful in combination. Moreover, there may be a difference between whether the CT is used with THC alone. Nabilone, a synthetic THC analogue, added to gabapentin (GBP) could be beneficial [39], but again, the results were produced from a very small number of participants, and the study was performed only for nine weeks. Findings indicating that GBP synergistically enhances THC have also been reported [50]. Thus, THC, but not a combination of THC/CBD, may represent a potential adjuvant for NP medications.
## (s39) Topical Treatments in Combination
(p39.0) Evidence for other topical treatments in CT is also controversial. Apart from the RCTs selected in this review, where CP8 was demonstrated to reduce NP as an add-on therapy [44], we also found three other non-selected studies on a lidocaine 5% plaster [51][52][53], one retrospective analysis on transdermal buprenorphine [54], and a very recent study protocol of a study combining clonidine and pentoxifylline [55]. One of the lidocaine 5% plaster studies [51] and the transdermal buprenorphine study not only were retrospective but also had a low number of participants, with different pain conditions and several concomitant therapies. Therefore, they were not suited for drawing any conclusions. Another retrospective study using a lidocaine 5% plaster as an off-label add-on therapy for different localized NP syndromes and conducted with 130 patients found that only 79 were still on the plaster after 3 months (44 after a year) [52]. Nevertheless, out of the 130, 66 reported >30% pain relief, from which 39 reported >50%. Despite being retrospective, this study suggests that lidocaine 5% plaster as an add-on therapy could have the same effect as CP8. Furthermore, an RCT for lidocaine 5% plaster against the placebo did pinpoint some findings about its use [53]. Randomization was stratified by concomitant treatment status, and no significant differences were found among the study groups, even though the treatment arm experienced better pain relief. A subgroup analysis showed that the add-on therapy group behaved almost the same as the placebo group. Hence, the results from the available literature on lidocaine 5% plaster are heterogeneous and inconsistent and should be clarified in a proper RCT for CT.
## (s41) Antidepressant and Opioid Combinations
(p41.0) The literature on antidepressants and opioids is limited too, but the results are more consistent towards a benefit for CT. In fact, combining antidepressants, be they tricyclic or otherwise, with opioids is a more frequent combination than combining antiepileptics with opioids [61]. Whilst DXT and methadone reduce cancer-related pain when compared with each drug alone (monotherapy) [62], adding DXT to an opioid-PGB therapy might have clinical benefits in alleviating refractory N-CP [32], and a superior efficacy of a nortriptyline-morphine combination has also been reported over each of these drugs in monotherapy [37]. Another RCT with a DXT-methadone combination could not be completed due to recruitment and retention issues [41]. Even though little evidence exists, the quality seems better for CT with antidepressants plus opioids than for gabapentinoids plus opioids.
## (s42) Gabapentinoids and Antidepressants in Combination
(p42.0) Another very frequently found combination is the one between gabapentinoids and antidepressants [61,63]. In fact, combinations of PGB/GBP and DXT/TCAs have been previously recommended for consideration as an alternative to increasing dosages in monotherapy for patients unresponsive to monotherapy with moderate dosages [8]. The American Academy of Neurology (AAN) guidelines have recommended adding venlafaxine to GBP in patients with inadequate pain relief on GBP monotherapy [64]. Recent evidence is contradictory, and recommendations may need to be reconsidered. An RCT selected in this review demonstrated the superiority for CT with PGB and imipramine. [38]. This RCT, though, had a low number of patients per arm, and the test lasted only for 5 weeks. The period was too short to show a persistence of the effect. Even so, PGB and imipramine in moderate doses was significantly superior to either drug in moderate-dose monotherapy. In another cohort study, PGB superadded to a pre-existing amitriptyline regimen helped to reduce pain [65]. However, though the authors claimed that the study was a randomized placebo-controlled study, the blinding and randomization procedures were not described properly. In addition, other recent contradictory results have been presented. In a post hoc analysis of another previous non-inferiority trial for DXT against PGB, patients treated with DXT plus GBP showed greater pain reduction than PGB monotherapy but not to DXT monotherapy, which was even more effective in patients who previously did not take any type of antidepressant [66]. Additionally, one of the other selected RCTs, the COMBO-DN study, did not find any statistically significant difference between the combination of DXT with PGB and high-dose monotherapy of either of them [42]. This RCT had some biases that made the results difficult to interpret. The result only lasted 8 weeks within the comparison period, no comparison for CT against low doses monotherapy was made, and the drop-out rate was high for several reasons: 109 out of 804 (13.5%) of the initial participants were drop-outs due to adverse effects, 10 dropped out due to a lack of efficacy, 42 dropped out due to patient decision, 64 dropped out for other reasons (noteworthily, 12 of them were withdrawn despite presenting a "satisfactory response" just before completion of the trial, and this issue, far from being odd, also appears in another selected study [44]), whereas only 290 completed the study out of 804 initially randomized. Additionally, in another cohort study, a combination of anticonvulsants and antidepressants was not associated with improved pain control at 6 months compared with individual therapy [67]. After considering these heterogeneous results, we are not sure recent evidence is strong enough to support recommendations on combining antidepressants with gabapentinoids. If a need for such combinations exists, the evidence shows it may be better to combine gabapentinoids with tricyclics.

(p42.1) Nevertheless, whether PGB should be added to the treatment of refractory uncontrolled pain, with an already broad treatment profile, remains to be answered. This was reported, with a relevant improvement in pain and treatment satisfaction, in two large observational studies [58,68], and neither TCAs nor opioids were found to be predictive factors for adverse events associated with PGB [69]. However, a re-analysis with pooled data from several RCTs showed that the therapeutic response to PGB was unaffected by concurrent NP medications and that the appearance of adverse events was unaffected too [70].
## (s46) Implications for Research
(p46.0) In order to properly identify specific CT that provides superior efficacy and/or safety, we recommend that future NP studies of two-drug combinations include comparisons with placebo and both single-agent components. When designing the study protocol, before calculating the sample size, researchers should consider that pain RCTs have a higher placebo response [15] and that claims about an increase in drop-out numbers have been made [38,41,42]. Moreover, a crossover trial takes longer than a parallel one, increasing the chance of more dropouts.
## (s47) Potential Biases and Limitations
(p47.0) We tried to scope the results of this review in the most objective way possible. However, we had some difficulties finding data. First, some trials were found after the third or even the fourth database search. Therefore, though unlikely, the possibility of missing RCTs still exists. As we could not afford the fee to search EMBASE, we may have missed information. Additionally, as the search was already very large, we did not include other websites (e.g., controlled-trials.com, and clinicalstudyresults.org). Thus, we may have missed some RCTs. This can lead to a publication bias. However, we considered that, as the search was conducted on four major databases with over 2000 different citations and over 1500 duplicated results, the probability of missing a trial was very low and the amount of work and duplicates would increase even further. Another difficulty we found was looking for proper data within the publications. Some data were very accessible, but other data needed to be inferred via tables, figures, or even the discussion. Thus, even after a colleague (see the Acknowledgments) reviewed our work, we may have made mistakes with the discernment of extracted data.

(p47.1) Another serious limitation was complying with all items for a systematic review. We did not register the protocol for this review in a review registry (e.g., PROSPERO). This is a critical flaw according to AMSTAR-2 [89]. Even so, we have tried to reflect, in the material and methods section, the entire search protocol as it was carried out. For conducting a proper systematic review, we missed item 2 (protocol registration), whereas items 4 (literature search) and 7 (justification for excluding individual studies) were partially fulfilled, but it only remains an issue for reviewing those studies conducted only after 2012.

(p47.2) We also could have performed a thorough meta-analysis including all the RCTs published prior to 2012 [27]. By doing this, we may have achieved a systematic review and a quantitative meta-analysis. Chaparro et al. performed one with only two RCTs. However, given the changes in trial methodology and requirements by EMA and FDA and that the NNT has increased (accompanied by a decrease in effect size), which stabilized after 2010 [10] we thought that not including those studies would be wise. Even though this may lead to a discussion about publication bias, mixing those trials could generate more bias and confusion than benefits. Maybe we should have been more thorough and included studies published after 2010. However, trying to conduct a complete meta-analysis based on individual data, not by sizing up several RCTs but by shelling individual data from every RCT and only then conducting the complete meta-analysis, would be wiser. This work is very time-consuming simply regarding retrieving individual data from old records, and we could not afford to do so. We recommend that other researchers follow this path for the purpose of obtaining better evidence on CT for NP.

(p47.3) Finally, we decided to keep the primary outcome strictly as the proportion of participants reporting ≥50% pain reductions from baseline (or ≥30% when 50% was not reported) and did not add other pain evaluations such as moderate or greater pain relief, or moderate or greater overall improvement, for the purpose of obtaining stronger evidence. In fact, the latest review used these other options as primary outcomes [27]. If we had added these criteria in the primary outcome, we could have gathered more studies. However, we believe that a study with measures of pain reduction as the primary outcome but not reporting the number of participants with that pain reduction in their results to be awkward. Hence, not reporting these numbers would give these awkward studies the same status as other studies that did report such an endpoint. If regulatory agencies have raised their standards for conducting RCTs from ≥30% to ≥50% pain reductions from baseline, we inferred that a systematic review should raise the primary endpoint too. Consequently, we made the primary objective simple and highly selective. As said before, the risk of doing so is leaving some good studies out. However, reporting the number of participants with a pain reduction is an important issue in pain trials. Reporting the number of participants with a reduction in other scores such as overall improvement or pain relief is also useful, but reporting the most important outcome should not be compromised.
## (s48) Agreements or Disagreements with Other Studies or Reviews
(p48.0) We completely agree with Eisenberg and Suzan's review. Even though several new trials have used various drug combinations for NP, the results are still inconsistent due to methodological problems [24]. We partially agree with the review by Finnerup et al. [8].

(p48.1) In recent years, no trials have been conducted on GBP CT. A combination of PGB with TCAs may be one option, whereas its combination with DXT (or other selective serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors) has yet to be elucidated.
