# A review on sustainability and quality of biochar production from oil palm biomass in Malaysia using thermal conversion technology

CorpusID: 237961574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19656163a685740442f5f18b802a39aea0dde25c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/19656163a685740442f5f18b802a39aea0dde25c)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s1) Availability of oil palm biomass and biomass industry value chain
(p1.0) Common solid wastes which is also known as biomass generated from oil palm plantations include oil palm trunk (OPT) and oil palm frond (OPF) while biomass generated from mills are empty fruit bunch (EFB), palm kernel shell (PKS) mesocarp fiber (MF) and palm oil mill effluent (POME). OPF are the leaves of oil palm tree, which are frequently can be obtained from the oil palm trees and inversely, OPT are only available at end of the oil palm tree lifecycle. EFB are the remains solid once the fruits were removed from the fruit bunches. Once CPO was extracted from the fruits, PKS and MF were obtained, from the wasted nuts and pericarps of the oil palm fruits respectively.

(p1.1) Harvesting fresh fruit bunch yield 70% fruits and 30% wastes which are the empty fruit bunch and evaporated water. In average, the fruits yield CPO by 43% and nuts and pericarps contribute about 13 and 14% respectively [5]. Fig. 2 summarized the amount of waste and biomass collected in year 2010 and forecasted to year of 2020. Oil palm frond shared the largest fraction of solid waste biomass generated which are 57.5% & 50.5% that is equivalent to 46 and 48 million ton in 2010 and 2015.
## (s2) Thermal conversion technology for biochar production
(p2.0) The thermal conversion process is divided into 5 stages depending on the conversion phases occur to the biomass and process conditions. Initially, at temperature less than 200°C, biomass was dried, where mainly moisture was released in vapor phase.

(p2.1) Then, devolatilization or carbonization took place once temperature reached 180 to 250°C, where volatile compound are released and char started to form due to initiation of decomposition. Torrefaction started to occur at 250°C and further temperature increased to 300°C would initiated pyrolysis process. Gasification proceeded if the temperature was higher than 500°C. Detail of the conversion phases is illustrated in Fig. 4. The products from thermal conversion process of biomass are liquid, solid and gaseous forms, which was dependant to temperature. Table 1 summarized the distribution of product yield with respect to difference techniques and conditions as reported by Kong et al. [13].  Pyrolysis is a typical thermal conversion technology to synthesis biochar particularly from biomass. The process is classified as slow torrefaction and slow carbonization technique. It decomposes the biomass in oxygen-free environment and producing solid, liquid and gaseous products [15]. The solid products are known as biochar while liquid and gaseous products are recognized as bio-oil and syngas, respectively [15]. Pyrolysis is classified by fast pyrolysis, slow pyrolysis or pyrolytic gasification depends on temperature and heating rate [16]. Fast pyrolysis occured at temperature higher than 500°C at heating rate higher than 1000°C/min, while slow pyrolysis generally occured within hours at temperature less than 500°C and heating rate less than 100°C/min [17].

(p2.2) The amount and distribution of product yield from thermal conversion are dependent on the type of thermal techniques. It was observed that slow pyrolysis yield the highest biochar formation compared to fast pyrolysis and gasification technique [18]. An amount of 35wt% of solid yield through slow pyrolysis while 10wt% of biochar yield was observed for fast pyrolysis and gasification technique respectively [18]. Under certain conditions, it was reported that biochar yield was 77% and obtained using slow torrefaction technique. In addition, higher mass yield can be observed by using biomass with high ash content yet the product mostly demonstrated low carbon content [19]. High yield of liquid and solid products were obtained for biomass that contained high fraction of volatile matters [20].

(p2.3) Hydrothermal carbonization, microwave carbonization, flash carbonization and torrefaction are among other technology for conversion of biomass [21]. Fire is ignited at high pressure (1-2MPa) in a packed bed reactor for biomass conversion using flash carbonization process meanwhile microwave carbonization applied microwave radiation to initiate the pyrolysis. Laser and plasma cracking technologies also have been developed as one of the pyrolysis technologies for biomass conversion. However the application using oil palm biomass are quite limited. Plasma is typically used for bacterial sterilisation, and chemical vapour deposition [22]. However, the technology has illustrated potential application for waste treatment and valorisation, bio-fuel production, pollution control or gas treatment [23]. For example, Khongkrapan et al. [24] utilized municipal solid waste (MSW) waste of used office papers, bamboo and plastics using microwave plasma assisted pyrolysis to obtain refuse derived fuel (RDF) in form of char and combustible gas. A modified microwave oven was used as the reactor and generated plasma converted the wastes into and char. The yield of char was 12-21% with gross higher heating value (HHV) was approximately 39MJ/kg. Lupa et al. [22] also applied microwave induced-plasma to perform pyrolysis of waste wood and obtained 20.4% of char production. Rapid heating and cooling of laser pyrolysis technology has enable to avoid the possibility of secondary reaction to occur during pyrolysis reaction [25].
