# Development and Application of Sen-timent Analysis Tools in Software Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 233864821 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4d3f9a314cdba9aec33a18ea4ccd53fbf635a860](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4d3f9a314cdba9aec33a18ea4ccd53fbf635a860)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s5) Selection of databases.
(p5.0) While some papers are available via several scientific databases, others are not. Therefore, we included a total of five databases in our search to reduce the risk of missing papers which are only available in one database. Our selection comprises databases that are often used in SLRs in the SE domain [18,36,37,64,66,77,78]: Science Direct 7 , IEEE Xplore 8 , ACM Digital Library 9 , Springer Link 10 , and Google Scholar 11 . We conducted a comprehensive search as proposed by Petersen et al. [62] in each of these databases in order to reduce biases.
## (s6) Definition of inclusion and exclusion criteria.
(p6.0) During the review process, we eliminated studies and publications that cannot contribute to answering our research questions. In order to make this decision more objective, we defined inclusion and exclusion criteria as summarized in Table 1. We first applied the exclusion criteria to each of the found publications. In case that none of the exclusion criteria was true for the publication, we decided on the inclusion by considering the inclusion criteria. If the publication fits at least one inclusion criterion, it was included. If a relevant publication appeared more than once (e.g., as a conference paper and as an extended journal publication), we included the most recently published version.  2. The publication is not peer-reviewed. 3. The publication appears repeatedly. In this case, we only considered the latest version. 4. The publication is not accessible (respectively only accessible only by payment). 5. The publication has technical content without proven scientific relevance such as invitation papers, editorials, tutorials, keynotes, speeches, white papers, grey literature, dissertations, theses, technical reports, and books. 6. The publication is a document that is not a full paper or study such as presentations, web postings, web content, citations, brochures, pamphlets, newsletters, or extended abstracts.
## (s8) 3.2.5
(p8.0) Execution. An overview of the execution can be seen in Figure 1. First, we searched the five databases mentioned in subsection 3.2.1 using the search string and selected probably relevant papers based on their title from a total of 6763 publications. After removing duplicates and filtering the papers based on the titles, we applied the inclusion and exclusion criteria to the remaining 420 papers' abstracts. Ninety-nine papers remained of which we scanned the full text, resulting in 71 papers used as the startset for the forward and backward search. This snowball principle was performed according to Wohlin [75]. The backward search resulted in 24 new papers based on the title, and the forward search resulted in 8 papers. We again scanned the 32 new papers based on abstract and full text, leading to 14 more papers considered as relevant.

(p8.1) In total, we identified 85 papers as relevant: 71 in the initial search and 14 in one forward and backward search. The number of new papers after one snowball iteration was small. Therefore, we refrained from repeating the snowball principle after having examined the first papers and could not find any relevant new papers based on the title, except duplicates.

(p8.2) We ended our search for papers at the end of December 2020. The quality metrics were applied to the 85 papers and five were excluded due to not passing the quality criterion. Some of them did not define research questions or discuss results, or the technologies used were not described. All of them had an average score less than 1 according to the quality assessments.
## (s13) Approaches for developing or using sentiment analysis
(p13.0) In line with the results presented in subsection 4.2, we again distinguish between development and application of the tools when looking at the algorithms the sentiment analysis is based on. For example, when a paper is about the development of a sentiment analysis tool, we listed which machine learning approach this tool uses, such as SVM or Bayes. If an existing tool like SentiStrength [68,69] is used, we listed this specific tool. Some papers did both developing and comparing their tool with other existing tools. An overview of approaches being used during developing can be seen in Table 4. Because only existing tools were compared in the "comparison" category, we did not list the respective papers.
