# Research and Applied Perspective to Blockchain Technology: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 237840325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dea157b78a395eb4601cfa3cf25e78f3c7e9c2a4)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s11) Public/Permissionless Blockchains
(p11.0) Blockchain that has no restriction on accommodating anonymous participants is known as permissionless blockchain [26]. The term public blockchain is used interchangeably. Lottery based consensus algorithms are used to publish a block. A single node is responsible for publishing a block. Lottery-based mechanisms elect the validator to decide the next block to be added into the blockchain ledger. Election is based on a lottery draw and the one who wins is the validator. Each new block is appended using a new draw. The lottery-based mechanism avoids the malicious node having forged block to append it into the ledger. Such mechanisms do not follow a rule of thumb for electing the validator hence each lottery has its own trust model for electing the validator. If voting based consensus is allowed to be used in permissionless blockchain, multiple accounts can be made by the participants to do a Sybil attack to make the decisions in their favour. A sybil attack is one of the issue in peer to peer network where a malicious node creates many identities and tries to manipulate the network by controlling it. Public blockchains need security and for this purpose the block creation mechanism needs to be difficult and expensive so that the resources of one node are not enough to bias the decisions in its favor. The disadvantage of public blockchain is in terms of PoW where heavy computation power is needed. All the nodes need to solve a cryptographic puzzle by brute force. The node which wins the puzzle is rewarded and all the other nodes computations are wasted. The consensus is achieved as 51% of power. Proof of stake uses the wealth of miners to win a ticket rather than computational power [27]. There are other various consensus algorithms for private and public blockchains which are discussed in Section 5.
## (s12) Private/Permissioned Blockchains
(p12.0) Private and consortium blockchains are permissioned blockchains. In such types of blockchain the number of participants are limited and they keep a copy of the blockchain [28]. Consensus mechanism is not much expensive for publishing a new block. All the participants in the permissioned blockchain are known so the risk of Sybil attack is eliminated. Private blockchains voting mechanisms for consensus are used. Hence, permissioned blockchains have higher performance than permissionless blockchains. Non-public blockchains are divided into fully private or consortium blockchains. An organization can choose one of them based on the cost and needs. A consortium can be the best option if organizations want to share cost and data.
## (s14) •
(p14.0) Does business deals through trusted third parties? • Do people frequently generate transactions? • Are validation and data integrity important? • Is the data integrity and process performance more important than confidentiality? However for time sensitive nature of the application it is not recommended as the transactions take time to be validated and verified. • Blockchain can influence several emerging areas like smart cities, Internet of Vehicles, banking, Internet of Things, edge computing and cloud [33]. • Is blockchain required to be deployed as public or private?
## (s15) Applications of Blockchain
(p15.0) Blockchain has now being deployed in not only cryptocurrency but its underlying technology is used in various applications [34]. We tried to discuss a few applications of blockchain which includes cryptocurrencies as well as other potential areas where blockchain has emerged. Figure 1 shows different applications of blockchain. However the applications are not limited to the ones discussed in this paper. 
## (s16) Cryptocurrency
(p16.0) Over the past decade cryptocurrency is being an evolving topic, merging incredible technical power and enticing investments worth of value trillions dollars on a world wide scale. The underlying technology of cryptocurrency is attractive for many other applications due to its unique features and architecture. This is why it is becoming popular due to its applicability, efficiency and data-centric characteristics [35]. Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin use blockchain technology to secure transactions using hashes. Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency using blockchain with Proof of Work algorithm.
## (s19) Cryptocurrency
(p19.0) Over the past decade cryptocurrency is being an evolving topic, merging incredible technical power and enticing investments worth of value trillions dollars on a world wide scale. The underlying technology of cryptocurrency is attractive for many other applications due to its unique features and architecture. This is why it is becoming popular due to its applicability, efficiency and data-centric characteristics [35]. Cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin use blockchain technology to secure transactions using hashes. Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency using blockchain with Proof of Work algorithm.
## (s21) Reputation Management
(p21.0) Private blockchain can be implemented for direct and real time feedback from participants without intermediaries to help in auditing and invoicing or any other value of reputation. By the use of this technology, manual collection and transmission of feedback has been reduced. This type of blockchain can be retrieved by the participants in case they want to know the reputation of other participants [37,38].
## (s24) Finance-Payroll and Settlement
(p24.0) Public service transactions involve a sequence of activities to legalize the validity of the transacting party, authentication of the data delivered by the transacting party or parties, performing of the transaction and finally delivery of the compulsory service. The transactions are then recorded from end to end. This process take a long time. The blockchain can reduce this time because of it nature of validity and authenticity. Since a large number of events connected to life built pension such as getting expenses from active customers, beneficiaries obtaining their payments and taxes on pensions are basically contract controlled payments. Sestoft [43] has suggested the use of Ethereum as the algorithm should work on self-regulated contracts. A prerequisite here is the fact that such an autonomous system will need event insurance relates life event triggers from other trusted bodies, so that self-executing contracts can act on them.
## (s28) Insurance
(p28.0) With the use of blockchain, travel insurance, crop insurance, property and casualty insurance and most importantly health insurance are all going to change [51]. A shared network of hospital insurance authorities, funeral houses and health departments can be created. This set up will provide non dependency on third parties speed up the whole process of claiming insurance, it can also eliminate frauds.

(p28.1) In Reference [52], blockchain is proposed to handle the transactions related to insurance process efficiently. They have used hyperledger fabric for the design implementation which is an open source permissioned blockchain platform.
## (s29) Smart Cities
(p29.0) In smart cities information and communication technologies are used to share resources. Blockchain is used in smart cities to reduce transaction costs, to achieve data immutability and accountability. The problem in [53] of data storage from sensors and its management is solved using blockchain technology. The blockchain answers to the request of accessibility and validity by offering smart contract facility where sensor information is managed and control logic is implemented.
## (s31) Blockchain in Social Media
(p31.0) Blockchain has played an important role in social media applications. The reason it is spreading is privacy. Being on blockchain takes away the concept of being centralized. Common examples are Ushare [59], DUST, BeeChat etc. Some of those applications provide anonymity which may give way to malicious behavior. We now discuss some of the top blockchain based social media networks as shown in Figure 2.
## (s40) Blockchain in Power
(p40.0) Another area of blockchain is to enable customers to quickly switch power suppliers. Companies are also using blockchain for meter registration to make the process less costly and more efficient. Blockchain may also make existing electric industry methods more efficient by helping the utilities' "smart grid" management systems that spontaneously diagnose network problems and emergencies and in reaction reconfigure the network [60].
## (s58) Consensus Algorithms
(p58.0) We know that blockchain is a decentralized distributed network that provides security, immutability, transparency and privacy. There is no concept of centralization to verify and validate the transactions, but still transactions in the blockchain are considered to be completely verified and secured. This is the result of a core algorithm present in every blockchain network called a consensus protocol.

(p58.1) A consensus algorithm is a technique through which all the peers of the blockchain network reach a common agreement about the current state of the distributed ledger. Therefore, consensus algorithms provide trust and reliability among unknown peers in a distributed environment. A consensus mechanism ensures that every new block added to the blockchain is the only truth which is agreed upon by all the blockchain nodes [66].

(p58.2) The blockchain consensus protocol comprises some specific aims that are coming to an agreement, co-operation, collaboration, mandatory participation of each node in the consensus process and equal rights to every node. Hence, a consensus algorithm targets at finding a common agreement that is a win for the whole network. The above discussed applications are categorized and consensus algorithms based on these categories are further discussed below. Figure 5 shows a categorical diagram of the consensus and their distribution.

(p58.3) Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 44 sidered to be completely verified and secured. This is the result of a core algorithm present in every blockchain network called a consensus protocol. A consensus algorithm is a technique through which all the peers of the blockchain network reach a common agreement about the current state of the distributed ledger. Therefore, consensus algorithms provide trust and reliability among unknown peers in a distributed environment. A consensus mechanism ensures that every new block added to the blockchain is the only truth which is agreed upon by all the blockchain nodes [66].

(p58.4) The blockchain consensus protocol comprises some specific aims that are coming to an agreement, co-operation, collaboration, mandatory participation of each node in the consensus process and equal rights to every node. Hence, a consensus algorithm targets at finding a common agreement that is a win for the whole network. The above discussed applications are categorized and consensus algorithms based on these categories are further discussed below. Figure 5 shows a categorical diagram of the consensus and their distribution. 
## (s60) Consensus Algorithms Used by Various Cryptocurrencies
(p60.0) Digital currencies have gained faster payment methods by using blockchain. Bitcoin was the first cryptocurrency used by blockchain. After gaining popularity in bitcoin other applications were/are implemented. Table 3 defines some of the important characteristics of consensus algorithms used in cryptocurrencies.   Proof of Work [67] is the first consensus protocol used by a public blockchain. All the nodes need to solve a cryptographic puzzle by brute force. The node which wins the puzzle is rewarded and all the other nodes computations are wasted. The consensus is achieved as 51% of power.
## (s67) Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
(p67.0) In directed acyclic graph (DAG) the data is stored topologically in graph manner. DAG can overcome the problems of data processing, compression and routing. One of the disadvantages of PoW is the creation time of the block which is 10 min. DAG instead of implementing a single chain, works on "side chains" [73]. Therefore, to reduce the time of block creation and validation different transactions are performed on multiple chains. Mining also is a waste of time and energy so in DAG all the transactions are maintained and directed in a certain sequence. DAG is acyclic so there is no chance of finding the parent node as it's a tree of nodes and not the loop of nodes. Some of the basic concepts of DAG are:
## (s71) Delegated Byzantine Fault Tolerance (DBFT)
(p71.0) Delegated byzantine fault tolerance (DBFT) is a different version of BFT. This fault tolerance algorithm divides P2P into two types' ordinary nodes and bookkeepers. Bookkeepers are elected by ordinary nodes who vote for the book keepers to take part in the consensus process. A random book keeper broadcasts its transaction to the network and other 66% bookkeepers should agree on the validation of transaction data. Upon validation the transaction is appended to the blockchain. For another consensus process another book keeper is selected via the same process [75].
## (s74) Proof of Importance
(p74.0) Proof of Importance (PoI) is used by the cryptocurrency New Economic Movement (NEM) [75]. NEM is a blockchain project which has created decentralized digital platform used by decentralized applications, and a digital asset having the same name. It was evolved in March 2015 by Singapore-based non-profit organization by the name of NEM.io Foundation. Every account has a vested and unvested XEM balance. Unvested balance is the amount received.

(p74.1) NEM is a blockchain project which has created decentralized digital platform used by decentralized applications, and a digital asset having the same name. Every account has a vested and unvested XEM balance. Unvested balance is the amount received. After every 1440 blocks one tenth of the unvested balance goes into a vested account. XEM is spent from both vested and unvested accounts when a XEM needs to be sent. This is so because both accounts need to retain the same ratio; 10,000 XEM is the minimum amount an account should hold in its vested part in order to be eligible for "Importance Calculation". Importance is calculated on a weighting factor i.e., to check if an account is a part of cluster nodes or an outlier, on amount of vested XEM, the rank of the account within the network. Ranking is held via the NCDawareRank algorithm and NEM network determined two suitable constants.
## (s76) Proof of Ownership
(p76.0) Proof of work is prone to Sybil attack where an attacker can do the amount of work multiple times as he acts as multiple participants [75]. Using a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) a participant needs to own a unique Central Processing Unit (CPU) instead of virtually maintaining participants. An Enhanced Privacy Identity (EPID) signature is used in this protocol which produces pseudonyms which show if the multiple proofs are coming from the same CPU. The algorithm generates unique pseudonyms so that if a malicious user resets the owner epoch register for using it multiple times, the attacker may not be able do that. Therefore, a consensus in blockchain is reached by following a block having most proofs with unique pseudonyms.
## (s77) Proof of Luck (PoL)
(p77.0) Proof of luck aims to increase transaction throughput and reduce the computational power used by PoW. Each block when mined is given a random number between 0 and 1 which is called a "luck value". Higher numbers are considered as luckier and less unlucky.

(p77.1) The highest luck value is calculated by adding all the values of each block starting from genesis block till the last block. The miners prefer to append their block to the blockchain having the highest luck value. A higher luck value produces less delay and optimizes communication within the system. The original miner will not need to broadcast its block to the network as another miner tries to solve the proof on the first block having higher luck value [77].
## (s78) Proof of Activity (PoA)
(p78.0) There are many disadvantages of proof of stake which includes keeping coins for long with oneself [75]. Coins are also sent to the transactions which further assigns coins to the rest destroying the coinage but they are not included in PoS. When the node is offline, coins are still collected and this is the main weakness of PoS. When the node is occasionally online, there is a delay in receiving their incentive which results in incentive distributions bursts. If the amount of online nodes are insufficient it may result in attacks.
## (s81) Proof of Retrievability (PoR)
(p81.0) PoR provides mining resources with the additional ability of distributed storage of archival data. It is similar to PoB but it does not just involve computational power but also storage. This consensus is more suitable for cloud computing where a file system (Prover) can give surety to a client (verifier) that the file is intact. PoR is well known for permacoin and koppercoin [78].
## (s85) Proof of Authority
(p85.0) Proof of authority was proposed for private networks as part of the Ethereum ecosystem. In PoA, authority is given to N nodes. Each node is given a unique id. These authorities are responsible for running the consensus and ordering the client's issued transactions. PoA runs on a mining rotation schema in which the responsibility of block creation is distributed fairly among the authorities [81].
## (s88) Proof of SpaceTime (PoST)
(p88.0) In proof of spacetime (PoST) a prover has to convince a verifier that data and space has been stored by him/her over a period of time. This data and space storing over a period of time is known as "spacetime" resource. PoST uses less energy as compared to proof of work as it requires that the difficulty level be increased by prolonging the time period in which the data is stored rather than increasing computation costs [85].
## (s89) A Federated Byzantine Agreement (FBA)
(p89.0) A federated byzantine agreement (FBA) is well known for its low transaction costs, scalability and high throughput. Steller and Ripple cryptocurrencies use this consensus where Steller was the first one to use FBA. It works like a byzantine fault tolerance where a blockchain is a responsibility of each byzantine general which belongs to the same blockchain. Nodes need to be known and verified in advance before the user requests any enactment from the FBA [86]. The notary node selects those nodes who they trust, making quorums of nodes and hence forming the FBA network.
## (s90) Healthcare Based Consensus
(p90.0) Blockchain is helpful in healthcare as it provides security to the medical records and other security breaches which healthcare faces on a daily basis. Figure 6 shows the patient profile over the blockchain which can be used for information by the concerned doctor, hospital, insurance company or it can be used in the supply chain management.

(p90.1) A federated byzantine agreement (FBA) is well known for its low transaction costs, scalability and high throughput. Steller and Ripple cryptocurrencies use this consensus where Steller was the first one to use FBA. It works like a byzantine fault tolerance where a blockchain is a responsibility of each byzantine general which belongs to the same blockchain. Nodes need to be known and verified in advance before the user requests any enactment from the FBA [86]. The notary node selects those nodes who they trust, making quorums of nodes and hence forming the FBA network.
## (s100) Medical Information Sharing Using PBFT (Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance)
(p100.0) As discussed by Jieying Chen [90] PoW utilizes much energy and resources so instead of PoW they used PBFT in their application of blockchain for medical information sharing. PBFT can tolerate one third of nodes to be malicious hence it is much more efficient in reaching consensus than PoW.
## (s102) Proof of Movement
(p102.0) Road miners (smart phones or computers etc.) share their transportation data with the community and get automatic reward (Tokens) called zooz. These tokens can be used to pay for ride sharing and other services. Road miners get more rewards if they drive for long (Incentive layer) [92].
## (s103) Proof of Driving
(p103.0) Proof of driving (PoD) validates and verifies the vehicles in communication. IV-TP (intelligent vehicle trusted point) is the crypto data which is assigned to each vehicle and if a vehicle wins the consensus competition, it gets more IV-TP from the benefiter IV. The vehicle having more IV-TP is leading the vehicle's communication network. This way it creates a trusted environment between vehicles communication [93].
## (s105) Proof of Movement
(p105.0) Road miners (smart phones or computers etc.) share their transportation data with the community and get automatic reward (Tokens) called zooz. These tokens can be used to pay for ride sharing and other services. Road miners get more rewards if they drive for long (Incentive layer) [92].
## (s106) Proof of Driving
(p106.0) Proof of driving (PoD) validates and verifies the vehicles in communication. IV-TP (intelligent vehicle trusted point) is the crypto data which is assigned to each vehicle and if a vehicle wins the consensus competition, it gets more IV-TP from the benefiter IV. The vehicle having more IV-TP is leading the vehicle's communication network. This way it creates a trusted environment between vehicles communication [93].
## (s107) Proof of Reputation
(p107.0) The paper discusses in this section a decentralized reputation-based blockchain in vehicular networks. The received messages are rated by the elected vehicle from the crowd and then broadcasts its ratings which are in the form of block. Using a vehicle's local knowledge they validate the block and decide to add the block to the blockchain or not. Thus the rating which are stored on the blockchain are said to be reliable enough as these are validated by most of the vehicles in the network [94]. Proof of reputation can also be used generally for almost any business network. Gochain uses proof of reputation for Dapps (Decentralized Applications) and smart contracts that aims to decrease energy consumption, increase performance, provide network security and decentralization.
## (s109) Soft Consensus-Based Group Decision Making
(p109.0) Acting in an isolation for the decision in supply chain cannot be that helpful than making joint decisions of planning and execution using supply chain coordination (SCC). A methodology named a fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution)-based MCDM (Multi Criteria Decision Making) for selection problems of SCC is proposed in this paper. As the decision makers are separated geographically, they give their preferences via the internet. A consensus should be reached for the preferences among the decision makers and in this regard this paper presents a soft consensusbased GDM (Group Decision Making) methodology. All the supply chain partners reach a consensus by forming a decision matrix. This is an objective weight determination methodology which is used for assessment of the weights of the criteria without mediation of the decision makers. This methodology is used as the meeting is internet based [96].
## (s110) Weight-Based PoS
(p110.0) As discussed by Leng Kaijun [97], a public blockchain consensus has slow speed. The selective incentive weight should be used in common for the agricultural business resources so that these resources reach the underdeveloped and remote areas. Therefore this paper presents a consensus algorithm for the blockchain of agriculture business re- 
## (s111) Soft Consensus-Based Group Decision Making
(p111.0) Acting in an isolation for the decision in supply chain cannot be that helpful than making joint decisions of planning and execution using supply chain coordination (SCC). A methodology named a fuzzy TOPSIS (Technique for Order Preference by Similarity to Ideal Solution)-based MCDM (Multi Criteria Decision Making) for selection problems of SCC is proposed in this paper. As the decision makers are separated geographically, they give their preferences via the internet. A consensus should be reached for the preferences among the decision makers and in this regard this paper presents a soft consensus-based GDM (Group Decision Making) methodology. All the supply chain partners reach a consensus by forming a decision matrix. This is an objective weight determination methodology which is used for assessment of the weights of the criteria without mediation of the decision makers. This methodology is used as the meeting is internet based [96].
## (s112) Weight-Based PoS
(p112.0) As discussed by Leng Kaijun [97], a public blockchain consensus has slow speed. The selective incentive weight should be used in common for the agricultural business resources so that these resources reach the underdeveloped and remote areas. Therefore this paper presents a consensus algorithm for the blockchain of agriculture business resources. The algorithm considers weight based on PoS.
## (s113) Consensus in Internet of Things (IoT)
(p113.0) IoT relies on a centralized system where many devices are attached to each other via the cloud or any other central system [98]. The data are sent back from the cloud to the device. This makes the scalability issue as sending and receiving of data from many devices can slow up the central system and security issues may arise. Blockchain has made the IoT more reliable, secure and efficient. IoT produces a massive transaction so a decentralized solution would provide a cost effective solution and a peer to peer communication can provide a standardized management for the massive transactions. Although a peer-to-peer communication model suffers a security challenge but the blockchain technology achieves transparent interactions among different parties. The use of a Proof of work consensus algorithm makes the blockchain distributed ledger more trusted and secure [99]. Figure 9 shows the scenario of blockchain retrieving data from various IoT devices. In different scenarios of IoT and blockchain different or already discussed consensus of the blockchain are discussed below.

(p113.1) Appl. Sci. 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 26 of 44 Figure 9 shows the scenario of blockchain retrieving data from various IoT devices. In different scenarios of IoT and blockchain different or already discussed consensus of the blockchain are discussed below. 
## (s114) A Distributed Consensus Algorithm
(p114.0) Global consensus might be the need to facilitate service integration and knowledge sharing. In this paper an idea of local consensus is developed and this is developed by each of IoT edge nodes when needed. Clusters are formed out of network nodes and each cluster reaches a local consensus. This local consensus can be used to make consensus decisions in integration of functional capabilities and knowledge sharing. Any service can become part of the service pool where a local consensus is achieved for all the edge nodes involved in IoT. The proposed matching value-based methods helps in finding the possibility that the existing services can lead to the composition of new services by the existing IoT services. Therefore, the matching values form the nodes are gathered and synthesized to reach a decision which would be acceptable to all. This is helpful in not only to achieve better solutions but also to create trust among nodes and clusters of the network [100].
## (s115) Consensus Protocol of Diversified Services of Complex Internet of Things Applications
(p115.0) The consensus protocol discussed is the merger of proof of stake and proof of work. Ethereum Casper FFG (Friendly Finality Gadget) [100] uses the same protocol. The implementation of the protocol begins with the genesis block. An appointing committee should be organized which will pay the deposit prior. However the amount to be deposited depends on the actual situation. Instead of each common block this paper focuses on the checkpoint blocks. Members vote for the final winner of the fork. The period in which 
## (s116) A Distributed Consensus Algorithm
(p116.0) Global consensus might be the need to facilitate service integration and knowledge sharing. In this paper an idea of local consensus is developed and this is developed by each of IoT edge nodes when needed. Clusters are formed out of network nodes and each cluster reaches a local consensus. This local consensus can be used to make consensus decisions in integration of functional capabilities and knowledge sharing. Any service can become part of the service pool where a local consensus is achieved for all the edge nodes involved in IoT. The proposed matching value-based methods helps in finding the possibility that the existing services can lead to the composition of new services by the existing IoT services. Therefore, the matching values form the nodes are gathered and synthesized to reach a decision which would be acceptable to all. This is helpful in not only to achieve better solutions but also to create trust among nodes and clusters of the network [100].
## (s117) Consensus Protocol of Diversified Services of Complex Internet of Things Applications
(p117.0) The consensus protocol discussed is the merger of proof of stake and proof of work. Ethereum Casper FFG (Friendly Finality Gadget) [100] uses the same protocol. The implementation of the protocol begins with the genesis block. An appointing committee should be organized which will pay the deposit prior. However the amount to be deposited depends on the actual situation. Instead of each common block this paper focuses on the checkpoint blocks. Members vote for the final winner of the fork. The period in which voting takes place is called an epoch. The appointing committee members can also issue transactions just like other nodes of the network. Additionally they have the charge of voting at justified checkpoints. Ballots are used by the members in voting where they decide which checkpoint block should be included in the main graph. Then the result of the vote is broadcast to the whole network. If Block checkpoint 1 (BCP1) gets more than 2/3 ballots, the block is acknowledged and prepared and the epoch ends. The transactions that are in leaf blocks and those incompatible transactions are sent to the pool for further processing. In the next cycle BCP1 is committed and finally confirmed once BCP2 is voted and said to be prepared.
## (s119) Paxos Algorithm for Consensus
(p119.0) Paxos is a decentralized consensus algorithm which lets nodes communicate through an asynchronous network. This algorithm is designed in a way that any value accepted by majority will not be changed so that all the nodes have the same copy of the value [101].
## (s123) Paxos Algorithm for Consensus
(p123.0) Paxos is a decentralized consensus algorithm which lets nodes communicate through an asynchronous network. This algorithm is designed in a way that any value accepted by majority will not be changed so that all the nodes have the same copy of the value [101].
## (s128) Proof of Credibility
(p128.0) The contractor signs contracts with different parties and the number of these parties is known as measuring credibility score. A miner in this consensus of blockchain provides proof that he has a high credibility score. This proof is actually an improvement of the previous work of researchers, in which the trust score was on how many good actions a node has made. The improvement calculates the connection between nodes by credibility score. Instead of using a proof of stake the credibility score gives a problem that even if a contract is true or fake the credibility score is added. An attacker can succeed in a 51% attack if he makes fake contracts with false parties in order to increase his credibility score. Later this attacker can join the true parties who will renew the contracts illegally. To settle this issue, a hybrid of proof of credibility and proof of stake is used in this proposed methodology where these proofs are executed alternately. If a miner generates a block using proof of credibility, the next miner will generate a block using proof of stake [103].
## (s132) Proof of Credibility
(p132.0) The contractor signs contracts with different parties and the number of these parties is known as measuring credibility score. A miner in this consensus of blockchain provides proof that he has a high credibility score. This proof is actually an improvement of the previous work of researchers, in which the trust score was on how many good actions a node has made. The improvement calculates the connection between nodes by credibility score. Instead of using a proof of stake the credibility score gives a problem that even if a contract is true or fake the credibility score is added. An attacker can succeed in a 51% attack if he makes fake contracts with false parties in order to increase his credibility score. Later this attacker can join the true parties who will renew the contracts illegally. To settle this issue, a hybrid of proof of credibility and proof of stake is used in this proposed methodology where these proofs are executed alternately. If a miner generates a block using proof of credibility, the next miner will generate a block using proof of stake [103].
## (s143) Consensus in Power
(p143.0) Blockchain is going to change the legacy systems of centralized nature by hybrid distributed systems which are made up of solar power micro grids and large power plants. This kind of distributed energy system will be a reliable, efficient and renewable energy delivering system. There is also a possibility that blockchain may change the trading system and businesses would trade off using electricity for example if a factory needs additional power, it can buy unused electricity which another factory is selling for five minutes. These five minutes are actually the unused downtime minutes of a factory. This kind of trade can give efficiency benefits to grid operators.

(p143.1) Each home is installed with a smart meter (SM) in order to achieve better scheduling in the smart grid. These SMs collect real-time data of electricity consumption and utilities use this data to provide smart home services in a better way. The real time data can disclose private data of the user and an adversary can take advantage of this data by reading the usage patterns of the electricity consumption profile of the user. In [108], a privacy-preserving and data efficiency aggregation scheme is proposed via blockchain. Users are divided into groups and a private blockchain is managed by each group for its members. For privacy preservation inside a group each user uses pseudonyms to hide their identity. In addition, proof of work is used to achieve block verification. The said scheme achieves security requirements and better performance than other methods.
## (s145) Consensus in Power
(p145.0) Blockchain is going to change the legacy systems of centralized nature by hybrid distributed systems which are made up of solar power micro grids and large power plants. This kind of distributed energy system will be a reliable, efficient and renewable energy delivering system. There is also a possibility that blockchain may change the trading system and businesses would trade off using electricity for example if a factory needs additional power, it can buy unused electricity which another factory is selling for five minutes. These five minutes are actually the unused downtime minutes of a factory. This kind of trade can give efficiency benefits to grid operators.

(p145.1) Each home is installed with a smart meter (SM) in order to achieve better scheduling in the smart grid. These SMs collect real-time data of electricity consumption and utilities use this data to provide smart home services in a better way. The real time data can disclose private data of the user and an adversary can take advantage of this data by reading the usage patterns of the electricity consumption profile of the user. In [108], a privacypreserving and data efficiency aggregation scheme is proposed via blockchain. Users are divided into groups and a private blockchain is managed by each group for its members. For privacy preservation inside a group each user uses pseudonyms to hide their identity. In addition, proof of work is used to achieve block verification. The said scheme achieves security requirements and better performance than other methods.
## (s146) General Consensus Algorithms
(p146.0) The algorithms discussed in this section are general purpose which can be used for any type of asset. Table 4 has some of the important features of the general consensus algorithms. A proof of vote is built for consortium blockchain where companies develop a partnership and each company represents an officer [109]. These companies share their businessrelated data via coalition committee. Business transactions and operations are recorded on blockchain. The companies do not agree on giving right to any of the companies to produce a block so they decided to hire a butler team. The team is hired from all over the world and the election is held among them on a regular basis. The blocks are produced by the team and are sent to the companies for verification and voting which makes the power decentralized among the team responsible for producing blocks and each block will be submitted to each company for verification and voting, making the power decentralized within the partnership committee. In order to maintain reliability, safety and efficiency the butlers are paid high salaries by the companies. Anyone can join the butler team but the team member is recommended by the coalition and they have to submit a deposit. The members of the coalition supervise the work of a butler and they are graded accordingly so that only the honest ones can survive. Therefore, PoV is a consensus method proposed for consortium blockchain which is maintained by organizations and enterprises in different areas of the world.
## (s148) Proof of Human Work
(p148.0) Puzzles related to human work are very much similar to PoW except that a human is involved in finding a solution [111]. The problem solver should not be a machine only and this is the main difference between PoW and PoH. A puzzle should be made hard to solve for humans and uneasy to solve for machines. Although we expect the verification to be easy for machines as in PoW.
## (s149) Simplified Byzantine Fault Tolerance (SBFT)
(p149.0) In simplified byzantine fault tolerance (SBFT), a block gathers all the transactions, batch them and validate them in a new block [112]. All the nodes follow the rules of a block generator to validate all the transactions. A block signer validates these transactions and adds its own signature. So if any of the blocks miss one of the keys, it is rejected. This algorithm uses an adopted version of a Practical PBFT consensus algorithm. This protocol is also aimed to provide improvements over PoW. There is a single validator who is a known party and the nature of the ledger is permissioned. The validator forms a new block with a bundle of proposed transactions. Consensus is achieved when a minimum number of nodes approve a block. The number of nodes to reach consensus is 2f + 1 that has 3f + 1 number of nodes where f is the number of faulty nodes. For example, if a system has seven nodes and two of them are faulty then 5 nodes must agree.
## (s154) Proof of Property
(p154.0) This proof allows participants not to have a local copy of the full blockchain [116]. Owner of new transaction should have coins enough in their address to fulfil the transaction. New participants can validate the transactions without the need to download a blockchain initially. The new participants need to access the root hash of the Patricia tree system state of the new block. As members of the network can obtain a state from the header so they can delete the old body of the blocks and save a lot of local space which is not the case in traditional blockchain applications.
## (s156) Ethereum
(p156.0) Ethereum is a crypto currency-based blockchain platform. It allows programmers to write smart contracts [117] which are self-executing methods. The language used for smart contracts writing is solidity. These smart contracts are executed by the Ethereum virtual machine (EVM). Every Ethereum node must have an EVM which keeps the copy of the blockchain. The EVM uses a stack register of 256-bits which is designed to run the same code as expected. EVM is also referred to as Ethereum yellow paper and it has been implemented in C++, Golang, Java, JavaScript, Ruby, Python and many others.
## (s161) Hyperledger
(p161.0) The hyperledger block chain technology is out of the box unlike others. It does not have any cryptocurrency, it is just a technology which allows developers to build a whole new blockchain [120]. It is hosted by the Linux foundation designed to build private blockchains [121]. There are many frameworks and tools for hyperledger which are given in the Figure 15.
## (s162) Hyperledger
(p162.0) The hyperledger block chain technology is out of the box unlike others. It does not have any cryptocurrency, it is just a technology which allows developers to build a whole new blockchain [120]. It is hosted by the Linux foundation designed to build private blockchains [121]. There are many frameworks and tools for hyperledger which are given in the Figure 15. 
## (s166) Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks
(p166.0) The attacker crash a node by flooding a large amount of traffic in a denial of service (DoS) [125]. It prevents authorized users from retrieving the service or resource. Similarly, a distributed denial of service (DDoS) is another type of attack where a node is flooded with malevolent requests. In DDoS multiple attackers attack a single node.
## (s167) Sybil Attacks
(p167.0) Multiple identities attacking a larger portion of network is called a sybil attack. The invaders can launch numerous false nodes that seem to be honest to their peers. These false nodes take part in falsifying the network to authenticate illegal transactions and to modify valid transactions. They can use virtual machines, several devices, or internet protocol (IP) addresses as bogus nodes for the attack. The peer to peer (P2P) network assumes that every participating node contains only one identity. Thus, numerous forged nodes give attackers the ability to repudiate transmitted blocks and to outvote authentic nodes. When an attacker controls a large number of nodes in the network, it increases the chances of double-spending [126].
## (s169) Routing Attacks
(p169.0) In routing attacks [129], a message is intercepted by the attacker in the blockchain network. The attack alters the message and sends it to its neighbors. Furthermore, this attack is divided into a partitioning attack and delay attack. In partitioning attack, the entire blockchain network is divided into two or more portions. In a delayed attack, the attacker captures the message and tampers with it. Then, it redirects the tamper message to another blockchain network portion.
## (s171) Double Spending
(p171.0) In double spending multiple transactions with the same cryptocurrency are performed by a user [131,132]. This transaction is broadcast to each node in that network. This transaction needs to be confirmed by the nodes, this confirmation is time consumable [131]. This time between two transactions' initiation and confirmation can be a window for the attacker to quickly launch his/her attack [133,134].
## (s173) Race Attacks
(p173.0) In the race attack, the attacker creates two transactions. The first transaction is sent to the merchant by the attacker [139,140]. This product is sent by the merchant without confirmation. Meanwhile, the second transaction is broadcast by the attacker to invalidate the first transaction.
## (s178) Blockhain Research Issues/Future Work in Real Estate
(p178.0) Private blockchain using smart contracts can be a best solution for recording transactions of real estate having high transaction fees [157]. Using resource information by a customer can lead to a conclusion about the business work of other customers. So a hybrid blockchain which includes both private and public best features can be deployed to audit the access of data as it provides the most authoritative system for the participating nodes [158].
