# Statistical methods and software used in nutrition and dietetics research: A review of the published literature using text mining

CorpusID: 235596972 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05a30de89ab8eb56ff6ba3bd67aa6ad1fea14813](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/05a30de89ab8eb56ff6ba3bd67aa6ad1fea14813)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) | METHODS
(p1.0) A text mining design based on the bag-of-words method 17 was used to review the frequency of statistical methods and packages reported in a random sample of nutrition-related journal articles published in 2018. This method counts the frequency of individual terms (unigrams) in a corpus (collection of text documents) by removing the structure of words and representing data as a multiset ('bag'), so that multiplicity is retained. The process of text mining here included the following steps: corpus selection, manual data extraction, generation of search terms, data cleaning and concatenation of search terms, quality assurance and statistical analysis to obtain results. As the study was restricted to published literature, ethical approval was not required.

(p1.1) All journals contained within the subject category of 'Nutrition and Dietetics' in SCImago Journal & Country Rank portal 18 at the time of review (April 2019) were considered for inclusion. This portal provides an expansive list of discipline-specific papers as it contains all journals found in the Scopus database. To maximise generalisability across countries and subdisciplines of nutrition and dietetics, all journals within the subject category were eligible unless written in a language other than English or categorised as a book series.

(p1.2) For each journal, one issue published between January and December 2018 was randomly selected using the RANDBETWEEN function in Microsoft Excel (2016). All articles identified within each selected journal issue were manually reviewed by the primary researcher against the following inclusion criteria: (a) human subjects research, (b) available in full text, (c) full text written in English and (d) contained statistical analyses that were described within the methods section. All in vitro, cadaveric and animal model studies were excluded as they are not typically undertaken by dietitians in practice. Titles and abstracts were initially screened, and full texts of all potentially relevant articles were assessed to determine eligibility. Any queries were resolved by consensus with the research team (all authors).

(p1.3) As the aim of the study was to identify frequently used statistical methods, the sample size calculation was based on detecting words expressed in 50% of the sample. After obtaining all eligible articles, 748 were required to detect a proportion of 50% with a 2% error and a 95% confidence interval. To distribute this between the journals and prevent over-representation from any one journal, a maximum of 20 eligible articles were included from each journal. Articles were randomly selected using RANDBETWEEN when this limit was exceeded. All identified articles were managed in Microsoft Excel (2016) and included articles were imported into EndNote X8.

(p1.4) All included journal articles were saved as PDF files and converted into plain text files using Adobe Acrobat Pro DC (2017) to facilitate optical character recognition. Relevant data were manually extracted and entered in a Microsoft Excel (2016) spreadsheet article by one researcher to create a central database where each row represented the data extracted from one journal article. To enhance the accuracy of identifying data of interest, only information that specifically described statistical analyses within the methods sections was extracted.

(p1.5) Text mining techniques were piloted in R (Version 3.6.0) 19 by the primary researcher using 15% of the extracted data. As many statistical methods are multiword terms or have various synonymous phrases, a framework containing a pre-specified list of unigrams was used to mine terms of interest. A list of statistical methods, which was developed using a Delphi panel to identify methods used in medical research was used as a starting point. 14 The list was reviewed by all members of the research team. Modifications were made by a biostatistician with expertise in nutrition and dietetics to build on the list of synonyms and include statistical terms relating to meta-analyses. To capture multi-word terms and synonyms, each specific statistical method and its synonyms corresponded with a unigram that was created by concatenating the specific statistical methods. These unigrams were to be used to mine the terms of interest in the database. The final list included 229 statistical terms, which could be mapped to 16 statistical method groups, and 19 statistical packages. The framework of terms to be mined, including identified synonyms, is found in Supplementary File 1.

(p1.6) Data cleaning was performed in Microsoft Excel (2016). The 'find and replace' tool was used to tokenise multi-word statistical phrases to unigrams. All statistical methods that directly corresponded with the unigrams specified in the framework were concatenated (eg, Mann-Whitney U test became Mann-Whitney U test). Synonymous phrases were searched for (eg, Wilcoxon rank-sum test, another name for the Mann-Whitney U test) and replaced with the appropriate unigram (eg, Mann-Whitney U test). Misspellings were also corrected when encountered.

(p1.7) Once data cleaning was complete, a source data verification audit was conducted for assurance of data quality 20 and to identify any statistical terms of interest not yet contained in the framework. This involved the senior investigator conducting a manual verification check on a 10% random sample of the database against the original records. Error rate was less than 5%, all identified errors were amended, and the final database was saved as a csv file for analysis.

(p1.8) All statistical analyses were conducted by the primary researcher within R (Version 3.6.0) and Microsoft Excel (2016). Data were pre-processed in R using the 'tm', 'readr' and 'qdap' packages. Pre-processing involved transforming all text to lowercase, removing all numbers and punctuation, replacing multiple whitespace characters with a single blank, removing English stop words and applying stemming algorithms to transform terms to their roots (eg, 'multilevelmodeling' and 'multilevelmodels' were reduced to 'multilevelmodel'). A further step to count the number of articles reporting statistical method groups was performed by replacing all specific statistical methods with the corresponding statistical method group. The pre-processed data were exported as Microsoft Excel files and the COUNTIF function was used to tally the total number of articles that reported each statistical method and statistical method group. To ensure only the exact words were counted, spaces were added before and after each unigram. A word cloud was produced using the 'wordcloud' package in R to visually present the most commonly reported inferential statistics within the corpus. The R codes to conduct the analyses are available in Supplementary File 2.
## (s2) | RESULTS
(p2.0) A total of 124 journals were identified within the 'Nutrition and Dietetics' subject category of the SCImago Journal & Country Rank portal. Random selection of one issue within each eligible journal identified 2044 articles. Title and abstract screening removed 841 articles and 1203 full-text articles were assessed for eligibility. A total of 1085 articles were eligible. The final sample included 757 journal articles from 72 journals ( Figure 1).

(p2.1) Twenty-three journals provided a large proportion of articles, together representing 49% of the corpus ( Table 1). The majority of these 23 journals contributed 20 articles, as this was the upper limit per issue to prevent over-representation from any one journal. A large proportion (46.2%) of articles were published in journals that had a SCImago journal rank indicator within the first quartile, while 38.0% of articles were from journals in the second quartile, 12.8% in the third quartile and only 2.9% in the fourth quartile. The complete list of articles and their corresponding journals are found in Supplementary File 3.

(p2.2) The source data verification audit identified an error rate of 1.3%. This indicates a high level of data accuracy and falls within the acceptable limit of 5% or below, as set by Houston et al. 20 Numerical descriptive statistics were the most commonly used statistical method group and were reported in majority of articles (83.2%) ( Table 2). The most frequently reported numerical descriptive statistic was mean (60.6%), followed by SD (37.1%) percent (23.2%), median (20.7%) and frequency (17.2%).

(p2.3) Graphical descriptive statistics were not reported as often, appearing in 7.0% of articles. The second most frequently encountered statistical methods group was specific hypothesis tests, reported in 68.8% of articles. This was followed by general hypothesis tests (58.4%), regression models (44.4%) and ANOVA models (30.8%). Other common methods were epidemiological measures of risk and effect, epidemiological concepts of classification, and correlated data models, which appeared in 28.0%, 16.1% and 14.7% of articles, respectively. Within these groups were specific statistical methods and various terminology was found to be used by authors to describe individual methods (Table 3).

(p2.4) SPSS was cited as the most commonly utilised package and appeared in 41.7% of the reviewed articles (Table 2). This was followed by SAS (17.2%) and STATA (15.9%). Other packages such as R and Microsoft Excel were less common, yet still used in 7.1% and 4.5% of articles, respectively ( Table 2).

(p2.5) P-values (29.7%) and confidence intervals (24.3%) were the most commonly used measures of significance. The chi-square test was the most commonly reported hypothesis test (29.7%), followed by the independent samples t-test likely to frequently encounter the following ANOVA models: ANOVA (20.9%), RMANOVA (7.1%) and ANCOVA (6.6%), as well as logistic regression (20.2%) and linear regression models (15.9%). The most frequent epidemiological statistics were sensitivity (10.6%), odds ratio (10.2%) and prevalence (6.1%). Effect size was reported in 8.9% of the corpus. Multilevel models (8.5%) were the only advanced statistical model that appeared in more than 5% of the corpus. Inferential tests that were observed in 10 or more articles within the corpus are visually depicted in a word cloud (Figure 2). The complete counts of all statistical terms mined can be found in Supplementary File 4.
## (s3) | DISCUSSION
(p3.0) Nutrition professionals require statistical literacy skills to effectively interpret the scientific literature that underpins the discipline. This is the first study that comprehensively reviews the literature to identify statistical methods and packages commonly used in nutrition and dietetics research.

(p3.1) As hypothesised, numerical descriptive statistics were observed in most articles reviewed. This is in agreeance with the findings of previous studies in other health-related disciplines, 14,16,21 with some studies reporting their appearance in almost all articles. Our study also agrees with previous studies in medical research, 14 where hypothesis tests, regression and ANOVA models were the most commonly reported types of inferential statistics.
## (s4) Count of articles (%)
(p4.0) Examples of common terms in each statistical method group   methods. 16 Technological advances and the ready availability of open-source software packages such as 'R' 19 in the past 20 years have enabled researchers to apply advanced modelling and computationally intensive statistical methods to data analysis. Continuing education opportunities in advanced statistical methods such as these would ideally be available to assist and upskill nutrition researchers.

(p4.1) SPSS (IBM SPSS Statistics, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY), SAS (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NJ) and STATA (STATA Corp., College Station, TX) were the three most prevalent statistical software packages. These packages have also been found to dominate the software used to conduct statistics within the public health literature. 15,16 Therefore, exposure of students to at least one of these packages F I G U R E 2 A word cloud to provide a visual representation of the inferential tests most frequently observed in the corpus, where larger font sizes represent words that appeared more often than words with smaller font size through practical laboratory-based experiences in statistic courses would seem prudent for any introductory statistical training.

(p4.2) The overarching strength of this study is its innovative and computationally efficient text mining approach. This enabled a large sample of journal articles published in 2018 to be reviewed, providing a representative sample of current statistical methods used in nutrition and dietetics research not previously achieved. Despite this, the study had some limitations. Firstly, the extraction of statistical information from only the methods sections meant that information contained within other sections was not captured. While it is recommended that all applied statistical methods are described in a paper's methods, descriptive statistics are commonplace in results sections, particularly within figures. This may explain why the descriptive studies reported in our review were proportionately lower than other similar studies. As previous studies have reported descriptive statistics appearing in 95% or more of articles reviewed, it seems plausible that they may have also occurred in almost all articles within this review.

(p4.3) This study provides a representative overview however, its cross-sectional design is unable to establish any emerging trends over time. As trends towards increasingly complex statistical techniques have been observed elsewhere, 14 it is important for nutrition researchers to be familiar with emergent methods. Follow-up studies or retrospective analysis to expand on our findings may provide further insight into any changed or emerging trends within the nutrition and dietetics literature.
