# Trends and Challenges in Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USV): From Survey to Shipping

CorpusID: 237333061 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1ac1ccb0a177eecb12a7a6efa965aabc361af91](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a1ac1ccb0a177eecb12a7a6efa965aabc361af91)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s2) POLICY FRAMEWORK AS KEY DRIVER FOR AUTONOMOUS MARITIME NAVIGATION AND SHIPPING IMPLEMENTATION
(p2.0) While technology and market push are required for any innovation to take hold, regulation aspects become a major consideration. This is especially right in the case of autonomous vessels, where certain key developments can be noted as advancing the field.

(p2.1) During the period of roughly 2000-2010 early work on software and algorithms to enable unmanned vessels to adhere to the COLREGs (Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea) began. The ASTM Committee launch, designed to develop technical standards for unmanned maritime vehicles, including a sub-committee for regulatory issues. This catalyzed further policy developments. The Association for Unmanned Systems International (AUVSI) began to engage the issue through their Maritime Advocacy Committee in 2011. A particular focus was informing and engaging the U.S. Navigation Safety Advisory Council (NAVSAC). This body informs the U.S. Coast Guard, the relevant regulator for U.S. Waters. Through a series of meetings this work eventually resulted, in late 2012, in a resolution offering advice on both technology solutions, such as use of the automated identification system (AIS) and policy steps, such as amendments to certain COLREGs [37].
