# electronics Machine Learning in Wireless Sensor Networks for Smart Cities: A Survey

CorpusID: 235850745 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2da9060ac67c4942b19e3c0bcef9fe2b74059e0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a2da9060ac67c4942b19e3c0bcef9fe2b74059e0)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) A smart city is an urban area that uses remote sensors and the Internet of Things (IoT) enabling technologies to collect data from different locations and uses to enhance the quality of life of the people. The low power, low data rate wireless sensor networks (WSN) are used for monitoring and control applications in smart cities. The WSN nodes are used as the underlying technology infrastructure in the IoT. In the IoT, the "things" refer to the tiny embedded physical sensing devices (i.e., WSN nodes) connected to the internet to perform a specific application. Currently, a new revolutionary technique known as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) is evolving as the future of fully automated IoT applications. Machine learning is a part of AI, in which, the computer algorithms learn by themselves by improving from past experiences. A detailed survey of ML algorithms was performed in [1] until the year 2013. As the ML and IoT, technologies are emerging rapidly, therefore, the authors extend their survey work also. The IoT applications in smart cities are smart traffic monitoring [2], smart grids [3], smart waste management [4], smart agriculture [5], smart medical healthcare [6], etc. Table 1 provides a full form of all important abbreviations used in this paper. The major problems in WSN based IoT (WSN-IoT) are fully autonomous operation, maximum network lifetime, energy efficiency, quality of service (QoS), cross-layer optimization, high bandwidth requirement, sensor data analysis, cloud computing, communication protocol design, etc. Currently, the industrial IoT (IIoT) or industry 4.0 is the biggest revolution for smart industries, smart manufacturing sector, automobile sector, smart cities and medical healthcare sector. Worldwide, various major companies like Microsoft, Google and Amazon are working on the development of AI and ML-based algorithms in advanced IoT applications for smart cities.

(p0.1) Machine learning can be applied in WSN-IoT for dynamic updating of routing tables in WSNs, node localization in mobile WSN-IoT nodes, identification and separation of faulty nodes for network optimization and prediction of the amount of energy harvesting in energy harvesting WSN (EH-WSN). Through this paper, the authors have tried to answer the following research questions: Why machine learning methods are used in WSN-IoT? What is its superiority of using ML over traditional optimization methods in WSN-IoT? Why is the smart city a typical use case of IoT applications?

(p0.2) IoT offers new opportunities for smart cities to use data to manage traffic, reduce pollution and make better use of infrastructure. The following are the advantages of using machine learning in traditional WSN-IoT:

(p0.3) • WSNs are generally deployed in a dynamically changing environment. Therefore, self-adaption to the new environment is expected from a fully automated IoT scenario. • Unknown parameter monitoring requires automatic adjustment of network topology and configurations, e.g., temperature measurement in a glacier or volcano monitoring. • Lack of accurate mathematical models of the unknown parameters in WSN-IoT. • WSN-IoT deals with a large amount of sensor data, therefore the correlation between different data set may be of critical concern.
## (s10) IoT Node Localization
(p10.0) In a WSN scenario, the current location identification of a sensor node is called node localization. In mobile WSN nodes, path planning is a very important step. Node localization is considered a classification problem because all the nodes are divided (classified) into range-based and range-free nodes. Several ML algorithms like, SVM, K-NN and RL-based techniques (Q-learning, SARSA) are used in WSN-IoT for node localization as a classification problem [31].

(p10.1) In a WSN scenario, the current location identification of a sensor node is called node localization. In mobile WSN nodes, path planning is a very important step. Node localization is considered a classification problem because all the nodes are divided (classified) into range-based and range-free nodes. Several ML algorithms like, SVM, K-NN and RL-based techniques (Q-learning, SARSA) are used in WSN-IoT for node localization as a classification problem [31].
## (s11) IoT Node Coverage and Connectivity
(p11.0) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].

(p11.1) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].
## (s12) Routing Layer Issues
(p12.0) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].

(p12.1) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].
## (s13) MAC Layer Issues
(p13.0) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].

(p13.1) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].
## (s14) Sensor Data Aggregation
(p14.0) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].

(p14.1) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].
## (s15) Event Monitoring and Target Detection
(p15.0) In a smart city application, the WSNs are deployed for event monitoring and target detection such as intrusion detection and traffic monitoring. In WSN, node failure, target recovery and tracking latency from sensing nodes are required. Various ML techniques like Bayesian, Q learning and genetic algorithms are used for event monitoring and target tracking in WSNs. Applying, ML techniques in WSNs can be useful to detect an event or target from the complex image sensor data [36].

(p15.1) In a smart city application, the WSNs are deployed for event monitoring and target detection such as intrusion detection and traffic monitoring. In WSN, node failure, target recovery and tracking latency from sensing nodes are required. Various ML techniques like Bayesian, Q learning and genetic algorithms are used for event monitoring and target tracking in WSNs. Applying, ML techniques in WSNs can be useful to detect an event or target from the complex image sensor data [36].
## (s16) Energy Harvesting
(p16.0) Energy harvesting is the process of extracting environmental energy from the sun, wind, tides, radio waves, etc., and converts it into the corresponding electrical energy. The broad objective of energy harvesting is to save our limited available fossil fuels (coal, oil and gases). However, in the smart city application, energy harvesting can also be used for achieving maximum network lifetime in rechargeable battery-based WSN-IoT nodes. Furthermore, the ML techniques are used in energy harvesting WSN-IoT for future available energy prediction tasks. The ML algorithms like regression technique and reinforcement learning techniques (Q-learning) are suitable for energy harvesting applications. Generally, solar energy, radio frequency (RF) waves and wind energy are used with rechargeable battery-based WSNs. Harvested energy prediction, battery power management are the tasks that can be optimized by using the ML algorithms in traditional WSN-IoT [37].

(p16.1) Energy harvesting is the process of extracting environmental energy from the sun, wind, tides, radio waves, etc., and converts it into the corresponding electrical energy. The broad objective of energy harvesting is to save our limited available fossil fuels (coal, oil and gases). However, in the smart city application, energy harvesting can also be used for achieving maximum network lifetime in rechargeable battery-based WSN-IoT nodes. Furthermore, the ML techniques are used in energy harvesting WSN-IoT for future available energy prediction tasks. The ML algorithms like regression technique and reinforcement learning techniques (Q-learning) are suitable for energy harvesting applications. Generally, solar energy, radio frequency (RF) waves and wind energy are used with rechargeable battery-based WSNs. Harvested energy prediction, battery power management are the tasks that can be optimized by using the ML algorithms in traditional WSN-IoT [37].
## (s21) Literature Survey of Supervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p21.0) In supervisor learning, data are labeled. In other words, we provide an input data variable (x) to the system. The system predicts output data (y) depending upon the type of input and system function. The objective of supervised learning is to approximate the mapping function so that when a new unknown input data is applied then, the output (y) can be predicted [39,40].

(p21.1) In this section, we will discuss various supervised learning algorithm, which can be applied in WSN-IoT applications. The supervised learning algorithms are used in WSN for target tracking, localization of Nodes, event monitoring, data security, fault detection, etc.
## (s22) Regression
(p22.0) In regression, the output variable (y) has some continuous numerical value like rupees, height, weight, etc. Regression is applied to solve various issues in WSNs such as localization, connectivity problem, data aggregation and energy harvesting [41].

(p22.1) In regression, the output variable (y) has some continuous numerical value like rupees, height, weight, etc. Regression is applied to solve various issues in WSNs such as localization, connectivity problem, data aggregation and energy harvesting [41].
## (s23) Classification
(p23.0) In classification, the output variable(y) is a category of objects like the type of colors (e.g., red or yellow), type of diseases (e.g., fever or fracture), etc. There are the following types of classification problems as k-NN, decision tree, ANN, Bayesian learning, etc [42].

(p23.1) (A). K-nearest neighborhood (k-NN) [43]: This is an instance-based supervised learning algorithm. Here, all training instances are stored in a master database. When a new instance query (x q ) arrives then this new query is compared with the stored database and classified results are derived. In the k-NN algorithm the distance between each data points is calculated by using the Euclidian distance formula

(p23.2) where q and p are data points and d is the distance between them. In [44] data streaming in IoT using the k-NN algorithm is proposed. The KNN algorithm is also used for the early detection of agriculture pests, diseases, sensor node failure and fault detection issues [45].

(p23.3) (B). Decision tree (DT) [46]: In the DT algorithm, the main task is to calculate the attribute of the root node from each level. This process is called attribute selection. There are two methods for attribute selection as information gain and Gini index. The average amount of information is called entropy and is given as
## (s24) Literature Survey of Unsupervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p24.0) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55]. such that,

(p24.1) where, w is the width between two support vectors planes, (x i ) is the data point value, (y i ) is the assigned label to each data point respectively, (b) is the distance of hyperplane from the origin and (n) is the total number of training examples. In WSN, the SVM technique is used for the localization of mobile sensor nodes.

(p24.2) (E). Bayesian Learning [52][53][54]: Bayesian learning is an important statistical technique to calculate the conditional probability of an event. Bayesian learning is based on the very popular Bayes' theorem for conditional probability as:

(p24.3) where, P(A) is called the probability of occurrence of event A, P(B) is called the probability of occurrence of event B, P(A|B) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event A if B is given and P(B|A) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event B if A is given earlier. In WSN, it is used for calibration, clustering and detecting outlier (i.e., outsider or different types) nodes in a group of several nodes deployment.

(p24.4) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55]. such that,

(p24.5) where, w is the width between two support vectors planes, (x i ) is the data point value, (y i ) is the assigned label to each data point respectively, (b) is the distance of hyperplane from the origin and (n) is the total number of training examples. In WSN, the SVM technique is used for the localization of mobile sensor nodes.

(p24.6) (E). Bayesian Learning [52][53][54]: Bayesian learning is an important statistical technique to calculate the conditional probability of an event. Bayesian learning is based on the very popular Bayes' theorem for conditional probability as:

(p24.7) where, P(A) is called the probability of occurrence of event A, P(B) is called the probability of occurrence of event B, P(A|B) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event A if B is given and P(B|A) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event B if A is given earlier. In WSN, it is used for calibration, clustering and detecting outlier (i.e., outsider or different types) nodes in a group of several nodes deployment.
## (s25) Literature Survey of Unsupervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p25.0) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55].

(p25.1) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55].
## (s26) Clustering Technique
(p26.0) In this method, the inherent groups in the data are identified, such as a particular type of customer database that purchases a specific type of goods from specified stores in smart cities. Figure 8 shows three clusters of class red, green and blue [56][57][58]. To make a cluster between data points of two vectors X and Y the Euclidian distance (d) is calculated as:
## (s27) Clustering Technique
(p27.0) In this method, the inherent groups in the data are identified, such as a particular type of customer database that purchases a specific type of goods from specified stores in smart cities. Figure 8 shows three clusters of class red, green and blue [56][57][58]. To make a cluster between data points of two vectors and the Euclidian distance ( ) is calculated as:
## (s28) Literature Survey of Reinforcement Learning (RL) for WSN-IoT
(p28.0) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (At) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (St) and provides a reward (Rt) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Qlearning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (sk), taking action (ak) following any policy (π) as:
## (s29) Literature Survey of Reinforcement Learning (RL) for WSN-IoT
(p29.0) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (A t ) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (S t ) and provides a reward (R t ) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Q-learning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (s k ), taking action (a k ) following any policy (π) as:

(p29.1) where, E = expectation, s = state, a = action, k = numerical integer value (0 to N-1), γ = discount rate and r = rewards value. Electronics 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 24 Figure 9. Reinforcement learning (RL) for WSN-IoT.

(p29.2) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (A t ) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (S t ) and provides a reward (R t ) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Q-learning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (s k ), taking action (a k ) following any policy (π) as:

(p29.3) where, E = expectation, s = state, a = action, k = numerical integer value (0 to N-1), γ = discount rate and r = rewards value. Electronics 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 24 Figure 9. Reinforcement learning (RL) for WSN-IoT.
## (s69) Introduction
(p69.0) A smart city is an urban area that uses remote sensors and the Internet of Things (IoT) enabling technologies to collect data from different locations and uses to enhance the quality of life of the people. The low power, low data rate wireless sensor networks (WSN) are used for monitoring and control applications in smart cities. The WSN nodes are used as the underlying technology infrastructure in the IoT. In the IoT, the "things" refer to the tiny embedded physical sensing devices (i.e., WSN nodes) connected to the internet to perform a specific application. Currently, a new revolutionary technique known as artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) is evolving as the future of fully automated IoT applications. Machine learning is a part of AI, in which, the computer algorithms learn by themselves by improving from past experiences. A detailed survey of ML algorithms was performed in [1] until the year 2013. As the ML and IoT, technologies are emerging rapidly, therefore, the authors extend their survey work also. The IoT applications in smart cities are smart traffic monitoring [2], smart grids [3], smart waste management [4], smart agriculture [5], smart medical healthcare [6], etc. Table 1 provides a full form of all important abbreviations used in this paper. The major problems in WSN based IoT (WSN-IoT) are fully autonomous operation, maximum network lifetime, energy efficiency, quality of service (QoS), cross-layer optimization, high bandwidth requirement, sensor data analysis, cloud computing, communication protocol design, etc. Currently, the industrial IoT (IIoT) or industry 4.0 is the biggest revolution for smart industries, smart manufacturing sector, automobile sector, smart cities and medical healthcare sector. Worldwide, various major companies like Microsoft, Google and Amazon are working on the development of AI and ML-based algorithms in advanced IoT applications for smart cities.

(p69.1) Machine learning can be applied in WSN-IoT for dynamic updating of routing tables in WSNs, node localization in mobile WSN-IoT nodes, identification and separation of faulty nodes for network optimization and prediction of the amount of energy harvesting in energy harvesting WSN (EH-WSN). Through this paper, the authors have tried to answer the following research questions: Why machine learning methods are used in WSN-IoT? What is its superiority of using ML over traditional optimization methods in WSN-IoT? Why is the smart city a typical use case of IoT applications?

(p69.2) IoT offers new opportunities for smart cities to use data to manage traffic, reduce pollution and make better use of infrastructure. The following are the advantages of using machine learning in traditional WSN-IoT:

(p69.3) • WSNs are generally deployed in a dynamically changing environment. Therefore, self-adaption to the new environment is expected from a fully automated IoT scenario. • Unknown parameter monitoring requires automatic adjustment of network topology and configurations, e.g., temperature measurement in a glacier or volcano monitoring. • Lack of accurate mathematical models of the unknown parameters in WSN-IoT. • WSN-IoT deals with a large amount of sensor data, therefore the correlation between different data set may be of critical concern.
## (s79) IoT Node Localization
(p79.0) In a WSN scenario, the current location identification of a sensor node is called node localization. In mobile WSN nodes, path planning is a very important step. Node localization is considered a classification problem because all the nodes are divided (classified) into range-based and range-free nodes. Several ML algorithms like, SVM, K-NN and RL-based techniques (Q-learning, SARSA) are used in WSN-IoT for node localization as a classification problem [31].

(p79.1) In a WSN scenario, the current location identification of a sensor node is called node localization. In mobile WSN nodes, path planning is a very important step. Node localization is considered a classification problem because all the nodes are divided (classified) into range-based and range-free nodes. Several ML algorithms like, SVM, K-NN and RL-based techniques (Q-learning, SARSA) are used in WSN-IoT for node localization as a classification problem [31].
## (s80) IoT Node Coverage and Connectivity
(p80.0) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].

(p80.1) In a WSN scenario, the sensing coverage is the field of interest (FOI), in which at least one sensor node covers all the points. Therefore, the optimal placement of sensor nodes is a design issue. To maximize the WSN lifetime, the connectivity should be proper between the neighbor nodes [32].
## (s81) Routing Layer Issues
(p81.0) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].

(p81.1) The processing for sending the data packets from one node to another via intermediate nodes is called routing. In the routing process, long routing tables are maintained by the gateway nodes, which consists of the source and destination address of all the packets in the network. In WSN, the sensed data is sent towards the main gateway node by the end nodes. If the routing path is very long then unnecessary energy is wasted in a WSN network. Therefore, smart routing algorithms need to be designed carefully to find the optimal routes between end node and gateway nodes. Several machine learning techniques such as decision tree, random forest, ANN, SVM and Bayesian learning are used to find the optimal path in WSNs [33].
## (s82) MAC Layer Issues
(p82.0) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].

(p82.1) The MAC layer controls the medium accessing technique in WSN. The sensor MAC (SMAC) protocol is generally used in WSN. Reinforcement learning (RL) based algorithms are used for MAC protocol design in WSN. The RL-MAC techniques control the sleep, wake, transmission and reception in sensor networks [34].
## (s83) Sensor Data Aggregation
(p83.0) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].

(p83.1) In a smart city, thousands of small sensor nodes are deployed to measure the same physical quantity, e.g., temperature, humidity, light, carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) gases, etc. Several sensors may report the same information to the gateway. This large amount of data is difficult to handle by the gateway. Therefore, sensor data aggregation is important in WSNs for smart city applications. Data aggregation means collecting and summarizing useful information from multiple sources. In this process, the data redundancy and data accuracy are improved. Data aggregation saves the power consumption of WSN nodes and hence improves the network lifetime also. Machine learning is useful for data aggregation. The cluster aggregates the data from the cluster head and transmits it to the base station. ML techniques based on artificial neural networks (ANN) and quality (Q)-learning algorithms are useful for data aggregation tasks in WSN-IoT [35].
## (s84) Event Monitoring and Target Detection
(p84.0) In a smart city application, the WSNs are deployed for event monitoring and target detection such as intrusion detection and traffic monitoring. In WSN, node failure, target recovery and tracking latency from sensing nodes are required. Various ML techniques like Bayesian, Q learning and genetic algorithms are used for event monitoring and target tracking in WSNs. Applying, ML techniques in WSNs can be useful to detect an event or target from the complex image sensor data [36].

(p84.1) In a smart city application, the WSNs are deployed for event monitoring and target detection such as intrusion detection and traffic monitoring. In WSN, node failure, target recovery and tracking latency from sensing nodes are required. Various ML techniques like Bayesian, Q learning and genetic algorithms are used for event monitoring and target tracking in WSNs. Applying, ML techniques in WSNs can be useful to detect an event or target from the complex image sensor data [36].
## (s85) Energy Harvesting
(p85.0) Energy harvesting is the process of extracting environmental energy from the sun, wind, tides, radio waves, etc., and converts it into the corresponding electrical energy. The broad objective of energy harvesting is to save our limited available fossil fuels (coal, oil and gases). However, in the smart city application, energy harvesting can also be used for achieving maximum network lifetime in rechargeable battery-based WSN-IoT nodes. Furthermore, the ML techniques are used in energy harvesting WSN-IoT for future available energy prediction tasks. The ML algorithms like regression technique and reinforcement learning techniques (Q-learning) are suitable for energy harvesting applications. Generally, solar energy, radio frequency (RF) waves and wind energy are used with rechargeable battery-based WSNs. Harvested energy prediction, battery power management are the tasks that can be optimized by using the ML algorithms in traditional WSN-IoT [37].

(p85.1) Energy harvesting is the process of extracting environmental energy from the sun, wind, tides, radio waves, etc., and converts it into the corresponding electrical energy. The broad objective of energy harvesting is to save our limited available fossil fuels (coal, oil and gases). However, in the smart city application, energy harvesting can also be used for achieving maximum network lifetime in rechargeable battery-based WSN-IoT nodes. Furthermore, the ML techniques are used in energy harvesting WSN-IoT for future available energy prediction tasks. The ML algorithms like regression technique and reinforcement learning techniques (Q-learning) are suitable for energy harvesting applications. Generally, solar energy, radio frequency (RF) waves and wind energy are used with rechargeable battery-based WSNs. Harvested energy prediction, battery power management are the tasks that can be optimized by using the ML algorithms in traditional WSN-IoT [37].
## (s90) Literature Survey of Supervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p90.0) In supervisor learning, data are labeled. In other words, we provide an input data variable (x) to the system. The system predicts output data (y) depending upon the type of input and system function. The objective of supervised learning is to approximate the mapping function so that when a new unknown input data is applied then, the output (y) can be predicted [39,40].

(p90.1) In this section, we will discuss various supervised learning algorithm, which can be applied in WSN-IoT applications. The supervised learning algorithms are used in WSN for target tracking, localization of Nodes, event monitoring, data security, fault detection, etc.
## (s91) Regression
(p91.0) In regression, the output variable (y) has some continuous numerical value like rupees, height, weight, etc. Regression is applied to solve various issues in WSNs such as localization, connectivity problem, data aggregation and energy harvesting [41].

(p91.1) In regression, the output variable (y) has some continuous numerical value like rupees, height, weight, etc. Regression is applied to solve various issues in WSNs such as localization, connectivity problem, data aggregation and energy harvesting [41].
## (s92) Classification
(p92.0) In classification, the output variable(y) is a category of objects like the type of colors (e.g., red or yellow), type of diseases (e.g., fever or fracture), etc. There are the following types of classification problems as k-NN, decision tree, ANN, Bayesian learning, etc [42].

(p92.1) (A). K-nearest neighborhood (k-NN) [43]: This is an instance-based supervised learning algorithm. Here, all training instances are stored in a master database. When a new instance query (x q ) arrives then this new query is compared with the stored database and classified results are derived. In the k-NN algorithm the distance between each data points is calculated by using the Euclidian distance formula

(p92.2) where q and p are data points and d is the distance between them. In [44] data streaming in IoT using the k-NN algorithm is proposed. The KNN algorithm is also used for the early detection of agriculture pests, diseases, sensor node failure and fault detection issues [45].

(p92.3) (B). Decision tree (DT) [46]: In the DT algorithm, the main task is to calculate the attribute of the root node from each level. This process is called attribute selection. There are two methods for attribute selection as information gain and Gini index. The average amount of information is called entropy and is given as
## (s93) Literature Survey of Unsupervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p93.0) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55]. such that,

(p93.1) where, w is the width between two support vectors planes, (x i ) is the data point value, (y i ) is the assigned label to each data point respectively, (b) is the distance of hyperplane from the origin and (n) is the total number of training examples. In WSN, the SVM technique is used for the localization of mobile sensor nodes.

(p93.2) (E). Bayesian Learning [52][53][54]: Bayesian learning is an important statistical technique to calculate the conditional probability of an event. Bayesian learning is based on the very popular Bayes' theorem for conditional probability as:

(p93.3) where, P(A) is called the probability of occurrence of event A, P(B) is called the probability of occurrence of event B, P(A|B) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event A if B is given and P(B|A) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event B if A is given earlier. In WSN, it is used for calibration, clustering and detecting outlier (i.e., outsider or different types) nodes in a group of several nodes deployment.

(p93.4) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55]. such that,

(p93.5) where, w is the width between two support vectors planes, (x i ) is the data point value, (y i ) is the assigned label to each data point respectively, (b) is the distance of hyperplane from the origin and (n) is the total number of training examples. In WSN, the SVM technique is used for the localization of mobile sensor nodes.

(p93.6) (E). Bayesian Learning [52][53][54]: Bayesian learning is an important statistical technique to calculate the conditional probability of an event. Bayesian learning is based on the very popular Bayes' theorem for conditional probability as:

(p93.7) where, P(A) is called the probability of occurrence of event A, P(B) is called the probability of occurrence of event B, P(A|B) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event A if B is given and P(B|A) is called conditional probability of occurrence of event B if A is given earlier. In WSN, it is used for calibration, clustering and detecting outlier (i.e., outsider or different types) nodes in a group of several nodes deployment.
## (s94) Literature Survey of Unsupervised Machine Learning for WSN-IoT
(p94.0) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55].

(p94.1) In unsupervised machine learning, only the input data variable (x) is known to the machine. The output data variable (y) is not known to the machine or system. The objective of unsupervised ML is to know the probability distribution model of input data [55].
## (s95) Clustering Technique
(p95.0) In this method, the inherent groups in the data are identified, such as a particular type of customer database that purchases a specific type of goods from specified stores in smart cities. Figure 8 shows three clusters of class red, green and blue [56][57][58]. To make a cluster between data points of two vectors X and Y the Euclidian distance (d) is calculated as:
## (s96) Clustering Technique
(p96.0) In this method, the inherent groups in the data are identified, such as a particular type of customer database that purchases a specific type of goods from specified stores in smart cities. Figure 8 shows three clusters of class red, green and blue [56][57][58]. To make a cluster between data points of two vectors and the Euclidian distance ( ) is calculated as:
## (s97) Literature Survey of Reinforcement Learning (RL) for WSN-IoT
(p97.0) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (At) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (St) and provides a reward (Rt) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Qlearning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (sk), taking action (ak) following any policy (π) as:
## (s98) Literature Survey of Reinforcement Learning (RL) for WSN-IoT
(p98.0) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (A t ) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (S t ) and provides a reward (R t ) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Q-learning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (s k ), taking action (a k ) following any policy (π) as:

(p98.1) where, E = expectation, s = state, a = action, k = numerical integer value (0 to N-1), γ = discount rate and r = rewards value. Electronics 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 24 Figure 9. Reinforcement learning (RL) for WSN-IoT.

(p98.2) In the reinforcement learning algorithm, there are two main components called the agent and the environment as shown in Figure 9 [67,68]. The agent refers to the WSN-IoT node and the environment refers to the type of application deployment, e.g., temperature monitoring, pollution monitoring, smart agriculture monitoring, etc [69]. The WSN-IoT node agent performs the actions (A t ) of sensing and actuation at time state (t). The application environment changes its state (S t ) and provides a reward (R t ) to the agent as shown in Figure 9. There are many types of reinforcement learning algorithms given as (A) Q-learning [70,71], (B) SARSA [72], temporal difference (TD) [73] and deep Q learning [74]. The Q value is defined as a sum of discounted rewards starting from the state (s k ), taking action (a k ) following any policy (π) as:

(p98.3) where, E = expectation, s = state, a = action, k = numerical integer value (0 to N-1), γ = discount rate and r = rewards value. Electronics 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 24 Figure 9. Reinforcement learning (RL) for WSN-IoT.
