# Overview of Beneficial Effects of (Poly)phenol Metabolites in the Context of Neurodegenerative Diseases on Model Organisms

CorpusID: 237935676 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154a6ecd2c4c942b59b882b0f58ddace8c6ed791](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/154a6ecd2c4c942b59b882b0f58ddace8c6ed791)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Bioavailability of Plant-Derived (Poly)phenols and the Low Molecular Weight (Poly)phenol Metabolites
(p1.0) Due to their chemical similarities (poly)phenols have been classified into stilbenes, lignans, ellagitannins, flavonoids (i.e., anthocyanidins, flavonols, flavanols, isoflavones, flavones), phenolic acids (i.e., benzoic acids, cinnamic acids, propionic acids), and many others. Flavonoids are amongst the most dominant (poly)phenols present in fruits and vegetables and represent the large majority of (poly)phenols in the gastrointestinal system. Flavonoids can be found alone as aglycones, conjugated with sugars, or in the form of polymers [20]. Polymers, however, like ellagitannins, are very complex molecules with low permeability [21].
## (s2) Models for Studying Neurodegenerative Diseases
(p2.0) Neurodegenerative diseases (NDDs) represent a family of heterogeneous disorders that affect millions of people worldwide. The prevalence of these disorders is increasing due, in part, to the extension of human lifespan. NDDs are characterized by a progressive and irreversible loss of function and/or death of neurons from specific brain regions, leading to severe cognitive and functional decline. The most well-known neurodegenerative diseases are Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), Lewy body dementia, Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), sharing common cellular and molecular mechanisms of disease, including protein misfolding and aggregation, neuroinflammation, oxidative stress and neuronal degeneration ( Figure 3).

(p2.1) conducting tissue repair and neurogenesis. As such, dysfunction in any of these welltuned systems could be harmful to neuronal viability, leading to neuronal cell death. The blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity represents a crucial step to maintain the balance of substances in the brain and out thanks to their flow to the cerebrospinal fluid. However, it is proposed that BBB integrity might diminish during aging leading to a pathological brain microenvironment. All these factors and the increasing number of research in the last decades about the mechanisms by which neurons die in NDDs have led to the conclusion that the process of neurodegeneration is multifactorial, potentially explaining why so many drugs have so far failed to show significant results [53]. The failure to develop effective therapeutic agents for NDDs may be in large part because the majority of the current treatments target single aspects of disease pathology. As such, in recent years, efforts to develop new therapeutic strategies focusing on targeting multiple factors contributing to disease progression, rather than a single one. In this sense, dietary (poly)phenols arose as promising candidates, due to their described pleiotropic effects, since they can modulate many of the features underlying neurodegenerative processes [12]. . Main hallmarks of neurodegeneration and neurodegenerative diseases-protein misfolding, neuroinflammation, neuronal degeneration and oxidative stress-shared between the major cellular types present in the brain such as neurons, astrocytes and microglia. UPS: ubiquitin-proteosome system, ROS: reactive oxygen species, RNS: reactive nitrogen system, AD: Alzheimer's disease, PD: Parkinson's disease, HD: Huntington's disease, ALS: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. . Main hallmarks of neurodegeneration and neurodegenerative diseases-protein misfolding, neuroinflammation, neuronal degeneration and oxidative stress-shared between the major cellular types present in the brain such as neurons, astrocytes and microglia. UPS: ubiquitin-proteosome system, ROS: reactive oxygen species, RNS: reactive nitrogen system, AD: Alzheimer's disease, PD: Parkinson's disease, HD: Huntington's disease, ALS: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

(p2.2) There are several forms in which intrinsically misfolded proteins exist in cells: unfolded, intermediately folded, and correctly folded species. Healthy cells degrade or try to refold misfolded proteins through chaperone proteins that are involved in protein folding and trafficking as well as intermediate stabilization. The question of the exact mechanism(s) by which protein misfolding and aggregation becomes pathological is still not answered, however, what is known is that cells lose the ability to refold or degrade misfolded proteins over time and in disease. Although different proteins are involved in the pathogenesis of different NDDs, the process of protein misfolding and aggregation is remarkably similar in all mentioned diseases ( Figure 3).

(p2.3) In addition to protein misfolding and aggregation, a common feature of all NDDs is chronic immune activation, in particular of microglial cells, the resident macrophages of the central nervous system (CNS) (Figure 3). While an acute inflammatory response is beneficial for removing dying cells or pathogens from the brain, prolonged (chronic) inflammation has been implicated as a factor underlying neurodegeneration in several NDDs, leading to the acceleration of disease progression [33][34][35]. By releasing various kinds of damaging factors such as pro-inflammatory cytokines or proinflammatory molecules (i.e., proteolytic enzymes, reactive oxygen intermediates or nitric oxide) microglia propagate and intensify the damage to the central nervous system [36][37][38][39]. Even though great progress has been made towards understanding how neuron-glia interactions become disrupted in NDDs, many aspects of inflammation-driven neurodegeneration remain unclear. It is still under debate whether glial activation is a cause or consequence of NDDs. But even if inflammation is not a primary causative process, its presence may greatly contribute to the continued loss of neurons. Thus, the strategies to modulate the activity of microglia and astrocytes could help tilt the inflammatory balance in the right direction to treat or mitigate NDDs more effectively. Another very important aspect of all NDDs, oxidative stress, was described as one of the major mechanisms linked to the development and progression of neurodegenerative diseases, which has made it an appealing therapeutic target ( Figure 3). In neuronal cells, the primary sources of oxidative stress are dysfunctional mitochondria. Under normal conditions, endogenous antioxidants, such as glutathione (GSH) and Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), together with several antioxidant enzymes, such as catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD), are responsible for detoxifying reactive oxygen species (ROS) and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) generated by cellular processes like mitochondrial respiration. However, evidence suggests that in NDDs the activity of antioxidant enzymes is decreased, and pools of GSH and CoQ10 are depleted [40][41][42]. Loss of intrinsic antioxidant defenses allows ROS and RNS to accumulate causing oxidative damage to vital cellular macromolecules such as proteins, lipid membranes and DNA, disrupting normal mechanisms of cellular signaling [43,44]. The low activity of antioxidant defense systems, paired with the high dependence of mitochondria for energy, makes the brain extremely susceptible to oxidative stress [45,46]. There is evidence that increased oxidative stress plays an important role in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD, PD, brain ischemic disease and aging [47,48]. Data support a strong link between oxidative stress and protein aggregation processes, which are noticeably involved in the development of proteinopathies, such as AD, PD, HD, ALS and prion diseases. Moreover, the relationship between oxidative stress and inflammation has been well documented [49] with evidence indicating that oxidative stress may play a pathogenic role in chronic inflammatory diseases [50]. Thus, inhibiting oxidative stress-induced neuronal injury might represent a good strategy in the treatment or prevention of aging and neurodegenerative diseases [51].

(p2.4) In addition to all underlying events already mentioned, NDDs are characterized by the loss or dysfunction of groups of neurons in different brain regions specific to each NDDs. Neuronal dysfunction can be caused by neuritic dystrophy, excitotoxicity, synaptic loss and synaptic pruning, impairment of long-term potentiation or disruption of the ubiquitin-proteasome system and neuronal signaling as a result of disease pathology ( Figure 3). These events often precede neuronal cell death in NDDs [52]. There is no single mechanism responsible for neuronal cell death. It is rather a combination of all the distinct aspects of NDDs mentioned above. The role of the other cell types in the CNS is crucial for neuronal homeostasis and survival. The already mentioned microglia cells and astrocytes together with microvascular endothelial cells can play several vital roles, besides inflammatory roles, like maintaining neurotransmitter, ion and energy homeostasis also conducting tissue repair and neurogenesis. As such, dysfunction in any of these well-tuned systems could be harmful to neuronal viability, leading to neuronal cell death. The blood brain barrier (BBB) integrity represents a crucial step to maintain the balance of substances in the brain and out thanks to their flow to the cerebrospinal fluid. However, it is proposed that BBB integrity might diminish during aging leading to a pathological brain microenvironment. All these factors and the increasing number of research in the last decades about the mechanisms by which neurons die in NDDs have led to the conclusion that the process of neurodegeneration is multifactorial, potentially explaining why so many drugs have so far failed to show significant results [53]. The failure to develop effective therapeutic agents for NDDs may be in large part because the majority of the current treatments target single aspects of disease pathology. As such, in recent years, efforts to develop new therapeutic strategies focusing on targeting multiple factors contributing to disease progression, rather than a single one. In this sense, dietary (poly)phenols arose as promising candidates, due to their described pleiotropic effects, since they can modulate many of the features underlying neurodegenerative processes [12].
## (s4) Models of NDDs
(p4.0) The budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is one of the most studied organisms in the eukaryotic kingdom. Presenting unique attributes, such as easy handling, short generation time and high amenability for genetic manipulation, S. cerevisiae has been established as a versatile and powerful experimental model in diverse areas of biology [62,63]. Remarkably, yeast shares highly conserved molecular and cellular mechanisms with human cells (e.g., cell division, DNA replication, metabolism, protein folding and intracellular trafficking), thus representing an invaluable model to study the major biological processes involved in several human diseases [64]. More than 400 essential yeast genes can be replaced with their human orthologs. Moreover, nearly a thousand yeast genes belong to orthologous gene families associated with human diseases [65]. In what concerns NDDs, yeast models have been described to recapitulate important pathological features, with a special focus on mitochondrial dysfunction, trafficking defects, proteasomal impairment and transcriptional dysregulation [64,66]. Besides being useful for the study of NDDs intricacies, such models have also been explored as in vivo platforms to identify the bioactive properties of compounds with therapeutic potential [63]. The data presented in this section summarizes the knowledge generated using yeast as a simple eukaryotic model to screen the biological effects and respective cellular targets of LMWPM in the protection against the pathological mechanisms of NDDs.
## (s5) Low Molecular Weight (Poly)phenol Metabolites in Invertebrate Models of NDDs
(p5.0) Invertebrate models, such as the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans or the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, are two of the most used model organisms in biomedicine, where the study of the potential of small molecules to counteract NDDs is rising. These are ideal systems, because they allow the fast evaluation of behavior and the dissection of molecular mechanisms in the context of aging and in disease models.

(p5.1) Some of the advantages of these models are their short generation time and lifespan, the ability to yield a large progeny, conserved molecular pathways, accessible nervous system, and low maintenance costs. The aging process of these models reproduces the hallmarks of vertebrate aging, but given their much shorter lifespans, with C. elegans living around 21 days and Drosophila about 70 days at 25 • C, the study of age-associated disorders becomes much more efficient [97,98]. Therefore, the use of C. elegans and Drosophila for fast high-throughput and high-content screenings for drugs or food-derived neuroprotective compounds is growing. In addition, the large number of genetic tools available, easy genetic manipulation and less genetic redundancy allow the discovery of the molecular mechanistic routes of action of these compounds, as well as the specific cell type(s) on which they act upon. These small molecules can be easily added to the worm's or flies' food or directly injected into their circulation (in the case of Drosophila) ensuring complete absorption of the specific compounds. Their effects can be easily tracked and evaluated over time through behavioral, cellular and biochemical assays. Moreover, the immediate molecular effect of these compounds can also be observed through ex vivo acute exposure either in fixed tissues or through live imaging. In this way, both C. elegans and Drosophila can substitute for in vitro approaches, also giving the advantage of mimicking the whole-tissue and organismal responses.
## (s6) C. elegans
(p6.0) Several studies used the nematode C. elegans to test the effect of bioactive compounds in neurodegeneration phenotypes or lifespan extension and in particular for the effects of LMWPM (Table 3). When administered to control strains of C. elegans 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde per se did not induce any locomotion phenotypes. However, if administered to worms exposed to 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA), a validated model of PD-like features that display slow and progressive degeneration of the dopamine system, this LMWPM can rescue some of the PD phenotypes [99]. After 6-OHDA administration, worms display a decrease in body bends compared to controls, a phenotype associated with 6-OHDA-induced PD. Furthermore, in the same study, in the transgenic strain BZ555, in which dopaminergic neurons are tagged with GFP, co-exposed to 6-OHDA and 2-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde, it was observed that the treatment conferred neurological protection, measured as the decrease of dopaminergic cell death and rescue of the locomotion phenotype [99].

(p6.1) To test the effect of 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid in C. elegans, a wild type (ATX3Q17-GFP) and a pathological (ATX3Q130-GFP) variant of Ataxin 3, which is involved in polyQ disorders due to CAG expansions (e.g., Machado Joseph's disease), were expressed in the nervous system under the control of the unc-119 promoter and compared with wild type Bristol N2 strain which was used as a control. After 24 h and 48 h of postexposure, 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid was able to rescue some of the motility defects induced by the over-expression of pathogenic ATX3Q130-GFP, but no survival increase was observed [100].

(p6.2) Treatment of C. elegans with cinnamic acid has also been performed. In particular, administration of hydroxycinnamic acid [101], 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid [102,103], 4hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamic acid [104] and 3-(3 ,4 -dihydroxyphenyl)propanoic acid [103] have been shown to give promising results regarding the neuroprotective potential of these compounds. Cinnamic acids described as LMWPM, 3-hydroxycinnamic acid, 2hydroxycinnamic acid, cinnamic acid, 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid, 2,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid, and 3,4,5-trihydroxycinnamic acid were shown to inhibit Aβ 40 fibrillogenesis and reduced Aβ 40 -induced cytotoxicity in a dose-dependent manner in cells, demonstrating the potential of cinnamic acids and the need to test other LMWPM. When hydroxycinnamic acid was given to a C. elegans transgenic line, CL4176, which expresses human Aβ in muscle and gives rise to a paralysis phenotype in the worms due to the generation of Aβ deposits, the results showed that all small molecules delayed the progress of Aβ-induced paralysis in a dose-dependent manner [101].  [32], however the name cited in the original publications where the effect is described is indicated in brackets. ↑-increased ↓-decreased.
## (s7) Drosophila
(p7.0) Drosophila is progressively emerging as a model organism to study the role of (poly)phenol metabolites in life extension and protection in aging and NDDs models ( Table 4). Flies that were fed with 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid together with a sucrose solution, were shown to have protective properties through the increase of antioxidant enzymes activity, namely SOD, catalase and glutathione S-transferase. Furthermore, 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid has also been shown to be protective against urethane-induced genotoxicity and oxidative stress, an environmental mutagenic [105]. Additionally, 0.1 mM 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid, 0.1 mM 4-hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamic acid and 0.5 and 1 mM of 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid, all LMWPM, were given individually in a 0.1% sucrose solution to flies exposed to paraquat (PQ), a chemical used to induce Parkinson's disease, and were able to extend the lifespan of the flies, and to ameliorate PQ-nduced locomotor defects [106,107]. In a different study, in which parkin (a PD-disease gene with ubiquitin-ligase activity, required for mitophagy) was knocked down in dopaminergic neurons and chronically exposed to PQ, a model in which mitophagy is impaired and ROS are produced at much higher levels, 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid at 0.1 and 0.5 mM could not rescue neither the locomotor defects nor the reduced lifespan of these flies. This result suggests that this compound does not interfere with the molecular mechanisms affected in this model, namely mitophagy and parkin [108]. Still, in a genetic model of Alzheimer's disease 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid showed anti-BACE1 and anti-cholinesterase activity [109]. WT-wild type; PD-Parkinson's disease; PQ-paraquat; SOD-Superoxide dismutase. 1 (Poly)phenol metabolites are named accordingly the recommendations recently published [32] however the name cited in the original publications where the effect is described is indicated in brackets. 2 Converted from w/v to mM using molecular mass of 170.12 g·mol −1 . 3 Converted from mg·L −1 to mM using molecular mass of 180.16 g·mol −1. ↑-increased ↓-decreased.

(p7.1) Supplementation with 3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid (1.1 mM to 5.55 mM) significantly extended lifespan, increased climbing index, increase SOD and catalase activity, counterbalanced the aging-induced amino acid imbalance and improved mitochondrial function by regulating redox state and mitochondrial metabolism [110].

(p7.2) Several other studies with the dietary (poly)phenol parent compounds individually or in extracts, also suggested that these compounds are neuroprotective, likely playing antioxidant and antiaging roles. For example, the effects of green tea, apple, blueberry and black rice extracts which all contained a complex mixture of phenolic compounds have all showed an enhancement of Drosophila WT lifespan [111][112][113][114]. Additionally, the supplementation with green tea extract reduced mutant Huntingtin-induced neurodegeneration and positively increased the longevity in this model [115]. Furthermore, glutathione (0.16 mM), catechin (0.17 mM) and epicatechin (0.17 mM) individually fed rescued lifespan of PQ treated flies [116]. Epicatechin (0.1-8 mM) and epigallocatechin-gallate alone could increase the lifespan of WT flies [117,118]. In a transgenic model of PD epicatechin-gallate showed dose-dependent significant protection against oxidative stress and apoptosis in the brain of the flies as well as a delay in the loss of locomotor activity [119]. Likewise, propyl gallate (0.1 mM) and epigallocatechin-gallate (0.1 mM and 0.5 mM) could increase locomotor activity and lifespan of a genetic model of PD exposed to PQ [108,120].

(p7.3) Although informative, the use of extracts or (poly)phenol mixtures, makes it difficult to precise the potential bioactivity of each individual compound. Furthermore, the studies with dietary (poly)phenols and extracts do not take into consideration the fact that (poly)phenols might have low bioavailability in humans together with their metabolism and transformation by human microbiota into LMWPM, before reaching circulation [121].

(p7.4) Altogether, Drosophila is rising as a good model system in which to study the side effects and behavioral outputs of (poly)phenol metabolites treatment, yet the discovery of the mechanisms of action of these physiological relevant metabolites is still underappreciated. The utilization of the genetic toolkit available in this model will help the identification of the precise molecular mechanisms through which these compounds function in cells.
## (s9) Effects of Low Molecular Weight (Poly)phenol Metabolites in Rodent Models of NDDS
(p9.0) Rodents such as mice and rats have been used for decades in research and are by far the most common mammalian animal models in research. This is due to their relatively low dimensions, space requirement and timespan with high breading capability. Mice are amongst the closest relatives to humans apart from primates, scadentia (treeshrews), dermoptera (colugos) and lagomorphs (hares, rabbits, and pikas) maintaining a high degree of similarity to human genes, proteins and cellular pathways.

(p9.1) Protein aggregation, the main feature of all neurodegenerative diseases, has been extensively studied in rodents. In the APP/PS1 mutant mouse model of Alzheimer's disease, orally administration of 3,4-dihydroxybenzoic acid reduced APP expression and Aβ deposition in hippocampal tissue while increasing learning and memory [155]. Treatment with 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid also prove to be effective in reducing APP deposition, as it was capable of decreasing the size of amyloid plaques within the hippocampus of APP/PS1 mice [156]. Finally, 3,4,5-trihydroxybenzoic acid administration improved spatial memory of 4-month-old mice while reducing severe deficits on spatial learning and working and reference memory, together with short term recognition of 9-month-old APP/PS1 mice [156].

(p9.2) Data from rodents also showed the anti-inflammatory action of different metabolites. Anti-inflammatory effects of 4-hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamic acid in the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced neuroinflammation and a rotenone-induced rat model of PD have been suggested. In the mentioned models, 4-hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamic acid exerts its effects by inhibiting p-JNK, p-NF-κB, and downstream signaling molecules, such as iNOS, COX-2, TNF-α, and IL-1β, which was accompanied by a remarkable reduction of ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba-1) and glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) [157,158]. Moreover, 4-hydroxy-3-methoxycinnamic acid treatment interfered with the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation factor 2 (MD-2) complex binding site, crucial for microglial activation and inhibited NF-κB phosphorylation in mouse hippocampus and microglia BV2 cells [157].

(p9.3) Orally administered 4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzoic acid, as a pretreatment, for two weeks, significantly restored spatial memory. Meanwhile the levels of IL-6, IL-1β, TNF-α, NF-kB p65 subunit and TUNEL positive cells were decreased in the rat hippocampus upon 4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzoic acid supplementation in the model of transient bilateral common carotid artery occlusion and reperfusion [159,160].
