# Management of a Pregnant Woman during the Pandemic of COVID-19: A Review

CorpusID: 233273477 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fd15a3203cf033e9acd21dd543abc5681458cf0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9fd15a3203cf033e9acd21dd543abc5681458cf0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Child care after birth to prevent disease
(p4.0) Due to frequent contact with health centers and increased risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection, preventive care is extremely important; in some cases, using a mask is recommended for the child [16,17] .
## (s5) Mother during pregnancy with Covid19
(p5.0) It is recommended that pregnant women with suspected respiratory illness be transferred to a single room immediately after being visited by a doctor, medical examinations be minimized, and patients be kept at home as much as possible. In special cases, doctors recommend preterm delivery. In such cases, corticosteroids are recommended by doctors to accelerate fetal lung maturation. Examination of fetal heart rate using ultrasound or electrical procedures should be monitored regularly according to fetal age. Contamination of immune fluid with COVID-19 infection in an infected mother is usually not examined unless in special circumstances [18,19] . COVID-19 infection is associated with cytokine storms, which are associated with increased IL2, IL7, IL10, GCSF, GIFN, inflammatory MQ1, and α TNF levels.
## (s11) Antiviral therapies
(p11.0) Many antiviral drugs are contraindicated during pregnancy because they are teratogenic. For example, ribavirin is contraindicated during pregnancy because it could cause abnormalities in the fetus. Hydroxychloroquine is a new anticongestion drug that is structurally different from chloroquine. The side effects of hydroxychloroquine are significantly less than those of chloroquine. The WHO has also not reported any side effects of chloroquine on pregnancy, childbirth, or infants. According to research, hydroxychloroquine is assumed to have the potential to be used as an effective drug for pregnant women with COVID-19. IFN-α also does not increase the risk of miscarriage, childbirth, or premature birth. Therefore, in the case of COVID-19 during pregnancy, IFN is predicted to be effective and safe. Lopinavir / Ritonavir, which was used to fight HIV, is therefore safer than other antiviral drugs. Lopinavir / Ritonavir is the preferred antiviral therapy for pregnant women with COVID-19. Host-directed therapy: HDT has been shown to be safe and effective in combination with commonly used drugs such as metformin, glitazone, and atorvastatin [8] .

(p11.1) Giving birth COVID-19 infection by itself is not a sign of childbirth, unless maternal oxygen delivery needs to be improved. The timing and manner of delivery should be decided individually according to the patient's clinical condition, gestational age, and fetal condition. The hospital should be equipped with a dedicated operating room with negative pressure and a neonatal isolation ward, and all medical personnel who provide the necessary care for the patient infected with COVID19 should be fitted out with personal protective equipment. Initially, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that pregnant women suspected of having COVID-19 be tested for COVID-19 before entering the obstetrics and gynecology department in order to take appropriate steps to control the infection. Care during childbirth is similar to the maternity protocol for mothers who are negative for COVID-19. All surgical devices must have the COVID-19 label to be disinfected separately after cesarean section [19] . Pregnant women who recover quickly do not need preterm labor. In the last trimester, it is best for the fetus to grow fully. According to some studies, COVID-19 infection during pregnancy could cause complications for both mother and fetus, such as preterm labor, respiratory problems, and fetal distress. Other pregnant women with COVID-19 showed other complications, such as preeclampsia, premature rupture of the bladder, and irregular contractions, indicating early labor intervention. Whether or not these side effects are related to COVID-19 needs further investigations If the mother has stable conditions, vaginal delivery is recommended; but in case of complications such as shock or loss of vital organs, cesarean section should be performed immediately.

(p11.2) No studies have been done on vaginal delivery yet, but it is still better than long procedures such as cesarean section. If one has a cesarean section, epidural anesthesia and local anesthesia are not prohibited. In addition, it is recommended that patients with general anesthesia wear a mask during childbirth, and that the closure of the baby's umbilical cord should not be delayed to minimize the infection. Also, the necessary tests of the placenta sample should be performed in accordance with the hygienic regulations, and at the end, the placenta sample of the infected mother should be disposed in biological waste in accordance with hygienic principles and regulations.
## (s12) Postpartum care
(p12.0) Complete separation of the baby from the mother is not recommended, unless the strict precautions for the isolation of mother are discontinued. Breastfeeding for mothers with or suspected of having COVLD-19: No virus has been detected in breast milk of mothers with SARS infection. Given the presence of antibodies in breast milk, it is recommended to minimize the mother's contact with the baby for 14 days. It is recommended that the mother wash her hands before touching the baby and use a mask when feeding the baby either by breastmilk or bottle. Although there is a possibility of transmitting antibodies from breast milk to infants, limited evidence has been reported in this regard so far [18] . Limited studies have been performed on women with COVID-19 and other coronavirus infections, including SARS; however, no virus has been detected in breast milk so far, and it is not well known if mothers with COVID-19 could transmit it to their babies through breastfeeding. It is recommended that if the patient is asymptomatic or has mild symptoms, breastfeeding and room-mating of mother and her baby be done in coordination with health care providers. Because the main concern is that the virus may be transmitted through respiratory droplets instead of breast milk, breastfeeding mothers must wash their hands and wear a three-layer surgical mask before contact with the baby. In the case of a mother and baby roommate, the baby's bed should be at least 2 meters away from the mother, and a physical barrier such as a curtain should be used. If the mother is very ill, separation seems to be the best option, trying to get the breast milk out in order to maintain milk production. Precautions should be taken when cleaning breast pumps. Breast milk protects the baby against many diseases. But in rare cases, breastfeeding is not recommended. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has not provided any specific guidelines for breastfeeding of mother infected with similar viruses, such as SARS or MERS. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends that a mother with influenza continue to breastfeed outside the postpartum position by following health tips to prevent the transmission of the disease to the baby [27,28] .
## (s13) If the child is infected through contact with an infected mother
(p13.0) There is still no comprehensive information on the transmission of coronavirus from infected mothers to infants or how the disease affects the infant. On the other hand, limited studies have been performed on infants with COVID-19, indicating that the symptoms of the disease are very mild in infants. The youngest infant infected was reported to be a 36-hour-old baby [28] . Studies have shown that babies whose test results are positive and show symptoms from 5 to 17 days are often infected through the infected mother's cough during breastfeeding, embracement of the baby by relatives, or through the contaminated environment. The US CDC recommends that the baby not need to be separated from the mother, but if the mother is definitely infected with COVID-19 infection, the baby should be placed in a separate room or, if not possible, at a distance of 2 meters [29] . According to algorithm Number 1, If the result of the mother's test is positive, the use of a mask is necessary for the mother, and in order to reduce the risk of exposure, the number of staff and nurses in the delivery room should be minimized, and the baby should be separated from the mother immediately after delivery and kept in a separate room. The recommended test for a baby's mouth and throat while swallowing is performed 24 hours after birth, and if the test is negative, it is repeated 48 hours after birth. If the test is negative, the child could be discharged, and if the test is positive, and the baby is asymptomatic, the baby may be discharged but may be quarantined at home. These guidelines vary with the evidence and symptoms of the disease.
## (s14) Recommended management for pregnant women with suspected COVID-19 disease
(p14.0) If a mother's tests are positive, the mother should use a mask. To reduce the risk of exposure, the number of crew and nurses in the delivery room should be kept to a minimum. The baby is separated from the mother immediately after delivery and placed in a separate room for testing. The recommended test is nasopharyngeal and throat swabs testing performed 24 hours after birth and repeated 48 hours after birth. If the tests are negative, and the child is asymptomatic, he or she could be discharged. If the tests are positive, but the infant is asymptomatic, the child may be discharged but may be quarantined at home. If possible, people over 60 and those with comorbidities should not take care of these babies. If marked, the child needs NICU. These instructions could be changed with evidence [30] .
## (s15) Conclusion
(p15.0) The COVID-19 epidemic still affects many countries and people around the world and could affect the health of most people. Although pregnancy is not very affected by the COVID-19 disease, failure to take necessary and timely precautions could lead to side effects on mother and fetus. Therefore, managing pregnancy period during the pandemic is of particular importance. Accordingly, the protocols and care applied to other groups should be applied to pregnant women; on the other hand, taking preventive measures is important for them, and this group of people should be controlled by monitoring systems [15,31,32] .
