# molecules Recent Advances in Biopolymeric Composite Materials for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicines: A Review

CorpusID: 231769116 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d54ec7fb1afc0438392b210267b2f3acd37957b9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d54ec7fb1afc0438392b210267b2f3acd37957b9)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Biopolymers
(p1.0) The polymers obtained from living resources or biological origin, including plants, animals, or microorganisms, and their system biology processes are called natural polymers. Carbohydrates, i.e., arabinoxylan, chitosan and starch, proteins, e.g., gelatin and keratin, and polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) such as poly-(3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)], are all known as biopolymers [8]. Biopolymeric composite materials' synthesis employs one or more biopolymers to enhance structural and functional properties in the resulting composites [9]. A biopolymer's composition influences its functional properties, whereas functional potential depends largely on the crystalline or amorphous materials' behavior. For example, cellulose is a structural polymer where its features are partly due to its crystalline nature.
## (s2) Biopolymers
(p2.0) The polymers obtained from living resources or biological origin, including plants, animals, or microorganisms, and their system biology processes are called natural polymers. Carbohydrates, i.e., arabinoxylan, chitosan and starch, proteins, e.g., gelatin and keratin, and polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) such as poly-(3-hydroxybutyrate) [P(3HB)], are all known as biopolymers [8]. Biopolymeric composite materials' synthesis employs one or more biopolymers to enhance structural and functional properties in the resulting composites [9]. A biopolymer's composition influences its functional properties, whereas functional potential depends largely on the crystalline or amorphous materials' behavior. For example, cellulose is a structural polymer where its features are partly due to its crystalline nature.
## (s3) Biopolymer Types
(p3.0) Polymeric composites come from a wide range of sources, from common synthetic materials (petroleum-based) including polystyrene to natural biopolymers like cellulose, proteins, and microbial polyesters, which are important for biological structure and function [18,19]. A broader spectrum of these polymeric materials has been categorized as natural or synthetic according to their source's nature, as presented in Figure 2. Biopolymers or bio-based polymer composites can be classified into three main categories, depending on their source. tions [14,15]. There are many problems to be considered, such as technical and turing issues before the widespread use of bio-sustainable polymers is possible. A tial obstacle to the broader use of biopolymers in various sectors is their functio acteristics that appear to be unfavorable compared with established petroleum-b ymers. For example, their performance is lower than that of plastic materials structural nature of a part of biopolymers with single bonds leads to lower m characteristics [16,17]. These deficiencies can be resolved in various ways, such ing, mixing, blending, and reinforcing with other appropriate polymers and cer
## (s4) Biopolymer Types
(p4.0) Polymeric composites come from a wide range of sources, from common materials (petroleum-based) including polystyrene to natural biopolymers like proteins, and microbial polyesters, which are important for biological structure tion [18,19]. A broader spectrum of these polymeric materials has been categoriz ural or synthetic according to their source's nature, as presented in Figure 2. Bio or bio-based polymer composites can be classified into three main categories, d on their source. Category 1: Polymers extracted or separated from biomass, such as starch, arabinoxylan, and keratin.
## (s7) Bone Tissue Engineering
(p7.0) Bone tissue engineering (BTE) is a capable technique that aims at 3D bone scaffolding, containing viable cells and bioactive molecules [50]. BTE focuses on the skeletal structure's perception, bone dynamics for tissue regeneration as it improves clinical abilities to treat disturbing skeletal and segmental abnormalities [51]. In other cases, the modern science of bone biochemistry and its development is necessary if bone tissue is to be effectively regenerated or restored. A bone may serve a wide multifunctional range that leads to physiological and endocrine stimulation.

(p7.1) Bones constitute the basis of our physical locomotion. Bones support our load-bearing skeleton and our internal organs with safety. The bones retain the necessary biological elements for hematopoiesis. The bones adsorb highly toxic metals due to a porous matrix. Bones retain vital electrolytes homeostasis by storing calcium and phosphate ions. The bone undergoes a continuous resorption and reconstruction process that undergoes the exchange of chemicals and structural remodelling due to internal intermediaries and external mechanical standards. Bone was historically and most accurately named the ultimate intelligent material because of its scarce regenerative adaptability. Functional bone tissue engineering includes the fusion of the newly healed bone with the adjacent 
## (s8) Bone Tissue Engineering
(p8.0) Bone tissue engineering (BTE) is a capable technique that aims at 3D bone scaffolding, containing viable cells and bioactive molecules [50]. BTE focuses on the skeletal structure's perception, bone dynamics for tissue regeneration as it improves clinical abilities to treat disturbing skeletal and segmental abnormalities [51]. In other cases, the modern science of bone biochemistry and its development is necessary if bone tissue is to be effectively regenerated or restored. A bone may serve a wide multifunctional range that leads to physiological and endocrine stimulation.
## (s9) Skin Tissue Engineering
(p9.0) The skin is considered one of the most sensitive organs due to its multi-functional roles, such as acting as a protecting enclosure for internal organs' safety, regulating the body's temperature, and acting as a sense organ [93,94]. Normal skin consists of three components known as epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis.
