# Scalenus Syndrome: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 234187450 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ad66128e43c5e0164ebeda97aa1ede843fe6d76](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ad66128e43c5e0164ebeda97aa1ede843fe6d76)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Anatomical Consideration
(p2.0) Understanding the basic concept of scalenus syndrome requires clinicians to understand and be familiar with thoracic outlet anatomy and its relationship with the neurovascular structure around it. The thoracic outlet is defined as space from the supraclavicular fossa to the axilla between the clavicle and the first rib [13], [14]. The name of thoracic outlet is considered false because the opening at superior thoracic aperture is called thoracic inlet while opening at inferior thoracic aperture is called thoracic outlet [14]. The thoracic outlet in this issue is actually superior thoracic aperture.
## (s3) Epidemiology
(p3.0) Scalenus syndrome is an entity that is not well reported and usually reported as nTOS and aTOS. In general, TOS may be classified into nTOS, vTOS, or aTOS. nTOS is the most common one, presenting about 90-95% of all TOS cases. Later, nTOS can be divided into true or disputed nTOS; both are more frequently in women than men, middle decades of life are more prone to this syndrome, and the right arm is more often involved to the left [16], [20].

(p3.1) The shoulder girdle seems to have an important issue in scalenus syndrome. The shoulder girdle is gradually descending as the age progresses and eventually forces the brachial plexus into the interscalene triangle, making it prone to compression. The shoulder on the right side usually drops lower in adults, thus make the brachial plexus more involved in this side. It is also suggested that women are more frequently exhibit this syndrome because of their posture, allowing lower shoulder girdle [3].
## (s5) Clinical Presentation
(p5.0) In scalenus syndrome, the compression occurs in a scalenus triangle, which bordered anteriorly by anterior scalenus muscle, posteriorly by scalenus medius, and the first rib inferiorly. The neurovascular structures passing through this triangle are the brachial plexus and the subclavian artery [3], [17]. In the literature, the manifestation of scalenus syndrome is identical to nTOS or aTOS because of the compression of these structures. Based on this, scalenus syndrome is also considered as mixed nTOS and aTOS.

(p5.1) The symptoms of scalenus syndrome can be divided into two types, which are neurologic and vascular symptoms. The neurologic manifestation can originate from the somatic and sympathetic nervous system. Symptoms involving somatic nervous system includes pain in the shoulder, arm, forearm, or extending into the hand; atrophy of intrinsic muscles of the hand; and muscular twitching [3], [23]. Paresthesia following ulnar nerve distribution, median nerve distribution, or both is also reported as a scalenus syndrome symptom. These neurological symptoms can be classified further as upper and lower plexus compression. Lower plexus represents a compression  [7] of C8 and T1, which manifests in the area of the ulnar forearm, axillary, and anterior shoulder region. Upper plexus compression involves C5-C7 manifest in the supraclavicular region [24].

(p5.2) The sympathetic nerve rami run surrounding the subclavian artery [17], which we hypothesize the sympathetic hypertonic occurrence in this syndrome. Tension on the first thoracic nerve may be transmitted to several sympathetic rami and nerves of Kuntz, which is perhaps responsible for vascular changes [7]. The sympathetic nervous system's involvement exhibits vasomotor spasm, lack of capillary refill in fingers, and reduction of temperature [3], [23]. In addition to the symptoms above, Raynaud phenomenon may also present because of overactive sympathetic activity since these fibers run in proximity to the roots of the lower brachial plexus [25].

(p5.3) The subclavian vein is passed posterior to the clavicula, which explains the uncommon occurrence of venous distention in this syndrome [3], [17]. The vascular compression manifestations are occurred because of subclavian artery compression. It exhibits partial or complete pulse reduction when the head is turned ipsilaterally, and a deep inspiration is taken [3], [23], [24]. However, Winsor et al. did a research to determine the occurrence of scalenus syndrome during the physical examination and confirmed a reduction of blood flow on the distal extremity with Doppler. They reported that the distal extremity's blood flow was lower when the subject turned their head contralateral to the affected side [17].

(p5.4) Scalenus tenderness is a constant finding of scalenus syndrome [3], [24]. The pain is radiating in ulnar distribution when the scalenus muscle above the clavicle is compressed [3]. Extension and abduction of the arm increased the pain [24]. Nishijima et al. reported that vertigo could be happened in scalenus anterior syndrome due to subclavian artery compression by anterior scalenus muscle [26].

(p5.5) Similar with nTOS, scalenus syndrome is diagnosed clinically and can be confirmed with nerve conduction study (NCS), while aTOS can be diagnosed with several maneuvers such as Adson, Wright, and Roos stress. Adson maneuver is performed with the shoulder in abduction and extension; the neck is extended with the head rotated toward the ipsilateral side of the symptoms. The patient is instructed to inhales deeply, and positive results are confirmed when the pulse is diminished. Wright test is performed with hyperabduction and external rotation of the affected arm, positive result when the pulse diminishes. Roos stress test is performed with the abduction and an external rotation of shoulder 90 degrees with elbow flexion at 90 degrees. The patient is told to open and close their hand for several minutes, and a positive result is interpreted as a reproduction of heaviness or fatigue [27].
## (s6) Diagnostic
(p6.0) Diagnosing scalene syndrome might be particularly challenging because of the variety of symptoms and mimics of symptoms from other causes [28]. The diagnosis is made mainly from clinical findings. However, further workup diagnostic can also have a value in clinching the diagnosis.
## (s7) Pathology
(p7.0) During the operation, it was reported that anterior scalenus muscle was large and very tense in scalenus syndrome patients. Beneath it, there was a fibrous band which has been thickened that covering the muscle [3], [24]. There is microscopic evidence of inflammation, hypertrophy, degeneration, fibrosis of scalenus anterior muscle in scalenus syndrome cases [2], [3]. It was also reported that the subclavian artery was small and sclerotic compressed by anterior scalenus muscle [24].
## (s8) Treatment
(p8.0) Scalenus syndrome can be treated surgically or conservatively. Non-surgical or conservative treatment can be applied to mild scalenus syndrome, especially nTOS in the initial phase. Surgical management should be performed in persistent symptoms of nTOS or involving subclavian artery manifesting as aTOS [13].
