# A Review on Feed Additives used in Fish Diet

CorpusID: 235850944 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f03ce20bad61d4f75270e7bbba4412f0257a713](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f03ce20bad61d4f75270e7bbba4412f0257a713)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) Fish oils:
(p2.0) Authors [7] suggested that fish oils such as cod liver oil, sardine oil, squid oil and clam oil are rich in PUFA. Fish oil is added at 2-3 per cent level in feeds to improve growth and food conversion ratio. Oils provide dietary energy as well as fatty acids essential for aquatic animals.
## (s4) Phospholipid:
(p4.0) Phospholipids such as phosphatidylcholine are essential in the diet of fish for growth and survival. Addition of 1-2 per cent of soybean lecithin in the diet promotes faster growth and improves feed conversion ratio. Phospholipids are physiologically important in transportation of lipids in the body according to [9] .
## (s5) Cholesterol:
(p5.0) Among the steroids, cholesterol is nutritionally essential in the diet. Addition of 0.1-0.5 % of cholesterol in feed enhances growth and survival. Cholesterol is present in the shrimp head waste meal [10] 2.2 Growth promoting but non-essential additives:
## (s6) Antibiotics:
(p6.0) Authors [12] suggested that antibiotics are generally found to stimulate growth of young animals rather than adults. Antibiotics show positive response in feeds formulated with vegetable proteins. Reduce or eliminate the activity of pathogens, Eliminate bacteria which produce toxins that reduce growth, Stimulate growth of beneficial micro-organisms which synthesize nutrients, Reduce microorganisms which compete with host for nutrients Increase the absorptive capacity of intestine.
## (s9) Enzyme:
(p9.0) Researchers [15] concluded that enzymes are improving the digestion of feed to the fish also can't digest and can't digest competently. Enzyme also used in the digestion of complex carbohydrates, collagen in skin and bones, and other feed constituents. Enzymes are typically denatured at temperatures above 65ยบ C. Thus enzyme supplements are typically spread on feeds after pelleting.
## (s10) Probiotics:
(p10.0) Probiotics are live microbial feed supplements that stimulate fish growth by affecting the microbial flora population in the gut. Probiotic may be a single species of microorganisms or a mixture of species. The species of microorganisms present in the supplement colonizes the gut and detrimental species of microorganisms. Allowing the fish are to avoid wasting metabolic energy fighting the effects of detrimental organisms. Probiotics must be added to the feeds after pelleting [16] .
## (s13) Phytobiotic
(p13.0) The phytobiotic canister is regarded as plant-derived foodstuffs inoculation to feed in arranges to improve performance in aquatic species. Generally the plants leaves, roots, tubers, and fruits of herbs, spices and other plants also used as pytobiotics. The pytobiotics menially used to enhance the growth performance in fish and shrimp culture [18] .
## (s15) Feed colorants:
(p15.0) Over 300 pigments are found in various plant and animals. Carotenoids and astaxanthins are either present in some natural or as synthetic substances. Xanthophyll and carotenoids are being the most important classes of pigments. Most part xanthophyll are found in plants and carotenoid pigments are in crustaceans and in fish [20] . They are also found to improve growth and survival of fish. The function of these colors is mainly for proper pigmentation of cultured species.
## (s16) Binders:
(p16.0) Fish feed must be strong enough to withstand normal handling and shipping without disintegration. Moreover, fish feed must be somewhat water-stable. Starch present in basic feed ingredients is gelatinize during processing and act as binder in feed. Materials such as agar-agar, carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), bentonite, guar gum, lignin sulfate, plaster of Paris, polyvinyl alcohol, sodium alginate and wheat gluten are used as binder. Used at 2 to 8 % level for higher stability of pellets [21] .
## (s19) IV. AN OVERVIEW ON THE RECENT STUDY RELATING THE INCORPORATION OF FEED ADDITIVES IN FISH DIET
(p19.0) Authors [23] suggested that the new aspects of using some safe feed additives on alleviated imidacloprid toxicity in farmed fish: a review. Investigators was [24] reviewed that the fish and shellfish are precious and cheap sources of Omega fatty acids and several other important nutrients for human consumption. There is critical need to study further on novel feed additives similar to inclusion of herbs on fish feeds which decrease feed expenditure, highest digestibility and prevention of remaining effects of hormones and antibiotics on fish muscles which in returns have effects on human that consumes them. The fishing have also been connected with a fast increase in fish consumption, as well as the presence of omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids, which are essential for humans other than high quality and feed additives. According to [25] the feed contain useful feed additives encourage the growth and physical condition of tilapia, get better their immune systems, and encourage physiological benefits away from traditional feeds. The feed additives such as probiotics, prebiotics, phytogenic substances, immune-stimulants, enzymes, hormones, mycotoxin binders, organic acids etc. are best functional feed additives.
