# Ambient Assisted Living: A Review of Technologies, Methodologies and Future Perspectives for Healthy Aging of Population

CorpusID: 235239912 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea97175d7bfabb77239abbff142d679171dc3f24](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea97175d7bfabb77239abbff142d679171dc3f24)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s2) Target Users
(p2.0) AAL systems are principally targeted to elderly adults, aiming maintain continuous support and prolong their autonomous life in an active and healthy way. Medical studies have categorized elderly people into three different classes, depending on their age: those between the ages of 65 and 74 years are classified as youngest-old, those between 75 and 84 years old as middle-old, and those aged over 85 years as oldest-old [17]. For all of these classes of people, health practices are aimed at disease management, at alarm alerting, or at behavioral change management. In recent years, several applications for diabetes control, depression treatment, hypertension control, medication adherence, and psychological support have been developed to allow people to live alone while having the possibility of daily control over their health status. Alarm alerting applications can save human life, when critical events, such as falls, prolonged inactivity, or environmental dangers, are detected. The early detection of behavioral changes is necessary before a notable deterioration of the basic activities involved in daily living [18]. Scientific studies have pointed out that the activity levels of people drop significantly when they retire. By the early identification of the risk factors of functional decline, this can be prevented in a large portion of the elderly population at the time of retirement by targeting timely interventions and reducing the risks. Furthermore, behavioral change applications include monitoring some dangerous attitudes, such as smoking, calorie intake for diet and exercise, and physical activity levels.
## (s3) Indoor Environments
(p3.0) In the literature, most of the researches focus on AAL systems for indoor environments. One of the main application contexts related to medical and public health practices supported by devices that deliver health care services via mobile communication. New systems and methods have been developed for the continuous monitoring of biological, behavioral, or environmental data, delivering interventions, and assessing their outcomes. Through the development of systems collecting data coming from heterogeneous sensors and additional self-reported data, new information regarding physiological, psychological, emotional, and environmental states can be derived.

(p3.1) Indoor environments can be further differentiated in homes [19], where people live alone or with a few relatives (see Figure 2) and retirement residences, where more people live together, move in common spaces, perform group or individual activities, and undertake controlled physical activities [20] (see Figure 3). Health status evaluation can be carried out by observing people movements, recognizing their actions, evaluating resting periods, monitoring food intake, and so on. Behavioral analysis can be done by detecting anomalies while comparing the actual behavior with the expected one [21]. Social activities in a group or interactions with relatives and friends can also be monitored. Figure 2. Several types of sensors deployed into the house and attached to devices permit gathering a variety of data concerning the location of the resident(s), the object(s) they communicate with, and data related to health conditions (from [19]).  [20]): heterogeneous sensors can collect data to support the caregivers in their work, while, at the same time, collect valuable data for the indoor localization of both residents and caregivers. The system detects a fallen person through the signal sent by the (a,b) Wi-fi bracelet and alerts (c) the caregiver. The (d) robot assists a (e) bedridden resident requesting help.
## (s4) Outdoor Environments
(p4.0) Elderly people spend a number of hours of the day outside the home environment. Recent studies have pointed out the need for seniors to spend time in outdoor environments, as they are motivated to be more active not only physically, but also spiritually and socially [22]. Moreover, outdoor habits, such as walking, shopping, meeting other people, and performing physical activities, can greatly help in the prevention of functional decline. If, on one hand, this is widely recognized to be very beneficial for elderly people, on the other hand it inevitably causes new safety concerns. In outdoor environments, elderly people can be exposed to several risks, such as falls or excessive heat or cold. Furthermore, in the case of people having early symptoms of dementia, wandering and becoming confused or lost are common risks. In these scenarios, the main objective of AAL systems is to provide support to elderly people in various aspects, such as in checking the routes, recognizing anomalous behaviors, evaluating motion activities, and so on.
## (s7) Smart Everyday Objects
(p7.0) With the recent emergence of Internet of Things (IoT) and miniaturized sensors and processors, everyday objects can be identifiable, and they possess the ability to communicate and interact: in a word they can be smart. In this way, home appliances can communicate with each other or be controlled remotely, providing home residents with new facilities that are able to detect anomalies or assess health issues early, in order to apply prevention policies or trigger actions [58][59][60]. In AAL contexts, smart every day objects are generally used together with wearable sensors to acquire joint knowledge regarding individual activities and interactions with the objects in the environment [61][62][63].

(p7.1) Home cooking is one of the basic activities in a daily routine. Monitoring elderly people when they use kitchen appliances is very important in preventing injures and increasing safety. The first signs of cognitive disorders are often easily seen in behaving variations during meal preparation or cooker handling. Some common appliances, such as refrigerators, microwaves, and cooktops, are interconnected with each other to provide assistance in meal preparation tasks [64]. Furthermore, specific conditions, such as the presence of objects on cookers, the presence of lids on the pots, and the liquid level in the pots, can be monitored during the cooking process [65].

(p7.2) Sensors in furniture, such as doors, beds, chairs, washstand, toilet, and cupboards, allow for the non-obtrusive monitoring of daily living activities, providing presence statistics of users in different spaces of the environment [62,66]. Furthermore, power meters can be used to monitor appliance usage, such as TV set or lamps [63], whereas smart pill box devices can be very useful for checking medication intake [61].

(p7.3) Many other solutions have been proposed to provide intelligent functionalities to specific objects and monitor some specific issues that are related to the health and safety of elderly people. Cushion sensors, for example, can be used in wheelchairs to track user posture [67] or capture the heart rate of a person sitting on it [68]. Smart carpets and smart walls can have various functionalities, such as monitoring the walking activity of people, in order to detect falls, measure gait, and count the number of people traversing the environment (socializing activity) [69,70]. 
## (s8) Environmental Sensors
(p8.0) Environmental monitoring sensors are used to detect parameters, such as temperature or air quality, which could have an adverse impact on elderly people [71,72]. They also contribute to monitoring daily life activities [73,74] or localizing people [75][76][77][78] and objects around people [79]. Unlike wearable sensors and smart object sensors, environmental sensors are placed in the environment without being invasive for people and without structuring or replacing home objects.
## (s9) Social Assistive Robots
(p9.0) Social Assistive Robots are less common than wearable or environmental sensors, but they represent an emerging technology that can support and enhance human activities, especially in heavy tasks [88]. Social Assistive Robots can be used for different purposes: to overcome elderly inabilities; to relieve nursing staff from time-consuming, non-empathic, and repetitive tasks in retirement house [89,90]; to transport food or medicine carts; for grasping objects [20]; for laundry collection; and, delivery services, mail delivery, warehouse logistics, trash logistics, and cleaning material logistics [91]. With the spread of these innovative technologies, the service quality can increase and, at the same time, resident and staff satisfaction improve. In this context, it is also important to personalize the humanrobot interaction by endowing the robot with human-like social skills (i.e., natural language processing, user emotion estimation, etc.) [92,93].
## (s10) Discussion: Pros and Cons of Different Technologies
(p10.0) The recent advancement in technological developments has made a wide variety of sensors available, even at a low cost, such as wearable rings, bracelets, smart watches, and mobile phones, for monitoring many functional parameters that are related to people's health and activities. These sensors have to be worn and they may not be accepted by older people. Less intrusive sensors can be introduced in intelligent dresses and, together with antennas placed in the environment, can provide information for the detection of people. Other more complex sensors for monitoring vital signs are, at the moment, in an experimental phase and, although they have been shown to be effective in experimental tests, they must be miniaturized for being acceptable as wearable devices or have to be used for disease monitoring with a conscious involvement. Environmental sensors that are based on optical or microwave technologies are less invasive for people and they have been demonstrated to be robust for both activity detection and vital sign monitoring. They have to be placed properly in the environment and they may require infrastructure changes for their installation. Smart objects or sensors in furniture can be used to monitor daily life activities and interactions with objects. Additionally, in this case, some of the proposed solutions only require the addition of IoT sensors to the furniture that is already available; in other cases, it is necessary to replace objects with smart ones. In Figure 5, an example of how an elderly people's residence or house could be structured is provided [94]: a large number of sensors could be installed at different locations of the environment, depending on the specific parameters that have to be measured and the particular events that would be monitored. It is evident that the selection of sensors among all of these possibilities depend on several factors: the costs of the sensors, their intrusiveness, their acceptability from users, the level of intervention that is required in the environments, the privacy issues that are related to the use of each sensor, and so on. Because these sensors have widely demonstrated their usefulness and potentialities, in the future they are certainly going to become of ordinary use. Thus, not only will the wearable sensors be a part of everyday life, but the environmental ones, even if they require structural interventions, will also be given in the new residences, thus making the flats and all the furniture smart. 
## (s11) Methodologies for Data Analysis
(p11.0) Many AAL systems only require data collection and the application of simple techniques for data analysis, such as threshold-based or distance-based methods. These techniques can be enough to trigger alerts when dangerous events are detected, providing interesting supports in various contexts of AAL. They only require a parameter estimation phase to be obtained by statistical analyses of the acquired data. When multiple heterogeneous sensors are used, several types of features have to be analyzed and more complex functionalities have to be recognized. The problem of feature selection becomes relevant for both reducing the cost of AAL systems by facilitating the execution of algorithms on devices with limited resources, as well as for generating reliable classification models of human activities and daily living. Several works have tested feature selection methods on large heterogeneous data comparing the results among different selections of spatio-temporal features [95][96][97].
## (s14) The need of a human-centered approach.
(p14.0) From a technological point of view, the main aspect that should be considered is cer-tainly connected to the actual acceptability of sensors by people and, consequently, to the reliability of the acquired data not affected by behavioral conditioning due to the awareness of being observed or having behavior assessed [122]. The design of AAL systems has to consider the needs of people preferring a human-centred approach, where the end users are involved and participate in all stages of the design process [123]. A long term evaluation as part of a field trials "in the wild", regarding functionality, acceptability, and utility of the AAL systems, in general, has only been studied in a few papers [124,125].
## (s17) The evaluation of processing constraints.
(p17.0) Processing constraints also have to be considered when AAL systems must be devised. Many AAL systems have been devised to provide alarms when dangerous situations are detected. In these cases, hard real time processing of data is necessary for providing prompt interventions, but, at the same time, robust processing techniques are necessary to avoid fake alarms [126]. In some approaches, information regarding people's behaviors has to be collected and advice provided. In these cases, soft real time processing is necessary, as data can be collected during the whole day, sent to a central server for the overall evaluation, and then the proper users can be provided with the processing results. On the contrary, long periods of observation are required when changes in habits require detection. In this case, systems have to collect data regarding all aspects of the daily life, and the results can only be evaluated when models of normal behaviors have been estimated. In these cases, offline processing can be done on a large sample of data collected in a cloud computing framework.

(p17.1) The importance of data clustering. The use of unsupervised approaches is very useful for clustering data and assessing the presence of common behaviors. In the following years, consistent with the predicted expanded deployment of smart objects or environmental sensors in the houses, together with the use of wearable sensors by users, large amounts of data will be available. Unsupervised approaches for data clustering will represent a useful and flexible means to analyze behaviors and extract the habits, as well as the social, behavioral, and functional aspects, of subjects for the purpose of providing medical staff with diagnostic support.
