# Environmental Factors Problems and use of cyanobacteria for environmental improvement -A Review

CorpusID: 233283435 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f81eb74c25345401a6a7ef2b97cdfae1e839b03](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f81eb74c25345401a6a7ef2b97cdfae1e839b03)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Cyanobacterial harmful algae blooms have been recognized as a problem worldwide, resulting from the inherent detrimental effects, although the presence in the ecosystem is not widely recognized. Cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae (N. A. Herrera et al., 2015) are a group of bacteria characterized by numerous structural features (El Gamal, 2010). These microorganisms are autotrophic, which are primary producers in aquatic systems, hence categorized as algae (Picardo et al., 2019). Also, due to the chlorophyll a content and the presence of related compounds (El Gamal, 2010), cyanobacteria are able to perform photosynthesis, which is a process that provides the primary source of energy for most forms of life on Earth (Axmann et al., 2014;Bortoli et al., 2014;Kimambo et al., 2019). Furthermore, they are also highly adaptive, with the capacity to grow autotrophically (Picardo et al., 2019), heterotrophically (Atteia et al., 2013), or mixotrophically (Subashchandrabose et al., 2013).
## (s5) Metabolism
(p5.0) Microcystin conjugates with glutathione and cysteine to increase solubility and facilitate excretion. Moreover, several studies have investigated the role of glutathione homeostasis and lipid peroxidation in microcystin-induced liver toxicity. However, as the potential risk of numerous cyanobacterial metabolites remains unknown. These processes are versatile, featuring rapid switching between modes (Subashchandrabose et al., 2013). Some scientists have affiliated the removal of microcystin to the incidence of biodegradation, as some bacteria have been reported capable of decomposing MC-LR. These include Arthrobacter, Brevibacterium, Rhodococcus, Paucibacter, Sphingomonas (Pseudomonas).
## (s6) Sources and Pathways
(p6.0) Microcystin-RR identified in most soils (Xiang et al., 2019), which is introduced through contacts with land plants by agriculture activities, especially along with contaminated irrigation water sources (Cao et al., 2018). This has led to high land invasion (Gibble & Kudela, 2014), characterized by the occurrence of microalgae on buildings, trees or roofs (Wiśniewska et al., 2019).

(p6.1) Furthermore, microcystin also can spread into the surrounding environment (Takahashi et al., 2014), especially for the aerosolized cyanobacteria, which is passively transported through the air. The vitality of these organisms depends on adaptation and the ability to react actively to the changing environmental conditions (resilience) (Fröhlich-Nowoisky et al., 2016). Also, cyanobacteria are mainly emitted into the atmosphere from water surfaces, and soil (Wiśniewska et al., 2019).

(p6.2) Exposure to cyanotoxins occurs through absorption, dermal, respiratory/inhalation, and hemodialysis/intravenous, while some research concluded oral/ingestion of contaminated drinkable water and food as the main source. These possibly lead to acute or chronic toxicity in humans and animals (Picardo et al., 2019), while the use of Microcystin-contaminated irrigation water was identified as the dominant pathway of accumulation in vegetables and soils.

(p6.3) Facilitated transport is necessary for uptake of Microcystin into organs and tissues, as well as for export. Several studies have produced information on the possible distribution through the digestive, respiratory and circulatory tracts. Microcystin was also detected in the villi of the small intestine, blood plasma, liver, lungs, kidneys, gill tissue, ileum, heart, large intestine, and spleen. The toxin is capable of inducing damage to distribution tissues, including vascular structures and gills (Martins et al., 2017). While in plants, based on the study conducted on rice plants, the greatest concentrations of microcystin was recognized in the leaves, following a process translocation from the roots (Cao et al., 2018).
## (s7) Bioaccumulation
(p7.0) This process is possibly affected by various factors, including the exposure route, duration, and concentration of Microcystin in their food resources (Dong et al., 2012), as well as bioaccumulation capacity and incomplete depuration after contact (Paldavičiene et al., 2015). The toxin accumulates on the seafloor (Takahashi et al., 2014), in snail (J. Zhang et al., 2012), in fish tissues (Dong et al., 2012), in various mammal organs, including muscle, liver, kidney, heart, lung, spleen, gastrointestinal tract and gonads, consequently leading to potential damage. Microcystin also affects vegetables and soils (Xiang et al., 2019), rice (Cao et al., 2018), cereals, corn, peanuts, soybeans, and spices, among others during maturation, storage, and transportation (Picardo et al., 2019). This toxin biomagnifies and persists in the medium of co-occurrence, and poses a large potential ecological risk within the food chains (Gibble & Kudela, 2014;Z. Wang et al., 2017). Furthermore, cyanotoxin persistence after agricultural land applications require urgent attention (Quilliam et al., 2015).
## (s8) UTILIZATION OF CYANOBACTERIA
(p8.0) In addition to the dangers of microcystin produced by Cyanobacteria previously discussed, Cyanobacteria attracts more and more attention to the production of some valuable products (Axmann et al., 2014). It is necessary to explore the possibility of adopting environmentally friendly applications of cyanobacteria in the provision of worldwide solutions in the aspect of mitigating the energy crisis, alleviating the problem of plastic, solving the waste and wastewater problems, as well as the clean production. The diverse, ubiquitous and easily available in nature, make cyanobacteria potentially being a suitable candidate for various purposes (Deviram et al., 2020).
