# International Journal of Home Science 2021; 7(2): 94-100 Finger millet (Ragi) as an essential dietary supplement with key health benefits: A review Padmaja Jagati, Indurekha Mahapatra and Debasmita Dash

CorpusID: 237970752 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6962f625f02594966cd623ecb1a8f8bfb206ccb7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6962f625f02594966cd623ecb1a8f8bfb206ccb7)

Fields: Medicine, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s7) Vitamins
(p7.0) Millets are considered as the potentially rich contents of vitamin B. It is reported that 100 g of finger millets only have 45 µg [21] . In another study, Ray et al. [22] revealed that the amount of β-carotene in finger millet is too scanty and nearly about 0-1 µg. Finger millets have vitamin A with its value equivalent to six retinol. Fat and water-soluble vitamins, such as thiamine, niacin, riboflavin and tocopherols known as vitamin E plus vitamin C are present in finger millets but in other dried millet grain vitamin C is not present. The germ and aleuronic layer of finger millet are rich in water soluble Vitamin B, while only vitamins which are lip soluble are concentrated in germ [21,22] .
## (s8) Fiber
(p8.0) Fiber has high nutritional value, which helps to maintain a healthy gastrointestinal function and to reduce the transit time of intestine. This will lower the total value of lipoprotein cholesterol within blood serum and blood postprandial glucose level. The fiber contents of finger millet support to enhance the bioavailability of calcium along with the development in immune system. It is active against the cancer in colon. It is recommended to take a daily diet having total fiber about 38g and 25g for men and women, respectively. Finger millet have total dietary fiber of 22% which is higher in comparison to the other millets or cereal grain such as 12.8%, 4.5%,13,4% and 12.6% for sorghum, rice, maize and wheat respectively [23] . Finger millets have fiber contents, which are concentrated in the wall of endosperm and pericarp. It is reported that finger millets have 18.6% of fiber contents and mainly composed of lignin 7.9%, cellulose 4.7% and noncellulosic polysaccharides 6.1% out of which water insoluble portion is 4.7% and 1.5% are water insoluble [24] . The high fiber content slows the rate of digestion, enabling consumers to work for long hours on a single meal of this millet.
## (s15) Popping
(p15.0) The simplified technique involved in processing of cereals to make it ready to consume is known as puffing or popping. The finger millet grain, after popping, transformed into a porous, crunchy and convenient precooked instant products with pleasant and acceptable aroma and taste. Popped finger millet is treated as a nutrients enriched food component in nutrition intervention programme [22] . Malleshi and Desikachar reported that the suitable conditions to get fully enlarged millets are a processing temperature of 250 ºC and moisture contents of about 19% [33] . The popped grains are highly fibrous because after popping it is not favorable to debran the grain. Popped millets are the porous products having low bulk density with an attractive texture and distinct flavor. In-vitro nitrogen content and starch digesting ability is increased by puffing. The increased starch digestion ability makes the grain more susceptible towards enzymatic digestion by attributing a high level starch gelatinization and de-bonding of starch granules from protein.
## (s17) Health benefits of Finger Millet usage
(p17.0) The polyphenolic finger millet is the potential resource of healthy food supplements and has health benefits. The brown variety of finger millet has 96% of phenolic acid contents and more threonine, valine and lysine in comparison to white and other varieties of millets [39] . In addition to these, black finger millets also have dry weight fatty acid 8.71 mg/g and dry weight protein 8.47 mg/g [40] . The diet having finger millet helps to reduce cholesterol in diabetic and reduction of blood glucose by 36%. It also have anti-ulcerative properties.
## (s18) Finger millet as a diet supplement for diabetes
(p18.0) The phytochemicals present in finger millet slows down the digestion process resulting in blood sugar level control as well as improving antioxidant level in the body [41] . Finger millet have high fiber contents in comparison to wheat and rice and a low response towards glycemic process means a low ability to enhance blood sugar and absorptivity of starch [42] . The seed coat phenolic of finger millet acts as an inhibitor that helps to reduce the postprandial hyperglycemia through restricting the role of enzymes, such as amylase, alphaglucosidase etc., essential in hydrolysis of complex carbohydrates [15] .
## (s19) Finger millets for lowering cardiovascular diseases
(p19.0) Methionine, threonine and lecithin, the two amino acids present in finger millets helps to remove unnecessary fat from liver and decrease the cholesterol level and encumbers the fat formation. Again, finger millet possesses low concentration of serum triglycerides. The possibility of cardiovascular disease is minimized with consumption of finger millets through reduction in plasma triglycerides [43] .
## (s24) Finger millets for reducing aging
(p24.0) Finger millets are rich in antioxidants and phenolics those are key parameters for good health, aging and metabolic syndrome. Finger millets curb cross-linking of collagen and glycation those are responsible for aging in individuals [45] .
