# A survey on active noise control techniques-Part I: Linear systems

CorpusID: 238253433 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/412a340b461d719f280a78c53af6c5ab0fa95da8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/412a340b461d719f280a78c53af6c5ab0fa95da8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s3) 3) FxLMS-based algorithms for impulsive noise
(p3.0) The impulsive noise is often due to the occurrence of noise disturbance with low probability but large amplitude, which has become a great challenge for ANC systems [177]. The α-stable noise can effectively model the impulsive noise encountered in ANC systems, which explains why such noise is widely used for active impulsive noise control (AINC) [177,178,179].

(p3.1) To combat α-stable noise, a clipped FxLMS algorithm was proposed by Sun et al., which puts limitations on the input signal [119]. In 2009, the improved version of Sun's algorithm was proposed and termed as Akhtar's algorithm [177]. The Akhtar's algorithm has a restriction in both input signal and error signal, which can be expressed as:
## (s4) Filtered-x AP-based algorithms 1) FxAP-based algorithms for broadband noise
(p4.0) The AP algorithm updates the weights on the basis of multiple input vectors to accelerate convergence speed if driven by highly correlated input signals. For these reasons, it has become a good alternative to LMS-type controllers. The update equation for the basic FxAP algorithm is [194] w(n + 1) = w(n) + µU (n) U T (n)U (n) −1 e(n)

(p4.1) where e(n) = [e(n), e(n − 1), . . . , e(n − P + 1)] T , U (n) = [x(n), x(n − 1), . . . , x(n − P + 1)] is a M × P matrix, and P denotes the projection order.
## (s5) Filtered-x RLS-based algorithms 1) FxRLS-based algorithms for broadband noise
(p5.0) The standard FxRLS algorithm can converge faster than the FxLMS algorithm, at the price of increased complexity [200]. As such, the RLS algorithm has been extended to ANC systems in recent years. In [200], a hybrid algorithm, which can switch between the filtered-x NLMS (FxNLMS) and FxRLS algorithms, was proposed for functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) acoustic noise control. The FxRLS algorithm is adopted at the initial convergence stage for obtaining fast convergence. Once detected it stops converging, the hybrid algorithm switches to the FxNLMS algorithm for low residual error. By doing this, the overall attenuation performance can be better than that of the individual FxRLS and FxNLMS components.
## (s6) 2) FxRLS-based algorithms for narrowband noise
(p6.0) There is scarce literature focused on using the FxRLS-type algorithm for NANC. In [201], a filtered-x optimally weighted RLS (FxOWRLS) algorithm was derived for both feedforward and feedback ANC systems with bounded narrowband disturbances, which can reduce the computational burden by reducing the update ratio in the adaptation process.
## (s7) 3) FxRLS-based algorithms for impulsive noise
(p7.0) In [202], to suppress the effect of the impulsive noise, a logarithmic cost function has been employed with the consideration of communication error in the error signal. Following this work, several FxRLS variants have been developed for AINC [203,204]. In [203], a modified FxRLS algorithm was proposed by addition of state-space for AINC. The filtered-x recursive maximum correntropy (FxRMC) algorithm [204] presented an information theoretic learning (ITL) approach for AINC. Moreover, an adaptive kernel size scheme was introduced. Note that such maximum correntropy criterion (MCC) can also be utilized in NLANC systems, see Part II of this work.

(p7.1) Another FxRLS-based algorithm for AINC was proposed in [205], where Akhtar's scheme [177] was incorporated with the modified gain method. To deal with the long channel responses and colored inputs in ANC systems, the subband adaptive filter (SAF) was developed for fast convergence and low computational complexity [206].
## (s8) 2) Subband ANC algorithms for narrowband noise
(p8.0) For most ANC systems, it is necessary to estimate the secondary path offline or online, which undoubtedly increases the computational complexity. Therefore, some subband ANC algorithms consider avoiding the secondary path estimation to reduce complexity. However, when the secondary path phase is close to ±90 o , the convergence rate of the algorithm is slow. To overcome this limitation, a frequency-domain delayless subband algorithm was proposed, where 4 update directions, 180 o , 0 o , and ±90 o are adopted to single-tone and narrowband noise control [210]. The disadvantage of this method is that the filter update process must be performed in the frequency-domain, resulting in high computational complexity. To overcome this limitation, in [211], a simplified attempt was developed to cope with the implementation problem when the secondary path phase is close to ±90 o . Two reference signals are generated in each subband, and two update directions are utilized. Only one subband reference signal and one update direction are employed to approximate the phase response of the residual secondary path. Then, the coefficients of the full-band adaptive controller are directly adapted in time-domain.
## (s9) 3) Subband ANC algorithms for impulsive noise
(p9.0) The above mentioned SAF algorithm may fail to work in the presence of impulsive noise since the adaptation is based on the MMSE criterion. To fill this gap, a VSS normalized SAF (VSS-NSAF) was introduced for ANC system, whose step size is adapted to prevent the wrong update by impulsive noise [212]. Since impulsive noise is a great challenge for ANC systems, we summarize the above mentioned contributions of AINC In Table 4.  [190,191,192,193] [199] [202,203] [ 204,205] [212]
## (s10) Lattice ANC algorithms
(p10.0) The lattice filter is also an important architecture in ANC systems. Such structure can attenuate multiple sinusoidal interferences in ANC systems and its corresponding algorithm, i.e., the gradient adaptive lattice (GAL) algorithm, can provide a reliable performance as compared with the known algorithm [213,214]. In the past decade, two VSS strategies have been suggested for the GAL algorithm, resulting in two VSS filtered-x GAL (VSS-FxGAL) algorithms [214,215]. These algorithms exhibit good attenuation performance for hybrid narrowband and broadband noise. Very recently, a recursive least-squares lattice (RLSL) algorithm grouping the secondary path innovation (SPI) and lattice-order decision (LOD) was developed [216]. The SPI algorithm whitens the error signal into a virtual error signal just before the secondary path to generate virtual undesired signals corresponding to the output of the lattice filter. The LOD algorithm determines the order of the lattice filter, while considering the noise reduction performance. As a consequence, a faster convergence rate and lower computational complexity is achieved as compared to the FxRLS algorithm.  The key contributions of the filtered-e ANC algorithms before the last decade are listed in Table   5. Note that the basic filtered-e LMS (FeLMS) and filtered-x FeLMS (FxFeLMS) algorithms have been developed in 1996 and 1999, respectively.
## (s12) 2) FeLMS-based algorithms for narrowband noise
(p12.0) The performance of the FxLMS-based algorithms for NANC systems is subjected to the number of targeted frequencies and the estimated secondary path. Therefore, it is natural to consider using FeLMS-based algorithms for NANC. In [223], the FeLMS algorithm was intentionally introduced to deal with the noise in NANC systems. Moreover, the convergence behavior of the algorithm was analyzed. This work has proven that FeLMS-type algorithms are feasible in dealing with narrowband noise. The existing works of NANC are outlined in Table 6. For band-limited white noises and tonal signals white noise) signals) [21,167,168] 2.3. Filtered-u ANC family Several fundamental filtered-u ANC algorithms have been proposed before the past decade. We summarize these efforts in Table 7. In the following, the development of filtered-u ANC algorithms in the past decade is reviewed in detail.
## (s14) Filtered-u RLS-based algorithms 1) FuRLS-based algorithms for broadband noise
(p14.0) To improve the convergence rate of the FuLMS algorithm, it is reasonable to consider RLS-based IIR filters. The algorithms in [235,236] were considered using the filtered-u RLS (FuRLS)-type algorithm for active noise and vibration control systems. Moreover, two novel fast implementation schemes were proposed for the FuRLS algorithm, generating the fast FuRLS algorithm. Simulation results demonstrated that two fast FuRLS algorithms outperform the FuLMS algorithm and SHARF algorithm.
## (s17) Online secondary path estimation
(p17.0) In the previously described works and other similar references on the topic, the solutions typically rely on the assumption S(z) =Ŝ(z). This assumption is based on the fact that the estimateŜ(z) can be very similar to the true value S(z), depending on the estimation method used, the equipment, and the room conditions 4 . However, in many cases, the secondary path is time-varying. The 4 It should be highlighted that the ANC system with heuristic algorithm usually does not require the estimation of S(z), see Part II of this work.
## (s20) Active Loudspeaker
(p20.0) One estimated transfer function of physical locationŜ p (z) is defined according to the path between the control signal and the physical microphone position, while the other estimated transfer function ofŜ v (z) represents the virtual locations between the control signal and the virtual microphone position. The diagram of RMT can be seen in Fig. 13, where e(n) can be interpreted as the total error signal at the virtual location, e p (n) denotes the error signal from a physical microphone,ŷ p (n)

(p20.1) andŷ v (n) is the estimation of the secondary disturbance at the physical and virtual microphones, respectively, and G(z) denotes the transfer function between the physical and virtual locations. The error signal in this model can be defined by (14) whereŝ v (n) is the impulse response ofŜ v (z) and d v (n) denotes the primary disturbance at the virtual location. Due to the additional calculations from three transfer functions,Ŝ p (z),Ŝ v (z), and G(z), the FxLMS algorithm with virtual microphone (virtual FxLMS algorithm) has increased computational complexity as compared to the FxLMS algorithm. To reduce computational complexity, the algorithm in [277] provides a solution by resorting to the frequency-domain method, which also has better performance than the traditional virtual FxLMS algorithm.
## (s23) Analog control in ANC
(p23.0) In the feedback ANC systems, analog control (analog circuitry) based on a negative feedback loop is broadly used for headphones, due to the cost and battery-life issues [287]. It is known that utilizing both digital and analog control has the ability to cancel broadband and narrowband noises.

(p23.1) In particular, the analog control is fairly inexpensive and it has good broadband noise reduction owing to the short time delay of analog components employed in the controller [296]. However, the performance of the analog controller for NANC is limited because it is unable to track the environmental changes, which may hinder the application of analog control in some cases [296].

(p23.2) To address this limitation, a hybrid system was proposed in [296], which adds an analog feedback Adding an analog feedback loop to a digital ANC system, generating a hybrid feedback ANC headset [296] loop into a digital ANC system to reduce disturbances. We summarize the development of analog control for ANC in Table 14.
## (s25) Active structural acoustic control (ASAC)
(p25.0) In the past decade, the ASAC techniques have been extensively used in diverse fields (helicopters [322,323], vehicles [324], etc [325,326,327]). In [328], an ASAC approach was proposed for repetitive impact noises. The efficiency of the suggested optimal control configuration and the iterative learning control (ILC) algorithm was verified. In [329], an implementation of multi-channel global ANC systems was presented, which utilizes an active casing. Moreover, a distributed version of the switched-error FxLMS algorithm was developed as the control algorithm. The fuzzy control is one of the most appealing methods where it is impossible to sufficiently well model the inference system and the FxLMS algorithm might be failed. The early work of fuzzy control in ANC systems can be found in [330,331], which employ the fuzzy-logic system for broadband noise control. In [332], the cross correlation between reference and error microphones signals and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) estimate of the cross-correlation function were used as the input of a fuzzy-logic system to adjust the coefficients of the FIR filter.
## (s28) Psychoacoustic ANC systems
(p28.0) The human hearing sensation has selective sensitivity to different frequencies. Hence, it is reasonable to take the characteristics of human hearing into account. In other words, more considerations should be given to the frequency response of the controller. Moreover, minimizing the perceived annoyance of human hearing with residual noise, which needs to be resolved.

(p28.1) To tackle this problem, the psychoacoustic ANC (PANC) systems were established by weighting of the reference and the error signal [337,26,338]. These PANC systems have similar structure to the FxFeLMS algorithm in Fig. 10 but with different design of the error filter H(z). Besides, instead of sound pressure level (SPL) and averaged noise reduction (ANR), PANC is inclined to utilize loudness as the measurement of the performance. In [26], a hybrid PANC system was proposed, which can simultaneously control either uncorrelated disturbance or correlated primary noise. In [339], a novel approach integrating subband PANC and psychoacoustic masking was proposed, resulting in reduced computational cost and improved perceptual sound quality and high-frequency noise reduction level.
## (s33) Selective ANC systems
(p33.0) Instead of employing the conventional real-time computation of control filter coefficients, the selective ANC (SANC) systems select the control filters from a set of pre-tuned filters based on the temporal or spectral audio features of incoming sounds. As such, the SANC systems have the improved robustness of control filters and reduced computational complexity. In [350], the SANC systems were originally proposed for open window systems and then extended to other methods. In [351], the SANC systems was integrated into the virtual microphone technique, leading to better noise reduction performance than the conventional virtual microphone technique. More extensions of the SANC systems can be referred to [352,353,354,355] 4.7. Distributed ANC algorithms   Figure 17: Diagram of the distributed ANC system with a diffusion collaborative strategy.

(p33.1) In practice, noise source and noise cancellation points may be distanced and the nature of the noise field is complicated. Hence, it is natural to consider employing several reference microphones, error microphones and loudspeakers, resulting in multi-channel ANC system [356]. The cost of multi-channel ANC system is still expensive and demanding. The reasons are as follows. 1) To achieve both sufficient multiple coherence and time advance between the reference and error signals, a sufficient number of reference microphones are needed [357].

(p33.2) 2) The number of filtered reference signals is usually not equal to the number of reference signals [356]. To mitigate the computational complexity of the multi-channel ANC system, several methods were proposed, such as GPU-based methods [6,306]. The theoretical behavior of the multi-channel ANC system was analyzed in [194,139]. Recently, a decentralized control method by making use of frequency-domain processing was proposed for multi-channel ANC system [358].
