# Data-Driven Decision Making in COVID-19 Response: A Survey

CorpusID: 236521932 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92d044230c5ea2fdc87acac0f68cad1d22ae8e65)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s2) Data-Driven Decisions
(p2.0) With the continuous spread of the epidemic, many types of information and data related to the epidemic are continually updated on the Internet. There is a huge amount of information, including global epidemic data, COVID-19 related research statistics, medical equipment details, transportation information and so on.

(p2.1) The integration and classification of these forms of information are important for epidemic prevention and control. We have categorized some commonly-used datasets by information type, as shown in Table 1. By using this, researchers can select appropriate datasets for analysis according to their needs.

(p2.2) To make full use of the data, it is necessary to process the data. The big data processing stages include data collection, data pre-processing, data storage, data analysis, data visualization, data application, etc, which are shown in Fig. 1. Through data analysis, technicians can effectively process raw data and aggregate related information. Subsequently, valuable information can be derived and then used to interpret and predict the development of the epidemic. Based on more comprehensive information or stronger evidences, decision-makers can make more scientific decisions [62].

(p2.3) Policies are generally made dynamically. This is because policies need to be adjusted in time according to specific situations. In modern society, decisions are no longer made based on empirical judgements, but are generally made based on big data [64]. Big data statistics are used in order to permit policy makers to rapidly assess the epidemic risk. With respect to COVID-19, related decisions and relevant plans are also adjusted correspondingly based on big data analysis [73]. Big data technologies provide accurate information for the decision making and analysis of the headquarters for the epidemic prevention. With the help of big data technologies, epidemic prevention and control can be carried out in an orderly manner, so that the epidemic can be effectively controlled within a determined period of time.
## (s3) Tracing Close Contacts
(p3.0) Close contact tracing is a common intervention to control outbreaks of infectious diseases [39]. In the early stages of the epidemic, traditional door-to-door surveys and paper form filling were still adopted in most areas, which was organized and implemented step by step [53]. If the execution was not strong enough or the provided information was wrong, it would affect the judgement and prevention of the epidemic.
## (s5) Hospital Relevant Policies
(p5.0) COVID-19 has extremely challenged medical processes such as hospital admissions. Data-driven hospital decision making has become more and more important. To better mitigate the epidemic and meanwhile limit collateral economic damage, proper hospital policies should be undertaken. Duque et al. [32] presented a strategy to minimize the number of days of disruption. When hospital admissions exceed a certain threshold, short-term in-place placement orders can be triggered. Random optimization is employed to export the triggers to make sure that the hospital admission capacity will not be insufficient. Based on COVID-19 hospitalization data, this work provides a flexible framework, which allows optimization using a relatively small discrete grid. Similar epidemics can be simulated with this proposed model.

(p5.1) The medical examination process can also be improved by using data analysis. Cohort-level clinical data, patient-level hospital data, and census-level epidemiological data can be analysed to develop an integrated optimization model. In the city of Daegu, the South Korean government reorganized the health system along with hospital-level interventions. Equipment are concentrated to relieve the shortage of medical resources. This policy ultimately protected patients and health care staff. The Iranian government added 3,000 hospital beds to the Iran Mall Exhibition based on data analysis. Meanwhile, a 2000-bed army hospital has been opened to accommodate more patients.

(p5.2) While optimizing the medical configuration and treating confirmed cases, scientists from all over the world are working towards effective vaccines for COVID-19. The United States, Australia, Russia, UK, China, South Africa, Korea, and many other countries have made progress towards the COVID-19 vaccine. With the progress of vaccine development, many hospitals have provided vaccine injections.
## (s6) Influence of the Pandemic
(p6.0) The outbreak and rapid spread of COVID-19 has caused an enormous impact on every country's economy in a short period of time. The impact on key industries such as accommodation and catering, transportation, tourism, and foreign trade is significant. To prevent the spread of the epidemic, many cities have closed roads, airports, and high-speed trains. Major tourist attractions have been closed and major cultural events cancelled. There has been a sharp decrease in all kinds of dinner parties and a large number of restaurants have been closed, with the stock of prepared dishes being sold at low prices. Workers cannot work normally, and companies have no way to produce and deliver as planned, so the supply chain is interrupted, and many factories face the crisis of closure [9]. The specific impact of the epidemic on these five industries is shown in Fig. 2.

(p6.1) Therefore, taking measures as early as possible to control the epidemic is key to reducing the impact of the epidemic on multiple industries. At present, the epidemic situation has been effectively controlled in many countries.
## (s7) PSYCHOLOGICAL COUNSELLING
(p7.0) The outbreak of COVID-19 has made people face many changes in lifestyle and environment [45]. Many places have adopted mandatory isolation measures to prevent the further spread of the virus. Isolation increases the possibility of depression and even makes people "desperate" [42]. Moreover, the negative reports about COVID-19 illnesses are constantly updated every day. The number of dead cases is increasing, and the number of confirmed cases is increasing daily, resulting in incalculable loss. These series of problems increase people's mental stress and negative psychological states. The large-scale pandemic disease causes panic in people, worrying about the possibility of becoming sick, and meanwhile increasing the fear of death, helplessness, irrespective of being a patient [69]. These cases involve the pain of treatment, the risk of relapse of mental diseases, and several uncontrollable behaviours.

(p7.1) More than half of the people were seriously affected by the outbreak of the disease. According to reports, during the SARS outbreak, there were many mental health diseases, such as depression, anxiety, panic, and additionally people developed suicidal tendencies [15]. Among patients, 59% of those hospitalized suffer from the impact of depression and trauma. The importance of psychological protection for medical staff should also be emphasized. What is more, with the expansion of the epidemic, the economic downturn, unemployment, and financial difficulties also affect people's mental health, and its serious results are immeasurable. Therefore, during the prevalence of COVID-19, besides the need for active and effective treatment measures, mental and psychological health guidance is also indispensable.
## (s9) Enterprise Policies
(p9.0) Significantly, most psychological intervention guiding measures have been taken up by hospitals and psychological counselling agencies. The decreed isolation policies also prevent enterprises from resuming work. Whether it is a private enterprise or a state-owned enterprise, employees are also isolated to their homes like most people. Due to the isolation policies, face-to-face communication is not possible, so hospitals and consulting agencies have jointly built many online consultation platforms [59]. Zhang et al. [99] proposed a mental health intervention model, which uses an Internet technology platform to provide timely psychological counselling to patients and their families. Doctors need the courage to overcome disease meanwhile, they need to deal with certain extreme emotions of patients due to illness, who can be physically and mentally exhausted. Therefore, their psychological guidance is also a top priority. Chen et al. [25] detailed the psychological guide measures for medical staff, including the establishment of a psychological intervention medical team, the establishment of a psychological assistance hotline team and psychological skills training.
## (s12) FINANCIAL AID
(p12.0) The WHO and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have never been more important in supporting the global emergency response. Funding needs to be made available in tracking the spread of the virus, ensuring patients receive assistance and primary staff receive essential supplies and information [87]. All these decisions about financial support are based on the data of the affected communities and economies. The
## (s15) Analytics Framework of Work Resumption
(p15.0) Wang et al. [95] proposed a data-driven network modelling analysis of the work resumption. Epidemiological report data, and Baidu's population migration trends and distribution data are integrated to estimate the actual cumulative number of cases with the reproductive matrix method. The primary conclusions revealed that the risk of a second outbreak will be negligible under strong prevention and self-protection measures. This work aimed to assess the risk of recovery work from a micro perspective.

(p15.1) The work resumption of is related to the economic impact of COVID-19. Some studies aim to quantify the impact of COVID-19 to provide decision making supports for work resumption from an indirect perspective.
## (s18) Online Education
(p18.0) A large number of schools have used the Internet for remote learning to ensure the continuity of teaching during the epidemic. In related research in educational psychology, multitasking has a negative impact on students' academic performance. This theory has been effectively proven by investigating the self-efficacy of self-regulated learning (SESRL) [102]. But in online education, SESRL eases the contradictory relationship between multitasking and academic performance [4]. The moderated mediation effect of self-efficacy is only found in online classrooms. Based on the above findings, research in [4] shows that when students with high SESRL levels study online, the negative impact of multitasking on the score is reduced. As for the public acceptance of online education, Samad and Khalid [74] survey 125 elementary school science teachers using a 10-item questionnaire and analyse the questionnaire data obtained. Their research results
