# Tactical Audit Planning: A Survey and Classification of Mathematical Programming Models

CorpusID: 235585619 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3348ccafc6f4afd49d83122bd4bd0ef68ca37e5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c3348ccafc6f4afd49d83122bd4bd0ef68ca37e5)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s2) Context and Scope
(p2.0) Audits are a necessary expense for firms. They counteract the loss of control resulting from the size and design complexity of organizations, and fills creditors with confidence in them since processes they are ensured processes are being executed according to the established by senior management (Abdel-Khalik 1993). Audits can be qualified according to the aspect being examined. Accounting audits ensure the veracity of financial and economic statements, with its forensic counterparts investigating the possibility of fraud. Quality audits verify if the organization is operating in accordance with its established quality system processes. Compliance audits check if a firm carries out its activities according to governmental regulations (e.g., General Data Protection Regulation in Europe or the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States). Management audits assess if the managing teams can apply the strategies 
## (s4) Literature review
(p4.0) To solve this problem, the authors provide multiple decomposition strategies consisting of separating team formation from assigning tasks. Rai et al. (2013) approach the problem of maximizing risk coverage with auditor-task exclusivity and the requirement of completing all jobs above a certain level of risk. The authors use this model in a real case of auditing autoparts suppliers before the launch of a new vehicle.

(p4.1) There is significant work aiming to minimize the duration of a project composed by audit tasks under the resource capacity constraints. Vairaktarakis (2003) approaches the problem with imposed precedence between tasks, exclusivity, and task eligibility. The latter implies only a subset of the auditors has the necessary skills for some of the tasks. The authors develop strong lower-bounds for the problem and propose a variety of heuristics. The model Yildirim, Angün, and Öncan (2019) use includes exclusivity and precedence relations between tasks along with tailor-made constraints for assigning a specific auditor to a given task. Çanakoğlu and Muter (2020) tackle the problem with teamwork, where an auditor can only be assigned to a team, a team to a job, and the resources of that team must be enough to fulfil that job. The auditors propose several heuristics to solve this problem, among which a tabu search procedure performed best. The model is then applied to the real case of a Turkish financial institution.
## (s10) Research gaps
(p10.0) Systematizing the literature enables the identification of several trends in audit scheduling research. Models considering risk-based payoff functions apply them to practical cases (Hemaida 1997;Rai et al. 2013). Models minimizing makespan tend to be similar to job-shop scheduling models. Task precedence is not considered in these models. Moreover, recent models consider auditor eligibility for a task, given its skillset, and the possibility of assigning teams of auditors to tasks. Furthermore, some gaps are made evident. Models featuring teamwork never consider the duration constraints or the capacity of audit clients. Eligibility and payoff maximization have not been considered together in papers with examples of practical application. Travel has been neglected in recent papers, and there is no model intersecting travel with eligibility or teamwork. Time-windows were only considered for a mismatch and tardiness minimization problem with exclusivity and precedence constraints. Finally, there was a single paper making use of goal programming to conciliate the number of potential objectives of the plan.
