# A Review on Deep Learning in UAV Remote Sensing

CorpusID: 231709807 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6a78801c67313c67e20c76375d6a704964f50abb)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s3) Classification and Regression Approaches
(p3.0) When considering remote sensing data processed with DL-based algorithms, the following tasks can be highlighted: scene-wise classification, semantic and instance segmentation, and object detection. Scene-wise classification involves assigning a class label to each image (or patch), while the object detection task aims to draw bounding boxes around objects in an image (or patch) and labeling each of them according to the class label. Object detection can be considered a more challenging task since it requires to locate the objects in the image and then perform their classification. Another manner to detect objects in an image, instead of drawing bounding boxes, is to draw regions or structures around the boundary of objects, i.e., distinguish the class of the object at the pixel level. This task is known as semantic segmentation. However, in semantic segmentation, it is not possible to distinguish multiple objects of the same category, as each pixel receives one class label [195]. To overcome this drawback, a task that combines semantic segmentation and object detection named instance segmentation was proposed to detect multiple objects in pixel-level masks and labeling each Figure 2: A DNN architecture. This is a simple example of how a DNN may be built. Here the initial layer (X input ) is composed of the collected data samples. Later this data information can be extracted by hidden layers in a back-propagation manner, which is used by subsequent hidden layers to learn these features' characteristics. In the end, another layer is used with an activation function related to the given problem (classification or regression, as an example), by returning a prediction outcome (Y label ). where a dropout layer is added between each conv layer, and a max-pooling layer is adopted each time the convolution window-size is decreased. By the end of it, a deconvolutional layer is used with the same size as the last convolutional, and then it uses information from the previous step to reconstruct the image with its original size. The final layer is of a softmax, where it returns the models' predictions.
## (s9) Urban Mapping
(p9.0) For urban environments, many DL-based proposals with UAV data have been presented in the literature in the last years. The high-spatial-resolution easily provided by UAV embedded sensors are one of the main reasons behind its usage in these areas. Object detection and instance segmentation methods in those images are necessary to individualize, recognize, and map highly-detailed targets. Thus, many applications rely on CNNs and, in small cases, RNNs (CNN-LSTM) to deal with them. Some of the most common examples encountered in this category during our survey are the identification of pedestrians, car and traffic monitoring, segmentation of individual tree-species in urban forests, detection of cracks in concrete surfaces and pavements, building extraction, etc. Most of these applications were conducted with RGB type of sensors, and, in a few cases, spectral ones.

(p9.1) The usage of RGB sensors is, as aforementioned, a preferred option for small-budget experiments, but also is related to another important preference of CNNs, and that is that features like pixel-size, form, and texture of an object are essential to its recognition. In this regard, novel experiments could compare the performance of DL-based methods with RGB imagery with other types of sensors. As low-budget systems are easy to implement in larger quantities, many urban monitoring activities could benefit from such investigations. In urban areas, the importance of UAV real-time monitoring is relevant, and that is one of the current objectives when implementing such applications.

(p9.2) The most common practices on UAV-based imagery in urban environments with DL-based methods involve the detection of vehicles and traffic. Car identification is an important task to help urban monitoring and may be useful for real-time analysis of traffic flow in those areas. It is not an easy task, since vehicles can be occluded by different objects like buildings and trees, for example. A recent approach using RGB video footage obtained with UAV, as presented in [204], used an object detection CNN for this task. They also dealt with differences in traffic monitoring to motorcycles, where a frame-by-frame analysis enabled the neural network to determine if the object in the image was a person (pedestrian) or a person riding a motorcycle since differences in its pattern and frame-movement indicated it. Regarding pedestrian traffic, an approach with thermal cameras presented by [43] demonstrated that CNNs are appropriate to detect persons with different camera rotations, angles, sizes, translation, and scale, corroborating the robustness of its learning and generalization capabilities.

(p9.3) Another important survey in those areas is the detection and localization of single-tree species, as well as the segmentation of their canopies. Identifying individual species of vegetation in urban locations is an important requisite for urban-environmental planning since it assists in inventorying species and providing information for decision-making models. A recent study [49] applied object detection methods to detect and locate tree-species threatened by extinction. Following their intentions, a research [183] evaluated semantic segmentation neural networks to map endangered tree-species in urban environments. While one approach aimed to recognize the object to compose an inventory, the other was able to identify it and return important metrics, like its canopy-area for example. Indeed, some proposals that were implemented in a forest type of study could also be adopted in urban areas, and this leaves an open field for future research that intends to evaluate DL-based models in this environment. Urban areas pose different challenges for tree monitoring, so these applications need to consider their characteristics.

(p9.4) DL-based methods have also been used to recognize and extract infrastructure information. An interesting approach demonstrated by [24], based on semantic segmentation methods, was able to extract buildings in heavily urbanized areas, with unique architectural styles and complex structures. Interestingly enough, a combination of RGB with a DSM improved building identification, indicating that the segmentation model was able to incorporate appropriate information related to the objects' height. This type of combinative approach, between spatialspectral data and height, may be useful in other identification and recognition approaches. Also regarding infrastructure, another possible application in urban areas is the identification and location of utility poles [67]. This application, although being of rather a specific example, is important to maintain and monitor the conditions of poles regularly. These types of monitoring in urban environments is something that benefits from DL-based models approaches, as it tends to substitute multiple human inspection tasks. Another application involves detecting cracks in concrete pavements and surfaces [20]. Because some regions of civil structures are hard to gain access to UAV-based data with object detection networks may be useful to this task, returning a viable real-life application.
## (s12) Perspectives in Deep Learning with UAV Data
(p12.0) There is no denying that DL-based methods are a powerful and important tool to deal with the numerous amounts of data daily produced by remote sensing systems. What follows in this section is a short commentary on the near perspectives of one of the most emerging fields in the DL and remote sensing communities that could be implemented with UAV-based imagery. These topics, although individually presented here, have the potential to be combined, as already performed in some studies, contributing to the development of novel approaches.

(p12.1) In general, DL architectures require low resolution input images (e.g., 512 × 512 pixels). High resolution images are generally scaled to the size required for processing. However, UAVs have the advantage of capturing images in higher resolution than most other types of sensing platforms aside from proximal sensing, and the direct application of traditional architectures may not take advantage of this feature. As such, processing images with DL while maintaining high resolution in deeper layers is a challenge to be explored. In real-time applications, such as autonomous navigation, this processing must be fast, which opens up a range of research related to reducing the complexity of architectures while preserving accuracy. Regarding DL, recently, some CNN architectures that try to maintain high resolution in deeper layers, such as HRNet, have been proposed [101]. These novel architectures can really take advantage of the high resolution from UAV images compared to commonly available orbital data.

(p12.2) To summarize, the topics addressed in this section compose some of the hot topics in the computer vision community, and the combination of them with remote sensing data can contribute to the development of novel approaches in the context of UAV mapping. In this regard, it is important to emphasize that not only these topics are currently being investigated by computer vision research, but that they also are being fastly implemented in multiple approaches aside from remote sensing. As other domains are investigated, novel ways of improving and adapting these networks can be achieved. Future studies in remote sensing communities, specifically on UAV-based systems, may benefit from these improvements and incorporate them into their applications.
## (s14) Dimensionality Reduction
(p14.0) Due to recent advances in capture devices, hyperspectral images can be acquired even in UAVs. These images consist of tens to hundreds of spectral bands that can assist in the classification of objects in a given application. However, two main issues arise from the high dimensionality: i) the bands can be highly correlated, and ii) the excessive increase in the computational cost of DL models. High-dimensionality could invoke a problem known as the Hughes phenomenon, which is also known as the curse of dimensionality, i.e., when the accuracy of a classification is reduced due to the introduction of noise and other implications encountered in hyperspectral or high-dimensional data [77]. Regardless, hyperspectral data may pose an hindrance for the DL-based approaches accuracies, thus being an important issue to be considered in remote sensing practices. The classic approach to address high dimensionality is by applying a Principal Component Analysis (PCA) [120]. Despite several proposals, PCA is generally not applied in conjunction with DL, but as a pre-processing step. Although this method may be one of the most known approaches to reduce dimensionality when dealing with hyperspectral data, different intakes were already presented in the literature. A novel DL approach, implemented with UAV-based imagery, was demonstrated by Miyoshi et al. [134]. There, the authors proposed a one-step approach, conducted within the networks' architecture, to consider a combination of bands of a hyperspectral sensor that were highly related to the labeled example provided in the input layer at the initial stage of the network. Another investigation [189] combines a band selection approach, spatial filtering, and CNN to simultaneously extract the spectral and spatial features. Still, the future perspective to solve this issue appears to be a combination of spectral band selection and DL methods in an end-to-end approach. Thus, both selection and DL methods can exchange information and improve results. This can also contribute to understanding how DL operates with these images, which was slightly accomplished at Miyoshi et al. [134].
## (s17) Few-Shot Learning
(p17.0) Although recent materials demonstrated the feasibility of DLbased methods for multiple tasks, they still are considered limited in terms of high generalization. This occurs when dealing with the same objects in different geographical areas or when new object classes are considered. Traditional solutions require retraining the model with a robust labeled dataset for the new area or object. Few-shot learning aims to cope with situations in which few labeled datasets are available. A recent study [119], in the context of scene classification, pointed out that few-shot methods in remote sensing are based on transfer learning and meta-learning. Meta-learning can be more flexible than transfer learning, and when applied in the training set to extract metaknowledge, contributes significantly to few-shot learning in the test set. An interesting strategy to cope with large intraclass variation and interclass similarity is the implementation of the attention mechanism in the feature learning step, as previously described. The datasets used in the [119] study were not UAVbased; however, the strategy can be explored in UAV imagery.

(p17.1) In the context of UAV remote sensing, there are few studies on few-shot learning. Recently, an investigation [102] aimed for the detection of maize plants using the object detection method CenterNet. The authors adopted a transfer learning strategy using pre-trained models from other geographical areas and dates. Fewer images (in total, 150 images), when compared to the previous training (with 600 images), from the new area were used for fine-tuning the model. Based on the literature survey, there is a research-gap to be further explored in the context of object detection using few-shot learning in UAV remote sensing.
## (s18) Semi-Supervised Learning and Unsupervised Learning
(p18.0) With the increasing availability of remote sensing images, the labeling task for supervised training of DL models is expensive and time-consuming. Thus, the performance of DL models is impacted due to the lack of large amount of labeled training images. Efforts have been made to consider unlabeled images in training through unsupervised (unlabeled images only) and semi-supervised (labeled and unlabeled images) learning. In remote sensing, most semi-supervised or unsupervised approaches are based on transfer learning, which usually requires a supervised pre-trained model [127]. In this regard, a recent study [99] proposed a promising approach for unlabeled remote sensing images that define spatial augmentation criteria for relating close sub-images. Regardless, this is still an underdeveloped practice with UAV-based data and should be investigated in novel approaches.
## (s20) Open-Set
(p20.0) The main idea of an open-set is to deal with unknown or unseen classes during the inference in the testing set [17]. As the authors mention, recognition in real-world scenarios is "open-set", different from neural networks' nature, which is in a "close-set". Consequently, the testing set is classified considering only the classes used during the training. Therefore, unknown or unseen classes are not rejected during the test. There are few studies regarding open-set in the context of remote sensing. Regarding semantic segmentation of aerial imagery, a study by [173] presented an approach considering the open-set context. There, an adaptation of a close-set semantic segmentation method, adding a probability threshold after the softmax, was conducted. Later, a post-processing step based on morphological filters was applied to the pixels classified as unknown to verify if they are inside pixels or from borders. Another interesting approach is to combine open-set and domain adaptation methods, as proposed by [2] in the remote sensing context.
## (s21) Photogrammetric Processing
(p21.0) Although not as developed as other practices, DL-based methods can be adopted for processing and optimizing the UAV photogrammetric processing task. This process aims to generate a dense point cloud and an orthomosaic, and it is based on Structure-from-Motion (SfM) and Multi-View Stereo (MVS) techniques. In SfM, the interior and exterior orientation parameters are estimated, and a sparse point cloud is generated. A matching technique between the images is applied in SfM. A recent survey on image matching [129] concluded that this thematic is still an open problem and pointed out the potential of DL is this task. The authors mentioned that DL techniques are mainly applied to feature detection and description, and further investigations on feature matching can be explored. Finally, they pointed out that a promising direction is the customization of modern feature matching techniques to attend SfM.
