# AMMU : A Survey of Transformer-based Biomedical Pretrained Language Models

CorpusID: 233481730 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420c897bc67e6f438db522d919d925df1a10aa8c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/420c897bc67e6f438db522d919d925df1a10aa8c)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s10) Self-Supervised Learning
(p10.0) Deep learning algorithms dominated rule-based and machine learning algorithms in the last decade. This is because deep learning models can learn features automatically which eliminates the requirement of expensive feature engineering and process the inputs in an end-to-end manner i.e., take raw inputs and give the decisions. The success of the deep learning algorithms comes from the knowledge gained during training from human-labeled instances. However, supervised learning has a lot of limitations a) with less data, the model may get overfitted and prone to bias b) some of the domains like biomedical are supervision starved i.e., difficult to get labeled data. In general, we expect models to be close to human intelligence i.e., more general and make decisions with just a few samples. This desire of developing models with more generalization ability and learning from fewer samples has made the researchers focus on other learning paradigms like Self-Supervised Learning [34].
## (s17) Main Pretraining Tasks
(p17.0) The main pretraining tasks allow the model to learn language representations. Some of the commonly used main pretraining tasks are masked language modelling (MLM) [2], replaced token detection (RTD) [50], sentence boundary objective (SBO) [49], next sentence prediction (NSP) [2] and sentence order prediction (SOP) [15].

(p17.1) Masked Language Modeling (MLM). It is an improved version of Language Modeling which utilizes both left and right contexts to predict the missing tokens [2]. The main drawback in Unidirectional LM (Forward LM or Backward LM) is the inability to utilize both left and right contexts at the same time to predict the tokens. However, the meaning of a word depends on both the left and right contexts. Devlin et al. [2] utilized MLM as a pretraining task for learning the parameters of the BERT model. Formally, for a given sequence x with tokens  NSP sentence-level Allows the model to learn sentence-level reasoning skills which are useful in tasks like NLI. Less challenging as it involves topic prediction which is a relatively easy task.
## (s25) Auxiliary Embeddings
(p25.0) Main embeddings represent the given input sequence in low dimensional space. The purpose of auxiliary embeddings is to provide additional information to the model so that the model can learn better. For each input token, a representation vector is obtained by summing the main and two or more auxiliary embeddings. The various auxiliary embeddings are Position Embeddings -Position embeddings enhance the final input representation of a token by providing its position information in the input sequence. As there is no convolution or recurrence layers which can learn the order of input tokens automatically, we need to explicitly provide the location of each token in the input sequence through position embeddings. Position embeddings can be pre-determined [27], [32] or learned during model pretraining [2].

(p25.1) Segment Embeddings -Segment embeddings help to Age Embeddings -In models like BEHRT [27] and BERT-EHR [32], age embeddings are used in addition to other embeddings. Age embeddings provide the age of the patient and help the model to leverage temporal information. Age embedding is the same for all the codes in a single patient visit.

(p25.2) Gender Embeddings -In models like BEHRT [27] and BERT-EHR [32], gender embeddings are used in addition to other embeddings. Gender embeddings provide the gender information of the patient to the model. Gender embedding is the same for all the codes in all the patient visits.

(p25.3) Semantic Group Embeddings -Semantic group embeddings are used in UmlsBERT [46] to explicitly inform the model to learn similar representations for words from the same semantic group i.e., semantic group embedding is same for all the words which fall into the same semantic group. Besides, it also helps to provide better representations for rare words. Figure 14 shows transformer-based BPLMs taxonomy.
## (s29) Radiology Reports
(p29.0) Following the success of EHR-based T-BPLMs, recently researchers focused on developing PLMs specifically for radiology reports. RadCore [90] dataset consists of around 2 million radiology reports. These reports were gathered from three major healthcare organizations: Mayo Clinic, MD Anderson Cancer Center, and Medical College of Wisconsin in 2007. Meng et al. [89] further pre-trained general BERT on radiology reports with impression section headings from RadCore dataset    Table 3 contains a summary of radiology reports-based T-BPLMs.
## (s36) Green Models
(p36.0) CPT allows the general T-PLMs to adapt to in-domain by further pretraining on large volumes of the in-domain corpus. As these models contain vocabulary, which is learned over general text, they cannot represent indomain words in a meaningful way as many of the indomain words are split into a number of subwords. This kind of representation increases the overall length of the input as well as hinders the model learning. DSPT or SPT allows the model to have an in-domain vocabulary that is learned over in-domain text. However, both these approaches involve learning the model parameters from scratch which is highly expensive. These approaches being expensive, are far away from the small research labs, and with long runtimes, they are environmentally unfriendly also [122], [123].

(p36.1) Recently there is raising interest in the biomedical research community to adapt general T-PLMs models to in-domain in a low cost way and the models contain in-domain vocabulary also [122], [123]. These models are referred to as Green Models as they are developed in a low cost environment-friendly approach. GreenBioBERT [122] -extends general BERT to the biomedical domain by refining the embedding layer with domain-specific word vectors. The authors generated indomain vocabulary using Word2Vec and then aligned them with general WordPiece vectors. With the addition of domain-specific word vectors, the model acquires domain-specific knowledge. The authors showed that GreenBioBERT achieves competitive performance compared to BioBERT in entity extraction. This approach is completely inexpensive as it requires only CPU. exBERT [123] -extends general BERT to the biomedical domain by refining the model with two additions a) in-domain WordPiece vocabulary in addition to existing general domain WordPiece vocabulary b) extension module. The in-domain WordPiece vectors and extension module parameters are learned during pretraining on biomedical text. During pretraining, as the parameters of general BERT are kept fixed, this approach is quite inexpensive. Table 9 contains summary of Green T-BPLMs.
## (s41) Entity Extraction
(p41.0) Entity Extraction is the first step in unlocking valuable information in unstructured text data. Entity Extraction is useful in many tasks like entity linking, relation extraction, knowledge graph construction, etc. Extracting clinical entities like drug and adverse drug reactions is useful in pharmacovigilance and biomedical entities like proteins, chemicals and drugs is useful to discover knowledge in scientific literature. Some of the popular entity extraction datasets are I2B2 2010 [141], VAERS [142], CADEC [143], N2C2 2018 [144] , BC4CHEMD [145], B5CDR-Chem [146], JNLPBA [147] and NCBI-Disease [148].
## (s43) Relation Extraction
(p43.0) Relation extraction is a crucial task in information extraction which identifies the semantic relations between entities in text. Entity extraction followed by relation extraction helps to convert unstructured text into structured data. Extracting relations between entities is useful in many tasks like knowledge graph construction, text summarization, and question answering. Some of relation extraction datasets are I2B2 2012 [162], AIMED [163], ChemProt [164], DDI [165], I2B2 2010 [141] and EU-ADR [166]. Wei et al. [167] achieved the best results on two datasets using MIMIC-BERT [40] +Softmax. Thillaisundaram and Togia [168] applied SciBERT +Softmax to extract relations from biomedical abstracts as part of AGAC track of BioNLP-OST 2019 shared tasks [169]. Liu et al. [170] proposed SciBERT+Softmax for relation extraction in biomedical text. They showed SciBERT+Softmax outperforms BERT+Softmax on three biomedical relation extraction datasets. The main drawback in the above existing works is that they utilize only the partial knowledge from the last layer in the form of '[CLS]' vector. Su et al. [171] added attention on the top of BioBERT to fully utilize the information in the last layer and achieved the best results on three biomedical extraction datasets. The authors generated the final representation by concatenating '[CLS]' vector and weighted sum vector of final hidden state vectors. When compared to applying LSTM on the final hidden state vectors, the attention layer gives better results.
## (s46) Text Summarization
(p46.0) In general, sources of biomedical information like clinical notes, scientific papers, radiology reports are length in nature. Researchers and domain experts need to go through a number of biomedical documents. As biomedical documents are length in nature, there is a need for automatic biomedical text summarization which reduces the effort and time for researchers and domain experts [185], [186]. Text summarization falls into two broad categories namely extractive summarization which identifies the most relevant sentences in the document while abstractive summarization generates new text which represents the summary of the document [187]. There are no standard datasets for biomedical text summarization. Researchers usually treat scientific papers as documents and their abstracts as summaries [188], [189].

(p46.1) Moradi et al. [188] proposed a novel approach to summarize biomedical scientific articles. They embedded sentences, generated clusters, and then extracted the most informative sentences from each of the clusters. They showed that BERT-large outperformed other models including the in-domain BERT models like BioBERT.

(p46.2) In the case of small models, BioBERT outperformed others. Moradi et al. [189] proposed a novel approach based on word embeddings and graph ranking to summarize the biomedical text. They generated a graph with sentences as nodes and edges as relations whose strength is measured by cosine similarity between sentence vectors generated by averaging BioBERT and Glove embeddings and finally, graph ranking algorithms identify the important sentences. Du et al. [190] introduced a novel approach called BioBERTSum to summarize the biomedical text. BioBERTSum uses BioBERT to encode sentences, transformer decoder + sigmoid to calculate the scores for each sentence. The sentences with the highest score are considered as the summary. Chen et al. [75] proposed a novel clinical text summarization based on AlphaBERT.
## (s49) Low Cost Domain Adaptation
(p49.0) The two popular approaches for developing T-BPLMs are MDPT and DSPT. These approaches involve pretraining on large volumes of in-domain text using highend GPUs or TPUs for days. These two approaches are quite successful in developing BPLMs. However, these approaches are quite expensive requiring high computing resources with long pretraining durations [122]. For example, BioBERT -it took around ten days to adapt general BERT to the biomedical domain using eight GPUs [16]. Moreover, DSPT is more expensive compared to continual pretraining as it involves learning model weights from scratch [122], [123]. So, there is a need for lost cost domain adaptation methods to adapt general Approach Description Pros Cons
## (s62) Domain Adaptation
(p62.0) In the beginning, the standard approach to develop BPLMs is to start with general PLMs and then further pretrain them on large volumes of biomedical text [16]. The main drawback of this approach is the lack of indomain vocabulary. Without domain-specific vocabulary, many of the in-domain are split into a number of subwords which hinders model learning during pretraining or fine-tuning. Moreover, continual pretraining is quite expensive as it involves pretraining on large volumes of unlabeled text. To overcome these drawbacks, there are low-cost domain adaptation approaches that extend the general domain vocabulary with in-domain vocabulary [122], [123]. The extra in-domain vocabulary is generated using Word2vec and then aligned [122] or generated directly using WordPiece [123] over biomedical text. The main drawback in these low-cost domain adaptation approaches is an increase in the size of the model with the addition of in-domain vocabulary. Further research on this topic can result in more novel methods for lowcost domain adaptation.
## (s63) Novel Pretraining Tasks
(p63.0) Most of the biomedical language models (except ELECTRA-based models) are pre-trained using MLM. In MLM, only 15% of tokens are randomly masked and the model learns by predicting that 15% of masked tokens only. Here the main drawbacks are a) as tokens are randomly chosen for masking, the model may not learn much by predicting random tokens b) as only 15% of tokens are predicted, the training signal per example is less. So, the model has to see more examples to learn enough language information which results in the requirement of large pretraining corpora and more computational resources. There is a need for novel pretraining tasks like Replaced Token Detection (RTD) which can provide more training signal per example. Moreover, when the model is pretrained using multiple pretraining tasks, the model receives more training signals per example and hence can learn enough language information using less pretraining corpora and computational resources [206].
## (s66) Efficient Models
(p66.0) Pretraining provides BPLMs with necessary background knowledge which can be transferred to downstream tasks. However, pretraining is computationally very expensive and also requires large volumes of pretraining data. So, there is need of novel model architecture which reduces the pretraining time as well as the amount of pretraining corpus. In general NLP, recently efficient models like ConvBERT [215] and DeBERTa [216] are proposed which reduces the pretraining time and amount of pretraining corpus required respectively. DeBERTa with two novel improvements (Disentangled attention mechanism and enhanced masked decoder) achieves better compared to RoBERTa. DeBERTa is pretrained on just 78GB of data while RoBERTa is pretrained on 160GB of data. ConvBERT with mixed attention block outperforms ELECTRA while using just 1/4 th of its pretraining cost. Biomedical NLP research community must focus on developing pretrained models based on these novel model architectures.
## (s67) LIMITATIONS
(p67.0) We have comprehensively covered the research works related to T-BPLMs. As our focus is on T-BPLMs, we have not included any papers related to context insensitive biomedical embeddings. For detailed information regarding context insensitive biomedical embeddings, please refer the survey paper written by Kalyan and Sangeetha [22]. As it is a survey focused on T-BPLMs, we have covered the foundation concepts like transformers and self-supervised learning in a very brief way only.
