# Mobile Augmented Reality Technologies for Autism Spectrum Disorder Interventions: A Systematic Literature Review Mobile Augmented Reality Technologies for Autism Spectrum Disorder Interventions: A Systematic

CorpusID: 236555375 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b029ac0956d0c0c53c39f244d6541b9029ce0abf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b029ac0956d0c0c53c39f244d6541b9029ce0abf)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s31) RQ8: Which Settings Are Used in the Primary Studies?
(p31.0) From the primary studies, there are three types of environment for primary research, including school environment, community environment and laboratory environment. The majority of research was conducted in a school environment (50%, n = 18), followed by the lab (22.2%). In the study conducted in [62,68], the setting used was community environment, and Nubia et al. [74] conducted their research in a clinic, while seven studies did not mention the setting environment.
## (s32) RQ10: How Generalized the Intervention Result Is?
(p32.0) From the primary studies, only one study by Lee et al. [58] conducted generalization probes at various instances (baseline, intervention and maintenance) of their research, but they did not present the generalization results.

(p32.1) From the primary studies, only one study by Lee et al. [58] conducted generalization probes at various instances (baseline, intervention and maintenance) of their research, but they did not present the generalization results.
## (s33) Discussion
(p33.0) Authors should discuss the results and how they can be interpreted from the perspective of previous studies and of the working hypotheses. The findings and their implications should be discussed in the broadest context possible. Future research directions may also be highlighted.

(p33.1) The diversity of the publication sources could be explained due to the high adaptability of the emerging mobile augmented reality technology, which allows them to be applied in different fields. The research team includes Keshav, Sahin, Vahabzadeh and Liu, and it is more active than the others, which have published a quarter of the primary studies (n = 9) on using the Empowered Brain on students with ASD. As for the researchers, McMahon and Cihak are also slightly more active than others, followed by Lee (n = 3) and Escobedo (n = 2). Initially, researchers mainly published their results through conferences, while after the year 2013, journals are preferred by researchers as being the most "prestigious" and impactful source to publish their studies. Increasingly advanced mobile devices provide fertile soil for applying mobile AR solutions to solve real-life problems of the ASD population. In view of the results, research related to the use of mobile AR technology for developing interventions in autism is expected to undergo an important increase in the coming years.

(p33.2) As far as the population is concerned, MAR studies were widely conducted with children rather than adolescents. This agrees with Marto et al. [41], who conducted the research on applying AR for autist patients with 16 studies. Their parents tend to provide intensive treatment for them at younger ages, which may be related to the golden period of the intervention; however, it has no evidence. Participants also have large deviations between male and female, almost for 4:1, that may be caused by the different prevalence rates of male and female with autism and the difficulty of recruiting participants. It is a common problem of the small sample size, which possibly due to the difficulty of recruiting participants. Further studies should address teen years for covering their needs, recruit more participants of different ages and reduce participants' gender bias. Furthermore, the limited participation of parents in the examined studies could also be related to privacy and security issues.

(p33.3) As for the selection of devices in intervention, the cost of technology is one of the essential factors to consider [86]. Handheld devices, such as smartphones (11 studies) and tablets, have become an obvious choice for use because they are getting cheaper and cheaper and widely available. The use of smart glasses (9 studies covering the Empowered Brain system) has also increased these years due to their size, portability and flexibility.

(p33.4) Regarding the target skill, most parts of these studies (n = 11) presented social communication as the variable to improve with the AR technology, which may be because social disorders are one of the most significant characteristics that affect the lives of people with autism. The last target skills are related to defect repair and skills learning as well, which is different from the educational assistance of typically developed students. In the future, we can design products that meet their need to improve the user's satisfaction.

(p33.5) With regard to the research design, these studies are devoted to examining whether the intervention method or project causes some outcomes or results. Research design can combine research projects (participants, measurements, interventions, etc.) and can be used to organize research to show how the research projects solve the research problem together. Among the primary studies, two research design methods have been used, including the quasi-experimental design and non-experimental design, and the quasi-experimental design divided into single case design and quasi-experimental design with a control group. The single-case design, also known as single-subject design, refers to a research design that can only use one subject in the research process. Although there is only one subject, it can also clearly determine whether there is a causal relationship between variables. However, all the studies did not use the randomized experiment design. This is because individual differences are normally large along the autism disorder spectrum and have different performances in each; therefore, treatment usually focuses only on a single individual's development rather than a group. Multiple baselines across subject design are regarded as a standard and evidence-based method in many computer-based treatments used in special education. It is a fundamental experimental method for research in the field, and, in actual practice, it does not require control groups or many participants. Based on this, maybe it is better to design a multiple baseline across subject design than a posttest or pretest-posttest single-case design. In the study conducted by Lorenzo et al. [68], the author used different evaluators before and after the test, and the sample size is too small. The number of participants and the factors that may affect reliability during the research process should be considered. In addition, studies without research design are also a major issue for the research effectiveness in this area.

(p33.6) Measurement methods are also the main concerns in research projects. In the methods used in these studies, both survey research and qualitative research require human participation, and it will increase the error rate and reduce the effectiveness and reliability of the measurement if observers are not adequately trained. Comprehensive training of observers before the intervention, calculating the data multiple times, or using a computer-assisted data collection method can reduce the inadvertent introduction of personnel errors. Furthermore, eye tracking is a technique used to measure a person's eye movements when interacting with a stimulus [87]. Greene et al. [88] examined the utility of eye-tracking as an outcome measure and stated that it has the potential to function as a valid treatment outcome measure for use with individuals with ASD of varying ages and levels of impairment. Eraslan et al. [89] assessed the ability to search for web information in individuals with high-functioning autism. Rezae et al. [90] assessed visual preferences for mobile device interfaces in individuals with autism. Yaneva et al. [91] applied eye-movement tracking to the diagnosis of high-functioning autism in adults using web stimuli. However, there is still a gap that directly uses eye-tracking technology to measure the AR intervention outcomes. Based on the current findings, future studies could investigate eye-tracking technology as a measure in pre-and post-intervention to track responses to intervention in individuals with ASD.
## (s80) RQ8: Which Settings Are Used in the Primary Studies?
(p80.0) From the primary studies, there are three types of environment for primary research, including school environment, community environment and laboratory environment. The majority of research was conducted in a school environment (50%, n = 18), followed by the lab (22.2%). In the study conducted in [62,68], the setting used was community environment, and Nubia et al. [74] conducted their research in a clinic, while seven studies did not mention the setting environment.
## (s81) RQ10: How Generalized the Intervention Result Is?
(p81.0) From the primary studies, only one study by Lee et al. [58] conducted generalization probes at various instances (baseline, intervention and maintenance) of their research, but they did not present the generalization results.

(p81.1) From the primary studies, only one study by Lee et al. [58] conducted generalization probes at various instances (baseline, intervention and maintenance) of their research, but they did not present the generalization results.
## (s82) Discussion
(p82.0) Authors should discuss the results and how they can be interpreted from the perspective of previous studies and of the working hypotheses. The findings and their implications should be discussed in the broadest context possible. Future research directions may also be highlighted.

(p82.1) The diversity of the publication sources could be explained due to the high adaptability of the emerging mobile augmented reality technology, which allows them to be applied in different fields. The research team includes Keshav, Sahin, Vahabzadeh and Liu, and it is more active than the others, which have published a quarter of the primary studies (n = 9) on using the Empowered Brain on students with ASD. As for the researchers, McMahon and Cihak are also slightly more active than others, followed by Lee (n = 3) and Escobedo (n = 2). Initially, researchers mainly published their results through conferences, while after the year 2013, journals are preferred by researchers as being the most "prestigious" and impactful source to publish their studies. Increasingly advanced mobile devices provide fertile soil for applying mobile AR solutions to solve real-life problems of the ASD population. In view of the results, research related to the use of mobile AR technology for developing interventions in autism is expected to undergo an important increase in the coming years.

(p82.2) As far as the population is concerned, MAR studies were widely conducted with children rather than adolescents. This agrees with Marto et al. [41], who conducted the research on applying AR for autist patients with 16 studies. Their parents tend to provide intensive treatment for them at younger ages, which may be related to the golden period of the intervention; however, it has no evidence. Participants also have large deviations between male and female, almost for 4:1, that may be caused by the different prevalence rates of male and female with autism and the difficulty of recruiting participants. It is a common problem of the small sample size, which possibly due to the difficulty of recruiting participants. Further studies should address teen years for covering their needs, recruit more participants of different ages and reduce participants' gender bias. Furthermore, the limited participation of parents in the examined studies could also be related to privacy and security issues.

(p82.3) As for the selection of devices in intervention, the cost of technology is one of the essential factors to consider [86]. Handheld devices, such as smartphones (11 studies) and tablets, have become an obvious choice for use because they are getting cheaper and cheaper and widely available. The use of smart glasses (9 studies covering the Empowered Brain system) has also increased these years due to their size, portability and flexibility.

(p82.4) Regarding the target skill, most parts of these studies (n = 11) presented social communication as the variable to improve with the AR technology, which may be because social disorders are one of the most significant characteristics that affect the lives of people with autism. The last target skills are related to defect repair and skills learning as well, which is different from the educational assistance of typically developed students. In the future, we can design products that meet their need to improve the user's satisfaction.

(p82.5) With regard to the research design, these studies are devoted to examining whether the intervention method or project causes some outcomes or results. Research design can combine research projects (participants, measurements, interventions, etc.) and can be used to organize research to show how the research projects solve the research problem together. Among the primary studies, two research design methods have been used, including the quasi-experimental design and non-experimental design, and the quasi-experimental design divided into single case design and quasi-experimental design with a control group. The single-case design, also known as single-subject design, refers to a research design that can only use one subject in the research process. Although there is only one subject, it can also clearly determine whether there is a causal relationship between variables. However, all the studies did not use the randomized experiment design. This is because individual differences are normally large along the autism disorder spectrum and have different performances in each; therefore, treatment usually focuses only on a single individual's development rather than a group. Multiple baselines across subject design are regarded as a standard and evidence-based method in many computer-based treatments used in special education. It is a fundamental experimental method for research in the field, and, in actual practice, it does not require control groups or many participants. Based on this, maybe it is better to design a multiple baseline across subject design than a posttest or pretest-posttest single-case design. In the study conducted by Lorenzo et al. [68], the author used different evaluators before and after the test, and the sample size is too small. The number of participants and the factors that may affect reliability during the research process should be considered. In addition, studies without research design are also a major issue for the research effectiveness in this area.

(p82.6) Measurement methods are also the main concerns in research projects. In the methods used in these studies, both survey research and qualitative research require human participation, and it will increase the error rate and reduce the effectiveness and reliability of the measurement if observers are not adequately trained. Comprehensive training of observers before the intervention, calculating the data multiple times, or using a computer-assisted data collection method can reduce the inadvertent introduction of personnel errors. Furthermore, eye tracking is a technique used to measure a person's eye movements when interacting with a stimulus [87]. Greene et al. [88] examined the utility of eye-tracking as an outcome measure and stated that it has the potential to function as a valid treatment outcome measure for use with individuals with ASD of varying ages and levels of impairment. Eraslan et al. [89] assessed the ability to search for web information in individuals with high-functioning autism. Rezae et al. [90] assessed visual preferences for mobile device interfaces in individuals with autism. Yaneva et al. [91] applied eye-movement tracking to the diagnosis of high-functioning autism in adults using web stimuli. However, there is still a gap that directly uses eye-tracking technology to measure the AR intervention outcomes. Based on the current findings, future studies could investigate eye-tracking technology as a measure in pre-and post-intervention to track responses to intervention in individuals with ASD.
