# Pediatric Stroke: Overview and Recent Updates

CorpusID: 235721636 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2517412de88b29baa9128bc966eda3da19489550)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Epidemiology of Pediatric Strokes
(p1.0) Pediatric stroke is uncommon. Most epidemiological studies are based on relatively few incident cases and lack power to assess for sociodemographic or socioeconomic differences [1]. Therefore, the epidemiological data in children are very different from adults. Furthermore, one of the primary limitations of national database studies is the heterogeneity of data from different centers. Stroke is more difficult to identify due to its varying signs and symptoms. These variations lead to ambiguities in consistency of diagnosis and variability in care.
## (s2) Clinical Presentation of Stroke in Pediatrics
(p2.0) The structural anatomy of the pediatric brain is remarkably similar to that of an adult, however, there are a multitude of physiologic differences that can result in significant heterogeneity with regards to stroke presentation. Cerebral hemodynamics does not resemble that of an adult until age eight. Prior to this point, pediatric brains are more metabolically active, utilizing up to 200% more glucose than that of an adults' brain at age five. The increased demand of cerebral blood flow makes them more susceptible to focal neurologic injury during hypoglycemic episodes [5].
## (s3) Etiology
(p3.0) Several conditions are associated with pediatric strokes [1]. The most relevant risk factors for the occurrence of stroke in children are vasculopathies, infections, cardiac causes, and coagulopathies [10]. Other risk factors include but are not limited to hematological diseases, renal diseases, child abuse, autoimmune diseases, metabolic disorders, and head trauma [11]. With that being said, no single risk factor results in less neurological harm.
## (s4) Cardiac Causes
(p4.0) Cerebrovascular diseases in the pediatric population are not as rare as were previously thought. The various types of cerebrovascular diseases along with their frequency and association with stroke have made them the subject of many studies in recent years. The risk factors for cardiac diseases in children range from genetic disorders such as Fabry's disease, to infections such as meningitis. These risk factors increase the likelihood of cardiac conditions like cardio-embolic strokes, which account for the majority of ischemic strokes in children [10]. In addition to congenital heart defects, the pediatric population is susceptible to the same cardiac abnormalities known to present as risk factors for stroke in adults. These etiologies include bacterial and non-bacterial thrombotic endocarditis, cardiomyopathies, rheumatic heart disease and other valvulopathies.

(p4.1) The prevalence of patent foramen ovale (PFO) is approximately one quarter of the population and in conjunction with underlying hypercoagulable states, can lead to paradoxical embolism [11]. The prevalence of PFO in cryptogenic stroke patients is approximately 40%. It rises to about 55% in cryptogenic patients under the age of 55. The Risk of Paradoxical Embolism (RoPE) study aimed to create a predictive model to determine the probability of an initial stroke being due to PFO. Many people with PFOs remain asymptomatic and require no intervention. However, those with a high RoPE score were found to be at greater risk for stroke and PFO closure was suggested in those cases. While the RoPE score is not the ultimate deciding factor regarding PFO management, it is highly validated in determining the extent of the causal relationship between PFOs and stroke [11].
## (s7) Prothrombotic States
(p7.0) Although prothrombotic states are more commonly associated with venous clots, it is an important cause of stroke. This accounts for both ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes. Up to 20 to 50% of children with strokes have an underlying thrombotic disorder; either hereditary or acquired [17]. Antiphospholipid antibodies, deficiency of protein C, MTHFR C677T polymorphism, factor V Leiden mutations, deficiency of antithrombin III, factor II G20210A, and elevated levels of lipoprotein(a), are examples of traits found to be significantly implicated in first occurrences of pediatric arterial ischemic strokes [18]. This also holds true for combined thrombophilias. Obtaining a family history regarding history of venous clots and strokes is essential. Also, a thorough review of medication list can aid in determining the underlying etiology. For example, valproic acid, an antiepileptic, has been linked to acquired protein C deficiency [17].
## (s8) Vascular
(p8.0) Hemorrhagic strokes in childhood often occur in the setting of vascular malformations. Such malformations are typically due to genetic disorders or are congenital in nature like arteriovenous malformations (AVMs). AVMS are the most commonly encountered and are seen in setting of neurocutaneous syndromes like Struge-Weber disease, Wyburn-Mason Syndrome, PHACE syndrome, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, and incontinentia pigmenti [17,19]. Arteriopathies are also a common cause of stroke. Arteriopathies can occur in the setting of infections and also with noninflammatory conditions like dissections and fibromuscular dysplasia as well as with moyamoya disease [19].
## (s10) Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
(p10.0) Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) in children has been linked to thrombophilias/prothrombotic states including cancer, inflammatory diseases, hematologic conditions and adolescents on oral contraception [21]. Craniofacial infections such as otitis media, sinusitis and periorbital infections are sources for CVT [17]. In the perinatal period, dehydration and perinatal complications are common causes. In the Canadian Pediatric Ischemic Stroke Group Study, the incidence of CVT was higher in neonates when compared to older children [21].
## (s11) Infections
(p11.0) A causal relationship exists between infectious processes and stroke; this includes bacterial, parasitic, viral, and fungal infections. Focal arteriopathy, vasculitis and or in situ thrombosis are common mechanisms for ischemia. These are often seen in cases of meningitis, encephalitis as well as with HIV and herpesviruses. Other common mechanisms occur either through direct invasion, prothrombotic state, accelerated atherogenesis, enhanced platelet aggregation, or secondary to an inflammatory response. Also, cardioembolic strokes can arise from endocarditis or with heart failure, for example, with Trypanosoma cruzi [21]. Subcortical strokes, in particular those involving the basal ganglia are associated with the Varicella Zoster Virus (VZV) [17]. In addition to HIV and VZV other organisms associated with strokes are: mycoplasma tuberculosis, influenza A, treponema pallidum, Parvovirus B19, and enterovirus, chlamydia pneumoniae, and aspergillus [21].
## (s12) Oncologic
(p12.0) Strokes can occur in the setting of cancer itself, or as a consequence of treatment, either through radiation or via chemotherapy. Patients with leukemia, and those with radiation therapy, have been cited as the most at risk [22,23]. Most strokes occur early during cancer treatment with a median time of 5 months after cancer diagnosis [24]. Children with cancer have the highest lifetime risk of fatal strokes and the risk is partially due to the exposure of radiation which causes strokes even decades after treatment [24,25]. The risk has been shown to be dose dependent [25]. In a study conducted by Haddy et al., radiation dose to the brain was significantly associated with long-term cerebrovascular mortality among 5-year survivors [26]. Sun et al. evaluated the relationship between cancer and childhood ischemic strokes from children enrolled in the International Pediatric Stroke Study between January 2003 and June 2019 and found that cancer was present in 3.3% of children with AIS and in 10.7% with cerebral sinovenous thrombosis [27]. These findings are consistent with the findings of other published studies, with hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke occurring at similar frequencies [22,28].
## (s14) Moyamoya Disease
(p14.0) Moyamoya Disease (MMD) is a non-inflammatory vasculopathy that is associated with the stenosis of intracranial arteries, notably the distal internal carotid artery (ICA) and its branches. Patients with Moyamoya disease are likely to have a stroke due to the occlusion and stenosis of the blood vessels. Compensatory mechanisms allow for the formation of collateral vessels at the base of the brain. Moyamoya has a variable presentation that can be broadly categorized into two groups; symptoms due to ischemia or symptoms due to intracranial hemorrhage which occurs as a complication of the collateral blood vessel network. Although most patients present with ischemia, adults are more likely to present with hemorrhagic strokes than children. Moyamoya has been linked to both genetic and environmental factors and should be a consideration for any patient displaying neurological deficits or cerebral ischemia. Moyamoya can be confirmed via various radiographic studies including CTs, MRIs, and angiography [38]. 
## (s16) Use of CT, CTA and MRI and Management Strategies
(p16.0) Initial management should focus on early detection and correctly diagnosing the type of stroke, along with immediate stabilization and resuscitation. Correction of underlying conditions such as hypoxia, febrility, hypoglycemia, or significant metabolic derangements are imperative.

(p16.1) Aging and Disease • Volume 12, Number 4, July 2021 1048 As mentioned, most children have no previously known risk factors for acute ischemic stroke. A CT scan in the acute setting is often non-diagnostic. Only 50% of non-contrast CT scans obtained at presentation revealed any findings consistent with evolving ischemic changes [39]. Despite this, CT imaging remains the modality of choice for acute presentations of focal neurologic deficits. It has a very high sensitivity for identifying acute hemorrhage and can also assist the clinician in rapidly narrowing the differential diagnosis [40]. Early ischemic infarcts may show a hypodense area corresponding to a vascular territory or other early changes such as sulcal effacement or loss of gray-white differentiation [40]. Radiation effects are cumulative in nature and therefore more concerning when used earlier in life. Still, it is clear the diagnostic information provided far outweighs the risks; especially with those presenting with focal neurologic deficits or otherwise unexplained depressed levels of consciousness.

(p16.2) If intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) is identified on CT, follow up vascular imaging should be obtained. A consideration for MR venography should be given as cerebral venous sinus thrombosis appears to have a much higher incidence as the etiology for ICH in the pediatric population compared with adults [41]. Additional vascular imaging, preferably with MR angiography can help identify other vascular malformations such as arteriovenous malformations, arteriovenous fistulas, or cavernomas that may have contributed to the area of hemorrhage. Conventional catheter-based angiography, though invasive, should be considered when no other explanation for hemorrhage has been identified. It is indicated in all cases of subarachnoid hemorrhages that are not clearly related to trauma. Doing so offers the most precise vascular evaluation.

(p16.3) As indicated previously, CT imaging is frequently unrevealing early in ischemic stroke and if suspicion remains high, MR imaging has exquisite sensitivity for identification of infarction [40]. It is the author's opinion that early treatment of suspected ischemic infarct should not be delayed in order to obtain MRI imaging. The TIPS study, a prior attempt at a randomized trial, had required MR imaging prior to the administration of IV thrombolytics. However, enrollment was exceptionally low, and the study was terminated early [42]. This likely was partially related to the strict criteria of requiring MRIs which often requires sedation in the pediatric population. Doing so causes significant delays in a population already known to frequently have delays in presentation and diagnosis.

(p16.4) In regards to advanced imaging, due to the altered hemodynamics of pediatric patients, particularly in those less than 8 years old, CT perfusion has not been validated with the same parameters for adults and should not be relied upon as the basis for mechanical thrombectomy in an extended time window. Also, there is limited evidence for the use of the modified ASPECTS (The Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score) scoring system. However, it could serve as an additional data point to assist in decision making for mechanical thrombectomy in the extended time window [43].
## (s19) Intravenous Tissue Plasminogen Activator (tPA)
(p19.0) The most comprehensive study to date regarding stroke and tPA uses in pediatrics is the TIPS study which was published in 2010. The TIPS study was an international multicenter, dose-adaptive, phase 1 study [42]. Children aged 2 through 17 years who presented with AIS were eligible for enrollment to receive IV tPA if initiated within 4.5 hours of stroke onset [42]. Three dosing tiers were planned (0.75, 0.9, and 1.0 mg/kg of IV tPA), given over the period of one hour [42]. The purpose of the TIPS study was to define safety criteria to guide the use of tPA in pediatric patients. However, the study was terminated due poor recruitment.

(p19.1) In a retrospective multicentric study in France conducted between 2012 and 2015, 11 pediatric patients (median age 11.8 years) with arterial ischemic stroke received intravenous recombinant-tPA [44]. The median time from onset to treatment was 240 minutes and the median time from onset to magnetic resonance imaging was 165 minutes [43]. Predominant clinical presentations consisted of acute hemiplegia/hemiparesis and dysphagia, and the median NIHSS score was 10 [43]. Most strokes involved the middle cerebral artery territory. No intracranial or peripheral bleeding was reported after treatment and most had a favorable outcome [45].

(p19.2) These two studies highlight the challenges involved in the management of pediatric stroke. To start, significant variability among facilities in the management of pediatric stroke exists. Furthermore, providers who care for these patients may not be familiar with the use of tPA in the pediatric population. This necessitates a need to standardize pediatric stroke care. In the case of the TIPS study, while an earnest effort was made to establish such guidelines, the fact is that the patient population who would benefit from the treatment is very few as reflected by its poor recruitment. Capturing this already small population and enrolling them in comprehensive studies like TIPS is very challenging due to the time-sensitive nature of the treatment. Although the study was ultimately terminated, the TIPS trial helped to inform and optimize acute pediatric stroke care. Furthermore, the trial served as a catalyst for significant changes in participating centers; this is demonstrated in data provided from subsequent retrospective studies as previously described.

(p19.3) Unfortunately, no consensus on specific inclusion criteria for the use of IV thrombolytics in the pediatric population exists. Several recommendations on dosing variations and timing have been made based on the understanding of certain differences in relative amounts of clotting factors and fibrinogen levels [46]. Dosing variations of 0.3mg/kg to 1.0mg/kg has been recommended by various societal groups, without any adequate randomized data [42]. It is the author's opinion that strict adherence to adult guidelines regarding contraindications for IV thrombolysis be followed in the absence of data in the pediatric population.
## (s20) Mechanical Thrombectomy
(p20.0) Similar to the use of tPA in pediatrics, mechanical thrombectomy in childhood stroke is also not wellestablished. Likewise, there are several small retrospective studies investigating its feasibility and efficacy. These studies have demonstrated its safety and benefit with long-term neurological outcomes in selected pediatric patients.

(p20.1) In a comprehensive review of available literature by Satti et al., 29 pediatric patients who had undergone ischemic stroke treatment using modern devices (excluding older techniques such as wire manipulation and balloon angioplasty) between 2008 and 2015 were identified [47]. The average age was 10.3 years, ranging from 1.8 to 18 years, with an average pediatric stroke scale score of 18.1 [47]. There was a broad range of reported time to treatment, with several cases of extremely delayed recanalization (overall range of 1.5 -120 hours). Excluding these outliers, the average time to treatment was 8.8 hours [47]. This excess lag time compared to adult trials is likely due to delay in recognition of acute stroke in children, as well as a lack of standardization of neurointerventional care. A variety of treatments were recorded, including stent retrievers, the Penumbra system, and other mechanical devices including Merci, Solitaire, Trevo, and Wingspan [47]. Given the severity of stroke on presentation, there were relatively few adverse events reported. Most adverse effects were from patients with basilar occlusion associated with high baseline pediatric NIHSS (National Institute of Health Stroke Scale) scores [47]. These events included severe cerebellar edema and hydrocephalus, asymptomatic hemorrhage, and basilar vasospasm. Of the 29 patients included in the study, clinical outcome was reported in 23 patients, 20 of which achieved favorable clinical outcomes with a mean mRS (modified Rankin Scale) score of 0-1 [47].

(p20.2) Similar outcomes like those seen by Satti et al. are also echoed by subsequent systematic reviews and metaanalyses conducted by Bhatia et al. and Fragata et al. These systematic reviews and meta-analyses investigated the efficacy of mechanical thrombectomy for pediatric ischemic stroke due to large vessel occlusion [48,49]. The former study found that mechanical thrombectomy resulted in good long-term neurological outcomes (mRS scores between 0-2) in 87 out of 96 cases, good short-term outcomes (reduction in NIHSS by ≥ 8 points) in 55 out of 79 cases, and successful recanalization (modified Treatment in Cerebral Ischemia, mTICI, 2b/3) in 86 out of 98 cases [48]. Death occurred in two patients and symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage in one patient [48]. The latter study by Fragata et al. reported seven cases over a period of seven years, in which five patients had cardiac disease, two of which were under external cardiac assistance, with a median time from onset of symptoms to treatment being approximately 7 hours [49]. Mechanical thrombectomy was performed using a stentriever in 3 patients, aspiration in 3 patients, and a combined technique in one patient [49]. While six patients had good recanalization, two patients died, one after hemorrhagic transformation of a middle cerebral artery infarct, and the other due to extensive brainstem ischemia caused by varicella vasculitis [49]. In a slightly larger retrospective study, which included nineteen patients who underwent endovascular thrombectomy between 2008 and 2017 with an average age of 10.9 years and a NIHSS score of 13.9, a transfemoral approach utilizing stent retrievers and aspiration resulted in successful revascularization in 89.5% of patients with an average of 2.2 passes and a recanalization time of 48.7 minutes [50]. Upon discharge the average reduction in NIHSS was 10.2 [50]. Although one patient had post-revascularization seizure, no other complications occurred [50].

(p20.3) Similar to their use in their adult counterparts, the use of modern devices for mechanical thrombectomy in pediatric populations appears to be associated with low complication rates and good clinical outcomes. While the existing literature consists of small cohort studies, case series, and case reports, publications of pediatric cases have been on the rise in recent years, and this has helped guide our decision-making.
