# polymers Chitosan: An Overview of Its Properties and Applications

CorpusID: 238746265 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61af8226a37b2bd2efbb50070afe82c46295f168](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61af8226a37b2bd2efbb50070afe82c46295f168)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Solubility
(p2.0) Chitosan is produced by deacetylation of chitin; in this process, some N-acetylglucosamine moieties are converted into glucosamine units. The presence of large amounts of protonated -NH 2 groups on the chitosan structure accounts for its solubility in acid aqueous media since its pKa value is approximately 6.5 [16]. When around 50% of all amino groups are protonated, chitosan becomes soluble [17].

(p2.1) Chitosan solubility depends on different factors such as polymer molecular weight, degree of acetylation, pH, temperature, and polymer crystallinity. Homogeneous deacetylation (alkali treatment, 0 • C) of chitin permits the production of polymers soluble in aqueous acetic acid solutions with DD as low as 28%, with this value never being reached under heterogeneous deacetylation (alkali treatment, high temperatures). Moreover, with a DD of 49%, the samples are soluble in water. This behaviour is explained by the fact that homogeneous deacetylation leads to an increase in the number of glucosamine units and a modification in the crystalline structure of the polymer. Depending on polymer DD, these modifications range from a reduction in crystal size and crystal perfection to the presence of a new crystal structure close to β-chitin [18]. Sogias et al. [19] studied the role of crystallinity and inter-or intramolecular forces on chitosan solubility; in this work, a parent chitosan sample was half re-acetylated with anhydride acetic or fully N-deacetylated under homogeneous conditions. After reacetylation, the solubility of the polymer was expanded until pH 7.4, while a slight reduction in the solubility range of the fully deacetylated chitosan was determined. The lower solubility was explained due to the increase in the polymer crystallinity after deacetylation, which offsets the effect of the increase in glucosamine moieties. On the contrary, a reduction in the crystallinity was observed in the half-acetylated sample. The use of hydrogen bond disruptors such as urea or guanidine hydrochloride also alters the solubility window of chitosan. In fact, by a combination of chemical and physical disruption of the hydrogen bonds, broad solubility is achieved.
## (s3) Viscosity
(p3.0) The viscosity of polymers is a parametre of great interest from the technological point of view since highly viscous solutions are difficult to manage. Moreover, viscometry is a powerful tool for determining chitosan's molecular weight, as it is a simple and rapid method even though it is not an absolute method, therefore requiring the determination of constants that are specific to the solvent. The average molecular weight is determined by the Mark-Houwink-Sakurada equation, which relates this parametre with the intrinsic viscosity:

(p3.1) where K and α are constants that must be determined experimentally. Several values of K and α have been reported depending on the solvent composition, pH, and ionic strength [20]. Chitosan viscosity depends on the molecular weight of the polymer and deacetylation degree and decreases as the molecular weight of chitosan is reduced. In fact, viscosity can be used to determine the stability of the polymer in solution, as a reduction is observed during polymer storage due to polymer degradation [21]. Shear viscosity increases with chitosan deacetylation degree. The shear viscosity at the same rate was studied in two samples with different deacetylation degrees (91% vs. 75%) and represented versus intrinsic viscosity [22]; it was reported that shear viscosity was larger for those samples with the highest deacetylation degree; when the curves were evaluated, straight lines were observed in both chitosan samples This is explained due to the nature of chitosan, as this polymer is a cationic polyelectrolyte because of the amine protonation in acidic media. Therefore, the higher the DD, the larger chain expansion is expected, as more glucosamine units are found in the polymer chain, leading to a greater charge density in this sample. In order to modulate chitosan viscosity, the addition of different co-solvents has been evaluated; in this sense, Kassai et al. [20] studied the effect of the addition of isopropanol and ethanol to a chitosan solution in 1% acetic acid, reporting that the presence of the cosolvents decreased the intrinsic viscosity of the polymer.
## (s4) Chemistry of Chitosan
(p4.0) As seen in Figure 1, the reactive groups found in chitosan are a primary amino group (C2) and primary and secondary hydroxyl groups (C6, C3). Glycosidic bonds and the acetamide group can also be considered functional groups. These functional groups allow for a great number of modifications, producing polymers with new properties and behaviours.

(p4.1) Chitosan derivatives have been produced, aiming to improve chitosan's properties, such as solubility or biodegradability, or to introduce new functions or properties. For instance, solubility has been improved in water aqueous media by deacetylation, depolymerization, or quaternisation among other processes [23]. New chitosan activities have been reported after its modification, for example, 6-O-sulphated chitosan promotes neuronal differentiation while phosphorylated chitosan inhibits corrosion [24,25]. Chitosan derivatives have been produced, aiming to improve chitosan's properties, such as solubility or biodegradability, or to introduce new functions or properties. For instance, solubility has been improved in water aqueous media by deacetylation, depolymerization, or quaternisation among other processes [23]. New chitosan activities have been reported after its modification, for example, 6-O-sulphated chitosan promotes neuronal differentiation while phosphorylated chitosan inhibits corrosion [24,25].

(p4.2) The field of chitosan chemistry is wide, and in this review, we want to focus on two types of processes, chitosan phosphorylation and chitosan degradation. Our group has participated in the development of a phosphorylated derivative via a simple method in which chitosan and phosphorus acid are mixed at the same ratio and formaldehyde is added at 70 °C [26] (Figure 2). This N-methylene phosphonic chitosan is soluble in water and keeps the filmogenic properties of the parent chitosan. With a similar methodology, a soluble in water N-methylenephenyl phosphonic chitosan has been produced [27]. Additionally, the surfactant derivative N-lauryl-N-methylene phosphonic chitosan was produced via N-alkylation of N-methylene phosphonic chitosan [28]. This derivative has a lower solubility in aqueous media compared to N-methylene phosphonic chitosan but better solubility in organic media and forms micelles. N-methylene phosphonic N-methylene carboxylic chitosan has been obtained in water-soluble form using N-methylene phosphonic chitosan and glyoxylic acid. The polymer maintains the filmogenic properties of parent chitosan and, because of the presence of multidentate ligands, its use as a bivalent metal chelating agent is proposed [29]. The field of chitosan chemistry is wide, and in this review, we want to focus on two types of processes, chitosan phosphorylation and chitosan degradation. Our group has participated in the development of a phosphorylated derivative via a simple method in which chitosan and phosphorus acid are mixed at the same ratio and formaldehyde is added at 70 • C [26] (Figure 2). Chitosan derivatives have been produced, aiming to improve chitosan's properties, such as solubility or biodegradability, or to introduce new functions or properties. For instance, solubility has been improved in water aqueous media by deacetylation, depolymerization, or quaternisation among other processes [23]. New chitosan activities have been reported after its modification, for example, 6-O-sulphated chitosan promotes neuronal differentiation while phosphorylated chitosan inhibits corrosion [24,25].

(p4.3) The field of chitosan chemistry is wide, and in this review, we want to focus on two types of processes, chitosan phosphorylation and chitosan degradation. Our group has participated in the development of a phosphorylated derivative via a simple method in which chitosan and phosphorus acid are mixed at the same ratio and formaldehyde is added at 70 °C [26] (Figure 2). This N-methylene phosphonic chitosan is soluble in water and keeps the filmogenic properties of the parent chitosan. With a similar methodology, a soluble in water N-methylenephenyl phosphonic chitosan has been produced [27]. Additionally, the surfactant derivative N-lauryl-N-methylene phosphonic chitosan was produced via N-alkylation of N-methylene phosphonic chitosan [28]. This derivative has a lower solubility in aqueous media compared to N-methylene phosphonic chitosan but better solubility in organic media and forms micelles. N-methylene phosphonic N-methylene carboxylic chitosan has been obtained in water-soluble form using N-methylene phosphonic chitosan and glyoxylic acid. The polymer maintains the filmogenic properties of parent chitosan and, because of the presence of multidentate ligands, its use as a bivalent metal chelating agent is proposed [29]. This N-methylene phosphonic chitosan is soluble in water and keeps the filmogenic properties of the parent chitosan. With a similar methodology, a soluble in water Nmethylenephenyl phosphonic chitosan has been produced [27]. Additionally, the surfactant derivative N-lauryl-N-methylene phosphonic chitosan was produced via N-alkylation of N-methylene phosphonic chitosan [28]. This derivative has a lower solubility in aqueous media compared to N-methylene phosphonic chitosan but better solubility in organic media and forms micelles. N-methylene phosphonic N-methylene carboxylic chitosan has been obtained in water-soluble form using N-methylene phosphonic chitosan and glyoxylic acid. The polymer maintains the filmogenic properties of parent chitosan and, because of the presence of multidentate ligands, its use as a bivalent metal chelating agent is proposed [29].

(p4.4) Although the use of chitosan as a gene carrier has been reported, the use of this biopolymer for this application is limited due to a relatively low transgenic efficacy. Phosphorylated derivatives have shown better performance (transfection was improved 100fold) and therefore are more suitable than chitosan to this end. Moreover, phosphorylated derivatives also exhibit and improve metal ion chelating activity when compared to the parent chitosan [30,31].
## (s7) Antimicrobial Activity
(p7.0) Bacterial resistance to antibiotics is a critical public health concern and, therefore, there is an urgency to find alternatives to antibiotics. Chitosan, chitosan derivatives and chitooligosaccharides exert antimicrobial activity against different microorganisms, including bacteria, filamentous fungi, and yeast [48]; some examples of the different microorganisms sensible to chitosan are shown in Table 3. Chitosan seems to have a growth-inhibitory activity since bacteria is able to grow after the polymer is removed from the media. This is of importance since resistant populations might emerge if the cells adapt to chitosan [49]. Strong effect [60][61][62] Due to chitosan's poor solubility above pH 6.5, the use of chitooligosaccharides is under consideration as polycationic biocides since they are soluble in water. Chitosan soluble derivatives such as sulphated chitosan, N-trimethyl chitosan, N-diethylmethyl chitosan or 2,6-diamino chitosan also avoid the use of acidic environments and exert antimicrobial activity [63][64][65]. This antimicrobial activity has applications in different fields such as the food, textile, or cosmetic industry, among others. Thus, due to the ability of chitosan to form shift bases, some new chitosan derivatives based on heterocyclic moieties have been developed, including pyrazole ring and furanyl, pyridyl, or thiophenyl moieties. Although these derivatives do not show higher solubility in aqueous media, their performance against gram-positive microorganism was improved when compared with the parent chitosan [66].

(p7.1) How these polymers (chitosan, chitooligosaccharides and derivatives) exert their antimicrobial activity is still under discussion. This fact can be explained by taking into account the lack of appropriate polymer characterization, purity issues, the use of different microorganisms, and the lack of methodological uniformity. Some studies point to the reduction in cell membrane permeability due to polymer coating on the surface of the cells that blocks cell access to nutrients. This process occurs due to the interaction of -NH 2 groups from chitosan chains with -COO-groups on the external cell membranes of microorganisms. Therefore, the antimicrobial activity depends on the acetylation degree. It has also been hypothesized that chitosan can penetrate the cells and block RNA transcription as a result of adsorption with bacterial DNA [9]. Most likely, these mechanisms are not mutually exclusive, and several events are related to cell growth inhibition.

(p7.2) Intrinsic factors affecting the antimicrobial chitosan activity are due to the polymer characteristics such as Mw, acetylation degree, polymer viscosity, or polymer concentration. The solvent used to dissolve the polymer also affects its behaviour. We have observed that typical solvents used to dissolve chitosan such as acetic acid, citric acid, or buffers such as AcOH-NaAc exert some antimicrobial activity per se (unpublished results). Other factors with great impact on the antimicrobial activity are related to the tested microorganism, growth media, pH, temperature, ionic strength, or physiological state of the cells.

(p7.3) The effect of polymer size is controversial. Some studies claim that the antimicrobial activity of chitosan improves with the polymer size and have found that oligosaccharides have lower antimicrobial activity [67][68][69]. When comparing chitooligosaccharides, those showing higher DP exhibited higher antimicrobial activity [70]. Moreover, Tokura and co-workers reported that chemically produced chitooligosaccharides of 2200 Da not only had no antimicrobial activity but also served as growth accelerators of E. coli, while a sample with 9300 Da inhibited bacterial growth [71]. On the contrary, other studies showed better antimicrobial activity for a lower molecular weight chitosan sample (55 kDa) than a higher one (155 kDa); in the same study when a sample of 90 kDa was tested a promotion of bacterial growth was observed [72]. In another study, different tendencies were observed depending on the pH of the media. In acidic pH conditions, the antimicrobial activity increased with increasing MW. However, at neutral pH, antimicrobial activity increased as the MW decreased [73]. Even so, no trend on the effect of chitosan Mw on antimicrobial activity has been reported [74]. Regarding acetylation degree, it seems that the lower the acetylation degree, the better the antimicrobial activity [69,74,75].

(p7.4) After depolimerization of a chitosan sample (400 kDa, DD~85%) with hemicellulose, a set of chitosan samples with similar DD and Mw ranging from 130 to 2.8 kDa and a chitooligosacharide sample with Mw 1.4 were produced. Some of these samples were also half-acetylated, furnishing two chitosan samples with Mw of 53 and 18 kDa, and some chitoligosaccharides with Mw of 1.4 kDa. Both chitooligosacharides samples and the half-acetylated samples were water soluble, while the others were not soluble in water. All samples were tested against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, and Candida albicans. In this study, water soluble chitosans and oligosaccharides did not exhibit antimicrobial activity; in fact, they promoted the growth of C. albicans. Insoluble chitosan samples exhibited antimicrobial activity with the most pronounced effect when medium molecular weight samples were tested (Mw 78-48 kDa) [76].

(p7.5) Our group has studied the antimicrobial activity of low molecular weight chitosans and oligosaccharides produced by enzymatic degradation in order to determine if the polymer pattern has some effect on this activity. Chitooligosaccharides were produced by two different processes; thus, in process P1 chitosan was enzymatically depolymerized with chitosanase, while in process P2 the sample was depolymerized in a two-step process with HNO 2 and chitosanase. The samples were tested against E coli and L. monocytogenes. COS from P1 showed a higher capability to inhibit bacterial growth than COS from P2. In both cases, COS were more effective at inhibiting E. coli (Gram-negative) than the Gram-positive L. monocytogenes. Antimicrobial activity depended on the production process and composition and structure of COS. COS produced in a one-step enzymatic procedure showed better antimicrobial activity than those produced in the two-step chemical-enzymatic process even when the samples exhibited similar DA and MW [77].
## (s8) Antioxidant Activity
(p8.0) Antioxidants are gaining interest due to the relationship between oxidative stress and several diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and cancer. Moreover, it is related to complications in other diseases such as diabetes [78][79][80].

(p8.1) Chitosan contains an amino and several hydroxyl groups, which can react with free radicals exhibiting scavenging ability. Some chitosan derivatives such as chitosan sulphates or N-2 carboxyethyl chitosan exhibited improved antioxidant activity [81][82][83]. Chitooligosaccharides have also been chemically modified to improve their antioxidant activity, for instance by modification of the polymers with gallic acid [84,85] or phenolic compounds [86].

(p8.2) Different methodologies have been used to determine chitosan and its derivatives' antioxidant assays, which includes DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picryl-hydrazyl-hydrate), ABTS (2,2-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid), and FRAP (ferric antioxidant power) assays, peroxide and hydroxyl radical scavenging assays or the use of macrophage models. DPPH and ABTS assays are based on electron and H atom transfer, while the FRAP assay is based on electron transfer reaction, as depicted in Figure 3. The ORAC (oxygen radical absorbance capacity assay) is also widely used to test antioxidant activities.

(p8.3) P2. In both cases, COS were more effective at inhibiting E. coli (Gram-negative) than the Gram-positive L. monocytogenes. Antimicrobial activity depended on the production process and composition and structure of COS. COS produced in a one-step enzymatic procedure showed better antimicrobial activity than those produced in the two-step chemical-enzymatic process even when the samples exhibited similar DA and MW [77].
## (s9) Antioxidant Activity
(p9.0) Antioxidants are gaining interest due to the relationship between oxidative stress and several diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and cancer. Moreover, it is related to complications in other diseases such as diabetes [78][79][80].

(p9.1) Chitosan contains an amino and several hydroxyl groups, which can react with free radicals exhibiting scavenging ability. Some chitosan derivatives such as chitosan sulphates or N-2 carboxyethyl chitosan exhibited improved antioxidant activity [81][82][83]. Chitooligosaccharides have also been chemically modified to improve their antioxidant activity, for instance by modification of the polymers with gallic acid [84,85] or phenolic compounds [86].

(p9.2) Different methodologies have been used to determine chitosan and its derivatives' antioxidant assays, which includes DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-1-picryl-hydrazyl-hydrate), ABTS (2,2-azinobis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid), and FRAP (ferric antioxidant power) assays, peroxide and hydroxyl radical scavenging assays or the use of macrophage models. DPPH and ABTS assays are based on electron and H atom transfer, while the FRAP assay is based on electron transfer reaction, as depicted in Figure 3. The ORAC (oxygen radical absorbance capacity assay) is also widely used to test antioxidant activities. The disparity between the polymers tested and the methodologies used to test the activity produces considerable differences in the polymer concentrations that range from 50 µ g/mL to 400 mg/mL [83]. Antioxidant activity is more remarkable for low molecular weight samples rather than for high molecular weight ones since shorter chains form The disparity between the polymers tested and the methodologies used to test the activity produces considerable differences in the polymer concentrations that range from 50 µg/mL to 400 mg/mL [83]. Antioxidant activity is more remarkable for low molecular weight samples rather than for high molecular weight ones since shorter chains form fewer intramolecular hydrogen bonds and therefore the reactive groups are more accessible, contributing to the radical scavenging activity [87,88]. Regarding the effect of the acetylation degree, the antioxidant activity seems to decrease when this parametre increases [88].
## (s11) Metallic Nanoparticles and Chitosan
(p11.0) Metallic nanoparticles are usually defined as particles of metal atoms with sizes ranging between 1 nm to a few hundred nanometres [95]. These particles exhibit optical, chemical, and electronic properties that differ from individual atoms or bulk materials. These unique properties are highly appreciated for different applications such as catalysis, photonics, or biomedicine [96].
## (s13) Chitosan in Drug Delivery
(p13.0) Since the introduction of the first polymers in drug delivery, chitosan has shown superior biological and physiochemical properties for a wide variety of biomedical and industrial applications. The main feature of this biopolymer is its cationic character due to amino groups. These amino groups are also responsible for properties such as controlled drug release, mucoadhesion, in situ gelation, transfection, permeation enhancement, and efflux pump inhibitory properties [166]. Moreover, interest in this biomaterial due to its central nervous system (CNS) bio-medical implementation has increased because of its ability to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) [167]. Synthesis of different natural and non-natural nucleosides using a recombinant nucleoside 2deoxyribosyltransferase from Lactobacillus reuteri (LrNDT) immobilized on cross-linked magnetic chitosan beads [165]. Commission on Biochemical Nomenclature: adenine (Ade), uracil (Ura), cytosine (Cyt), thymine (Thy), 2,6-diaminopurine (2,6-DAP), 5-trifluorothymine (5-tFThy), 2 -deoxyuridine (dUrd), 2 -deoxyadenosine (dAdo), 2 -deoxycytidine (dCyd), thymidine (dThd), 2,6-diaminopurine-2 -deoxyriboside (2,6-DAPdRib), 5-trifluorothymidine (5-tFdThd), 2 -fluoro-20deoxyuridine (2 -FdUrd), 2 -fluoro-2 -deoxycitydine (2 -FdCyd), ara-uracil (ara-U), ara-adenine (ara-A).
## (s14) Chitosan in Drug Delivery
(p14.0) Since the introduction of the first polymers in drug delivery, chitosan has shown superior biological and physiochemical properties for a wide variety of biomedical and industrial applications. The main feature of this biopolymer is its cationic character due to amino groups. These amino groups are also responsible for properties such as controlled drug release, mucoadhesion, in situ gelation, transfection, permeation enhancement, and efflux pump inhibitory properties [166]. Moreover, interest in this biomaterial due to its central nervous system (CNS) bio-medical implementation has increased because of its ability to cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) [167].
