# Impact of the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic on scientific research and implications for clinical academic training -A review

CorpusID: 231610946 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/304317e56f223185bccb2d841bc8e1f3d6d3758f)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s1) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p1.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s3) Impact on clinical science
(p3.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s4) Impact on researchers
(p4.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p4.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:

(p4.2) 1. Publications: Due to the closure of universities and research institutions, researchers may be unable to complete essential experiments required for the submission of scientific work. Of course, they may still be able to catch up on unfinished work. 2. Funding: Since research output is often used to make funding decisions, researchers may struggle to obtain the necessary funding to complete their planned research programmes, leading many academic contributions to go unrecognized. 3. Networking: With the majority of worldwide scientific events transitioning to a virtual platform, many researchers may lose important career development opportunities in the form of building their reputation within the scientific community via networking or research dissemination. Additionally, junior researchers may feel particularly vulnerable when sharing sensitive information and novel ideas digitally. 4. Job cuts and hiring freeze: Due to an unprecedented decline in international student enrolment and the resulting fall in university revenue, several universities are under financial pressure. Many have responded with job cuts and the imposition of hiring slowdowns and freezes.
## (s6) Funding
(p6.0) The COVID-19 lockdown has led to monumental implications for charities and funding for scientific research. The increasingly likely prospect of a long-term economic downturn could lead to longer-term impacts on development budgets, funding from direct donations, as well as government and charitable grants. Moreover, a reduction in fundraising income due to the cancellation of events and nationwide lockdowns have led to concerns regarding charity-funded research, the premature closure of sites working overseas, and the furlough of charity staff [42].
## (s9) Outlook and future considerations
(p9.0) As with the rest of 'normal' life, the research landscape has been significantly and detrimentally altered by COVID-19. The changes having come into effect over the past several months are unlikely to revert to the old status quo in the near future and so a 'new normal' may have to be reached [54].
## (s15) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p15.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s17) Impact on clinical science
(p17.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s18) Impact on researchers
(p18.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p18.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:

(p18.2) 1. Publications: Due to the closure of universities and research institutions, researchers may be unable to complete essential experiments required for the submission of scientific work. Of course, they may still be able to catch up on unfinished work. 2. Funding: Since research output is often used to make funding decisions, researchers may struggle to obtain the necessary funding to complete their planned research programmes, leading many academic contributions to go unrecognized. 3. Networking: With the majority of worldwide scientific events transitioning to a virtual platform, many researchers may lose important career development opportunities in the form of building their reputation within the scientific community via networking or research dissemination. Additionally, junior researchers may feel particularly vulnerable when sharing sensitive information and novel ideas digitally. 4. Job cuts and hiring freeze: Due to an unprecedented decline in international student enrolment and the resulting fall in university revenue, several universities are under financial pressure. Many have responded with job cuts and the imposition of hiring slowdowns and freezes.
## (s20) Funding
(p20.0) The COVID-19 lockdown has led to monumental implications for charities and funding for scientific research. The increasingly likely prospect of a long-term economic downturn could lead to longer-term impacts on development budgets, funding from direct donations, as well as government and charitable grants. Moreover, a reduction in fundraising income due to the cancellation of events and nationwide lockdowns have led to concerns regarding charity-funded research, the premature closure of sites working overseas, and the furlough of charity staff [42].
## (s23) Outlook and future considerations
(p23.0) As with the rest of 'normal' life, the research landscape has been significantly and detrimentally altered by COVID-19. The changes having come into effect over the past several months are unlikely to revert to the old status quo in the near future and so a 'new normal' may have to be reached [54].
## (s29) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p29.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s31) Impact on clinical science
(p31.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s32) Impact on researchers
(p32.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p32.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:

(p32.2) 1. Publications: Due to the closure of universities and research institutions, researchers may be unable to complete essential experiments required for the submission of scientific work. Of course, they may still be able to catch up on unfinished work. 2. Funding: Since research output is often used to make funding decisions, researchers may struggle to obtain the necessary funding to complete their planned research programmes, leading many academic contributions to go unrecognized. 3. Networking: With the majority of worldwide scientific events transitioning to a virtual platform, many researchers may lose important career development opportunities in the form of building their reputation within the scientific community via networking or research dissemination. Additionally, junior researchers may feel particularly vulnerable when sharing sensitive information and novel ideas digitally. 4. Job cuts and hiring freeze: Due to an unprecedented decline in international student enrolment and the resulting fall in university revenue, several universities are under financial pressure. Many have responded with job cuts and the imposition of hiring slowdowns and freezes.
## (s34) Funding
(p34.0) The COVID-19 lockdown has led to monumental implications for charities and funding for scientific research. The increasingly likely prospect of a long-term economic downturn could lead to longer-term impacts on development budgets, funding from direct donations, as well as government and charitable grants. Moreover, a reduction in fundraising income due to the cancellation of events and nationwide lockdowns have led to concerns regarding charity-funded research, the premature closure of sites working overseas, and the furlough of charity staff [42].
## (s37) Outlook and future considerations
(p37.0) As with the rest of 'normal' life, the research landscape has been significantly and detrimentally altered by COVID-19. The changes having come into effect over the past several months are unlikely to revert to the old status quo in the near future and so a 'new normal' may have to be reached [54].
## (s43) The evolution and current status of COVID-19
(p43.0) The last ten months have necessitated unprecedented global efforts to understand SARS-CoV-2 and the disease that it is responsible for causing, COVID-19. When SARS-CoV-1 was first identified in humans in 2002, the genomic sequencing of the virus cost several months [4]. Technological advancements have since allowed SARS-CoV-2 to be mapped within weeks of the first recognised case [5]. Months later, this genetic information has enabled sophisticated tracing of transmission chains, allowing researchers to understand that a particularly infectious variant of the virus has now become globally dominant [6,7].
## (s45) Impact on clinical science
(p45.0) Since March 2020, the challenge of performing clinical research has been immense due to the suspension of many healthcare services. The impact of COVID-19 on clinical studies was immediate and will have long-standing consequences. Many clinical trials have been paused with the exception of those focused on COVID-19. Enrolment into new studies has also been suspended due to the risk of spreading COVID-19. Where possible, on-going and future clinical trials have been revised to allow for the implementation of virtual monitoring systems to minimize participants' risk of infection [27].
## (s46) Impact on researchers
(p46.0) Early-career researchers (ECR) and PhD students have been particularly hard struck by the COVID-19 pandemic [31]. The income of both are vulnerable to economic change and research programme time is often limited. PhD students typically rely on fellowships spanning one to four years in length. Added time due to lost productivity owing to COVID-19 may result in the incurrence of additional tuition and research consumable fees. ECRs are expected to yield high outputs during their short-term contracts, spanning one to two years in length. An inability to complete the originally proposed research programme objectives within a pre-defined timeline could impact future job applications [31].

(p46.1) A survey conducted by Nature between mid-June and end of July 2020 indicated that almost two-thirds of postdoctoral researchers had felt that the COVID-19 pandemic could dampen future career prospects [32][33][34]. Several other factors have fuelled concerns regarding career progression. For example:

(p46.2) 1. Publications: Due to the closure of universities and research institutions, researchers may be unable to complete essential experiments required for the submission of scientific work. Of course, they may still be able to catch up on unfinished work. 2. Funding: Since research output is often used to make funding decisions, researchers may struggle to obtain the necessary funding to complete their planned research programmes, leading many academic contributions to go unrecognized. 3. Networking: With the majority of worldwide scientific events transitioning to a virtual platform, many researchers may lose important career development opportunities in the form of building their reputation within the scientific community via networking or research dissemination. Additionally, junior researchers may feel particularly vulnerable when sharing sensitive information and novel ideas digitally. 4. Job cuts and hiring freeze: Due to an unprecedented decline in international student enrolment and the resulting fall in university revenue, several universities are under financial pressure. Many have responded with job cuts and the imposition of hiring slowdowns and freezes.
## (s48) Funding
(p48.0) The COVID-19 lockdown has led to monumental implications for charities and funding for scientific research. The increasingly likely prospect of a long-term economic downturn could lead to longer-term impacts on development budgets, funding from direct donations, as well as government and charitable grants. Moreover, a reduction in fundraising income due to the cancellation of events and nationwide lockdowns have led to concerns regarding charity-funded research, the premature closure of sites working overseas, and the furlough of charity staff [42].
## (s51) Outlook and future considerations
(p51.0) As with the rest of 'normal' life, the research landscape has been significantly and detrimentally altered by COVID-19. The changes having come into effect over the past several months are unlikely to revert to the old status quo in the near future and so a 'new normal' may have to be reached [54].
