# Duhring Disease, A Rare Autoimmune Disease Diagnosis and Management: A Review Article

CorpusID: 235500035 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c7f8b1c9544ead3ad3c3763d074379b6b6cc3f1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4c7f8b1c9544ead3ad3c3763d074379b6b6cc3f1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Gluten Free Diet
(p6.0) The main therapeutic management of dermatitis herpetiformis is a gluten-free diet. Adherence to a strict gluten-free diet resulted in resolution of symptoms of dermatitis herpetiformis and a positive development of intestinal pathology. Despite implementing a non-strict gluten-free diet, the accumulation of IgA in the dermoepidermal junction in dermatitis herpetiformis patients will slowly disappear and may take several years to completely disappear. The gluten challenge in dermatitis herpetiformis patients will cause the re-emergence of IgA accumulation on the skin and flaring as a clinical skin symptom in dermatitis herpetiformis. In rare patients, the application of a gluten-free diet does not promote a healing process in these patients. This indicates that there may be other processes involved in the pathogenesis of the disease [10,11,14,15]. Table 1: Group of products and products that are allowed to be consumed by patients on a gluten-free diet [9].
## (s9) Other Sulphon Drugs
(p9.0) Apart from dapsone, the use of sulfasalazine and sulfametoksipiridazine is also reported to be used in the management of patients with dermatitis herpetiformis. This is because the metabolism of the two drugs against sulphapyridine has a similar action to the metabolism of dapsone. Because sulfasalazine is absorbed variably, the outcome of therapy is more difficult to predict; it is therefore positioned as a second-line treatment agent for dermatitis herpetiformis. Usually, controlled patients are given sulphapiridine at a dose of 1 to 2 g orally per day.

(p9.1) As for sulfasalazine, it was reported that the patient responded at a dose of 2 to 4 g per day [10,11]. And in other literature, the authors found that the recommended therapy for dermatitis herpetiformis in order to achieve fast and lasting results for sufferers is to provide a gluten-free diet directly in combination with Dapsone (100 -200 mg per day for adults) and sulfapiridine (1 -1.5 g per day for adults) [11,14].
## (s12) Other Pharmacological Treatment
(p12.0) In uncontrolled studies and several case reports, cyclosporine, colchicine, heparin, tetracyclines, and nicotinamide are claimed to be quite effective in therapy in patients with dermatitis herpetiformis. But still requires further study and research [11].
