# Active Compound and Heavy Metals in Bleaching Creams and Their Health Effects: A Review

CorpusID: 234276335 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3af7dd7dd0cde6a3824e78b7fe08a2d6f9956e14](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3af7dd7dd0cde6a3824e78b7fe08a2d6f9956e14)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s11) Health Risk
(p11.0) Skincare products may reason allergic and skin harmful it can stay on the body for a duration [31]. Skin whitening factor as hydroquinone (HQ) is dangerous chemicals and potential mutagenicity. Ochronosis is described by a gradually darkening of the region to which the cream which contained a great dose of HQ is used for many years [32].

(p11.1) The allergic reactions correlated with deodorant and fragrances are great may be due to the aroma or other components. Aromas can enter the body byway the skin (adsorption), and it can be caused by more symptoms. carcinogens were found as co phethleugenol, while phthalates are suspected hormone disrupters [33].
## (s16) Zinc
(p16.0) Zinc is one of the important elements for humans and problems may occur due to not eating this element. Excessive exposure to this ingredient causes toxic effects through the mouth or the skin and causes gastrointestinal pain. So far, there is no evidence proving that zinc is a carcinogen, but it is known that the high density of this mineral is toxic to living cells [42]. Moreover, it was found that toothpaste contains high levels of zinc (1842 and 2417 ppm). These ratios were higher than reported by Odukudu et al. [43] for toothpaste formulations (0.743 ppm). On the other hand, children's toothpaste does not contain the element zinc. Meanwhile, zinc is found in plaque, saliva, and tooth enamel. However, zinc has been incorporated into toothpaste to keep the teeth clean. Furthermore, a study by Lynch [20], it was observed that elevated zinc levels persist for hours after using toothpaste for oral hygiene.
## (s17) Health hazards of heavy metals in bleaching creams
(p17.0) Skin remains the main important source of heavy metal toxicity in humans. Thus, different cosmetics had contained heavy metals. The levels of Cr, lead, and cadmium in cosmetics products was higher than the limits levels as follows: 1.0, 10.0, and 0.3 ppm, respectively, according to the EPA and the World Health Organization. Long time use of cosmetics is a potential source of heavy metal toxicity [44].
