# OPEN ACCESS RECEIVED A review of mental health and wellbeing under climate change in small island developing states (SIDS)

CorpusID: 233915026 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d691486cd3302470a4aeb431ece9e3eba5e6a7a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d691486cd3302470a4aeb431ece9e3eba5e6a7a6)

Fields: Environmental Science, Psychology, Medicine, Physics

## (s5) The role of uncertainty
(p5.0) Several SIDS locations around the Caribbean have recently reported severe coastal erosion anecdotally or through local shoreline surveys. These reports require further formal study in terms of local understandings, quantitative tracking, and attribution to climate change. For instance, climate change was thought to be causing beach erosion in Barbados until locally caused ecosystem damage was found to play the predominant role (Mycoo 2014). Good practice case studies also exist, but require formal research for verification. In Anseà la Mouche, Seychelles, the government instituted coastal protection through land reclamation in 2013, creating a local park which supported local ownership and protected a main road. Such locally focused green spaces are known to promote mental health and wellbeing (Nieuwenhuijsen and Khreis 2017), but the developments in Anseà la Mouche (and elsewhere around SIDS, e.g. Havana (Orta Ortiz and Geneletti 2018)) have not been formally evaluated with respect to their local and national influences on health and wellbeing.
## (s9) Climate change, migration, and mental health and wellbeing
(p9.0) There has been little investigation of the effects of potential migration linked to climate change on mental health and wellbeing in SIDS. This includes for the places most often mentioned as likely candidates for large-scale forced migration due to sea-level rise, namely the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Maldives, Marshall Islands, and Tuvalu. Migration can be a highly stressful experience, especially when forced. The stress of migration can be exacerbated by a lack of social support, poor health systems, insufficient livelihoods, economic hardship, discrimination, and limited access to housing, education, social services, and healthcare. Consequences can include reduced self-esteem, poor adjustment to the new location, and increased rates of depression, phobias, and schizophrenia (e.g. Bennouna et al 2019, Henssler et al 2020, Selten et al 2020). Unpublished local anecdotes from people previously affected in the Pacific by forced migration from nuclear testing indicate that psychosocial impacts of forced migration can span generations, so corroboration through research methods would be an important task.
