# Prognostic factors for patients with metastatic breast cancer: a literature review

CorpusID: 234246455 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c3d62672f1c29ca61f152b1b2acc3f623a3f5e6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Breast cancer (BC) is one of the most common malignant tumors and the leading cause of cancer death among women (1,2). Metastasis is the main reason causing death in patients with BC (3). Metastasis would occur in approximately 5% to 10% of patients with BC. Besides, about 30% of women will finally develop relapsed BC after the initial diagnosis at early stages (4,5). Despite of medical advances, the 5-year survival rate of patients with metastatic breast cancer (MBC) is still less than 30% (6).

(p0.1) In order to treat MBC more precisely, many efforts have been made to identify prognostic factors of MBC in many studies. It has been found in some studies that patient characteristics such as age and performance status are associated with the prognosis of patients with MBC (1,7). Moreover, it has been found in other studies that characteristics of tumors such as molecular type and histological grade are related to the survival of these patients (8,9). According to molecular type and other prognostic factors, specific treatment strategies, such as anti-HER2 therapy and endocrine therapy, could be adopted to improve the outcome of patients.

(p0.2) Due to the fact that the prognosis of MBC is affected by various factors, it is significant to better evaluate the prognosis of individual patients through combining those factors together. There are various results on prognostic factors of MBC from different studies involving different subtypes. This review aims to make a summarization of these studies and give some suggestions on future studies, so that researchers could easily find the specific prognostic factors and relevant information about different subtypes of MBC, thus providing a reference for the research of MBC. We present the following article in accordance with the PRISMA reporting checklist (available at http://dx.doi. org/10.21037/tcr-20-2119).
## (s7) Prognostic factors of MBC, including PMBC and metastatic recurrence
(p7.0) Khanfir et al. (15) analyzed 332 patients with histologically confirmed PMBC and metastatic recurrence BC in Tunisia. They found that good performance status (PS), non-visceral metastatic recurrence and ≤70 years old were related to better OS ( independently associated with OS after the first recurrence.

(p7.1) In the study from China, it was found that PS was related to OS besides the mentioned factors, while there was no such relation for DFS. There was another study evaluating patients in Spain (1), which included more population compared with the study in Spain. This study collected the clinical data of 2,322 patients from 50 hospitals. In this study, it was found that age, tumor characteristics and treatment were related to prognosis, but DFS appeared not to be associated with prognosis as per the multivariate analysis.
## (s8) Patients with PMBC
(p8.0) Ren et al. (23) identified 194 patients with distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis in the United States. They found race and HR status could exert impact on OS. In another study from the United States (24), researchers aimed to identify clinical characteristics related to distant metastasis by age groups in a large population. They found that age, HR and other factors such as T stage and the site of metastasis, could affect OS and BCSS of these patients. In a study from Japan, Kawano et al. (22) conducted an analysis of 69 HR positive PMBC patients. They found that progesterone receptor status and clinical benefit rate from the first-line endocrine therapy were independent prognostic factors of OS.
## (s10) Prognostic factors of MBC with positive HER2
(p10.0) Qin et al. (11) assessed 243 MBC patients with HER2 positive in southern China. They found that anti-HER2 therapy (trastuzumab or lapatinib), endocrine therapy and surgical intervention were favorable independent prognostic factors for OS in these patients, while poor PS and brain metastasis were unfavorable factors. In another study, Bringolf et al. (14) identified 81 patients with HER2 positive, among whom there were 25 receiving HER2targeted therapy in Switzerland. They found that only primary brain metastasis was an unfavorable prognostic factor, while other factors were not significantly associated with the prognosis of these patients. Median OS of patients with primary brain metastasis was 1.9 years (95% CI, 1.7-2.2 years), while median OS of all patients with brain metastasis was 26 months (95% CI, 19.9-32.0 months).
## (s12) Discussion
(p12.0) In this review, an exploration on the prognostic factors of MBC from 30 studies has been carried out from different aspects. As per the results, it can be seen that age at primary diagnosis, tumor size, histological grade, HR status, HER2 status, lymph node involvement, site and number of metastasis are universally acknowledged prognostic factors (Figure 1), which reflects that the intrinsic characteristics of tumor are main factors affecting the prognosis of patients with MBC.

(p12.1) In previous studies, DFS was considered as a strong prognostic factor of MBC (39)(40)(41). In this study, however, there is still a contention on the relationship between DFS and OS. It was revealed in some studies that short DFS was significantly associated with worse OS (2,8,9,16,19); however, there were some studies not revealing this association (1,7,18). There are several possible reasons for those studies not showing the significant association between DFS and OS. Firstly, as per the study of Largillier et al. (18), DFS appears to be related to OS in the univariate analysis, but other parameters like tumor size are more powerful in the prediction of the specific survival in multivariate Cox model, which would eliminate the efficacy of DFS. Secondly, as per the study of Liu et al. (7), a prognostic tool named Nottingham Prognostic Index, along with DFS and other factors, has been included in the analysis. The Nottingham Prognostic Index has been constructed via histological grade, ER status, site of metastasis and DFS (42) and DFS indeed could exert an impact on this index. Finally, all the mentioned factors do not show a significant influence on OS except for Nottingham Prognostic Index. Since there is a relationship between Nottingham Prognostic Index and other factors, the results may not be persuasive enough. As we know, DFS reflects the aggressiveness of tumor. If there is a relationship between DFS and OS, DFS would be a useful factor to predict the survival time of patients and maybe a more powerful ajuvant treatment should be applied to patients to prolong the duration of DFS. Of course, a further investigation shall be made in the future.

(p12.2) Owing to advances in early detection and modern systemic therapy, the survival of patients with MBC improves over time (43) and the risk of death decreases by 1% in each year (44). It is suggested that the improvement in survival is related to treatment as per the results from a large multicenter study (43). Referring to the efficacy, there are various outcomes in different studies in this review. It could be found in some studies that adjuvant therapies, including chemotherapy, endocrine therapy, targeted therapy and radiotherapy, could prolong the survival time of patients with MBC, while there still are some studies not revealing the significant benefits on survival from systemic treatment (1,2,7,8,(18)(19)(20)(21)24 inevitable for the existence of patient selection bias, which would disturb the results. Nevertheless, in this review, there are two studies carried out in eight and fifty hospitals respectively (1,8). As per the results from these two studies, the adjuvant treatment can be regarded as a favorable prognostic factor of MBC. These results are relatively more convincing. A prospective study should be conducted to testify the impact of adjuvant therapy on survival. Bone is the most common site of metastasis in BC. It is suggested that about 70% of patients with BC will develop BM (45). Bone metastasis are mainly distributed to axial skeleton, due to the possible fact that malignant cells could migrate through the axial bone marrow circulation which is connected with low-pressure valveless vertebral-venous plexus (16). As per the study of Parkes et al., 36% of patients would have BM in the axial skeleton, 11% of patients would have BM in the appendicular skeleton, and 54% of patients would have BM in both the axial and appendicular skeleton. These results could confirm the theory mentioned above. In this study, metastasis in both axial and appendicular skeleton would result in worse outcome than in either axial or appendicular skeleton, which could help us to stratify the risk of death within patients diagnosed with BM and provide them with a more appropriate treatment.

(p12.3) CNS is one of the most common sites of metastasis and accounts for about 30% of all MBC (46). It has been assumed that the incidence of CNS metastasis would be higher in young, ER negative (47) and HER2 positive patients (48). As per the study of Altundag et al. (17), there is a better prognosis of MBC with CNS metastasis for young and ER positive patients. Although young patients are more likely to develop CNS metastasis, they tend to have better outcomes than old patients. However, for patients with ER negative, the prognosis is not optimistic due to both higher risk of developing CNS metastasis and poor prognosis after CNS metastasis. It has also been found by the authors that patients with HER2 positive tend to live longer than those with HER2 negative, which is consistent with the results from Yamamura et al. (20). Anti-HER2 therapy may be the main factor that could improve the prognosis of patients with HER2 positive.
