# environmental engineering Humic substances and significance of their application -a review

CorpusID: 237204868 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9015012640937723bba910c607b1a55b3d1bf75b)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s2) Industrial applications of humic substances
(p2.0) The potential use of HAs for industrial purposes may lie in their ability to increase the toughness and plasticity of various materials. HAs can replace fossil-based cement additives as well as lignin. The possibility of using HAs in the processes of crystal morphosynthesis, non-classical crystallisation as well as mineralisation and remineralisation in soil is also expected due to the very strong metal ion binding properties of HAs (Yang and Antonietti, 2020).
## (s3) The utilisation of HAs obtained from the wastewater of the olive mill oil industry
(p3.0) In an experiment in which HA extraction was preceded by abiotic catalysis, the content of the obtained acids in the wastewater tripled in comparison with treatment in open-air lagoon. This indicated the ability of manganese (IV) oxide to efficiently catalyse the organic matter humification process in wastewater from an olive-oil mill. The results were applied industrially in wastewater -abiotic catalysis was applied before the addition of the liquid amendments to induce humification. Enhancing the quality of the HA-like fraction, which is a natural source of organic matter, as a liquid soil amendment is a promising treatment to avoid its dispersion and as a result, to minimise its negative environmental impact. This treatment is especially desirable in semi-arid regions (Brunetti, Sensesi and Plaza, 2008).
## (s7) Remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals -cadmium and arsenic
(p7.0) Due to the high content of functional groups containing oxygen, HSs are an effective material used for the remediation of soils contaminated with heavy metals. Examples of such metals are Cd and As, the difficulty of their simultaneous removal is caused by the opposite chemical behaviours of these elements. It is important to adjust the washing conditions to the soil properties. Important factors are the pH value, the duration and cycles of washing and the HSs concentration (Bi, Yuan, Wei, Xiao, Feng, Meng and Wang, 2019). The content of Cd and As in soil can be a serious problem in specific places, as is the case in China. A national survey showed that the national standards were exceeded in 7% and 2.7% of the sampling sites for Cd and As, respectively. Cd and As are toxic and carcinogenic elements -their presence in soil poses a threat to the quality of the environment and human health and has a negative effect on food. Therefore, it is so important to minimise the risk by removing these elements from the soil (Bi et. al., 2019).

(p7.1) The research concerns the possibility of using HSs as a washing agent for the simultaneous removal of Cd and As from soil. Dissolved HSs were extracted from leonardite. The efficiency of Cd and As removal with HSs were tested in three types of contaminated soils: red soil, black soil and fluvo-aquic soil. Toxic elements were removed as a result of the complexation of Cd and As with the carboxyl and phenolic groups of HSs. The use of HSs as a washing agent is justified due to their efficiency, cheap availability (coal, peat, sludge) and their positive influence on the physical, chemical and biological properties of the soil (Bi et. al., 2019).

(p7.2) Single washing with HSs for twelve hours at pH 7 resulted in the removal of 88.1% of Cd and 44.2% of As from the red soil. The content of Cd decreased by 75.1% and As decreased by 57.4% in fluvo-aquic soil -washing was performed for twelve hours. The effect of a single six-hour wash of black soil reduced the Cd content by 68.2%, while the As content decreased by 49.9%. Repeated washing resulted in an increased efficiency of toxic-element removal. The pH value of HSs was close to neutral, positively influencing the removal rate and limiting the possible destructive effect on the soil. The high removal efficiency of Cd and As from soils and the low content of other metals (Cd: 0.09, Pb: 5.32, Cu: 8.72, Cr: 6.60, As: 3.69, Ni: 8.39, Zn: 20.36 mg/kg) confirm the applicability of using HSs for the remediation of contaminated soil (Bi et. al., 2019).
## (s10) Application of humic acids in agriculture
(p10.0) One of the technologies of organic waste management is composting, which promotes humification and the creation of forms that are more stable than raw waste. Compost can be used as a soil amendment. In agricultural and horticultural production, compost can be a high-quality substitute for peat, which is used for container-grown plants. Municipal solid waste can also be composted -composting reduces the volume and weight of waste by half, and the resulting product can be beneficial for agriculture use. In the tested compost made of municipal solid waste, the maturity of the compost was assessed. It was observed that after 112 days, the HA content of the compost increased to a maximum plateau. Moreover, the cucumber bioassay of compost maturity showed that the highest dry weight of the plants was obtained in the mentioned time (Olk, Bloom, Perdue, McKnight, Chen, Farenhorst, Senesi, Chin, Schmitt-Kopplin, Hertkorn and Harir, 2019;Chefetz, Hatcher, Hadar and Chen, 1996). Lignite is a low-rank coal, and instead of being used for energy purposes, it can be implemented in agriculture. Lignite is a source of HSs and may therefore be used as an indirect component of fertilisers. Research was performed in which the properties of HAs obtained from lignite were assessed. The obtained HAs have a high number of aliphatic connections (58-78%) and a low aromatic polycondensation. Aromatic and aliphatic groups are an important element of the ion exchange capacity, mineral-organic connections with commercial humic products are possible thanks to these groups. Moreover, aromatic structures stabilise organic substances and constitute a source of energy and matter for microorganisms .

(p10.1) Each industrial use of HSs is preceded by detailed analyses performed in order to properly characterise them. Depending on the source of HSs and the applied extractants, their structure and properties may differ (Huculak-Mączka, Hoffman and Hoffman, 2018).
## (s12) Humic acids as growth stimulators
(p12.0) During the research work, the influence of various fractions of HAs extracted from leonardite on seedlings of snap bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) was analyzed. The obtained HAs were divided into three groups in terms of molecular weight (Qian et. al., 2015).

(p12.1) The study confirmed that the use of HAs stimulates plant growth. The acid fraction characterised by low molecular weight had a particularly positive effect on plant height compared to the group of control plants (without the addition of HAs) and the group of plants in which acid fractions of a high molecular weight were applied. The beneficial effects include increasing the number of leaves and the total root length, increasing the leaf and root area of snap beans, and promoting the uptake of nitrates by the roots and their accumulation at leaf level. The potassium content in plants also increased with the decreasing molecular weight of the HAs fractions used. HAs fractions characterised by high molecular weight determined leaf growth and reduced the length and surface of the roots. The amount of phosphorus did not differ significantly between the different groups of the tested plants, which may be related to the property of HSs to form complexes with metals. This may lead to the increased sorption of phosphorus ions, the effect of sorption is stronger than the ability of the roots to uptake this element, which reduces the phosphorus content in the plant (Qian et. al., 2015).

(p12.2) In summary, the improvement of physical parameters (growth of leaves and roots of green beans) can be achieved through the use of HAs fractions of low molecular weight, as shown by the results of the experiment (Qian et. al., 2015).

(p12.3) The stimulating effect of HSs was also demonstrated in an experiment on peppermint (Mentha piperita L.), which was subjected to foliar spraying with HSs, chemical fertilisation (nitrogen and potassium fertilisation) and the addition of Funneliformis mosseae (Shahabivand, Padash, Aghaee, Nasiri and Rezaei, 2018).

(p12.4) As a result of the experiment, an increase in the level of proline was observed in the leaves of plants sprayed with HSs and fertilised. Similar effects occurred in the case of maize leaves, in which HSs was applied as foliar, under different irrigation conditions (Shahabivand, Padash, Aghaee, Nasiri and Rezaei, 2018;Anjum, Wang, Farooq, Xue and Ali, 2011).

(p12.5) It was shown that the addition of HSs improved the photosynthesis process in peppermint plants. Other studies also showed a positive effect of HSs on the chlorophyll content of leaves. One of the studies concerned chrysanthemums with chemical fertilisation and foliar spraying with HA solution -the effects of which were better. A different study was conducted under deficient and optimal water regimes, the chlorophyll content in maize also increased after the foliar application of HSs (Shahabivand, Padash, Aghaee, Nasiri and Rezaei, 2018).

(p12.6) The HSs application influenced the accumulation of soluble proteins, which provides information about the role of HSs in the nitrogen cycle. In addition, a reduction in peppermint plant root colonisation was observed similar to that occurring with green beans, probably due to the increased availability of phosphorus in the soil (Shahabivand, Padash, Aghaee, Nasiri and Rezaei, 2018).

(p12.7) The best results were achieved with the combined use of Funneliformis mosseae and spraying with a HSs solution. These two components can be successfully used in the field as biostimulants for peppermint. Such technological solutions contribute to improving soil health and reducing environmental problems in sustainable agriculture (Shahabivand, Padash, Aghaee, Nasiri and Rezaei, 2018 
## (s13) Sustainability of monoculture paddy rice
(p13.0) In the Philippines, long-term field trials have been performed on the cultivation of a paddy rice monoculture (double-and triple-cropped). The results of the research have shown a large decline in yields over the decades due to a decrease in the crop uptake of nitrogen from soil organic matter (SOM), despite the increased amounts of this element in these soils and the continuous uptake of nitrogen fertilisers. Presumably, phenolic lignin residues were accumulated in the HA fractions and soil nitrogen cycling was inhibited in the conditions of soil supersaturation with water during the rice-cultivation season. In order to improve the nitrogen cycling of the soil, alternate wetting and drying cycles were applied, thereby increasing soil aeration and degrading phenolic lignin residues, which can bind soil nitrogen forms. These new crop management treatments were also created to conserve the water. The combination of the described treatments and fertilisation resulted in the amount of water needed for irrigation being reduced by 25%, what is more, a significant decrease in greenhouse gas emissions was also achieved, equal to 90%, the incidence of fungal diseases and the content of arsenic and mercury in grains also decreased (Olk et. al., 2019).

(p13.1) The characterisation of HA extracted without first removing calcium allowed a better understanding of the nitrogen cycle of the soil. Concepts based on these characteristics have contributed to the achievement of sustainable rice production. It has been verified that the fractions of HA can reflect the dynamics of SOM, thus the obtained information can be used in solving problems related to soil-nutrient cycling (Olk et. al., 2019).
