# A REVIEW ON RECENT DEVELOPMENTS FOR THE CURE OF SALMONELLA ENTERICA SEROVAR TYPHI, THE CAUSATIVE AGENT FOR TYPHOID FEVER

CorpusID: 238104458 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6415dfab16b7799a4e144911f6a9af32732be42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6415dfab16b7799a4e144911f6a9af32732be42)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Vaccine Developments in Cure of Salmonella
(p1.0) In recent decades, there have been several improvements in typhoid fever in accordance with the understanding of its global burden, including the geographical representation of high-quality incidence studies of typhoid fever and an increase in the number of cases, as well as greater complexity of modelling approaches. There are several barriers to the generation of evidence to promote the implementation, however, of an effective S. Typhi vaccine in endemic countries worldwide. With a no reliable point-of-care diagnostic, nonspecific clinical presentation and predicting the precise ailment and thus the need for vaccination to prevent dumps, loss of life, and financial burden has been difficult (Ibe et al., 2019).
## (s2) Multiple Drugs Resistant
(p2.0) The antimicrobial arsenal gradually exhausted due to drug resistant strains, making treatment difficult and costly. A new extensive antibiotic resistant strain (XDR) emerged in Hyderabad in 2016, infecting more than 8,000 people in 14 areas and has since been distributed across Sindh. A recent outbreak of XDR typhoid (defined as MDR plus fluoroquinolone resistance) has been reported in Pakistan (Klemm et al., 2018) . These XDR Salmonella isolates are not only resistant to first-line antibiotics (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, chloramphenicol and ampicillin), they are also resistant to ciprofloxacin. They do not respond to cephalosporins (third generation antibiotics) due to the acquisition of the H58 haplotype mutation. In a large-scale outbreak in Hyderabad, Sindh, for the first time, the new S. typhi XDR clone isolated. The chromosomally located resistance region is present in this S. typhi along the IncY plasmid, which contains the blaCTX-M15 extended-spectrum -lactamase, which mediates ceftriaxone resistance, as well as the qnrS fluoroquinolone resistance gene. S. typhi can convert from MDR to XDR in one single phase by acquiring a plasmid which can propagate the XDR clone globally. This problem must also be addressed with diagnostic and therapeutic options. In every clinical setting, these include a quick and accurate diagnosis of typhoid fever. Widal and Typhidot tests, are unreliable and obsolete serological tests that must be phased out. We need 3rd generation cephalosporins and IV ceftriaxone for empirical therapy and for serious cases, respectively (Andualem et al., 2014). Oral cefixime (high dose) should be used in casualty settings in less serious situations, including MDR typhoid. Sensitive strains can be treated safely with oral administration of Amoxicillin or Trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole. Treatment must last for at least 10-14 days or until the patient is afebrile for at least 5 days, whichever comes first. With XDR typhoid, the fear of the dreadful "untreatable typhoid" has become a hideous fact.
## (s6) Recommended Vaccines
(p6.0) Currently three recommended typhoid vaccines are used. The first one is the injectable typhoid conjugate vaccine (TCV), which is made up of ViCPS linked to the tetanus protein which is approved for below year and up to 45 years aged group public. The second is an un-conjugated injectable polysaccharide vaccine based on purified VI antigen (Vi-PS) for people over the age of two years. The third vaccine is approved for six years of age is an oral liveattenuated Ty21a vaccine involve in capsule formulation. It is suitable for use in younger children and expects a longer safety period due to its improved immunological characteristics while TCV is preferred at all ages (Martin, 2012;Organization, 2019).
## (s7) Current Typhoid Vaccines
(p7.0) Current Typhoid Vaccines are characterized as Vi-capsular polysaccharide (ViCPS) injectable vaccine and live attenuated Ty21a (oral) vaccine, both are worldwide accessible. Ty21a is standard to use for six years and up to this aged group children with three to four doses recommendation. The ViCPS vaccine is approved for children under the age of two. And in older, after every two to three years a booster dose required (Rebaza & Lee, 2015).
