# Citation: Metal Material, Properties and Design Methods of Porous Biomedical Scaffolds for Additive Manufacturing: A Review

CorpusID: 232358450 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5c5149933e604953218b801b8b2bc7a95a184c66](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5c5149933e604953218b801b8b2bc7a95a184c66)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Bone defects caused by pathologies such as fracture, bone tumor, or external trauma are among the main problems in clinical treatment (Moiduddin et al., 2017). Autologous bone transplantation is considered to be a good choice, but the mismatched performance of different bone sites and the limited number of useful bone grafts limit the application of autologous bone transplantation (Henkel et al., 2013). In contrast, allogeneic bone transplantation has an obvious risk of immune rejection and infection, which affects bone formation and is prone to bone resorption. Therefore, it is ideal to seek natural bone replacement for bone transplantation in orthopedics.

(p0.1) As an alternative material, porous metal scaffolds avoid a series of adverse reactions in natural bone grafting and have gradually attracted researchers' attention. To simulate the mechanical properties and biocompatibility of real bone, porous metal scaffolds not only have interconnected porous structures but also have good mechanical properties and biocompatibility (Li et al., 2020a). Mechanical properties mainly include better yield strength, matching elastic modulus, and better fatigue strength (Yuan et al., 2019). Common biomedical metal materials such as Ti and Ti alloys can completely meet bone implants needs in terms of strength. Nevertheless, the elastic modulus of dense metals is much greater than that of human bones, which is prone to bone resorption and leads to bone loosening in the human body (Bundy, 2008). The porous scaffolds can obtain matching elastic modulus with human bone by adjusting the pore size and porosity (Kelly et al., 2019), and at the same time have better yield and fatigue strength (Chen et al., 2018). Porous metal scaffolds should also have good biocompatibility, which not only can promote cell attachment, growth, proliferation, and differentiation, but also facilitates the transport of nutrients and metabolic wastes (Little et al., 2011;Saint-Pastou Terrier and Gasque, 2017).

(p0.2) Traditional processing methods are challenging to prepare porous metal scaffolds with complex structures, while additive manufacturing (AM) technology can prepare the scaffolds with controllable structures, shape, and properties (Wang et al., 2020a). Thus AM is one of the most effective methods to prepare porous metal scaffolds. The design of porous metal scaffolds is another crucial problem because scaffold features such as unit type, pore size, porosity, and distribution have significantly influence on their mechanical properties and biocompatibility. Therefore, this article introduces the AM technologies for preparing metal scaffolds and summaries the research progress in relative metal materials, including non-biodegradable metals (Ti alloys, Ta alloy, and stainless steel), and biodegradable metals (Fe, Mg alloy, and Zn alloy). Besides, we review the structural characteristics of porous metal scaffolds and their design methods in detail, and evaluate the advantages and limitations of these methods. Finally, we prospect the future development direction of bone scaffolds.
## (s2) ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING TECHNOLOGY
(p2.0) Additive manufacturing (AM) technologies, also known as 3D printing, attracts extensive attention in the fabrication of biomedical implants due to their capability of manufacturing porous scaffolds with irregular shapes (Chen et al., 2020b). AM prepares products by layer-by-layer stacking method, which divides into the following three steps. Firstly, the entity model is established by commercial software such as UG, Pro/Engineer, SolidWorks, and Materialise 3-Matic, etc. Secondly, the model is imported into slicing software for slicing and layering. Finally, the layered file is imported into a 3D printer, and the parts are formed layer by layer from bottom to top. At present, the AM technologies suitable for preparing porous metal scaffolds mainly divides into two categories: powder bed fusion technology (PBF) and directional deposition technology (DED) . Compared with DED, PBF can prepare the parts with better manufacturing accuracy and surface quality and are more prevalent in the biomedical field. Therefore, this article focuses on powder bed fusion technologies, including selective laser sintering (SLS), selective laser melting (SLM), and electron beam melting (EBM) (Chen et al., 2020b). The differences in these AM technologies are summarized, as shown in Table 1.
## (s3) Selective Laser Sintering (SLS) and
(p3.0) Selective Laser Melting (SLM) Figure 1A show the schematic diagram of SLS. SLS uses a laser as an energy source to sinter the powder materials (Szymczyk-Ziółkowska et al., 2020). After melting one layer, the equipment descends to fabrication platform and raises the powder delivery platform. Then the roller rolls out powders on the fabrication platform, and a new layer of sintering begins. This process is repeated until entirely formation of the part. When using SLS, prepared material need introduce binder materials (alloys with a low melting point) to reduce the melting point, promoting sintering (Lee et al., 2017). SLS can prepare a variety of materials such as polymers (Goodridge et al., 2012), metals and alloys (Bae et al., 2014), etc. but it is challenging to prepare metal materials with a high melting points.

(p3.1) Selective laser melting is developed based on SLS technology, and its principles are the same. Nevertheless, powder material and the bonding mechanisms in the two technologies are different. In SLS technology, the powder materials are heated to partly melt by laser beams instead of completely melting . Powders with a low melting points are used as binders for bonding high melting point metals (Qu, 2020). Compared with SLS, the laser of SLM has higher energy (Dogan et al., 2020), which can completely melt the powder. Thus it can prepare metals or alloys with a high melting points. The parts prepared by SLM have higher dimensional accuracy and density, and their mechanical properties are comparable to those of forged one. Due to the high sintering temperature, the powder sintering needs to be performed under the protection of inert gas to prevent metal oxidation (Wang et al., 2017).

(p3.2) Selective laser melting technology also has shortcomings. The surface of parts prepared by SLM can adhere to some particles that do not melt completely (Zadpoor, 2019), resulting in its high surface roughness. It is necessary to smooth the surface by sandblasting or chemical corrosion (Ahmadi et al., 2019;Zadpoor, 2019). Besides, when the SLM is used to process brittle materials, residual stresses are easily generated inside the parts during the cooling process. Thus it is often necessary to adopt isobaric sintering or heat treatment to eliminate residual stress .
## (s7) Biodegradable Metals
(p7.0) The biodegradable metal can effectively avoid chronic local inflammation (Moravej and Mantovani, 2011), continuous physical stimulation (Song and Song, 2007), and implant-related infections, which has broad prospects in the biomedical field. At present, Fe, Mg, and Zn alloys are widely studied as materials for degradable scaffolds . How to match the rate of metal degradation to that of bone tissue ingrowth is the main challenge. Table 2 lists the mechanical properties of Fe, Mg, and Zn porous scaffolds.

(p7.1) Fe is an element needed by the human body, and also has good biocompatibility. The main problem for Fe is the slower degradation rate in the human body, which can inhibit the ingrowth rate of bone tissue. Li et al. (2019b) prepared gradient porous Fe scaffolds and the pore size of scaffolds are 600 µm (S0.4), 600-800 µm (Dense-out), 800-600 µm (Dense-in), and 800-600 µm (S0.2). They found that the scaffold of S0.2 and Dense-out had exactly the same structure in the center (Figure 2B), but the weight loss of the Dense-out scaffold in the center was higher than that of the S0.2 scaffold, as shown in Figure 2C. They believe that the Dense-out scaffold has higher flow velocities in the center than on the periphery, as shown in Figure 2D. Adding alloy elements into the Fe can also affect its degradation rate. Carluccio et al. (2019) prepared Fe and Fe-Mn porous scaffolds. They found that the corrosion rate of Fe-Mn scaffold is much higher than that of pure Fe. They believed that a galvanic cell is formed between the different metal scaffolds, which accelerates Fe-Mn alloy's degradation. The Fe-Mn alloy scaffold has good biocompatibility and vitality to mammalian cells.
## (s9) THE STRUCTURE DESIGN OF POROUS METAL SCAFFOLDS
(p9.0) The ideal scaffold should be a porous structure in space that provides space for cells to adhere, grow and proliferate, and have mechanical properties similar to the bone tissue (Cheng et al., 2014). Pore size and porosity are very important structural parameters, which have a direct impact on mechanical properties and biocompatibility of bone scaffolds. Proper pore size can provide growth space for cells, and proper porosity can ensure transportation of nutrients and metabolites in bone tissue (Cheng et al., 2014). Besides, the shape of the porous scaffold structure is also related to the biocompatibility and mechanical properties. The continuous and smooth porous structure can avoid stress concentration and facilitate the attachment of cells to the scaffold surface.

(p9.1) Porous scaffold prepared by the traditional foaming (Murray, 2003) and sintered microsphere methods (Mark et al., 2002) has a single structural unit, and the shape, size, and spatial distribution can not be precisely controlled. With the development of computer-aided design and AM technologies, problems as mentioned above have gradually been improved. AM technologies not only can accurately control the porous scaffold size and spatial structure distribution but also can obtain ideal mechanical properties and biocompatibility of porous scaffold by adjusting the pore size and porosity. In this section, the pore size and porosity of the scaffold are described, and the influence of pore size and porosity on the scaffold's performance are summarized. Then current design methods for porous metal scaffold including CAD structure, topology optimization, minimal surface structure, Voronoi mosaic method, CT imaging method, etc. are systematically reviewed.
## (s12) The Influence of Pore Size and Porosity on Mechanical Properties
(p12.0) The dense metal materials have a much higher elastic modulus than human bone. For example, the elastic modulus of pure Ti and Ti-6Al-4V are 112 and 132 Gpa, respectively (Sing et al., 2016). While the elastic modulus of trabecular or cancellous bone is between 0.02 and 2 Gpa (Wang X. et al., 2016), cortical bone is higher, ranging from 7.7 to 21.8 Gpa . At present, the implant's elastic modulus is mainly controlled by adjusting the pore size and porosity. Yan et al. (2015) prepared Ti-6Al-4V scaffolds with G and D structures with a porosity of 80-95%, a pore size of 480-1600 µm, and found that the elastic modulus is about 0.12-1.25 GPa. The pore size and porosity of scaffold also have immediate impact on strength (Ran et al., 2018). Zhao et al. (2019) prepared octahedral structured Ti-6Al-4V porous scaffolds with pore sizes of 500 and 1000 µm and found that increasing pore size can decrease the tensile strength and fatigue strength. Therefore, increasing the pore size and can reduces the elastic modulus, but it will also cause a decrease in the tensile strength and fatigue strength of the scaffold.
## (s15) Triple Periodic Minimal Surface (TPMS) Structure
(p15.0) A minimal surface is an implicit equivalent surface with zero mean curvature. If the minimal surface is periodic in three independent directions, it is usually called triple periodic minimal surface (TPMS). TPMS can be expressed by a trigonometric function, as shown in Table 3. Changing the TPMS's threshold value can accurately control the internal pore structure, optimize the gradient pore structure, and maximize the specific surface area of the scaffold. Yoo (2011b) proposed a three-dimensional bone scaffold design method that integrated distance field algorithms and TPMS curved surfaces. This method can automatically obtain a bone scaffold model with complex microstructures and high quality free-form external surfaces. Yoo (2011a) proposed another TPMS design method that two different TPMS structures can be combined by using a linear interpolation algorithm.  reported that smooth transition between multiple different TPMS substructures could be combined by sigmoid and Gaussian radial basis functions (Yang and Zhou, 2014;Yang et al., 2015). Ma et al. (2020a) proposed a new method for designing heterogeneous porous scaffolds, that is, TPMS units were combined with grid units using shape functions, and they obtained a conformal refined discrete scaffold of a full hexahedral grid. After finite element analysis, they found that the elastic modulus, strength, and energy absorption of the heterogeneous scaffolds are significantly improved than uniform structure. Nature bone has a porous gradient structure; thus, the gradient TPMS structure is a hot spot in scaffolds design (Almeida and Bártolo, 2014;Zhou et al., 2020). Wang et al. (2020c) designed a symmetrical gradient Ti-6Al-4V scaffolds with a P structure. They found that the gradient structure has better mechanical performance than that of the uniform structure. 
## (s17) Voronoi Tessellation Method
(p17.0) Voronoi tessellation is a space division method based on seed points (Du et al., 2020). The seed points are connected through a specific algorithm to form a space polygon surrounding the seed points. Based on these polygonal edges, irregular porous scaffolds are generated (Xiao and Yin, 2016). Thus the internal structure of natural bone can be well simulated by irregular porous scaffolds based on the Voronoi tessellation principle. Kou and Tan (2010) proposed a design method with controllable shape and distribution by using the twodimensional Voronoi diagram and they obtained irregular concave and convex polygons through the merging of Voronoi units. Then the boundaries of the concave and convex polygons were interconnected to form a bracket. The method makes a heterogeneous porous structure easier and maintain the irregularities in natural bone. Fantini et al. (2016) and Fantini and Curto (2017) used the three-dimensional Voronoi tessellation method to design porous structures, and obtained the three-dimensional Voronoi unit by processing the three-dimensional coordinates, and established the porous structure by Boolean operation on Voronoi unit, as shown in Figure 4. Lei et al. (2020) proposed a new Voronoi tessellation method to control the distribution of seed points and established a function relationship of the porosity and the number of seed points. Through this method, they obtained a Voronoi tessellation scaffold with a gradient distribution of seed points, which realizes the global control of the lattice porous structure.

(p17.1) The Voronoi tessellation method can generate an irregular pore model with controllable pore size and distribution, and the automation degree of generating the model is relatively higher. However, this method can not generate complicate porous structure due to the difficulty in the visualization of the porous scaffolds (Wang et al., 2020b).
## (s19) CT Imaging Method
(p19.0) The main principle of CT imaging method is to analysis and processing of CT or MRI images (Feinberg et al., 1999) and to extract key features by various reconstruction algorithms to perform three-dimensional reconstruction. The modeling flow chart is shown in Figure 5. Hollister (2005) performed gray-scale processing of medical images and obtained the distribution of solid voxel and void information using a binarization segmentation algorithm. Then FIGURE 5 | CT image modeling process (Podshivalov et al., 2013).

(p19.1) Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.frontiersin.org they established the porous structure by mapping the defined porous structure unit to the solid voxel. Podshivalov et al. (2013) segmented the CT image and removed the redundant shadow part, then repaired hole on the model, and finally obtained ideal bone scaffold model, as shown in Figure 4. Ben and Fischer (2015) made important progress in CT image adaptive model reconstruction. They introduced the quadtree and octree algorithms into the process of adaptive model reconstruction, which greatly simplifies the modeling process. Zheng et al. (2020) scanned skull samples, extracted the shape of the skull and reconstructed inside structure of the trabecular. Cell cultures experiment showed that the model restores the internal structure of the skull, and has good biocompatibility. The CT imaging method can produce porous structure closest to the threedimensional structure inside the bone tissue (Cai, 2008;Cai and Xi, 2009;Cai et al., 2012). However, the method has a high dependence on the image resolution (Li et al., 2006), and the simplification processing of CT or MRI data is relatively cumbersome, which leads to certain restrictions on its clinical application (Jones et al., 2007).
## (s20) Comparison of Porous Scaffold Design Methods
(p20.0) At present, CAD design and topology optimization methods are the widely used methods in the design of porous scaffolds because these methods are simple and reliable, and simultaneously meeting the basic requirements of reducing the modulus of the scaffolds. The structures designed by TPMS and Voronoi methods are more similar to the internal structure of human bone, and they have better permeability and mechanical properties than the structure designed by CAD method. The CT imaging method can reflect the real structure of bone. If the reconstruction process of the model can be simplified, it is believed that the CT imaging method can be further developed. The comparisons of these modeling methods are summarized, as shown in Table 4.

(p20.1) The above is the comparison and summary of structural unit design methods. In addition, we also pay attention to the overall design of the scaffold, and the hierarchical structure is the hot spot in the overall design of the scaffold (He et al., 2021). The real shape of bone in human body is the porous structure with gradient distribution. According to the size and porosity of the pores, bone can be divided into dense and cancellous bone from the outside to the inside (Du et al., 2019). Only vascular and nerve channels remain in dense bone, with a porosity of about 5-30%. Cancellous bone has a porosity of 30-90%, and can deform under stress and absorb energy shocks from outside (Liu et al., 2018). The hierarchical structure of natural bone in human body can not only meet the needs of material transportation, but also meet the requirements of mechanical properties. Singh et al. (2010) and Huang et al. (2014) demonstrated that the hierarchical structure of the scaffold can produce anisotropic mechanical properties, which are more similar to the mechanical properties of human bones than the homogeneous structure. If the unit design is combined with the overall hierarchical design, scaffolds with better comprehensive performance can be obtained.
## (s21) SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
(p21.0) Additive manufacturing technology provides unprecedented opportunities for the production of customized biomedical  Gómez et al., 2016;Fantini et al., 2016;Fantini and Curto, 2017 CT imaging method Extract the key shape features of the CT images and perform 3D reconstruction
