# Prevention and Harm Reduction Interventions for Adult Gambling at the Local Level: An Umbrella Review of Empirical Evidence

CorpusID: 237934342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb472e34abe93e49ad032e1ba438cb8b8ea702a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cb472e34abe93e49ad032e1ba438cb8b8ea702a3)

Fields: Business, Psychology, Medicine

## (s3) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria
(p3.0) The search strategy targeted the period from 2000 to the 20 April 2020. Publications had to be peer-reviewed and written in English. More specific inclusion and exclusion criteria have been defined according to the review aim:

(p3.1) • Population: Only reviews regarding the adult population were included; • Intervention: Reviews about the effectiveness of actions, interventions, and policies to prevent or reduce harms and risks of gambling were included. Reviews about risk and protective factors or about gambling disorders treatment were excluded. Only interventions deemed feasible at local level, that can be implemented in specific areas by municipalities, regions, or other local agencies were considered. Reviews about actions which require the involvement of gambling industry or national laws or agreements were excluded; • Outcomes: Changes in gambling behavior or related harm were considered as primary outcomes; secondary outcomes pertain to gambling attitudes, perceptions, and intentions. Recollections, acceptance of intervention, or knowledge were not considered; • Comparison: Only systematic reviews and meta-analyses were included. Three mandatory criteria of the Database of Abstracts of Reviews of Effects (DARE) had to be met: the definition of a review question, the inclusion of a search strategy, and the presence of some data synthesis [3,24,25]. Reviews that considered randomized and nonrandomized trials and qualitative studies were included to better identify effective conditions of implementation.
## (s47) Limitations
(p47.0) The review presents some limitations related to the methodology used. For an umbrella review to be useful requires the pre-existence of the narrower component reviews and its output is inevitably limited by the content of the included reviews and the level of synthesis provided. Moreover, it does not include statistical processing typical of meta-analyses to assess the results. However, its ability to synthesize the evidence across a breadth of literature offers a good overview and several recommendations [3,23].

(p47.1) First, most of the studies considered were conducted in Canada, Australia, the USA, and the north of Europe, thus offering limited insights into the relevance of findings in societies and countries with different social norms and cultures. Second, not all reviews displayed the same level of methodological quality. The criteria used to select the studies were different across reviews and in some cases the list of primary studies was not available. The sample size and effect size are not reported in most of the reviews. However, consistency of results was verified, and differences in implementation and methods were considered. Finally, although most of the reviews reported conflicts of interests and funding sources, primary studies' sources were not reported. More specific distinctions should be considered according to this issue.

(p47.2) Other limitations concern the local perspective. The reviews analyzed did not consider the local perspective and no information was given about the level of implementation of the strategies considered. Future research is needed to confirm this evidence at both the national and local levels.
