# A Survey on Modern Cloud Computing Security over Smart City Networks: Threats, Vulnerabilities, Consequences, Countermeasures, and Challenges

CorpusID: 237706261 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/660c2cf3e8700c8dcd02e8e39db8e2a078db7f2a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/660c2cf3e8700c8dcd02e8e39db8e2a078db7f2a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) With the introduction of the IoT, every object is connected to the Internet to provide diverse types of services, like resource management, scalability, elasticity, power management, data storage, etc. Concepts of CC have been proposed to provide these services. CC provides many facilities, such as remotely accessing data, cost reduction, bandwidth, storage, and ease of access [1]. Its services can run over distributed networks without any interface, as shown in Figure 1. Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) require their software and hardware, while users have to install CC-based web applications [2]. Clouds provide us with interoperability and control sharing managed by different authorities, which is why trust matters for sharing sensitive data. Clouds have many types, like the public, private, community, and hybrid [3,4].
## (s5) CC Security
(p5.0) The perceived risks for CC include confidentiality, integrity, and availability as cybersecurity objectives. At the same time, cloud services are subject to local threats, as well as external ones. Similar to other ICT applications, the possible threats to CC services (including both sides, CSPs and CSCs) include but are not limited to: accidents, natural disasters, criminal organizations, hostile governments, and internal and external unauthorized and authorized cloud systems access (including intruders, employees at the CSPs, etc.). Multi-tenancy characteristics of the cloud service implementations and various cloud service models increase the risks on security and privacy of the end-users and their data.

(p5.1) Cloud security objectives are manifold and discussed as follows. Firstly, the Prevention of unauthorized access to CC infrastructure. This typically includes the implementation of logical separation of cloud resources (e.g., logical separation of cloud user workload on the same server in the cloud by using hypervisors in a multi-tenant environment). Secondly, the Protection of customer data from unauthorized access. This includes supporting Identity Management (IdM), so the CSCs will have a possibility to enforce policies on authorized access to their data and resources in the cloud. Thirdly, the Protection from threats from hardware and software used on the CSP or CSC side, including trustworthiness and reliability of the software and hardware. Fourthly, the implementation of security solutions into the design of Web applications for access to cloud resources. For example, the use of SSL/TLS, certificates, etc. [71].

(p5.2) Fifthly, the Protection of Web servers from attacks with the installation of Firewalls between the public Internet and cloud servers in data centers, applying patches to the software in use, etc. Sixth, the Deployment of access control and intrusion detection systems at the CSP. It includes restriction of physical access (of people, including unauthorized employees) to network and devices, disabling unused ports and services, applying for role-based access, minimizing the use of privileges, mandatory use of antivirus software, and encryption of the end-to-end communication. Seventh, the precise definition of responsibilities regarding the security measures between the CSPs and CSCs. Finally, the Portability of the cloud solutions aiming to provide a possibility to the CSC to change the CSP when the provider fails to satisfy the requirements on confidentiality, availability, and integrity. Figure 4 essentially illustrates the key objectives and aspects of CC security [72].

(p5.3) Security solutions applied in the cloud services by the CSP may create differentiation in the cloud service offerings to customers, which may lead to price differentiation between different service packages offered to different types of CSCs (business, individual, etc.) [73]. Several laws apply to CC, which is country-specific, including telecommunication law, consumer protection law, competition law, and regulations on environmental and jurisdictional concerns. Certain cloud services (e.g., NaaS, CaaS) can fall directly into the regulated sphere of telecommunications regarding networks and services. OTT cloud services (e.g., SaaS, PaaS) provided through public access to the Internet (based on the network-neutral principle) are not treated as separate telecommunication services [74]. 
## (s6) Attacks, Threats, Concerns, Consequences, and Challenges
(p6.0) In CC, with variations of underlying technologies, like IoT, Cloud of Things (CoT), and smart city networks, it is prone to suspect and face various security and privacy threats. Those circumstances and consequences include, by default, the hard-coded and weak credentials (e.g., in web cameras), difficulties to update firmware, and Operating Systems (e.g., in sensors) in the prevailing systems, lack of vendor's support for repairing, rectifying, and removing the vulnerabilities, vulnerabilities regarding the Web interfaces and GUIs over the inter/intra connected networks, encoding, coding, and, subsequently, the decoding errors (e.g., buffer overflow), plain or clear text transfer protocols (no ciphering/encoding/hashing) and presence of the unnecessary and unwanted open ports and sockets, DoS (Denial of Service) and Distributed DoS sensitivities and Ů Physical theft or damage (it may happen to all physical things, not only limited to the IoT, CoT devices), and Ethical hacking and hijacking of presently installed systems (e.g., automobile control systems); in addition, Reconnaissance, Surveillance, Monitoring, and Interception of the data from unauthorized and unwanted modifications or changes (e.g., to automated healthcare delivery mechanisms, to automated inter-banking transactions) in them are considered [75].

(p6.1) Various security problems stem from a loss of control, lack of trust (mechanisms), and multi-tenancy that exist mainly in 3rd party management models. Finally, the selfmanaged clouds still have security, privacy, and trust issues that are not related to the aforementioned security issues, and all these security issues and concerns are elaborated in the preceding paragraph. Over the cloud, the loss of the control is manifested as the consumer's loss of control, along with data, tools, applications, and resources distributed over the cloud located with the cloud service providers. Cloud service performs handling and management of user identity management, user's access control rules, security policies, and further enforcement. Consumers rely on the cloud service providers for assured security and privacy of data, resource availability, monitoring, and repairing of services and resources. In the cloud, lack of trust is manifested in a variety of ways. Putting faith in a third party necessitates taking risks. Defining the terms "confidence" and "risk", people believe, when it costs (J. Camp), they are two sides of the same coin (Economists view).

(p6.2) Trust is only required in high-risk circumstances, such as failed third-party management schemes. It is challenging to strike a balance between confidence and risk, as with Key Escrow (Clipper chip), and there is also the question of whether the cloud is on the same track [76]. The tension between tenants opposing goals was highlighted in the multi-tenancy issues in the cloud. Consumers or the Tenants share a pool of resources and have competing goals; how does multi-tenancy cope with conflict of interest, such as if tenants get along and play well together, and, if not, do we need to separate them by offering separation between consumers [77]? Theoretically, key security and privacy issues in the cloud can be summarized as loss of control and take back control, data and apps may still need to be on the cloud provided they can be managed in some way by the consumer, lack of trust, which can be increased by applying trust (mechanisms), technology, policy, regulation, contracts (incentives) topic of a future talk, multi-tenancy, and private cloud which takes away the reasons to use a cloud in the first place, and VPC which is yet not a separate system and strong separation.
## (s7) Countermeasures against Security Threats and Attacks
(p7.0) The end-to-end security solutions between the CSP and CSC include specific Internet security solutions, such as SSL/TLS (e.g., HTTPS) or VPN access to the cloud (with IPsec). Another possibility for application layer security mechanism is the use of PKI (Public Key Infrastructure) mechanisms for the cloud [78]. Consumer-managed access control requires less trust in the CSP. In this case, Policy Decision Point (PDP) is in the CSC domain and Policy Enforcement Point (PEP) belongs to the CSP domain. Theoretically, the steps should be as minimizing the lack of security, privacy, and trust policy language, loss of control monitoring, lack of trust certification, loss of control utilizing different clouds, multi-tenancy in the cloud, etc. [79].
## (s8) CC Security Prospects in the Future Networks
(p8.0) Future networks should be developed and conceptualize for the safety and privacy of their end-users. The rationale for this lies in the targeted use of future networks in human society including mission-critical services, such as: Ů intelligent landline, railway, and air traffic management, eHealth, emergency telecommunications, reliable services in disaster conditions, etc. On the contrary, security for further networks can be provided by using multi-level access control, that is, assurance of user identification, authentication, and authorization, which is in addition to the security requirements of the NGN. For example, network virtualization will bring many benefits to all actors, including providers and end-users, but it also raises new security threats. For example, a malicious user can monitor or control virtual resources even in cases when they are not allocated to that user [83].
## (s11) Why Is Security & Privacy a concern in CC-Based Smart City?
(p11.0) The question of privacy concerns in the smart city has come into the picture since information and communication technology (ICT) developments have drastically increased. An integrative framework has been proposed in Reference [84] by Chourabi et al. to understand a smart city. The authors discuss eight factors that characterize a smart city. One of these factors is built infrastructure. In this domain, one of the technological barriers in e-government is privacy and security. The challenges in this dimension are threats from intruders, hackers, worms, Trojans, personal data privacy, and the cost of the solutions to provide security against all these. With the expansion of ICT, information flows have drastically increased, and, with this expansion in information flows, threats to information privacy have become a point of concern. In Reference [91], the author argues on the three potential threats to personal privacy that have been posed by smart cities: IoT, big data, and cloud.
## (s12) Consequences of Security and Privacy Concerns in Smart City Networks over CC
(p12.0) (1) Bluetooth Technology: Bluetooth technology has penetrated many devices, such as smartphones, navigation systems, hands-free sets in cars, etc. Bluetooth devices emit signals and readers of these signals can be placed at different locations, and devices' movement can be monitored. Digital forgetting is an IoT domain of research in these privacy concerns [79].

(p12.1) (2) Health Sector: The privacy of a patient's health data is very important because a patient may face serious problems if their health information is disclosed and misused [80]. In this study, the authors have enlightened the fact that training in handling patient data must be provided to ensure privacy, but these training programs fade away when it comes to the importance and effectiveness of the use of security algorithms for access control, anonymity, and authentication.
## (s13) Attacks, Threats, and Vulnerabilities in CC-Based Smart City Network
(p13.0) Smart city network generates huge amounts of data and involved devices and processes are spread over a larger geographic area. Extraction, filtering, serialization, mining, and analysis of smart city huge data is challenging and requires a lot of human and material resources [34]. It is challenging to establish proper convergence and mapping of networking parameters among different layers of OSI model network stack over various data generation peers, like servers, gateways, workstations, sensors, accumulators, smart devices, and routers [71].

(p13.1) In smart city networks, the data transmission is susceptible to confront several attacks, such as cross-site scripting and side-channels, and its multi-latency can cause data leakage [22]. In smart city networks, due to the involvement of the smart grid over sensitive data, there is a dire need for high level security in all over the infrastructure. Security is the major challenge in achieving the accountable, reliable and consistent communication over the smart city networks [36,50].

(p13.2) Likewise, Robust network management in the cloud computing for smart city networks is the major challenge to tackle services delays, data loss during mining, lack of communication links with every node in centralized and distributive cloud computing, transmission delays, lost packets, and unstable connections, localized transmission, low latency, and low mobility services. Fog computing is introduced to overcome issues in cloud computing but there are still issues, like demand for robust and efficient communication links, exclusive and specialized network planning and management, and network security support and its integration, till each tier [24,33].

(p13.3) CC is a hot topic in the current era. After studying most research articles, we convexed the identified challenges of the smart city over CC in Table 2. Table 2 illustrates the identified threats and challenges to the CC domain in the smart city networks and the compromised security attributes related to the CIA triad [74]. Furthermore, the different authors have resolved many issues in their article work; however, they have not achieved some of the most important aspects. Most of the authors in Table 2 compromised on the integrity and confidentiality, which is the most important factor for the challenges, like IP Spooling, DDOS attack, phishing attack, backdoor, social engineering, Trojan horses and malware (ransomware), etc. The complete challenges, along with their description and author details, are enlisted in Table 2.
## (s14) Countermeasures for Security & Privacy Concerns
(p14.0) (1) Sensing as a service model: Sensing has been introduced as a service model in Reference [22]. The smart city and IoT have different origins, but the sensors make them move into each other. To preserve the privacy of sensor data, the sensor owner can define restrictions, such as who can access what data. In addition, sensitive information collected by sensors, such as location data, needs to be altered implicitly to anonymize the data.

(p14.1) (2) 5D model for privacy: In Reference [26], Antoni Martínez-Ballesté et al. identify some privacy breaches in the context of smart cities. The concept of a smart city presents the citizen's privacy in the form of a model. A 5D model for the privacy of a smart city is proposed in the research. The five dimensions are identity, query, location, footprint, and owner.
