# Molecular Sciences Inherited Platelet Disorders: An Updated Overview

CorpusID: 233461385 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/48a68a5b7e21df902ff5009b8ab638b5cddd4edf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) GNAS GNAQ GNAZ GNAI1
(p3.0) Normal platelet count and morphology. Gs hyperfunction may be associated with discrete macrothrombocytopenia and neurological disorders. Reduced LTA and secretion in response to multiple soluble agonists. Moderate hemorrhagic symptoms; mainly associated with hemostatic challenges. [8,111,112] CalDAG-GEF1 defect (615888) AR RASGRP2

(p3.1) Normal platelet count and morphology. LTA and secretion defects with weak agonists. αIIbβ3 integrin activation defects with weak agonists (fibrinogen binding deficit, PAC-1). Normal or moderately reduced response to PMA. [113][114][115] LAD-III Syndrome (Kindlin-3 deficiency) (612840) AR FERMT3
## (s4) Inherited Platelet Disorder Diagnosis
(p4.0) The diagnosis of IPD has traditionally been limited by their considerable clinical and laboratory heterogeneity, as well as by the scant reproducibility and specificity of platelet function tests [129,130]. This has led to many patients reaching adulthood undiagnosed or misdiagnosed, thereby exposing themselves to a high risk of suboptimal clinical management or even harmful and unnecessarily invasive treatment. One clear example of this is the misdiagnosis of immune thrombocytopenia (ITP) in many individuals with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSS) and improper treatment with steroids or even splenectomy [119].
## (s6) Syndromic Platelet Diseases
(p6.0) Approximately half of all inherited thrombocytopenias, as well as some inherited platelet function disorders, are syndromes in which the congenital platelet defect is associated with a high probability of clinically relevant alterations in other cell types, organs, or tissues, or with developing neoplastic disease [5,8,26,129]. In light of their considerable clinical relevance, we will highlight the following:
## (s7) Congenital Amegakaryocytic Thrombocytopenia (CAMT)
(p7.0) This is a rare bone marrow failure that presents at birth as hypomegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia without any other physical characteristics. Most affected individuals develop additional cytopenias during childhood until finally progressing to bone marrow aplasia.

(p7.1) This autosomal recessive disorder is caused by mutations in the c-MPL gene that provoke the expression of a dysfunctional thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor. There is a correlation between genotype and phenotype, such that the nonsense mutations display a more aggressive pattern with progression to hypocellular bone marrow within the first decade of life, whereas patients with amino acid substitution mutations can exhibit moderate decrease in platelet counts and later go on to develop anemia or pancytopenia. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is the only curative option for these patients [9].

(p7.2) A few cases (five unrelated families) have recently been identified with very similar clinical symptoms caused by biallelic mutations on the THPO gene that encodes TPO, leading to absent and/or dysfunctional circulating TPO [13]. Unlike patients with c-MPL mutations, individuals with molecular pathology in THPO fail to respond to allo-HSCT, given that the defect is extrinsic to the hematopoietic cells. In contrast, in these cases, administering thrombopoietic agents such as romiplostim, a TPO receptor agonist (TPO-RA) does induce trilinear hematopoietic responses, remission of bleeding and infections, and transfusion independence. On the other hand, the monoallelic mutations that result in loss of function, determine decreased circulating TPO and mild thrombocytopenia with autosomal dominant inheritance [12].
## (s9) Wiskott-Aldrich Syndrome (WAS)
(p9.0) WAS is an X-linked disease that affects males almost exclusively, with clinical manifestations that include bleeding, eczema, and combined immunodeficiency (many patients have infections caused by opportunistic germs). Autoimmune syndromes have been observed in some 40% of the cases and patients have and increased risk of developing tumors, especially lymphoma, at any age. With the exception of extremely rare instances, one clinical hallmark of WAS is microthrombocytopenia, with counts of between 5 and 50 ×10 9 /L and small dysfunctional platelet (mean platelet volume [MPV]: 3.5-7 fL; normal: 7-11 fL) [83].

(p9.1) WAS is attributable to a molecular defect on the WAS gene (Xp11.22) that encodes the WASP protein that is involved in actin cytoskeletal remodeling. Four hundred different mutations have been reported in WAS patients, one third of which are located in nine gene hotspots. A relationship between clinical course and genotype has been reported, such that the mutations having the greatest effect on WASP expression/ functionality are associated with a more severe phenotype [83]. Hypomorphic mutations of the WAS gene can lead to an attenuated form of WAS called chronic or intermittent X-linked thrombocytopenia (XLT), which is correlated with a lower risk of the infections and malignancy, which otherwise are the leading cause of early death in the classical form of WAS.

(p9.2) The only curative treatment to date is allo-HSCT, with an 80% survival rate. Gene therapy comprises a promising approach for patients without a suitable donor. Immunoglobu-lin replacement therapy and oral antibiotics prevent infections and TPO-RA can be used to temporarily boost platelet counts in cases of severe refractory thrombocytopenia [83,84].
## (s10) Sitosterolemia (STSL)
(p10.0) Sitosterolemia, also known as phytosterolemia, is a rare autosomal recessive sterol storage disorder characterized by increased plant sterol levels in plasma. This disease results from recessive pathogenic variants in the ABCG5 and ABCG8 genes. The clinical characteristics of STSL include cutaneous and tendon xanthomas, xanthelasmas, premature coronary atherosclerosis and associated complications, arthritis, and/or arthralgias.

(p10.1) Hematologic abnormalities, such as hemolytic anemia (with a negative direct antiglobulin test and stomatocytosis) and macrothrombocytopenia are present in 80-90% of the cases, and/or splenomegaly may also be present with other clinical attributes. Ezetimib (EZE) improves the distribution of VLDL and HDL, thereby lowering the atherogenic lipid profile, yielding a potential clinical benefit in STSL and increasing platelet count. A delay in diagnosis is not without consequences, as it can lead to inadequate clinical management with its incumbent risk of advanced atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease [57,58].
## (s11) DIAPH1-Related Thrombocytopenia (DIAPH1-RT)
(p11.0) DIAPH1-related thrombocytopenia is an autosomal dominant defect with macrothrombocytopenia and variable neutropenia, as well as hearing loss beginning in the first decade of life (at much younger ages than in MYH9-RD). DIAPH1, encoded by the homonymous gene DIAPH1, is a formin involved in the organization of the cytoskeleton of megakaryocytes and platelets, also present in the organ of Corti.

(p11.1) In a recent multicenter study we have reported a 16-case series that reveals that patients exhibit megakaryocyte clustering in bone marrow, with deficient proplatelet formation. In in vitro cultures of megakaryocytes, these defects can be overcome, at least partially, with eltrombopag. This drug can enable DIAPH1-related thrombocytopenia to be temporarily corrected prior to surgery, thereby obviating platelet transfusion [66].
## (s12) Inherited Platelet Disorders with Predisposition to Hematological Neoplasms
(p12.0) The WHO's 2016 revision of the classification of myeloid neoplasms and acute leukemias [155] introduced a new category of diseases defined as myeloid neoplasms with germline predisposition and pre-existing platelet disorders, that includes those that evolve with molecular variants on ankyrin repeat domain 26 gene (ANKRD26) or on transcription factors ETV6 and RUNX1 [18][19][20]22,122,156,157].

(p12.1) These three autosomal dominant inherited disorders justify 18%, 3%, and 5%, of the inherited thrombocytopenias, respectively, and, together, account for almost one quarter of the cases. Individuals affected by these diseases typically present with mild, isolated, non-syndromic thrombocytopenia with normal-sized platelets. In all three conditions, bone marrow examination reveals a normal or increased number of megakaryocytes, typically with dysplastic characteristics, such as small hypolobulated nuclei. In patients with ANKRD26-RT (thrombocytopenia type-2) or ETV6-related disease (thrombocytopenia type-5), bleeding, when present, is generally mild, consistent with normal platelet function. In contrast, individuals with congenital RUNX1-related thrombocytopenia, known as familial platelet disorder with propensity to acute myelogenous leukemia (FPD/AML) typically exhibit platelet function abnormalities, primarily alpha/dense granules deficiency, that can associate a propensity toward bleeding of varying severity.

(p12.2) The common, clinically relevant characteristic of these three conditions is the greater risk of hematological neoplasms. Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) develop in approximately 48% of patients with FPD/AML and in 7% of cases of ANKRD26-RT; 21% of individuals with ETV6-RT will go on to develop acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), whereas another 7% will suffer from AML, MDS, multiple myeloma, or polycythemia vera. These malignacies generally debut between the second and fifth decade of life, while thrombocytopenia is generally present at birth. Only rarely will platelet counts be within the lower limit of normal range. Therefore, conspicuous thrombocytopenia is not an essential diagnostic criterion for these conditions, particularly in FPD/AML.
## (s15) Defects of the GPIb/IX/V Complex
(p15.0) BSS is an autosomal recessive hemorrhagic diathesis characterized by moderate or severe thrombocytopenia and giant, dysfunctional platelets. It is due to mutations (more than 100 different mutations reported) in GP1BA, GP1BB, and GP9 genes, leading to the absence of the Ib/IX/V complex in platelets (classical BSS) or, in exceptional cases, the expression of a non-functional receptor (variant BSS) [31]. The most unique laboratory anomaly of BSS is the absence of platelet agglutination with ristocetin, which is not corrected with normal plasma, unlike severe von Willebrand disease (VWD). In contrast, aggregation with other agonists (adenosine diphosphate [ADP], collagen, adrenaline, thrombin, etc.) is normal. Flow cytometry enables rapid detection of the selective deficit of the Ib/IX/V receptor and increased MPV.
## (s16) Glanzmann Thrombasthenia
(p16.0) In the hemostatic response, platelets adhered to the vascular wound recruit other circulating platelets to form the thrombus [162]. This platelet aggregation is achieved by means of fibrinogen bridges between αIIbβ3 integrins of nearby platelets. Molecular defects of the ITGA2B and ITGB3 genes, that encode for the αIIbβ3 complex, cause GT. Some 200 different mutations (deletions, insertions, point mutations, etc.) have been reported in approximately 200 families, and these numbers are growing constantly [91,92,163].

(p16.1) Individuals with GT display normal platelet count and morphology, as well as strikingly defective aggregation to multiple agonists (ADP, collagen, arachidonic acid, and thrombin), whereas agglutination with ristocetin is normal or moderately decreased in its second wave. Flow cytometry reveals the deficit of the αIIbβ3 receptor. According to the platelet expression level of the integrin, there are three types of GT: i) Type I, with a total absence (<5%) of αIIbβ3; ii) Type II, with 10-20% of residual αIIbβ3; iii) variant GT, with non-functional expression (>50%) of αIIbβ3.

(p16.2) Because it is a recessive autosomal disorder, only homozygote subjects exhibit moderatesevere mucocutaneous bleeding starting in childhood, whereas heterozygote individuals tend to be asymptomatic [1,8,163]. On the other hand, some ITGA2B and ITGB3 heterozygous variants can cause autosomal dominant inherited thrombocytopenia [39].
