# machines Possible Applications of Additive Manufacturing Technologies in Shipbuilding: A Review

CorpusID: 230572342 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/37e5ae2f1d78f8d61f2624b90ea1c9d47d1021a3)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Additive manufacturing has gained great popularity over the last decade due to media interest in 3D printers. The main factor of this situation was the popularization of small and inexpensive 3D printers, designed for home use, producing objects from thermoplastic materials. Such devices have experienced the fastest development as a result of high demand, and for many they are the only association with additive manufacturing.

(p0.1) However, the origins of 3D printing date back much earlier than the last decade. The first patents for devices producing objects additively began to appear in the 1980s and the first commercial device using stereolithography technology was released in 1987 [1]. However, until the turn of the first and the second decades of the 21st century, these were niche technologies, very expensive and limited to only a small group of specialized applications. The popularization of fused deposition modeling 3D printers through the RepRap project [2] have been a driving force for the development of the entire 3D printing industry. It aroused interest in these techniques in many sectors of the economy and contributed to the discovery of new applications of additive manufacturing (AM).

(p0.2) In addition to thermoplastic based 3D printing, there are many other methods, including photosensitive resins curing, sand or composite powders bonding, powdered polymers and metals sintering or wire metal arc welding. Each of these technologies is characterized by different properties of the final product, need of providing special condition during manufacturing, production time, need of support structures or complexity of post-processing. These may result in the specific method not being applicable or financially justified in some cases. Due to the above mentioned, AM should A common limitation for most of the AM methods is the size limit of the part. It is a big obstacle in shipbuilding since most of the marine parts used tend to be large and heavy. The source of the problem is the AM process itself. In most of the technologies the part is created by applying material, layer by layer, simultaneously fusing them. This results in an introduction of a significant amount of heat into the workpiece. In professional 3D printers, the processing chamber is heated but the fusing temperature is much higher. Because applying the subsequent layers is relatively slow, it causes a big temperature gradient across the manufactured part which results in significant shrinkage. This shrinkage may lead to dimensional inaccuracies, warping, displacement of the model during printing and cracks. It can be controlled in cases of small parts but is an issue in long and tall parts. This effect is present in FDM, stereolithography (SLA), digital light processing (DLP), liquid-crystal display (LCD), SLS and metal powder bed fusion (M-PBF) technologies.

(p0.3) The other problem affecting item size is printing head movement. In AM processing the printing head performs a movement, or the item is moved relative to the printing head in some cases, covering the cross-sectional area of the item, usually hundreds of times during the process. In order to achieve reasonable times for manufacturing the movement must be fast, especially when the best print quality layer height is desired to be as low as possible. Usually the print head is heavy, which is connected with high inertia and leads to vibration increase. Vibration can affect the quality of the print. Furthermore, providing too big a printing area creates difficulties with maintaining rigidity and proper geometry of printer frame, which can also affect the printing quality.
## (s10) Electron Beam Melting
(p10.0) Electron beam melting (EBM) is a method technologically similar to SLS or MPBF, with the difference that instead of a laser as a heat source, a focused beam of electrons is used. The electron beam comes from the electron gun. The tungsten electron gun emits electrons that are accelerated to half the speed of light. The device is equipped with a system of coils whose task is to align the electron beam, focus it in such a way as to obtain the desired spot and deflect it to scan the working field.

(p10.1) As the EBM technology does not use any moving parts to move the heat source and the heat flux density is very high, the printing speed is one of the highest among other 3D printing techniques. Printing takes place in a vacuum to avoid energy loss through the collision of electrons with air molecules. Thanks to this, the process achieves an energy efficiency of 95%, which makes it 5-10 times more energy-efficient than laser sintering. An additional advantage of using the vacuum is the possibility of using reactive materials such as titanium alloys, but the available materials are very limited-Ti grade 2, Ti6Al4V, Inconel 718, CoCrMo [20].
## (s13) The Demand for 3D Printing in Shipbuilding
(p13.0) The marine industry is a specific area that generates huge demand for products and services from many other industries, such as carpentry; metallurgy; machinery and electromechanical industries; industrial automation; heating, ventilation air conditioning (HVAC); energy recovery systems; exhaust after treatment systems; corrosion protection systems; fire protection systems and petrochemicals. The supply demand forecast for years 2016-2025 is presented on the Figure 3. structures to α and β microstructure by adding solute, which can refine prior-β grains in Ti alloys. They considered many elements, including silicon, molybdenum, beryllium, chromium, boron, tungsten, iron and rare-earth elements. The result of the research proves the addition of Fe combined with post-processing heat treatment can decompose as-built microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V-3Fe to fully laminar α + β microstructure. Ultrafine eutectic Ti-Fe alloys can gain strength above 2.5 GPa in room temperature and compressive ductility above 10% [24]. In these alloys, grain sizes commonly decrease with increasing growth velocity or cooling rate. This allows significant size-hardening effects and opens a gateway to materials design by rapid solidification techniques. The study presented by Gussone et al. [24] provides the first demonstration of the feasibility of producing eutectic and near-eutectic Ti-Fe alloys by LAM with ultrafine microstructures and mechanical strength as well as compressive ductility attractive for structural applications.
## (s14) The Demand for 3D Printing in Shipbuilding
(p14.0) The marine industry is a specific area that generates huge demand for products and services from many other industries, such as carpentry; metallurgy; machinery and electromechanical industries; industrial automation; heating, ventilation air conditioning (HVAC); energy recovery systems; exhaust after treatment systems; corrosion protection systems; fire protection systems and petrochemicals. The supply demand forecast for years 2016-2025 is presented on the Figure 3. Ships are equipped with thousands of devices and items, consisting of hundreds of parts. These devices are subject to failures and due to the specificity of the ship's operation, are often subject to the requirements of classification societies for periodic replacement or regeneration. The operation of a ship usually involves travelling tens of thousands of kilometers to distant countries for commercial purposes. Due to the above factors, the maritime industry has very extensive supply chains, connecting many manufacturers, distributors, service providers and customers around the world. Figure 4 shows the number of marine supplies companies, in the 20 most important countries in the marine industry. Ships are equipped with thousands of devices and items, consisting of hundreds of parts. These devices are subject to failures and due to the specificity of the ship's operation, are often subject to the requirements of classification societies for periodic replacement or regeneration. The operation of a ship usually involves travelling tens of thousands of kilometers to distant countries for commercial purposes. Due to the above factors, the maritime industry has very extensive supply chains, connecting many manufacturers, distributors, service providers and customers around the world. Figure 4 shows the number of marine supplies companies, in the 20 most important countries in the marine industry. This requires constant coordination of teams, orders and ongoing projects as well as monitoring of the geopolitical or legal situation in the world. This is due to the fact that the service or product must be delivered where the ship currently is. In some parts of the world, there may be complications, longer delivery times, inability to provide a service or part of it, or a significant increase in the cost of such services.

(p14.1) The way to minimize the risks associated with the logistics of products and services is to implement the Industry 4.0 solutions into shipbuilding, whose general goal is to digitize and optimize processes using modern digital technologies [26]. Additive manufacturing is listed as one of the key technologies supporting the implementation of Industry 4.0 solutions in the marine industry. According to assumptions of this vision, AM should fulfill sustainability paradigms, known as LARG, which is an acronym for lean, agile, resilient and green [27]. In the lean area, the aim is to introduce large-scale production of small product series with a strong customer orientation and to maximize production while minimizing waste [28]. The results of the agile paradigm are to include customer-specific products and processes [29]. The implementation of resilient's objectives is to result in production located geographically as close as possible to the customer, which will positively reduce the response time [30]. The adaptation of industry to green's objectives includes technologies allowing the use of techniques for the re-use and recycling of urban waste [31]. It is worth noting that the goals set by LARG sustainability paradigms need fundamental change in global scale, requiring both consumers and suppliers to focus on implementing these solutions. This will involve a completely new model of order execution, business cooperation, raw material management, as well as changes in logistics and storage. Full implementation of the above assumptions is a long-term process worth pursuing, bearing in mind the gradual introduction of components. Growing interest in changing the supply chain with AM solutions is shown on Figure 5 by increased the number of related publications in recent years. This requires constant coordination of teams, orders and ongoing projects as well as monitoring of the geopolitical or legal situation in the world. This is due to the fact that the service or product must be delivered where the ship currently is. In some parts of the world, there may be complications, longer delivery times, inability to provide a service or part of it, or a significant increase in the cost of such services.
## (s52) Digital Model Database
(p52.0) The possibility offered by 3D printing is so-called dispersed manufacturing, in an on-demand production system which can enable a digital model base. This database would include models of spare parts, together with information of materials, mechanical properties, manufacturing technologies. The geometrical properties and parameters of each part are entered into the database via CAD design, creating a digital "twin" of the part. Each part entered into the database is cataloged and saved. The digital database is one of the important steps in view of the upcoming digitization process within Industry 4.0 [57].

(p52.1) By integrating with CAD/CAM software, as well as with a view to the development of the internet of things and artificial intelligence, it is possible to significantly reduce the supply chain and latency, and eventually produce parts and deliver them to a port that the ship will visit next, just before a breakdown or planned overhaul. It is a vision that assumes development of the internet of things to the level that the entire engine room is equipped with sensors live-monitoring the condition of the devices. Software using artificial intelligence on the basis of the collected data, information about the ship's stock and supplies as well as its location, next destination and available infrastructure in the port, would make decisions about ordering and delivering parts within the optimal time and financial framework.
## (s55) •
(p55.0) Waste management: waste treatment generates significant amounts of waste, which can be reduced by up to 90% by using 3D printing [59]. This is possible thanks to the use of only the volume of material that the final product has, plus the amount of allowances for support structures and finishing.
## (s57) Digital Model Database
(p57.0) The possibility offered by 3D printing is so-called dispersed manufacturing, in an on-demand production system which can enable a digital model base. This database would include models of spare parts, together with information of materials, mechanical properties, manufacturing technologies. The geometrical properties and parameters of each part are entered into the database via CAD design, creating a digital "twin" of the part. Each part entered into the database is cataloged and saved. The digital database is one of the important steps in view of the upcoming digitization process within Industry 4.0 [57].

(p57.1) By integrating with CAD/CAM software, as well as with a view to the development of the internet of things and artificial intelligence, it is possible to significantly reduce the supply chain and latency, and eventually produce parts and deliver them to a port that the ship will visit next, just before a breakdown or planned overhaul. It is a vision that assumes development of the internet of things to the level that the entire engine room is equipped with sensors live-monitoring the condition of the devices. Software using artificial intelligence on the basis of the collected data, information about the ship's stock and supplies as well as its location, next destination and available infrastructure in the port, would make decisions about ordering and delivering parts within the optimal time and financial framework.
## (s60) •
(p60.0) Waste management: waste treatment generates significant amounts of waste, which can be reduced by up to 90% by using 3D printing [59]. This is possible thanks to the use of only the volume of material that the final product has, plus the amount of allowances for support structures and finishing.
## (s63) Scale of Production
(p63.0) The benefits of using 3D printing, considering their current performance, are inversely proportional to the production volume [60], therefore AM techniques are not cost-effective methods of mass production now. This situation may change with the development of 3D printers, which are likely to allow even faster, more energy-efficient and more repeatable production.
## (s64) Repeatability of Production
(p64.0) Additive manufacturing is a dynamically developing but still young method of production. There are large discrepancies in the parameters of machines and materials from different manufacturers and operating in different 3D printing technologies. Each manufacturer uses different processes, materials, principles of printer operation, pre-processing and post-processing. This set of variables creates the possibility of errors during production, and the variety of methods makes it difficult to verify them. In addition, 3D printers are sensitive to interference, for example, in the power grid, sudden changes of temperature, humidity, vibration or even ambient light intensity when using photopolymers. They can cause printing errors such as poor layer connection, incorrect layer arrangement, layer thickness faults, surface imperfections and pores and voids inside the model [58]. This is the reason why it is so important to implement monitoring of parameters in 3D printing to optimize the process and avoid any manufacturing flaws. Classification societies such as Bureau Veritas and DNV GL are conducting advanced work in the field of AM normalization, making classification procedures and creating a set of guidelines to help different manufacturers achieve the same repeatable results.
## (s65) Financial Outlays
(p65.0) Investments in equipment necessary to start AM-based production is associated with significant cost-industrial 3D printers' prices start at several hundreds of USD and end at hundreds of thousands of USD [61]. A popular way to minimize the costs of implementing and developing AM techniques is business cooperation between manufacturers and companies specializing in 3D printing, as well as establishing consortia, to split the cost of AM implementation. This allows significant reduction in investment costs and exchanging of experiences and involving specialists from many fields in the project.
## (s68) Class Requirements and Certification
(p68.0) Regulatory standards and norms specific to the maritime industry should be developed to deal with typical marine difficulties. Without standards, maritime companies face difficulties in evaluating and accepting additively produced items. Their assessment can only be based on general ISO/ASTM standards, which do not define requirements for the maritime industry [66].This situation is not acceptable because it leaves room for interpretation, which may result in the use of parts that do not have proper certification. Classification societies such as DNV GL and Bureau Veritas are trying to fill this gap by working with research centers using the expertise of industry professionals. The establishment of classification standards and guidelines will allow for unambiguous verification of AM produced parts [51].
