# polymers Development of Graphene-Based Polymeric Nanocomposites: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 237468825 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8bdcf511904ad872ca0e6ef96dc8c0f1c9067e82)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Reinforced polymers contain a polymeric matrix and a rigid filler that experiences a drastic change in modulus or stress at a given strain over the pure polymer. Conventional fillers include glass fibers, carbon fibers, carbon black, silica, calcium carbonate particles, and so forth, in the micrometer range. Though, most micron sized fillers need high loadings to attain moderate property improvements, leading to melt flow and processing issues owed to the high viscosity of the filled materials [1]. Besides, the high density of some conventional fillers frequently results in heavy composites. Furthermore, the poor interfacial interaction between the filler and the polymeric matrix leads to weak interfacial adhesion and results in composite failure.

(p0.1) A wide variety of filler sizes has been used for reinforcing polymeric matrices [2], and the best performance has been detected in the particle size range of 100 nm and below. Nanofillers in the range of 3-5 wt% attain comparable reinforcement as 20-30 wt% of microsized fillers [3]. Therefore, nanocomposites have a weight advantage over conventional composites and, nanoscale materials have emerged as suitable fillers owed to their increased specific interfacial area that enables stronger interfacial interactions and henceforth, superior modulus [4,5].
## (s2) Properties and Synthesis Methods of Graphene
(p2.0) G is a 2D flat single-atom-thick sheet composed of sp 2 carbon structure arranged in a honeycomb structure (Scheme 1a). G exhibits exceptional electronic, thermal, and mechanical properties [13]. It presents high gas impermeability, a high specific area (2600 m 2 /g), larger than that of carbon nanotubes (about 1000 m 2 /g), and a delocalized movement of electrons, which implies an outstanding electronic behavior and very high electron mobility (i.e., 15,000 cm 2 /V s) [14]. It displays very high electrical conductivity (6000 S/cm) and thermal conductivity (between 4800 and 5300 W/m K at room temperature) [15], significantly higher than that of Cu (400 W/m K). Besides, it is believed to be the thinnest material on earth and the strongest in terms of stiffness and strength, with a breaking strength 200 times greater than steel, a tensile strength of 130 GPa, and a Young's modulus close to 1 TPa [16]. On the other hand, it shows high optical transparency [17], it is chemically inert, and electrochemically stable. Due to these properties, G is regarded as an excellent candidate for a variety of applications: (1) sensing and biosensing devices; (2) ultracapacitors that could store more renewable energy from sun, wind, and waves than current technologies; (3) transparent conducting electrodes required in applications such as touch screens, liquid crystal displays, organic photovoltaic cells; (4) light emitting diodes (LEDs); and (5) transistors and microchips or nanochips with high operating speed. The synthesis of G can be carried out following two different approaches: (1) bottomup method; and (2) top-down method. The former approach is based on the synthesis of G from small units of carbon to obtain graphene layers. The most common techniques The synthesis of G can be carried out following two different approaches: (1) bottomup method; and (2) top-down method. The former approach is based on the synthesis of G from small units of carbon to obtain graphene layers. The most common techniques based on this methodology are chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and epitaxial growth (Scheme 2). based on this methodology are chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and epitaxial growth (Scheme 2).

(p2.1) A brief description of these methods along with their advantages and limitations are shown below. CVD produces high-quality G using a transition metal substrate such as Cu, Ni, Pd, Au, or Ru [18]. The deposition consists of the flow of a hydrocarbon precursor at high temperature (i.e., 750-1200 °C) (Scheme 2). As the surface of the metal cools, a deposition phenomenon takes place due to the reduction in the solubility of carbon atoms, which precipitate forming a monolayer. Thus, CVD graphene is synthesized via two stages: (1) the pyrolytic decomposition of precursors, which is performed at very high temperatures with the aid of a metal catalyst and onto a substrate to prevent the precipitation of carbon clusters; and (2) the formation of G monolayer out of the disassociated carbon atoms, which also requires very high temperatures, hence catalysts are employed. This method is scalable and enables the synthesis of large graphene flakes. The main disadvantage is that the catalysts can incorporate impurities into G monolayer.

(p2.2) Epitaxial growth is usually carried out using a silicon carbide (SiC) substrate [19]. The substrate is graphitized under thermal treatment at ~1300 °C and vacuum conditions, which leads to the sublimation of the Si atoms at the same time as the carbon-enriched surface experiences reorganization and graphitization. This technique allows controlling of the G layer thickness via modifying either the time, the temperature, or in combination, and enables obtaining high-quality G. One of its advantages is that it enables electric devices to be fabricated directly on semi-insulating SiC [20]. Though, it is one of the most expensive synthesis methods given that SiC has to be heated at very high temperatures; thus, it is not reasonably priced on a large-scale. A brief description of these methods along with their advantages and limitations are shown below.

(p2.3) CVD produces high-quality G using a transition metal substrate such as Cu, Ni, Pd, Au, or Ru [18]. The deposition consists of the flow of a hydrocarbon precursor at high temperature (i.e., 750-1200 • C) (Scheme 2). As the surface of the metal cools, a deposition phenomenon takes place due to the reduction in the solubility of carbon atoms, which precipitate forming a monolayer. Thus, CVD graphene is synthesized via two stages: (1) the pyrolytic decomposition of precursors, which is performed at very high temperatures with the aid of a metal catalyst and onto a substrate to prevent the precipitation of carbon clusters; and (2) the formation of G monolayer out of the disassociated carbon atoms, which also requires very high temperatures, hence catalysts are employed. This method is scalable and enables the synthesis of large graphene flakes. The main disadvantage is that the catalysts can incorporate impurities into G monolayer.

(p2.4) Epitaxial growth is usually carried out using a silicon carbide (SiC) substrate [19]. The substrate is graphitized under thermal treatment at~1300 • C and vacuum conditions, which leads to the sublimation of the Si atoms at the same time as the carbon-enriched surface experiences reorganization and graphitization. This technique allows controlling of the G layer thickness via modifying either the time, the temperature, or in combination, and enables obtaining high-quality G. One of its advantages is that it enables electric devices to be fabricated directly on semi-insulating SiC [20]. Though, it is one of the most expensive synthesis methods given that SiC has to be heated at very high temperatures; thus, it is not reasonably priced on a large-scale.

(p2.5) Regarding the top-down methods (Scheme 2), the most widely employed are mechanical exfoliation and the electrochemical exfoliation. The former is the method developed by Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov in 2004 [21] to isolate G by peeling it off from graphite flakes using Scotch tape. Since the interlayer van der Waals forces in graphite are very weak (interaction energy of~2 eV/nm), graphite can be easily exfoliated using an adhesive tape or atomic force microscopy (AFM). This method yields good quality G sheets; however, it is not suitable for mass production. G can also be exfoliated in liquid media, which uses specific organic molecules or surfactants that intercalate between the G sheets.

(p2.6) Another widely used process is electrochemical exfoliation [22], based on the penetration of graphite by ions from the solution forced by the applied potential. G obtained by this approach can be dispersed in organic solvents such as DMF, which enables the fabrication of thin films. By modifying a number of parameters such as the voltage applied, the time, and concentration of the electrolyte, the properties of the resulting layer can be tailored. This is a simple and cheap method, that could easily be scaled up.
## (s3) Characteristics and Synthesis Methods of Graphene Oxide
(p3.0) Graphene oxide (GO) is an oxidized layer of G that contains epoxides, hydroxyls, and carbonyls on the basal planes and carboxylic acids on the edges (Scheme 1). Consequently, some properties of GO differ from those of G: The sp 3 carbon atoms in GO increase the interlayer spacing, improving its ability to hold compounds. The functional groups also modify the electronic structure; thus its electronic properties are worse than those of pristine G (i.e., lower electron mobility and lower conductivity, it is typically insulating with a sheet resistance value of around 1000 Ω/sq). It presents aqueous processability, surface functionalization capability, amphiphilicity, biocompatibility, and ability to interact with biological cells and tissues [23]. It is impermeable to gases and vapors except for water, hence it can be employed in membranes. Further, it can form stable aqueous dispersions by simple and cheap sonication processes, which is critical for large-scale uses.
## (s4) Synthesis and Characteristics of Reduced Graphene Oxide
(p4.0) The reduced GO (rGO) sheets are obtained via elimination of functional groups from GO. The goal is to attain graphene-like materials analogous to the pristine graphene. Though, residual functional groups and defects substantially change the structure of the carbon plane, consequently, the characteristics of rGO vary from those of G. So, the electrical conductivity of rGO is generally several orders of magnitude lower than that of G.

(p4.1) rGO can be prepared starting from graphite, which is oxidized into graphite oxide, exfoliated, and then reduced via thermal, chemical, or electrical treatments (Scheme 4) [32]. The thermal annealing involves the reduction of GO just by heat treatment [33]. The exfoliation is triggered by the sudden expansion of CO or CO 2 gases grown within the spaces between graphene sheets during heating. This procedure is very efficient, although it has some disadvantages: heating should be gentle to avoid explosion, while slow heating makes this reduction a time-consuming process. Besides, this approach cannot be applied for GO films on substrates such as glass and polymers, hence it is not suitable for energy applications. Other paths are microwave irradiation or photo-reduction [34], using the energy discharged by a lamp or a laser. This method can be more effective, resulting in rGO films with superior conductivity (i.e., 260 S/cm [35]), and allows the direct manufacture of electronic devices. 
## (s5) Synthesis and Characteristics of Reduced Graphene Oxide
(p5.0) The reduced GO (rGO) sheets are obtained via elimination of functional groups from GO. The goal is to attain graphene-like materials analogous to the pristine graphene. Though, residual functional groups and defects substantially change the structure of the carbon plane, consequently, the characteristics of rGO vary from those of G. So, the electrical conductivity of rGO is generally several orders of magnitude lower than that of G.

(p5.1) rGO can be prepared starting from graphite, which is oxidized into graphite oxide, exfoliated, and then reduced via thermal, chemical, or electrical treatments (Scheme 4) [32]. The thermal annealing involves the reduction of GO just by heat treatment [33]. The exfoliation is triggered by the sudden expansion of CO or CO2 gases grown within the spaces between graphene sheets during heating. This procedure is very efficient, although it has some disadvantages: heating should be gentle to avoid explosion, while slow heating makes this reduction a time-consuming process. Besides, this approach cannot be applied for GO films on substrates such as glass and polymers, hence it is not suitable for energy applications. Other paths are microwave irradiation or photo-reduction [34], using the energy discharged by a lamp or a laser. This method can be more effective, resulting in rGO films with superior conductivity (i.e., 260 S/cm [35]), and allows the direct manufacture of electronic devices. Chemical reduction either at room temperature or by applying a moderate heating is one of the most important methods. The reagent more classically employed is hydrazine monohydrate (N2H4·H2O), which is added to a GO aqueous dispersion, resulting in agglomerated rGO nanosheets due to the increase in hydrophobicity [36]. Despite this ap- Chemical reduction either at room temperature or by applying a moderate heating is one of the most important methods. The reagent more classically employed is hydrazine monohydrate (N 2 H 4 ·H 2 O), which is added to a GO aqueous dispersion, resulting in agglomerated rGO nanosheets due to the increase in hydrophobicity [36]. Despite this approach possibly being appropriate for industrial production, the high toxicity of hydrazine make it unsuitable for large-scale synthesis. Consequently, other reducing agents have been suggested, such as NaBH 4 , which is very helpful at reducing C=O groups while it is less useful in the reduction of epoxy and carboxylic acid moieties [37], and cannot reduce alcohol groups. Other green reducing agents such as ascorbic acid, hydroiodic acid, and urea have been employed for GO synthesis [32].

(p5.2) On the other hand, electrochemical reduction of GO can be performed in a traditional electrochemical cell at room temperature in an aqueous buffer solution and without the need for chemical reductors. This method seems advantageous for energy and electrochemical applications.
## (s6) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/ Polymer Nanocomposites
(p6.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38].

(p6.1) Polymers 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 25 proach possibly being appropriate for industrial production, the high toxicity of hydrazine make it unsuitable for large-scale synthesis. Consequently, other reducing agents have been suggested, such as NaBH4, which is very helpful at reducing C=O groups while it is less useful in the reduction of epoxy and carboxylic acid moieties [37], and cannot reduce alcohol groups. Other green reducing agents such as ascorbic acid, hydroiodic acid, and urea have been employed for GO synthesis [32].

(p6.2) On the other hand, electrochemical reduction of GO can be performed in a traditional electrochemical cell at room temperature in an aqueous buffer solution and without the need for chemical reductors. This method seems advantageous for energy and electrochemical applications.
## (s7) Functionalization Procedures for the Development of Graphene/Polymer Nanocomposites
(p7.0) The combination of G with a polymeric matrix typically improves the polymer mechanical properties, charge dissociation, and charge transport. However, G and its derivatives require a functionalization process in order to be properly mixed with the polymer chains. A wide range of functionalization options to improve the G-polymer interaction have been reported [3,11]. These methods can be classified into two main categories: noncovalent and covalent strategies (covalent linking of polymer chains to G materials). A representative scheme of these approaches, which are described in detail in the following subsections, is shown in Scheme 5 [38]. Scheme 5. Schematic illustration of graphene-based nanomaterials, and covalent and non-covalent functionalization approaches. Taken from reference [38].
## (s8) Covalent Functionalization with Polymers
(p8.0) This approach involves a chemical reaction between G-based compounds and polymer chains. The irreversible linking of polymers can take place either at functional groups located on the basal planes or at the edges, and can take place in two different ways Scheme 5. Schematic illustration of graphene-based nanomaterials, and covalent and non-covalent functionalization approaches. Reprinted from Ref. [38].
## (s11) Grafting-from Methods
(p11.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the Gbased material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a pre-functionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.

(p11.1) The ATRP is a radical reaction that creates a carbon-carbon bond with a transition metal catalyst (a copper halide and an amine-based ligand). It comprises a fast initiation process and the development of a dynamic equilibrium between dormant and growing radicals [41]. It is suitable for the polymerization of many monomers with diverse chemical functionalities and provides good control of molecular weight, polymer composition, and structure with a low polydispersity. Though, it has some disadvantages, such as the elevated catalyst concentration needed and its removal that can be difficult and expensive, hence limiting its use on a large scale. Besides, it is an air-sensitive reaction, difficult to perform in aqueous media. For instance, it has been used for synthesizing a polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposite [42]. rGO sheets were initially prepared via reduction of GO in the presence of a surfactant. Then, aryl diazonium salt as an ATRP initiator was covalently linked to the rGO sheets. Methyl 2-bromopropionate was used as a grafting initiator to Scheme 6. Schematic representation of the grafting-from and grafting-to approaches to functionalize graphene with polymers.
## (s12) Grafting-from Methods
(p12.0) These are based on the anchoring of polymer-growth initiator molecules to the G-based material surface; then, the polymerization can start in these anchored initiators [39]. This technique avoids the possible steric hindrance since the polymer grows directly onto the G-based material surface, allowing the grafting of polymers with a high molecular weight, hence nanocompounds with an elevated grafting extent can be synthesized. Though, it requires a fine control of the reaction conditions as well as the amounts of initiator and substrate. Given that the initiator requires a functional group to be grafted, GO and rGO are more frequently used than G [40]. However, it is also feasible to use G if a prefunctionalization step is carried out to introduce functional groups within the structure. Several grafting-from techniques have been described in the literature, the most important being atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP), reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT), polycondensation, ring opening polymerization (ROP) and Ziegler-Natta polymerization.

(p12.1) The ATRP is a radical reaction that creates a carbon-carbon bond with a transition metal catalyst (a copper halide and an amine-based ligand). It comprises a fast initiation process and the development of a dynamic equilibrium between dormant and growing radicals [41]. It is suitable for the polymerization of many monomers with diverse chemical functionalities and provides good control of molecular weight, polymer composition, and structure with a low polydispersity. Though, it has some disadvantages, such as the elevated catalyst concentration needed and its removal that can be difficult and expensive, hence limiting its use on a large scale. Besides, it is an air-sensitive reaction, difficult to perform in aqueous media. For instance, it has been used for synthesizing a polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposite [42]. rGO sheets were initially prepared via reduction of GO in the presence of a surfactant. Then, aryl diazonium salt as an ATRP initiator was covalently linked to the rGO sheets. Methyl 2-bromopropionate was used as a grafting initiator to control the chain propagation on the surfaces of graphene sheets (Scheme 7). The length and grafting density of polymer chains were tailored by changing the amount of the grafting initiator and its molar ratio with styrene monomer. Significant increases in thermal conductivity were observed for the nanocomposite with only 2.0 wt% rGO. Furthermore, Polymers 2021, 13, 2978 9 of 25 the resulting PS nanocomposites with 0.9 wt% rGO showed about 70% and 57% increases in tensile strength and Young's modulus, respectively. Additionally, it has been applied for the preparation of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) grafted from GO [43]. The initiators were immobilized by esterification reaction with the carboxylic groups of GO. In this work, the polydispersity of the grafted PMMA was approximately one, demonstrating a wellcontrolled process. This PMMA-g-GO displayed good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform and methanol, and could be used as nanoreinforcement in a PMMA matrix. Due to the strong interfacial interactions between the PMMA-g-GO and PMMA, an efficient load transfer was attained, thus improving the mechanical and thermal properties of the nanocomposites. For instance, the addition of 1 wt% PMMA-g-GO led to a noteworthy improvement in the elongation at break, resulting in a more ductile and tougher material, and also increased the initial degradation temperature of the matrix by around 50 • C. control the chain propagation on the surfaces of graphene sheets (Scheme 7). The length and grafting density of polymer chains were tailored by changing the amount of the grafting initiator and its molar ratio with styrene monomer. Significant increases in thermal conductivity were observed for the nanocomposite with only 2.0 wt% rGO. Furthermore, the resulting PS nanocomposites with 0.9 wt% rGO showed about 70% and 57% increases in tensile strength and Young's modulus, respectively. Additionally, it has been applied for the preparation of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) grafted from GO [43]. The initiators were immobilized by esterification reaction with the carboxylic groups of GO. In this work, the polydispersity of the grafted PMMA was approximately one, demonstrating a well-controlled process. This PMMA-g-GO displayed good solubility in organic solvents such as chloroform and methanol, and could be used as nanoreinforcement in a PMMA matrix. Due to the strong interfacial interactions between the PMMA-g-GO and PMMA, an efficient load transfer was attained, thus improving the mechanical and thermal properties of the nanocomposites. For instance, the addition of 1 wt% PMMA-g-GO led to a noteworthy improvement in the elongation at break, resulting in a more ductile and tougher material, and also increased the initial degradation temperature of the matrix by around 50 °C. RAFT is a controlled radical polymerization reaction based on chain transfer agents, such as thiocarbonylthio (C=S) or vinyl (C=CH2) compounds [44], to produce low polydispersity index polymers. It works under mild conditions; polymerization can be attained by several approaches including emulsion, bulk, or suspension polymerization, and the structures are well-defined. The key benefits are that it is appropriate to varied types of Scheme 7. Synthetic routes for achieving controllable functionalization of polystyrene (PS)/G nanocomposites. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [42]. Copyright 1991 Royal Society of Chemistry.

(p12.2) RAFT is a controlled radical polymerization reaction based on chain transfer agents, such as thiocarbonylthio (C=S) or vinyl (C=CH 2 ) compounds [44], to produce low polydispersity index polymers. It works under mild conditions; polymerization can be attained by several approaches including emulsion, bulk, or suspension polymerization, and the structures are well-defined. The key benefits are that it is appropriate to varied types of monomers and that it allows controlling the polymerization of monomers soluble in water. The drawbacks are the need to select a RAFT agent for the specific polymerization and processing conditions. In this regard, PS/GO nanocomposites have been prepared via RAFT mediated mini-emulsion polymerization [45]. In this work, dodecyl isobutyric acid trithiocarbonate (DIBTC) RAFT agent was anchored to the hydroxyl groups of GO through an esterification reaction (Scheme 8). Then, stable mini-emulsions were obtained by sonicating RAFT-g-GO in styrene monomer in the presence of a surfactant, followed by polymerizing using 2,2-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) as initiator to yield encapsulated PS/GO nanocomposites. The molecular weight and polydispersity of PS in the nanocomposites changed with the amount of RAFT-g-GO. The thermal stability and mechanical properties were also improved due to the intercalation of PS within the GO flakes. The storage and loss modulus of the nanocomposites with 3 and 6 wt% GO were higher than those of raw PS, while the glass transition T g value decreased due to the change in the molecular weight of PS. monomers and that it allows controlling the polymerization of monomers soluble in water. The drawbacks are the need to select a RAFT agent for the specific polymerization and processing conditions. In this regard, PS/GO nanocomposites have been prepared via RAFT mediated mini-emulsion polymerization [45]. In this work, dodecyl isobutyric acid trithiocarbonate (DIBTC) RAFT agent was anchored to the hydroxyl groups of GO through an esterification reaction (Scheme 8). Then, stable mini-emulsions were obtained by sonicating RAFT-g-GO in styrene monomer in the presence of a surfactant, followed by polymerizing using 2,2-azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) as initiator to yield encapsulated PS/GO nanocomposites. The molecular weight and polydispersity of PS in the nanocomposites changed with the amount of RAFT-g-GO. The thermal stability and mechanical properties were also improved due to the intercalation of PS within the GO flakes. The storage and loss modulus of the nanocomposites with 3 and 6 wt% GO were higher than those of raw PS, while the glass transition Tg value decreased due to the change in the molecular weight of PS. Scheme 8. Synthesis route for the preparation of RAFT immobilized GO nanosheets. Taken from reference [45].

(p12.3) Polycondensation is a process in which monomers and lower molecular weight polymers react and form longer chains with higher molecular weight, while small molecules are obtained as byproducts. The resulting polymers usually present two functional groups, one in each side of the chain, because of the contribution of the functional groups of the monomers [46]. Using this procedure, GO has been functionalized with polyurethane (PU): the GO sheets reacted with 4,4′-diphenylmethane diisocyanate followed by polycondensation of poly(tetramethylene glycol) and ethylene glycol. The presence of PU chains linked to GO enhanced its dispersion within the matrix and provided a better matrix-GO load transfer, thus improving the mechanical properties, thermal stability and electrical conductivity. The tensile strength and storage modulus of PU increased by 240% and 200%, respectively, upon addition of 2.0 wt% PU-g-GO.

(p12.4) ROP is a method in which one termination of the polymer chain bears a group suitable to react with cyclic monomers. The end group of a compound acts as initiator and forces the opening of the first cyclic monomer, which is added to the structure as a new chain with its end group being reactive, such as the previous initiator. The polymerization continues adding more cyclic broken monomers to the structure. Different researchers also used this method for anchoring polycaprolactone (PCL) and poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) to GO [47,48]. This route was developed to prepare polyamide 6 (PA6)/GO composites Polycondensation is a process in which monomers and lower molecular weight polymers react and form longer chains with higher molecular weight, while small molecules are obtained as byproducts. The resulting polymers usually present two functional groups, one in each side of the chain, because of the contribution of the functional groups of the monomers [46]. Using this procedure, GO has been functionalized with polyurethane (PU): the GO sheets reacted with 4,4 -diphenylmethane diisocyanate followed by polycondensation of poly(tetramethylene glycol) and ethylene glycol. The presence of PU chains linked to GO enhanced its dispersion within the matrix and provided a better matrix-GO load transfer, thus improving the mechanical properties, thermal stability and electrical conductivity. The tensile strength and storage modulus of PU increased by 240% and 200%, respectively, upon addition of 2.0 wt% PU-g-GO.

(p12.5) ROP is a method in which one termination of the polymer chain bears a group suitable to react with cyclic monomers. The end group of a compound acts as initiator and forces the opening of the first cyclic monomer, which is added to the structure as a new chain with its end group being reactive, such as the previous initiator. The polymerization continues adding more cyclic broken monomers to the structure. Different researchers also used this method for anchoring polycaprolactone (PCL) and poly(L-lactide) (PLLA) to GO [47,48]. This route was developed to prepare polyamide 6 (PA6)/GO composites (Scheme 9): εcaprolactam (CL) was fixed onto the GO sheets coupling by 4,4 -methylenebis(phenyl isocyanate), and then PA6 was grafted from the GO surface by in situ anionic ring-opening polymerization. The polymerization was performed at 150 • C and for 20-40 min, by using a caprolactam magnesium bromide initiator (C1) in combination with a difunctional hexamethylene-1,6-dicarbamoylcaprolactam (C20) activator, leading to about 74 wt% polymer content [48]. The crystallization temperature, degree of crystallinity, and mechanical properties of PA6/GO nanocomposites increased, especially for the composites with GO loading less than 0.2 wt%, owed to the strong interfacial adhesion. This simple and effective approach can offer novel possibilities for expanding the applications of polymer-g-G nanocomposites.

(p12.6) to about 74 wt% polymer content [48]. The crystallization temperature, degree of crystallinity, and mechanical properties of PA6/GO nanocomposites increased, especially for the composites with GO loading less than 0.2 wt%, owed to the strong interfacial adhesion. This simple and effective approach can offer novel possibilities for expanding the applications of polymer-g-G nanocomposites. Scheme 9. Synthesis route of polyamide 6 (PA6)-g-GO nanocomposites via anionic ring-opening polymerization. Taken from reference [48].

(p12.7) The Ziegler-Natta polymerization involves the use of catalysts to bind together vinyl-contained compounds. It usually employs TiCl3 or TiCl4, along with an aluminumbased co-catalyst [49,50], and allows synthesizing of polymers of specific tacticity. The reaction is based on the breakage of the double bound to add another molecule and continues until the termination step. As the reaction involves the functional groups of Gbased compounds, the selected monomer requires a vinyl group. Polypropylene (PP)-g-GO nanocomposites have been prepared via in situ Ziegler-Natta polymerization (Scheme 10). A Mg/Ti catalyst was immobilized onto GO sheets by reacting with the surface functional groups including -OH and -COOH. Furthermore, PP polymerization was carried out together with the nanoscale exfoliation of GO. A good dispersion of the GO flakes within the PP matrix was corroborated by morphological inspection done by TEM Scheme 9. Synthesis route of polyamide 6 (PA6)-g-GO nanocomposites via anionic ring-opening polymerization. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [48]. Copyright 1991 Royal Society of Chemistry.

(p12.8) The Ziegler-Natta polymerization involves the use of catalysts to bind together vinylcontained compounds. It usually employs TiCl 3 or TiCl 4 , along with an aluminum-based co-catalyst [49,50], and allows synthesizing of polymers of specific tacticity. The reaction is based on the breakage of the double bound to add another molecule and continues until the termination step. As the reaction involves the functional groups of G-based compounds, the selected monomer requires a vinyl group. Polypropylene (PP)-g-GO nanocomposites have been prepared via in situ Ziegler-Natta polymerization (Scheme 10). A Mg/Ti catalyst was immobilized onto GO sheets by reacting with the surface functional groups including -OH and -COOH. Furthermore, PP polymerization was carried out together with the nanoscale exfoliation of GO. A good dispersion of the GO flakes within the PP matrix was corroborated by morphological inspection done by TEM and SEM analysis. Furthermore, high electrical conductivity was found: for instance, for a GO loading of 4.9 wt%, the conductivity was 0.3 S m −1 . This could arise from a side reaction involving the reduction of GO sheets that takes place in one of the synthetic steps.

(p12.9) Polymers 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 25 flakes within the PP matrix was corroborated by morphological inspection done by TEM and SEM analysis. Furthermore, high electrical conductivity was found: for instance, for a GO loading of 4.9 wt%, the conductivity was 0.3 S m −1 . This could arise from a side reaction involving the reduction of GO sheets that takes place in one of the synthetic steps.
## (s14) Grafting-to Methods
(p14.0) This approach involves the grafting of the polymer chain itself onto the G-based compound surface, although it may require former functionalization steps of either the G surface or the polymer. The goal of these functionalization steps is to provide reactive groups that can be employed for a coupling reaction. In contrast with grafting from procedures, grafting-to methods are strongly affected by steric hindrance, due to the G flakes' size. However, they are highly versatile, since a wide variety of functional groups can be employed [51]. Besides, they allow the selection of the location of graphene, which influences the final properties. Grafting-to techniques can be divided into three types: (1) esterification/amidation reactions; (2) cycloaddition reactions; and (3) click coupling reactions.

(p14.1) The most extended approaches are focused on esterification or amidation reactions of the surface oxygenated groups of G with functional groups of the polymer, such as carboxylic acid or hydroxyl in order to form esters, or epoxy or carboxylic acid to form amide linkages [52]. Furthermore, other pathways to exploit the reactivity of GO and rGO have been proposed, such as the conversion of double/triple bounds using radicals (i.e., amide radicals) [53], multi-step amidation/esterification reactions (which involve a conversion of functional groups with other compounds, e.g., SOCl2), etc.
## (s15) Grafting-to Methods
(p15.0) This approach involves the grafting of the polymer chain itself onto the G-based compound surface, although it may require former functionalization steps of either the G surface or the polymer. The goal of these functionalization steps is to provide reactive groups that can be employed for a coupling reaction. In contrast with grafting from procedures, grafting-to methods are strongly affected by steric hindrance, due to the G flakes' size. However, they are highly versatile, since a wide variety of functional groups can be employed [51]. Besides, they allow the selection of the location of graphene, which influences the final properties. Grafting-to techniques can be divided into three types: (1) esterification/amidation reactions; (2) cycloaddition reactions; and (3) click coupling reactions.

(p15.1) The most extended approaches are focused on esterification or amidation reactions of the surface oxygenated groups of G with functional groups of the polymer, such as carboxylic acid or hydroxyl in order to form esters, or epoxy or carboxylic acid to form amide linkages [52]. Furthermore, other pathways to exploit the reactivity of GO and rGO have been proposed, such as the conversion of double/triple bounds using radicals (i.e., amide radicals) [53], multi-step amidation/esterification reactions (which involve a conversion of functional groups with other compounds, e.g., SOCl 2 ), etc.
## (s17) Non-Covalent Functionalization with Polymers
(p17.0) Three main approaches have been described among the non-covalent functionalization methods, namely, hydrogen bonding, π-π stacking, and electrostatic interactions, which do not alter the chemical structure of the G sheets, hence the electronic structure of G is preserved and its electrical conductivity is hardly affected. They are usually followed by physical methods, such as melt blending, solution mixing, or in situ polymerization [12]. They are typically simple and can be performed under mild conditions. Nevertheless, the main drawback of this method is that other components (such as surfactants) are frequently introduced.
## (s18) Scheme 12.
(p18.0) Schematic representation of the different interactions between PEDOT:PSS and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [74]. Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydrophobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emeraldine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the two nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71].

(p18.1) Similarly, different types of interactions, including H-bonding, π-π stacking, hydro phobic as well as electrostatic have been reported between PANI, in the form of emerald ine salt, and HDI-GO (Scheme 13), that result in improved interaction between the tw nanocomposite components, hence very high electrical conductivity [71]. Scheme 13. Schematic representation of the different interactions between PANI and hexameth ylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Taken from [71].
## (s19) Applications of Graphene/Polymer Nanocomposites in the Field of Energy
(p19.0) As mentioned earlier, G/polymer nanocomposites can be developed via melt blend ing, solution mixing, or in situ polymerization, combined with covalent and non-covalen modification. These composites have superior optical, electrical, and thermal propertie that make them suitable for a large number of applications, particularly in the field o energy. A chart flow showing these applications is shown in Scheme 14, and some of them are briefly described below.

(p19.1) Lithium-ion batteries are widely used energy storage devices owed to their high en ergy and power density, good durability, and environmental safety. Conventional cath ode materials used in these batteries are LiCoO2 and LiFePO4, although they present som drawbacks such as restricted capacity and nonrenewable resources [75]. Hence, novel ma terials for use as cathodes are required, including polymeric ones that present some ben efits like lightness, mechanical flexibility, and easy processing. Nevertheless, polymeri Scheme 13. Schematic representation of the different interactions between PANI and hexamethylene diisocyanate (HDI)-modified GO. Reprinted with permission from Ref. [71]. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.
## (s20) Applications of Graphene/Polymer Nanocomposites in the Field of Energy
(p20.0) As mentioned earlier, G/polymer nanocomposites can be developed via melt blending, solution mixing, or in situ polymerization, combined with covalent and non-covalent modification. These composites have superior optical, electrical, and thermal properties that make them suitable for a large number of applications, particularly in the field of energy. A chart flow showing these applications is shown in Scheme 14, and some of them are briefly described below.

(p20.1) Lithium-ion batteries are widely used energy storage devices owed to their high energy and power density, good durability, and environmental safety. Conventional cathode materials used in these batteries are LiCoO 2 and LiFePO 4 , although they present some drawbacks such as restricted capacity and nonrenewable resources [75]. Hence, novel materials for use as cathodes are required, including polymeric ones that present some benefits like lightness, mechanical flexibility, and easy processing. Nevertheless, polymeric cathode materials have low electrical conductivities and slow redox reactions. Thus, G-based nanomaterials can be incorporated to improve performance. For instance, PPy/rGO nanocomposites were prepared via electrodeposition on a stainless steel mesh, and their performance was compared to that of PPy/sodium p-toluenesulfonate (PPy/pTS) [76]. The nanocomposite with rGO showed improved conductivity and higher discharge capacity at low current rates, ascribed to the porous structure and the high conductivity of rGO.

(p20.2) Polymers 2021, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 18 of 25 cathode materials have low electrical conductivities and slow redox reactions. Thus, Gbased nanomaterials can be incorporated to improve performance. For instance, PPy/rGO nanocomposites were prepared via electrodeposition on a stainless steel mesh, and their performance was compared to that of PPy/sodium p-toluenesulfonate (PPy/pTS) [76]. The nanocomposite with rGO showed improved conductivity and higher discharge capacity at low current rates, ascribed to the porous structure and the high conductivity of rGO.
