# A review of codebook design methods for sparse code multiple access

CorpusID: 237251889 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bb9bbcd766bf513c1d38b84ad384754b5589046a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) Multidimensional constellation design
(p3.0) A modulation scheme needs to be designed for encoding the user data. The requirement is to have maximum Euclidean distance and energy diversity between the points. Generally, the SCMA structure can be represented as a function of ( , , , , , ) where is the MD constellation, not considering the constants, the SCMA optimisation equation is based on spreading matrix and constellation given by (6).

(p3.1) For a fully loaded system, the spreading matrix has a unique solution, and the optimisation equation from (6) is reduced to a constellation operator. Based on (6), constellation design is primarily performed in two steps, first design a mother constellation of size M and then perform user-specific rotation operations to generate user-specific MD constellations. These operations maintain the uniqueness of symbols for users that are transmitted in the same RE. However, in the uplink, the channel applies a random rotation to constellations, so the rotation does not affect the system's output. But, it allows the critical performance indicators to be configured for better uplink SCMA performance.
## (s4) Codebook designing
(p4.0) The codebook design performs layer-specific operations ɸ on the MD constellation matrix, = * ɸ, where is the optimised MD constellation. Special operations involve in the codebook designing are complex conjugate, phase rotation and vector permutation. The designing can be a combination of these operations depending upon the performance enhancement of SCMA in BER improvement. User codebooks are extracted from the mother codebook using the mapping matrixes of the factor graph. Element wise product of codebook and each user vector-matrix generates the user codebooks. For number of users, each with the codebook the mother codebook matrix is defined as

(p4.1) In codebook design, the constellation point separation is necessary for Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) transmission. There is a need for energy diversity and product distance between the constellation points for performance enhancement in a fading channel. The improvement is made using the phase rotation technique. The phase rotation is carried out in two steps; firstly, the constellation used in communication is partitioned into sub-constellations of 1, 2, 4 or 8 points. Next, the rotation parameter Ɵ needs to be calculated by maximising the Ɵ as in (7), for which optimisation is performed on the minimum coordinate product distance (CPD) for all the sub-constellations created in step 1 given by (8).
## (s6) DISCUSSION
(p6.0) Results show their effectiveness of codebook optimisation in different environments. Like codebook based on constellation rotation and interleaving based technique in [7] is presented to have a better BER then [24]. However, being a more straightforward technique, the required SNR for decoding is very high. Constellation segmentation in [36] is another technique with proper MED maximisation operation and better SNR gains. However, this technique's performance increases at higher SNRs, while matching results with other SCMA codebooks are observed at lower SNR values. The method in [31] is up-and-coming with low SNR signals but problematic in higher overloading situations due to erroneous multi-user detection. Compared with [41,44,45], it has a better BER performance and applicable to large codebooks than other techniques. The author in [37] signifies the importance of SNR with BER for phase rotation based codebook. Results show a drastic increase in errors with SNR higher than -4dB. The results indicate the importance of further research in the phase rotated mother constellation design for practical purposes. The article [38] presents the proposed codebook's comparative results, with [24,34,45] showing better BER performance for large codebooks. [40] offers a circular QAM based codebook with an improved performance from the original SCMA codebook design [24]. The author in [35] presents a bit interleaved technique for codebook design with improved performance at much lower SNR. Methods in [32][33][34]43] provide efficient codebook designing techniques with BER analysis in varying conditions and parameters.

(p6.1) This study analysed the codebooks from [33,34,36,37,39] and evaluated them for BER performance. The simulation is performed with six users and four resources, covering SNR signals from 4.7 to 22.7 dB, including AWGN and fading channel with no channel coding. The code length is adapted to be 10,000. Figure 2 shows the simulation results of RBs with the best values for different codebooks. It is observed that codebooks from the rotation and permutation category have comparatively better performance. Considering the cumulative result of all RBs for a codebook, the codebook from [36] is observed to have a better error rate in both the lower and higher SNR. However, considering individual blocks, the star QAM codebook [39] is found to have the best results in some RBs. In both codebooks [36,39], the proposed method is based on the prominent constellation segmentation where actual optimisation is performed. The constellation is then used for designing individual codebooks. It gives a direction of using segmentation in other methods presented, predicting for even better BER.  Figure 2. BER performance for SCMA system with different codebooks
## (s7) OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
(p7.0) The main challenge in codebook designing is user data segregation in signal space, optimising easy decoding and a simple decoder at the receiver [46]. In designing mother constellations, more power-efficient and simple models need to be developed, focusing on IoT [47]. There is a need to explore better-fit mathematical models to extract the required codebooks. Some theories are discussed in this study, but there is a need to explore mathematical models for codebook designing.

(p7.1) Further research should explore machine-learning techniques for SCMA data processing used in similar domains [48]. Prominent of these are regression, decision tree, and neural networks. Learning techniques can extract codebooks best suited for the required channel conditions. Machine learning can be enhanced by mixing with adaptive processing algorithms. Such a method exists in the 5G domain as presented in [48], and they can be used for the SCMA domain. According to channel or data, adaptive nature can be explored, leading to a new codebook domain for 5G communication. The author utilised an adaptive approach in designing better SCMA architectures according to user features [49]. Another research domain is resource planning organisation [50], including adaptively allocating resources and developing optimised algorithms.
