# Myocardial Infarction in the Absence of Obstructive Coronary Artery Disease (MINOCA): a Review of the Present and Preview of the Future

CorpusID: 235737919 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c121a9bc870a2f366f8a6af0182f83f9d49a851](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3c121a9bc870a2f366f8a6af0182f83f9d49a851)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection
(p3.0) Spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) is an uncommon cause of AMI characterized by a nontraumatic and noniatrogenic separation of the layers of the coronary arterial wall resulting from intramural hematoma. This intramural hematoma will compress the true lumen and lead to a decrease in arterial blood flow. There are several types of SCAD described in the literature [13]. The tapering appearance of the arterial lumen that is seen in type II SCAD can often be misinterpreted as a nonobstructive lesion, resulting in MINOCA.
## (s4) Coronary Vasospasm
(p4.0) Epicardial coronary artery vasospasm is a transient and reversible vasoconstriction of the major epicardial coronary artery that can result in AMI. Coronary vasospasm therefore is a common cause of MINOCA. Its prevalence will vary across race, with a larger proportion of coronary vasospasm seen in Asian populations. In one series, coronary vasospasm was reported in 40% of patients with MINOCA undergoing provocative spasm testing [22]. In contrary to the other phenotypes of MINOCA, coronary vasospasm has a male predominance and is associated with higher rates of smoking and alcohol consumption [23].

(p4.1) Patients usually present with typical chest pain at rest or while asleep, associated with transient ST segment elevations, or at times ST segment depressions and T wave inversion which resolves spontaneously or following the administration of nitrates [24]. The diagnosis of coronary vasospasm is made if there are either spontaneous episodes with ECG changes, reversed with NTG, or if provocation results in chest pain, ECG changes, or angiographic evidence of epicardial coronary vasospasm. Because coronary vasospasm is a transient functional abnormality, spasm provocation plays a key role in diagnosing this condition. Provocation can be performed with exercise or hyperventilation or through pharmacologic mechanisms administered in the cath laboratory under controlled circumstances. Provocative testing with acetylcholine is the gold standard to demonstrate reversible coronary obstruction and demand supply mismatch of coronary blood flow [25]. Provocative testing is considered positive for coronary vasospasm when there is demonstration of the following findings:
## (s5) Coronary Thrombus or Embolism
(p5.0) Coronary embolism is the underlying cause of 3%-7% of acute coronary syndromes [28]. In patients with MINOCA, one should suspect either coronary embolism or thrombosis to an epicardial coronary artery with partial resolution at the time of angiography or embolism or thrombosis to the distal microvasculature, if there is a known underlying source (i.e., left atrial or ventricular thrombus) or if there is a suspicion of a hypercoagulable state. Coronary embolism maybe be direct (from the left ventricle, aortic or mitral valves, or the left atrial appendage), paradoxical (from the venous circulation through a patent foramen ovale), or iatrogenic (following cardiac intervention). Certain genetic thrombophilic disorders like protein C and S deficiency, factor V Leiden mutation, and antiphospholipid syndrome are more prevalent in MINOCA than the general population in multiple observational studies and registries [28,29]. Pregnancy is a known procoagulant state, and the effect of estrogen and oral contraceptives on precipitating thrombosis as well as AMI are well documented in literature [30].
## (s9) Case 2: MINOCA Secondary to Hypercoagulable State
(p9.0) A 49-year-old man with a past medical history of sickle cell disease presented with chest pain. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with no significant STsegment deviations. Cardiac troponin trended up to 11.5 ng/ml. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricle function without significant regional wall motion abnormalities. Coronary angiography demonstrated normal coronary arteries. Cardiac MRI exhibited in the inferior wall myocardial edema on T2-weighted imaging ( Fig. 2A), and a focal area of subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement, is suggestive of an acute myocardial infarction ( Fig. 2B and C). A diagnosis of MINOCA secondary to microvascular obstruction was made, and the patient was discharged on antiplatelet therapy [45].
