# A Review of Three-Dimensional Medical Image Visualization

CorpusID: 247983782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f79ed86667be3d8d6d97955cddbea13ffd8ddca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9f79ed86667be3d8d6d97955cddbea13ffd8ddca)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent years, with advances in computing power and algorithms, the impact of technology in medicine is greater than ever and keeps increasing. Strategic plans focusing on promoting the application and development of medical technologies have been made worldwide. In 2018, the General Office of the State Council of China issued "Opinions on Promoting the Development of 'Internet Plus Healthcare,'" calling for strengthening the integration, sharing, and application of clinical and research data and supporting the research and development of healthrelated artificial intelligence (AI) technology, medical robots, etc. (http://www.gov.cn/zhengce/content/2018-04/ 28/content_5286645.htm). A three-year action plan was released to develop AI, which puts a priority on expanding the clinical application such as medical image-assisted diagnosis systems (http://www.cac.gov.cn/2017-12/15/c_ 1122114520.htm). In the same year, the National Institutes of Health (NIH), USA, released the NIH Strategic Plan for Data Science, which proposed that technological innovations such as machine learning, deep learning, AI, and virtual reality (VR) could revolutionize biomedical research over the next 10 years (https://datascience.nih.gov/nihstrategic-plan-data-science).

(p0.1) Medical images, such as computerized tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), are the backbone of modern medical practices and research. Furthermore, medical images are a core data source and target for analysis in AI and VR in aforementioned strategic plans. Therefore, the analysis and understanding of medical images are of utmost importance in medical technologies. In practice, most if not everyone in health science areas is familiar with medical images, and many use medical images in daily work. Medical images are massive and complex and hard to explore and gain insights with traditional statistical methods that do not involve the expertise of humans. Therefore, technologies that have humans in the loop are needed for medical image exploration and analysis, and medical experts could make the best of the potential values of medical images to enable high-quality healthcare solutions. Vision is known to be the major and most efficient perception mechanism for humans. Visualization transforms data into interactive visual representations to facilitate data understanding and exploration through visual perception and humancomputer interaction, and it can present medical images in 3D with high accuracy. Visualization integrates the cognitive advantage of humans and the computational advantage of computers for data mining [1] and decision-making [2] and is an effective data analysis technology for medical images. Throughout this paper, we understand the term medical image visualization as 3D visualization of medical images.

(p0.2) We first report on the scope and sources of papers involved (Section 2). We then summarize fundamental techniques that enable the visualization of various types of medical images (Section 3). Next, in Section 4, specialized medical imaging visualization methods are reviewed based on our medical procedure-oriented and scale-based taxonomy. In Section 5, we summarize visualization techniques that may have potential medical applications and discuss limitations of medical image visualization. Finally, we list free software tools that are readily available online for medical image visualization (Section 6) and conclude the overview in Section 7.
## (s5) Techniques for Improved Spatial Perception.
(p5.0) Although local illumination is widely used in volume rendering, more realistic rendering is often necessary for clinical purposes as it provides important depth cues allowing accurate spatial perception. Therefore, global illumination has been a core research topic in volume rendering. A general and comprehensive global illumination model that creates various visual phenomenon is available in computer graphics [37].

(p5.1) In the case of direct volume rendering, Monte Carlo sampling enables global illumination [38]; however, the gradual rendering from a coarse to fine visualization and the noisy look makes its integration to the clinical pipeline premature. Shadows and translucency are enabled by halfangle slicing [22], and directional occlusion is also available [35]. Figure 3(b) shows the volume rendering of an MRI brain scan with directional occlusion. Compared to Figure 3(a) with the traditional Phong illumination-a frequently used local illumination method-directional occlusion ( Figure 3(b)) creates important depth cues that improve the perception of the complex creases of the brain.

(p5.2) Scattering and shadows are also made possible with GPU-based ray casting that achieves high image quality [39]. Advanced global illumination models [36,40] are available to include scattering and soft shadowing in raycasting volume rendering. Figure 3(c) shows the volume rendering of a CT scan with a low-pass shadowing model with scattering that provides translucency. These methods could aid medical experts in their clinical work to quickly and accurately locate features of interest in the visualization, which is not possible with traditional local illumination models.
## (s6) Vector Image Visualization.
(p6.0) When attributes s (equation (1)) are vectors, the medical image to be visualized is a vector field. Vector field visualization is extensively used and studied in computational fluid dynamics for science and engineering, and a survey of general vector field visualization techniques is available [43]. In medicine, vector field data in terms of fluid flow from phase-contrast MR (PC-MR) scans are typically used for understanding pathological cerebral aneurysm haemodynamic, nasal aerodynamics, and aortic haemodynamics; bioelectric simulations based on electrocardiography (ECG) in cardiology and electroencephalography (EEG) or magnetoancephalography (MEG) in neurology are another source of vector image data [44].

(p6.1) For more details on medical vector field data visualization, we refer the reader to several surveys [5,8,45]. In this section, we briefly review medical vector field visualization techniques in the following order: direct methods, geometry methods, feature methods, and techniques for accurate spatial perception. Segmentation and mesh generation are also important processes in vector medical image visualization but are beyond of the scope of our review.  [35]. A more advanced global illumination technique [36] generates the photorealistic rendering of a CT scan in (c). ©2014 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from Ament et al. [36]. 5 Health Data Science 3.2.1. Direct Methods. Direct methods do not explicitly extract any geometry or features in a vector field. One strategy visualizes vector information with glyphs on 2D slices [46]. Another strategy converts vector information into multiple scalars and visualizes them with color coding in slices or volumes using direct volume rendering. However, direct methods do not visualize trajectories of particles in the vector field, i.e., global path features, which is one of the focal points of vector field analysis. Therefore, direct methods see limited use in vector medical image visualization.
## (s7) Geometry Methods.
(p7.0) Extracting and visualizing representative geometry in the vector field, e.g., streamlines, pathlines, or streaklines, are effective and well-received methods. Geometry methods extract global path features from seeded points in the image [47]. Streamlines are visualized as 3D lines or tubes colored by the desired property, for example, the electrical potentials of electric fields of a torso in Figure 4(v) or a brain with the volume rendering as context in Figure 4(d). The analysis of flow patterns is aided with image slices [48] similar to the case of volume rendering, where a cutting plane is often used. The extraction of global path features is sensitive to seed points; a probing tool facilitates seeding in images [49]. However, automatic seeding remains as a challenging and open question.

(p7.1) Alternative to visualizing 3D geometry as lines, tubes, or surfaces, global path features can be shown with textures. Line integral convolution (LIC) [50] visualizes the vector field by convolving a noise image with a low-pass filter along streamlines extracted from the data image. The LIC method can be extended to curved surfaces [41,51], for example, on the surface of a heart [41] as shown in Figure 4(a) or a torso as shown in Figure 4(b).
## (s8) Feature Methods.
(p8.0) Feature methods extract features of interests, e.g., sinks, sources, saddle points, vortices, and regions of abnormal flow velocity, in vector fields. We cover specialized methods for medical fluid flows; for other vector field data, we refer the readers to a general overview of texture-based vector field visualization [43]. Extracting vor-tex regions is a vital process in a number of vector medical image visualization techniques [52,53]. Vortex cores in blood vessels are related to blood transportation mechanisms in the aorta and the left ventricle [53]. Vortex regions are extracted for analysis of potential malfunctions [52].

(p8.1) Line predicates [54] are functions used for querying integral lines (streamlines or pathlines) that meet certain properties of interest. These functions are flexible and especially suitable for vector medical images as flow features such as velocity, shapes of lines, and distances to the vessel wall can be encoded. Blood with high residence times [55] and impingement zones of cerebral aneurysms [56] can be extracted with line predicates.
## (s9) 3.2.4.
(p9.0) Techniques for Improved Spatial Perception. Spatial perception of path geometry, lines or tubes, is difficult in 3D due to many factors, e.g., cluttering, inaccurate depth perception, occlusion, and inaccurate perception of orientation. Methods that improve spatial perception are available to complement aforementioned visualization techniques (Sections 3.2.1-3.2.3). Particles in the flow field can be drawn as different shaped glyphs [52] or cartoon-styled stretched ellipsoids or short pathlines (pathlets) [49]. Drawing whole extracted lines as illuminated streamlines [57] or with halos [58,59] is another strategy for visualization with enhanced spatial perception.

(p9.1) Global illumination is superior to local illumination in user performance for locating and comparing features with tube/line renderings as shown in a comparative study [60]. Shadows are especially important for depth perception of vector field visualization as they provide depth cues. Directional ambient occlusion [61] or ray tracing for tubes [62] is able to create shadow effects for vector field data or field lines extracted from tensor fields (Figures 5(c) and 5(d)).
## (s10) Tensor Image Visualization.
(p10.0) Tensor image visualization techniques concern medical images with the attribute(s) s of equation (1) as tensors-here, we consider only secondorder tensors [65], i.e., matrices, and most applications in medicine assume symmetric matrices. DTI captures the Figure 4: Vector field visualization of medical images. The LIC method is used to visualize (a) a simulation of the bioelectric field of the heart [41]. ©2008 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from Li et al. [41]. Streamlines are visualized as colored lines in bioelectric field simulations in (b) a torso (reprinted, with permission, from the SCI Institute). The visualization of a brain in (c) applies LIC with isosurfacing for an MRI scan along with volume rendering of a functional MRI (fMRI) [42]. ©2007 SPIE. Reprinted, with permission, from Schafhitzel et al. [42]. 6 Health Data Science diffusion information of water molecules in tissues as symmetric matrices at each point. In medicine, clinical experts often use the term diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) to refer to the isotropic diffusion map-a scalar measurement of DTI.

(p10.1) To avoid confusion, we use the term DTI to refer to the imaging that measures tensor fields and do not use DWI. We classify techniques into three categories for tensor image visualization: voxel-based, glyph-based, and tractography. As in previous sections, we also discuss available techniques for improved spatial perception for tensor medical images.

(p10.2) 3.3.1. Voxel-Based Methods. By computing scalar descriptions of tensors and using 2D slices and/or volume rendering, voxel-based methods convert tensor data visualization to scalar data visualization. One such description is fractional anisotropy [66], and other anisotropy measurements, including linear anisotropy, planar anisotropy, and isotropy are also helpful for describing the shape and size of tensors. Moreover, measurements based on characteristic curves, for example, finite separation ratio, are calculated to describe coherent fiber structures [64]. Tract-based spatial statistics uses nonlinear registration and fractional skeleton to improve the analysis of multisubject DT images [67]. Strategies of voxel-based visualization using direct volume rendering are available, including designing transfer functions based on tensor information and using diffusion volume textures [68].
## (s11) Glyph-Based Methods.
(p11.0) Glyphs allow encoding the complex tensor information using multiple visual channels, for example, shape, size, and color. Classic glyph design uses ellipsoids [69,70] (spherical glyphs) or cuboids that change shape and orientation based on diffusion information-the anisotropy and orientation of principal components. A composite glyph can directly encode linear, planar, and spherical information [71]. Superquadric glyphs [72] with general principles of usage [73] avoid the shortcomings of spherical or cubical glyphs. Uncertainty-aware visualization is available for augmenting spherical, superquadric glyphs for DTI and fourth-order homogeneous polynomial glyphs for high angular resolution diffusion imaging (HARDI) [63]. Aforementioned glyph shapes can be found in Figure 5(a). The spatial arrangement of glyphs is another crucial issue. A glyph packing technique leads to efficient use of space and correct perception of the visualization [74].
## (s13) Techniques for Improved Spatial Perception.
(p13.0) Perception of glyphs is difficult in 3D due to loss of information from projection to the 2D image plane and the ambiguity in the 3D shape representation. There are superquadric glyphs that avoid the ambiguity and improve over spherical and cubical glyphs [72,73]. The glyphs are typically rendered with illuminated surfaces and shadow effects in 3D to further enhance depth perception.
## (s16) Population.
(p16.0) Diagnosis can benefit from studying health problems in a population, for example, with a cohort study, and by comparing different individuals. Traditionally, cohort studies with medical images rely on hypothesis formation and statistical analysis, but the visualization and exploration of the imaging data are ignored. A visual analysis method combines hypothesis formation and reasoning with interactive volume rendering of multivariate brain MRI and fMRI cohort study data [99]. With multiplelinked views, the method supports the exploration of the bidirectional correlations between the volume rendering and clinical parameters and the comparison of different patient groups.

(p16.1) Diagnosis can be potentially further improved by including tensor information of DTIs. However, visualization of DTIs in a population is challenging because, on top of the occlusion issue of spatially overlapping images, each voxel there encodes complex information. As a first step, effective comparative visualization of two DTI images is required. A glyph-based technique visualizes three aspects of tensors, namely, the scale, the anisotropy type, and the orientation [102]. By showing the glyphs on 2D slices, the method is able to compare two DTI images. As an example, the brain DTI of a healthy subject is compared to an HIV-infected subject. An overview+detail visualization is devised for DTI image ensembles: aggregate tensor glyphs show an overview of the ensemble in the spatial layout, and visualizations of tensor properties (scale, shape, and orientation) are used for detailed analysis [103]. A case study demonstrates that the method is able to visualize and analyze a cohort DTI study of 46 subjects.
## (s18) Prognosis.
(p18.0) In contrast to the case of treatment, the value of visualization lies in its capability of comparison in a population to aid the prognosis evaluation. Therefore, all techniques for prognosis summarized in Table 3 are population-based. A number of techniques focus on radiotherapy treatment evaluation. A visualization method is available for exploring and understanding tumor control probability models for cohorts [127]. By combining visualizations of medical images and statistical models, the method supports the exploration of uncertainty, parameter sensitivity analysis, interpatient response variability identification, and finding treatment strategies that result in the desired outcome.

(p18.1) A cohort study of patients who underwent breast cancer chemotherapy treatment is analyzed with a visualization method that shows different aspects of the study using multiple-linked views [128]. The method combines medical images and nonimage information in an interactive visualization tool that allows for analyzing individual patients, comparing different chemotherapy treatment strategies and comparing different patients.

(p18.2) Radiotherapy-induced bladder toxicity is analyzed with a visualization technique tailored to investigating individual patients and cohorts in the whole treatment process of a cohort study [129]. This method focuses on the analysis of the impact of shape variations on the accuracy of dose delivery by integrating the spatial visualization of bladders, dimensionality reduction and clustering, and dose distribution visualizations. The idea is further extended to visualize and analyze more organs that may impact the accuracy of dose delivery in radiotherapy treatment for prostate cancer [130], and its usefulness has been demonstrated through the exploration of cohort studies by health experts.
## (s20) 12
(p20.0) Health Data Science methods for bioelectric fields problems can be found in a review, where related visualization techniques are also discussed [44]. Comparative visualization is important for understanding an ensemble of simulation runs and comparing between patients or different measures of medical images. Scalar image ensembles, for example, brain MR atlas data (https://www.oasis-brains.org/), are a common form of ensemble medical image data. Direct visualization of image members in 2D and 3D is not effective due to occlusion, and quantitative comparison is not feasible in this way either. One possible solution is to reduce the dimensionality of image data to one (1D) with space-filing curves [135,137,138]. Data-driven space-filling curves [135] better preserve spatial coherency in the resulting 1D representation than static curves [137,138], which potentially break spatially coherent features into distant 1D fragments. The method is applied for visualizing brain MRI atlas and an ensemble of 3D myocardial ischemia simulations and could potentially be used for diagnosis or research by finding anomalies of subjects through comparison to the main trends. Comparative visualization of stress tensors is available for analyzing rupture risks of cerebral aneurysms based on computational fluid dynamic simulations [134]. With several glyph designs, the method supports the comparison of local stress tensors on the inner and outer vessel walls. Medical experts consider that this method introduces the often overlooked wall structure information for rupture assessment and could contribute to the development of a comprehensive risk factor of aneurysms in the future.

(p20.1) Medical image visualization has its limitations. First, customized techniques and tools are required for specific medical problems, which demand close collaborations between the visualization and medical experts. Typically, an iterative process with several prototypes is required for a method and its associated software tool to become usable, which is often time-consuming. Second, a learning process is required for medical experts to familiarize themselves with new concepts or interactions, for example, transfer function design in volume rendering. Nevertheless, medical image visualization has the advantage of combining the expertise of humans and the computational power of machines, which is vital for health science, making it a promising research direction.
