# A Review on SRAM Memory Design Using FinFET Technology

CorpusID: 249593104 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de139ec252be4e69ad436583072c535808eeb46b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/de139ec252be4e69ad436583072c535808eeb46b)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRoDUCTIoN
(p0.0) For a long time, the integration procedure used by the researchers is the VLSI (Very Large Scale Integration). The process in which millions of transistors are integrated into a single chip, thereby creating an IC (Integrated Circuit) is termed as VLSI. The advancements in the field of VLSI, brings rise of innovative technologies which further enhance the speed of circuit and also minimize the design constraints. Electronic gadgets have moved to the trend of miniaturization. Today, all the Smart Gadgets (SG) are introduced in small, portable and compact sizes. The most common circuits present in these devices are the memory and processor. For most of the designs, the need for memory is increasing nowadays. In today's development, beyond 85-90% of the chip area is occupied mainly by memory. The two memory devices namely Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) and Dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) provides significant performance for SSD (Solid State Drives). A solid-state drive (SSD) is a solid-state storage device that uses integrated circuit assemblies to store data persistently, typically using flash memory, and functioning as secondary storage in the hierarchy of computer storage. However, there is a necessity for reliable as well as quicker memory for different BACKGRoUND This section presents the basic concepts and related terminologies about FinFET and SRAM memory architecture.

(p0.1) • FinFET Technology: In today's era, one of the most suitable forms of FET is FinFET technology (Jurczak et al., 2009). This permits the execution and simulation of transistor applications in a faster way both in analog as well as digital domains. FinFET seem to be a better option for the future nano electronics because of its following characteristics such as compact susceptibility, high performance, minimized manufacturing costs and low power consumption (Dadoria et al., 2017;Guo et al., 2016). The bulk CMOS transistors can be replaced by means of FinFETs . This technology is an appropriate option for the design of memory sub-systems due to its standby power or low leakage current property (Garg & Singh, 2016).

(p0.2) The diagrammatic representation of FinFET is mentioned in Figure 1. The FinFET structure includes multiple perpendicular channels that appear similar to 'Fin' of fish, so it is named as FinFET. It is also known as Multi-Gate Device (MGD) which is built on a substrate. The gate is positioned on two, three or else four sides of the channel which forms a double gate arrangement. The source or drain region forms 'Fin' on the surface of silicon. The other name of FinFET is multi-gate transistor. The FinFET model includes the following regions: 3 • Gate-oxide region (SiO2): Highly doped poly-silicon region. • Low doping silicon Fin: Highly doped contact region between source and drain.
## (s2) FinFET Based SRAM Cells
(p2.0) Advanced circuit methodology is essential to bridge the gap between power, area, robustness, frequency and quality in cases of maintaining the abundant manufacturing outcome. FinFET based structures are introduced as an alternate to bulk devices. Several methods have been implemented earlier, mainly to reduce the static power dissipation. However, these devices can only be able to decrease the leakage current variations. Thus, to boost the cell stability and to minimalize the leakage power various FinFET based SRAM cells are introduced.

(p2.1) • FinFET-6T SRAM cell: The 6T (6Transistor) SRAM (Limachia & Kothari, 2020) includes two cross-coupled (2-CC) inverters and dual access FinFET transistors. The 2-CC inverters consist of 4 transistors named as (XM3, XM4, XM5 and XM6). In SRAM, each bit is stored on these 4 FinFET transistors. The two access FinFETs are (XM1, XM2) and the source terminals are linked to BL and BLB (BLBar). 6T SRAM cell is widely used basic cell as it occupies smaller area. The dual access FinFETs are enabled when WL=1 and the bit lines are connected to latch which performs read or else write operation. When WL=0, the access transistors move to OFF state and BL, BLB are separated from the latch. The schematic diagram of FinFET based SRAM 6T cell is presented in Figure 5.

(p2.2) The three fundamental operations are read, write and hold (Banu & Shubham, 2017;. In hold mode, WL is attached to ground (GND). Hence the transistors XM5 and XM6 become OFF and separate the latching circuit from the bit lines. The remaining transistors (XM1, XM2, XM3 and XM4) forms a latch structure which holds a stored data until it is disconnected from the bit lines. During read mode, pre-charge the bit lines to VDD also WL is attached to VDD and the transistors XM5 and XM6 becomes ON. The transistors XM1 and XM4 are in OFF state if Q=1 and Q =0 and XM3 and XM2 becomes ON. Hence, the voltage level of BL sustains at VDD and BLB voltage level discharges. At write mode, WL is attached to VDD and makes the transistor XM5 and 7 XM6 ON. Then the node voltage level Q starts to rise up to the voltage level at which Q is ample to turn ON the transistors XM4 and XM2 and Q get drops.

(p2.3) • FinFET-7T SRAM cell: The representation of 7T-FinFET SRAM cell is mentioned in Figure  6. The 7T (7Transistor) cell design (Asli & Taghipour, 2017;Sneha et al., 2017) includes 2-CC inverters namely (XM3, XM4, XM5, and XM6) with an additional transistor (XM7) that is linked to the WL. Also, dual access transistors (XM1, XM2) are attached with the BL and BLB respectively. The leakage problem occurred in the 6T cell is solved using 7T FinFET structure.

(p2.4) To execute the read as well as write processes, the XM1 and XM2 transistors are attached to WL. During read and write operation, the dual bit lines serve as input or else output nodes, in order to detect the data from SRM cells using sense amplifier.

(p2.5) The working procedure defines that at hold mode, the WL is turned OFF and the transistors XM3 and XM4 become inactive. Due to logic 0 in SRAM cell, a sub-threshold leakage current flows via the transistors in OFF state. And the supplementary transistor XM7 performs feedback connection as well as disconnection and the SRAM cell depends only on the BLB to execute write operation (Ansari et al., 2015;Yang et al., 2016).

(p2.6) • FinFET-8T SRAM cell: The 8T (8Transistor) (Neelima et al., 2020) FinFET SRAM cell is introduced to overcome the limitations of 6T cell. The main problem is that the read and writes procedures are not decoupled. The cell with lower SNM (Static Noise Margin) during read mode possibly has enhanced write ability. Therefore, if the read, write functions are decoupled perfectly, the circuit designers have superior flexibility in optimizing read and write functions. The schematic representation of FinFET-8T SRAM cell is shown in Figure 7.

(p2.7) The 8T design is introduced to separate the read operation from write in order to attain improved stability when allowing low-voltage operations (Guler & Jha, 2019;Neelima et al., 2020). The 8T configuration represents that, addition of 2 FETs to a 6T cell offers a read processes which won't The upper section of 9T SRAM is similar to 6T cell design composed of (XM1, XM2, XM3, XM4, and Q & Q ). This primary sub-section is utilized to store data. The other section in 9T SRAM includes dual (XM5 and XM6) bit-line access transistors and one read access transistor (XM9). The operations of transistors (XM8 and XM7) depends on the data stored in the cell. XM9 depends on the separate read signal (RD). The write access transistors perform write access which is controlled by WBL and WBLB (write bit lines). Also, read access transistor executes read access which is controlled using RWL (Read word line). The schematic representation of 9T FinFET SRAM cell is mentioned in Figure 8.

(p2.8) 9T cell design is introduced to solve the leakage problem identified on the 8T cell RBL. This causes change in data during read processes. 8T cell is limited to low-density applications that can be solved using 9T structure (Adding XM9 transistor in between XM7 and XM8). Therefore, leakage in BL is reduced significantly by the stack effect phenomena. In 9T SRAM, when OFF state transistors are connected in series, stacking takes place. Thus, the upper transistor source voltage will be somewhat higher than lower transistor source voltage in stack. The threshold voltage is increased due to higher voltage of the upper transistor. This increment of the threshold voltage reduces the leakage. Hence, this reduction is called stack effect.

(p2.9) • FinFET-10T SRAM cell: The 10T (10Transistor) SRAM cell includes 4 pull-up, 4 pull-down and 2 access transistors. The design of 10T cell using FINFET is shown in Figure 9. In order to minimize the power dissipation and leakage current, this 10T cell is introduced. The deployment of dual threshold-voltage technique is performed using the transistors in read path, which  FinFET based 10T design, minimize the leakage current using transistors (XM7, XM8, XM9 and XM10) when compared to 9T cell design. For read operation, the two access transistors are used to connect the pseudo nodes. The read stability is maintained well, as there is no flow of read current by storage nodes. To perform write operation, the node Q stores I value whereas Q stores 0. By applying a high supply voltage, the node Q is pulled down to '0' due to discharging through the access and the pull-up transistor.
## (s8) CoNCLUSIoN
(p8.0) In this survey, a number of SRAM design using FINFET technology have been reviewed. The presented analysis prove that it is better to design SRAM using FINFET because it has lower static power dissipation and delay as compare to CMOS SRAM cell and delay is also reduced in both operations. FinFETs have many advantage over the bulk MOSFET, such as FinFET developed with a process (fabrication) flow similar to conventional Silicon On Insulator (SOI) CMOS process  (Moradi & Tohidi, 2015) 22nm FINFET(9 T SRAM) Multi-threshold 3X lower power consumption Oh et al., (Oh et al., 2016) 22nm FINFET(9 T SRAM) Power Gated 9T SRAM Consumes less energy per read and writes operation, and smaller bit cell area.
