# "EFFECT OF MEDITATION ON MENTAL HEALTH"-A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 244864324 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2048ccbdd335a66541eb64bf0c643146bc6cd5d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2048ccbdd335a66541eb64bf0c643146bc6cd5d)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s5) Inclusion and exclusion criteria -
(p5.0) This study reviews the effects of meditation on mental health. This study however does not focus upon other techniques and physical health. Chen et al. (2012) in their study mentioned about general reviews in existence on health benefits in general of meditation, and however efficacy of meditation for anxiety, has no review focused upon. They searched medical databases in relation to different types of meditation as well as anxiety. The Boutron checklist was used to analyse a report on non-pharmaceutical trials to assess study quality, and for additional information-90% authors were approached. For meta-analysis Review Manager 5 was used. This review paper suggests efficacy of meditative therapies that are beneficial to reduce anxiety symptoms, which also has important clinical implications for meditative techniques in treating anxiety.
## (s6) Review of Literature:-
(p6.0) 452 Goyal et al. (2014) examined the efficacy of meditation programs in order to improve stress-related outcomes like anxiety, depression, stress/distress, positive mood, mental health-related quality of life, attention, substance use, eating habits, sleep, pain, and weight in the adult clinical population. This demonstrated that meditation programs can lessen negative aspects of psychological stress. (2015) researched upon the process of meditation at fundamental level and directed towards shedding light on the underlying mechanism of favourable effects linked with meditation. This study has also focused upon previous articles. In addition, the effect of meditation is also summarised in this research article. Cebolla et al. (2017) in their study examined the occurrence of unwanted effects among meditation practitioners by keeping in mind the moderating factors like type, frequency, lifetime duration of meditation practices. For data collection, an online survey method was used, wherein a survey was circulated via websites, scientific research portals related to mindfulness and meditation. A total of 342 participants participated and only 87 reported information about unwanted effects. Results indicated that the majority of the population were women practitioners from Spain, married and university education level. This study suggests that unwanted effects are prevalent and transitory and should be further studied. Standardised questionnaires to assess unwanted effects of meditation practices was recommended.
## (s7) Sharma (2015) Sharma
(p7.0) Karimi et al. (2019) examined the impact of meditation on mindfulness, emotional intelligence, job satisfaction and job stress-related presenteeism in Australian worksites. Participants of the study had to try an "Auto Transcending Meditation Technique" (ATMT) at the worksite. Switching replications experimental design was used in the study which was compared to an intervention group with a control group. In order to compare the mean pre-post intervention differences, quantitative data analysis was used. From the training evaluation and qualitative data collected from focus groups, thematic analysis was completed. As a result of ATMT, participants indicated significant improvements in levels of mindfulness and emotional intelligence. It was also reported that themat ic analysis showed that participants felt the meditation training and practice resumed into positive personal changes. Results indicated higher mindfulness lessens the effect of stress in participants' mental and physical health. Results demonstrated that meditation training and practice intensifies mindfulness and emotional intelligence, along with benefits for employees" physical and mental health. The study suggested for workplace meditation to be contemplated in health promoting work settings. Schlosser et al. (2019) in their study aimed to report the prevalence of experiences related to unpleasant meditation in the international population of regular meditators as well as understanding the connection of these experiences with demographic characteristics. A total of 315 participants reported having unpleasant meditation experiences, which they thought of were due to meditation practice. Unpleasant meditation experiences were less likely to occur in female and religious participants as indicated by Logistic regression models. The study also reported that those with higher levels of repetitive negative thinking and those who took part in meditation retreat were more likely to experience unpleasant meditation.
