# gels Novel Trends in the Development of Surfactant-Based Hydraulic Fracturing Fluids: A Review

CorpusID: 245161102 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7450a0e511ab3647fb167bac0c6c9b95969e85dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7450a0e511ab3647fb167bac0c6c9b95969e85dc)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s1) General Concepts of VES-Based Fluids
(p1.0) Since their introduction in 1997 [20,21], polymer-free, surfactant-based fracturing fluids have been attracting constantly increasing attention due to their adequate viscoelastic properties and sand-carrying capacity combined with almost complete clean-up from fracture and low formation damage [22][23][24]. Such fluids contain VES which are able to thicken aqueous solutions due to the formation of long self-assembled aggregateswormlike micelles (WLMs) [25].

(p1.1) Surfactant molecules are amphiphilic and contain two parts-a polar hydrophilic head and a non-polar hydrophobic tail. Above the critical micelle concentration (CMC), they self-assemble and form aggregates of various shapes-spherical or cylindrical micelles, lamellae, bicontinuous structures, etc. [26]. The cylinders can grow and form very long chains-WLMs-which resemble polymers [27] and can attain several microns in length. Above an overlap concentration (C*), WLMs form an entangled network, imparting high viscosity and viscoelastic properties to water solutions [28]. Zero-shear viscosities up to 5-7 magnitudes higher than the viscosity of water are attained at moderate surfactant concentrations in the range of a few wt %, making VES highly efficient thickeners for fracturing fluids and comparable to polymer-based fluids [29].

(p1.2) WLMs may be formed by ionic or non-ionic surfactants; however, most of the examples of fracturing fluids currently employed contain ionic VES. Normally, WLMs are formed by ionic surfactants in the case of sufficient screening of electrostatic repulsions between similarly charged head groups, which allows them to pack closer than in the spherical micelles [25]. Screening of electrostatic forces may be achieved by the addition of low-molecular-weight salts (such as KCl) [30][31][32], oppositely charged surfactants [33], or hydrotrope ions [34][35][36].

(p1.3) Surfactants containing long (C18-C22) alkyl chains are currently regarded as the best thickening agents for fracturing fluids. Examples of such surfactants include a cationic surfactant with C22 mono-unsaturated tail -erucyl bis-(hydroxyethyl)methylammonium chloride (EHAC) [30] and an anionic surfactant with C18 mono-unsaturated tail -sodium (or potassium) oleate [37].

(p1.4) Another possibility for forming WLMs consists in the use of zwitterionic surfactants, which contain both anionic and cationic groups in the polar head. Such VES are generally more expensive than cationic or anionic species, but they provide stronger thickening effect at lower concentrations. Betaine surfactants with long (C22) tails are among the best thickening agents [29,[38][39][40].
## (s2) Advantages and Limitations of VES-Based Fluids
(p2.0) VES solutions have a number of advantages over polymer fracturing fluids [24]. They arise from the fact that, in contrast to polymer chains, the wormlike surfactant micelles are labile structures formed by the self-assembly of small molecules due to weak non-covalent interactions. Therefore, they are dynamic and are able to break and recombine [45]. This imparts reversible shear-thinning to the VES solutions: their viscosity decreases by several orders of magnitude under shear, which is explained by the alignment and breaking of the WLMs in flow, but completely restores at rest. This property is very important in hydraulic fracturing operations to facilitate the pumping of the fluid into the well.
## (s3) Oligomeric Surfactants
(p3.0) One of the approaches to increasing the strength of micellar networks for hydraulic fracturing applications is the use of oligomeric surfactants [50]. These surfactants consist of several hydrophobic tails (n) and hydrophilic heads (m) covalently linked to each other [51]. Such molecules exhibit stronger hydrophobic interactions, which enhance micellization, resulting in lower CMC values and smaller amounts of non-aggregated free surfactant, the lower surfactant concentrations necessary to form WLMs, and higher micellar scission energies and more stable micelles.

(p3.1) With regard to the example of cationic surfactant oligomers with quaternary ammonium heads, it was demonstrated that with an increase in the number of units in the oligomer (n), the CMC decreases, and the packing of surfactant molecules in the micelles becomes denser [52]. With an increase in n from 2 to 4, a transition occurs first from the spherical to the cylindrical micelles, which is accompanied by a significant increase in viscosity, and then to the ring-like micelles. Longer alkyl spacer-(CH 2 ) s -between head groups of quaternary ammonium gemini surfactants also decreases the CMC [53]. An increase in the concentration of dimeric or trimeric surfactants leads to a transition from spherical aggregates to cylindrical and then to long WLMs, as shown by molecular dynamics simulations [54,55].

(p3.2) A promising approach consists in the synthesis of oligomeric surfactants with very long (C18-C22) alkyl tails in order to enhance the hydrophobic interactions. For instance, gemini cationic surfactants EHAB 22:1-s-22:1 (based on two erucyl dimethylammonium bromide moieties linked by an alkyl spacer) with C22 unsaturated tails and different spacers (s = 2, 6) were synthesized, and it was shown that the solutions of gemini EHAB exhibit higher viscosities at lower surfactant concentrations than the monomeric EHAB, which is due to the easier formation of longer WLMs [56]. Addition of a hydrotrope ion (sodium salicylate) to the gemini EHAB 22:1-6-22:1 allows the reaching of the zero-shear viscosity of ca. 30,000 Pa·s.

(p3.3) Recently, a series of dimeric and trimeric VES with long tails have been proposed, aiming at the increased temperature and salt resistance of WLMs [57,58]. The use of a trimeric cationic surfactant with long hydrophobic tails based on erucamidopropyldimethylamine allows the obtaining of WLMs with good thermal stability-due to very strong hydrophobic interactions the micelles do not break down when heated to at least 90 • C, and a stability of the solutions under ultra-high temperatures ranging from 140 to 180 • C is observed [59]. High thermal stability (up to 110-150 • C) was achieved for long-chain (C22) gemini surfactants with various spacers between the polar heads (C25-alkyl(C6)-C25, C25-alkyl(C8)-C25, C25-ester-C25, and C25-amide-C25) [60,61]. The incorporation of a sulfonate group into the spacer of a gemini zwitterionic VES with two unsaturated C22 tails resulted in a significant increase in the salt tolerance as compared to the previously reported cases [62]. Addition of a benzene sulfonate group in the polar head of a gemini zwitterionic surfactant with C22 tails (EDBS) allowed the obtaining of a viscoelastic WLM solution with combined good temperature and salt resistance: it withstood shearing at 170 s −1 and 120 • C for 120 min in the 25% standard brine solution [63].

(p3.4) Thus, a variety of gemini and trimeric surfactants with C22 erucyl tails and different chemical structures of spacers between polar groups were proposed (Table 1). However, the variation of the tail length may also be of importance in obtaining an optimized composition for the fracturing fluids. A gemini surfactant with 18:1 oleyl tails was proposed and showed sufficient viscoelastic properties and shear resistance at 80 • C, low proppant settling velocity, and low permeability and conductivity loss rates [64]. However, the behavior of the fluid at higher temperatures (above 80 • C) was not studied. The viscosity of the fluid at 80 • C reached 70.2 mPa·s, and should be lower at higher temperatures, which may be insufficient for high-temperature applications of the fluid.  [66][67][68][69] A promising improvement of gemini surfactants consists in the synthesis of dissymmetric surfactants containing different alkyl tails. For instance, a heterogemini cationic surfactant, YS-18, containing one saturated (18:0) and one unsaturated (18:1) tail, has much better salt tolerance and thermostability than the corresponding symmetrical surfactants. YS-18/KCl fluid viscosity remains stable under a share rate of 170 s −1 at 110 • C for 60 min and can easily be broken by reservoir brine and hydrocarbon [65].

(p3.5) Tariq et al. [67][68][69] showed that the use of a solution of cationic gemini surfactants with different spacers resulted in the reduction in the breakdown pressure in unconventional tight sandstones compared to that of the deionized water, which was attributed to the clay stabilization against swelling provided by the surfactant. In addition to the lower breakdown pressure, the use of gemini surfactants allows a reduction in the volume of fluid required to fracture the formation. The coreflooding experiment used to evaluate the formation damage demonstrated that the gemini surfactants do not cause any permeability impairment.

(p3.6) Therefore, the use of oligomeric surfactants with long hydrophobic tails is a promising way of improving the properties of WLMs. Incorporation of a sulfonate group or/and a benzene ring in the spacer increases the temperature and salinity stability of the VES fluids. Cationic gemini surfactants reduce the breakdown pressure and do not cause any permeability impairment. Up to now, mostly dimeric (n = 2) and trimeric (n = 3) surfactants have been employed due to the difficulties associated with the synthesis of higher oligomers. Development of new oligomeric surfactants with n ≥ 4 at a reasonable cost may further advance the fracturing fluid applications of oligomeric surfactants.
## (s5) Single-Chain Surfactants
(p5.0) A common method of WLM preparation consists in mixing different surfactantsanionic/cationic [70], zwitterionic/anionic [71,72], anionic/non-ionic [73], cationic/nonionic [74,75], or two non-ionic surfactants [44]. In many cases, mixing results in the synergistic enhancement of the viscoelastic properties.

(p5.1) Strong synergy is observed for many anionic/cationic surfactant systems, even in the absence of added low-molecular-weight salt, and is a result of two processes: (1) the anionic and cationic polar heads reside in close proximity due to the co-assembly of two surfactants, resulting in a very efficient screening of the electrostatic repulsions at the micellar surface and tighter packing of the surfactant molecules, and (2) the counter ions of both surfactants are released to the solution, giving additional salt, which also weakens the electrostatic repulsions. For instance, in the mixtures of sodium or potassium oleate with different alkyltrimethylammonium or alkylpyridinium surfactants (n-octyltrimethylammonium bromide [33], n-octylpyridinium chloride [76], 1-dodecylpyridinium chloride [77]), the formation of a viscoelastic network of WLMs with viscosities up to ca. 1000 Pa·s was observed, which was not inherent in the solutions of each surfactant taken separately. Many other viscoelastic mixed systems of anionic/cationic surfactants have been described: cetyltrimethylammonium tosylate/sodium dodecyl benzyl sulfonate [78,79]; hexadecyl-or dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide/N-dodecylglutamic acid salt [70]; cetyltrimethylammonium bromide with sodium laurate [80][81][82]; sodium dodecyl sulfonate [83] or sodium N-alkylmaleimidepimaric carboxylate [84]; and cetylpyridinium chloride/sodium deoxycholate [85] systems. If the association between the anionic and cationic species is rather strong, such a co-assembly may be treated as a formation of a "pseudo-gemini" betaine surfactant. At a non-stoichiometric ratio of anionic and cationic surfactants, the system to some extent resembles mixtures of a betaine and a single-chain ionic surfactant.

(p5.2) A great advantage of mixed anionic/cationic WLMs is a strong rheological synergy, due to which sufficient viscoelastic properties are attained at a reduced concentration of surfactants. However, these systems are usually prepared without additional lowmolecular-weight salts and, thus, are salt-sensitive. Positive cases of viscosity and elasticity increase upon the addition of monovalent salts (KCl) have been reported [33]; however, due to the presence of an anionic surfactant, anionic/cationic WLMs may be intolerant to divalent cations (Ca 2+ , Mg 2+ , etc.).
## (s6) Oligomeric and Single-Chain Surfactants
(p6.0) One of the approaches for obtaining long WLMs consists in the mixing of oligomeric surfactants with single-chain species [86,87]. A synergistic effect has been observed for some short-chain (C12) cationic oligomeric surfactants mixed with anionic single-chain species. For instance, the addition of small amounts (5-20 mol%) of single-chain anionic surfactants (sodium dodecyl sulfate, sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate, and sodium laurate) to a cationic gemini surfactant 12-3(OH)-12 (2-hydroxyl-propanediyl-α,ω-bis (dimethyldodecylammonium bromide) induces an increase in viscosity by 2 orders of magnitude, up to 60-120 Pa·s, and an enhancement of the viscoelastic properties of the micellar network [88]. In the mixtures of a trimeric cationic surfactant DDTPA (penta sodium N,N ,N -dodecyl diethylene triamine pentaacetic acid) and sodium dodecyl sulfate in the presence of KCl, a network of WLMs is formed, which imparts high zero-shear viscosity (~400 Pa·s) and viscoelastic behavior [86].
## (s7) Multiple Oligomeric Surfactants
(p7.0) Very recently, the mixing of two different long-chain (C22) sulfobetaine zwitterionic gemini surfactants, EDABS (based on erucyl dimethyl amidopropyl benzenesulfonic acid) and EDAES (based on erucyl dimethyl amidopropylethanesulfonic acid), which differ only slightly by the presence of a benzene ring in the polar head, was proposed to obtain a combination of viscoelasticity, good shear, and temperature and salt tolerance [89].
## (s8) "Pseudo-Oligomeric" Surfactants
(p8.0) As stated above (Section 5.1), a strong association of anionic and cationic single-chain surfactants may be treated as a formation of a "pseudo-gemini" betaine surfactant species comprising anionic and cationic polar groups and two tails from both surfactants. However, such associations are transient and usually sensitive to salts.

(p8.1) A recently proposed interesting approach consists in the non-covalent self-assembly of "ordinary" single-chain cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) into a pseudo-gemini species by an interaction with di-or tricarboxylic acids (citric or maleic acid) [90]. The fluid possesses high viscosity (1000 Pa·s), strong viscoelasticity, and temperature and shear resistance. Such an approach eliminates the complex and expensive synthesis of oligomeric surfactants as cheap surfactants and acids may be used.

(p8.2) Therefore, the mixing of surfactants is an efficient way of obtaining viscoelastic networks of long WLMs with enhanced rheological performance. Promising approaches consist in using mixtures of single-chain and oligomeric surfactants or in the formation of "pseudo-oligomeric" surfactants.
## (s11) Interaction of Polymers with VES
(p11.0) One of the new directions in the research on hydraulic fracturing fluids is aimed at combining the advantages of polymer-and surfactant-based fluids, which may be achieved by creating mixed (or "hybrid") gels of polymer chains and WLMs. A key factor determining the structure and properties of such fluids is the interaction of the polymer and surfactant. The tuning of this interaction allows the obtaining of homogeneous mixtures and the preserving of the structure of micellar chains.

(p11.1) The addition of polymers may either destroy or preserve WLMs, depending on the hydrophobicity of the polymer. For instance, weakly hydrophobic but water-soluble polymers, such as poly (vinyl methyl ether) or poly (propylene oxide), break WLMs [116][117][118]. This happens due to the "wrapping" of the polymer chains around the micelle, which is favorable because it reduces the contact of both the micellar and the polymer hydrophobic parts with water. As a result, the WLMs are transformed into spherical [119], ellipsoidal [116], or disc-like aggregates [120].
## (s13) HM PAAm/Surfactants
(p13.0) In most of the published works, synthetic polymers, such as HM PAAm [127][128][129][130][131], hydrophobically modified polyacrylic acid (HM PAA) [132][133][134][135], their copolymers [136][137][138], copolymers of PAAm, and other monomers [139][140][141] are used. Such polymers are usually synthesized by radical co-polymerization of a hydrophilic (acrylamide/acrylic acid) and hydrophobic (e.g., alkylacrylates) monomers in a common solvent [142]. Otherwise, micellar co-polymerization is employed [143].

(p13.1) In a pioneering work [128], HM PAAm with n-dodecyl side chains was mixed with C22-tailed cationic surfactant EHAC, and a huge synergistic increase in viscosity by 4 orders of magnitude was observed, and a rise of viscosity began at lower surfactant concentrations than in the absence of polymer (Figure 3b). This behavior is observed at the rather low HM PAAm concentration of 0.5 wt %, close to C*, at which polymer solutions without surfactant have low viscosities close to water. Such a strong synergistic effect was explained by the formation of a common polymer-micellar network with hydrophobic polymer groups serving as junctions to WLMs.

(p13.2) It is shown that the presence of hydrophobic groups is important for the phase compatibility of PAAm and WLMs [128], and the one-phase region widens with an increase in the length and number of grafted alkyl chains. It confirms that polymer hydrophobic groups are responsible for the interaction with WLMs. The distribution of hydrophobic groups along the polymer chain affects the viscoelastic properties of the mixtures [128]: at a fixed total content of hydrophobic groups, statistical HM PAAm induces a stronger increase in the rheological parameters (viscosity, elastic modulus, and relaxation time) than HM PAAm with a higher degree of blockiness, which is due to the formation of more cross-links between the statistical polymer and WLMs. It should be noted that the characteristic lifetime of such cross-links is mainly determined by the WLM breaking time and not by the time when the polymer hydrophobic group resides inside the micelle.

(p13.3) Thus, the main practically important effect of mixing HM PAAm/HM PAA and WLMs consists in the synergistic increase in the viscoelastic properties. Many works showing a similar effect for the mixtures of HM PAAm or its copolymers and anionic [136,137], zwitterionic [138,140,141], zwitterionic and anionic [139], gemini cationic [144], and trimeric zwitterionic [145] surfactants have been published.

(p13.4) SANS data show that the WLM local structure is preserved in the presence of the HM polymer: the SANS curve of mixed WLM/HM PAAm systems is described by a cylinder model with a radius equal to the radius of WLMs in the absence of HM PAAm [136]. An increase in viscoelasticity was observed both for the C8-C12 polymer hydrophobic groups and for a specific case of HM PAAm modified by ultra-long C22 alkyl groups [135].

(p13.5) The second important effect of mixing HM PAAm and WLMs is the increased temperature stability [128,144]. Upon heating, the viscosity of the polymer/VES mixtures decreases to a lesser extent than that of a VES solution in the absence of polymer. This is explained by the fact that, in contrast to the micellar chains, macromolecules do not break upon heating and contribute to the heating resistance of the fluids.

(p13.6) The third advantage of HM PAAm/WLM fluids is their high responsiveness to hydrocarbons [128,136,144]. Upon contact with aliphatic oils, the fluids completely lose viscoelastic properties, and their viscosity drops by several orders of magnitude, reaching the viscosity of water (Figure 3c) [128,136]. The responsiveness of mixed polymer/WLM fluids is due to the hydrocarbon-induced breaking of the WLM sub-chains into spherical microemulsion droplets (which is proven by SANS, Figure 3d), leading to the disruption of the common network. This effect is analogous to the case of WLMs without polymers. In this regard, mixed polymer/WLM solutions are clean fracturing fluids which do not require additional breakers for their removal from the fracture.
## (s14) Other Synthetic HM Polymers/Surfactants
(p14.0) The formation of the common networks with surfactant WLMs was also observed for other synthetic HM polymers. For instance, water-soluble telechelic poly (ethylene glycol) polymers end-modified by hydrophobic fragments have been reported to form common networks with cetyltrimethylammonium toluene sulfonate [147] or cetylpyridinium chloride in the presence of sodium salicylate [148][149][150]. It is shown that the hydrophobic end groups of the polymer embed into WLMs, while its main hydrophilic part resides in water and links two micelles together. As a result, the mixtures show viscoelastic behavior which is not observed for the components taken separately [147].
## (s15) Natural HM Polymers/Surfactants
(p15.0) The common networks of WLMs and natural HM polymers are much less described than the synthetic macromolecules, though natural polymers are preferable for hydraulic fracturing applications due to their better biodegradability, lower environmental impact and lack of need for polymerization processes.

(p15.1) Hydroxypropyl guar, modified by long C22 alkyl groups (HM HPG), was reported to form common viscoelastic networks with cationic surfactant EHAC in the presence of KCl [151], which resulted in a significant synergistic effect in a wide range of concentrations and at elevated temperatures of up to 60 • C. It is important to note that a rather low degree of hydrophobic substitution (10 hydrophobic groups per macromolecule) was enough to achieve a pronounced synergy in rheological properties.

(p15.2) A similar synergistic effect on viscoelastic properties was observed upon the bridging of cationic cetyltrimethylammonium tosylate WLMs with HM chitosan with C12 alkyl side chains [152], or of cetyltrimethylammonium p-toluenesulfonate WLMs with HM hydroxyethyl cellulose [153], and, in the latter case, the HM polymer had a much stronger effect on the solution viscosity than a similar unmodified hydroxyethyl cellulose, proving the incorporation of hydrophobic side groups of macromolecules into WLMs.

(p15.3) An absolute majority of WLM/HM polymer (either synthetic or natural) common networks employed alkyl hydrophobic groups attached to polymer. An interesting variation of the hydrophobic modification approach was proposed [154], in which cholesterol-modified gellan gum was used to strengthen a network of cylindrical micelles formed by a non-ionic surfactant polyoxyethylene cholesteryl ester (ChEO 10 ), with the hydrophobic tail of the same chemical structure as the polymer hydrophobic groups. At the same time, cholesterolmodified short-chained dextran was shown to break longer WLMs of ChEO 10 into shorter ones, leading to a more liquid-like behavior [155].

(p15.4) Therefore, the enhancement of the viscoelastic properties of the WLM networks by HM-polymers is a general effect observed for both the synthetic and the natural polymers bearing alkyl groups of different length (C8-C22) or hydrophobic groups of other chemical natures. This effect is due to the bridging of WLMs by polymer chains and the formation of a common polymer/micellar network. The practical application of this approach may be greatly advanced by the easier and cheaper synthesis methods of HM-polymers.
## (s17) Hydrophilic Polymers/VES
(p17.0) A recently described novel approach for the development of viscoelastic polymer/surfactant fluids consists in the use of fully hydrophilic polymers which do not interact with WLMs and do not destroy them.

(p17.1) One of the first reported cases is the mixing of potassium oleate WLMs with a similarly charged polyelectrolyte-sodium polystyrenesulfonate (PSS) [37]. However, in this work, no increase in viscosity or elasticity caused by the polymer was reported. The WLMs of a cationic surfactant EHAC are preserved in the presence of an oppositely charged natural polyelectrolyte-xanthan [157]. One-phase homogeneous mixtures are obtained when a significant amount (4-4.75 wt %) of low-molecular-weight salt KCl is added, which screens the electrostatic attraction between the components and prevents the precipitation of the polymer/surfactant complex. A synergistic increase of the plateau storage modulus is seen for the mixture, which is explained by the formation of a common semi-interpenetrating network of polymer and micellar chains with entanglements between the components (Figure 4a). Synergy in viscoelastic properties has been observed for the mixtures of a synthetic polymer poly(vinyl alcohol) and mixed anionic/cationic WLMs [158,159]. A nearly 3magnitude increase in viscosity is observed, which is accompanied by a significant en-hancement of the elastic modulus and relaxation time (Figure 4b) and is explained by two factors: (1) the formation of entanglements between the polymer and micellar chains, (2) the microphase separation with the formation of polymer-rich and micellar-rich microdomains, which arises from weak repulsive interaction between the polymer and micelles. Microphase separation results in the concentration of both components in their domains, leading to the augmentation of the rheological parameters. Later, the same effect was observed for a natural polymer HPG mixed with anionic/cationic WLMs [160]. The use of a weakly repulsive polymer and WLMs, which form one-phase but microscopically segregated solutions, allows the significant reduction in the concentrations of the components in the fluid in order to obtain viscosity and elasticity sufficient for fracturing operations.
