# A Review on Bioactive Compounds from Marine-Derived Chaetomium Species

CorpusID: 248890828 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f67359a855354c1a31cf6ad344db684a4842a8f5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f67359a855354c1a31cf6ad344db684a4842a8f5)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) Cytochalasans
(p3.0) Cytochalasans are a large group of fungal alkaloids with a wide range of biological activities. They have been an important chemical tool in cell and molecular biology. Some of them also possess phytotoxic, cytotoxic, and antibiotic activities [9,10]. Cytochalasans are characterized by a highly substituted perhydro-isoindolone moiety incorporating a macrocyclic ring [11]. The fungal polyketide synthase nonribosomal peptide synthetase (PKS-NRPS) plays an important role in forming cytochalasans [12].

(p3.1) Cytoglobosins, chaetoglobosins and penochalasins are common classes of cytochalasan alkaloids in Chaetomium. Seven new cytochalasan derivatives cytoglobosins A-G (1-7), together with two known, structurally related compounds, isochaetoglobosin D (8) and chaetoglobosin Fex (9) (Fig. 1), were isolated from C. Globosum QEN-14, an endophytic fungus derived from the marine green alga Ulva pertusa. Cytoglobosins C (3) and D (4) showed moderate activity against A-549 cell line with IC 50 values of 2.26 and 2.55 μM, respectively [13]. From C. globosum 1C51, a fungus residing inside the gut of an ocean fish, Epinephelus drummondhayi, three metabolite chaetoglobosins, A, B and J (10-12) (Fig. 1), were obtained with high yields. Using precursor-directed biosynthesis, nine halogenated derivatives were produced (13-21) (Fig. 1). All isolated compounds were tested and found to be immunosuppressive, and compound 18 had the most potential with a high selectivity index (SI = 26.6) [14].

(p3.2) Chemical investigation of deep-sea-derived fungus C. globosum MCCC 3A00607 resulted in obtaining two new compounds, cytoglobosins H (22) and I (23), together with seven known ones: cytoglobosins B (2) and C (3), chaetoglobosins F ex (9), F (24), E (25), and B (11), and isochaetoglobosin D (8) (Fig. 1). Compound 25 exhibited significant antiproliferative activity on LNCaP human prostate cancer cells and B16F10 mouse melanoma cells with IC 50 values of 0.62 and 2.78 μM, respectively [15]. Chemical investigation of the EtOAc extract of the gorgonian-derived fungus C. globosum RA07-3 resulted in the isolation of six cytochalasans, chaetoglobosins A and B (10 and 11), cytoglobosin C (3), chaetoglobosins D-F (26, 25, 24) ( Fig. 1), together with three other compounds, xylariol A (107), (3R,4S)-6,8-dihydroxy-3,4,5-trimethylisochroman-1-one (108), and 2,5,8benzotrioxacycloundecin-1,9-dione (109) (Fig. 7). Compounds 10 and 11 exhibited moderate brine shrimp lethality with LC 50 values of 9.72 and 12.41 μg/mL, respectively. Compounds 10, 11 and 3 also exhibited strong antibacterial activities against Tetragenococcus halophilus with MIC values of 0.7, 0.4, and 0.7 μM, respectively [16].
## (s4) Dioxopiperazines
(p4.0) Dioxopiperazines are common metabolites of microorganisms that are distributed in a diverse range of filamentous fungi [23,24]. Many dioxtopiperazines reported from marine-derived fungi display a variety of pharmacological properties, particularly in the field of antitumor and antimicrobial therapy [25].

(p4.1) A new dioxopiperazine alkaloid cristazine (37), together with three known ones, chetomin (38), neoechinulin A (39), and golmaenone (40) (Fig. 2), were isolated from the mudflat-sediment-derived fungus C. cristatum. Compounds 37-40 showed potent radical-scavenging activity against DPPH, with similar IC 50 values to that of the positive control (ascorbic acid). Compound 37 also displayed cytotoxic activity against human cervical carcinoma (HeLa) cells, with an IC 50 value of 0.5 μM [26].
## (s6) Indole Alkaloids
(p6.0) Indole alkaloids are the active moiety of several clinical drugs, such as reserpine, tadalafil and fluvastatin, which are all designed based on an indole skeleton [38,39]. The indole framework is widely distributed in many fungal natural products [40,41]. 19-O-demethylchaetogline A (54) and 20-O-demethylchaetogline F (55), together with two known ones, 42 and 47, were produced. Compound 50 was found to be antibacterial against Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (xoo), a pathogen causing rice bacterial leaf blight. Compound 42 was shown to be inhibitory against rape pathogenic fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum [43].
## (s9) Xanthone Derivatives
(p9.0) Xanthones are a class of oxygen-heterocycles containing a γ-pyrone moiety with two aromatic rings. This family of compounds has shown a variety of biological activities, such as α-glucosidase inhibitory activity, antimicrobial activity, anti-inflammatory activity and cytotoxicity [64][65][66][67][68][69]. Xanthones derived from marine Chaetomium species are shown in Fig. 6.

(p9.1) Three new natural xanthone derivatives, chaetocyclinone A-C (101-103), were produced by the marine algaederived Chaetomium sp. Gö 100/2. Among them, chaetocyclinone A (101) exhibited inhibitory activity against phytopathogenic fungi Phytophthora infestans [70]. Investigations of the marine fungus Chaetomium sp. 620/ GrK 1a led to the discovery of three new fungal polyketide metabolites, chaetoxanthones A-C (104-106). Their antiparasitic activity was tested, and compound 105 showed selective activity against Plasmodium falciparum, while compound 106 displayed a moderate activity against Trypanosoma cruzi [71].
## (s10) Others
(p10.0) Cultivation of the marine red alga-derived fungus C. globosum revealed a new benzaldehyde secondary metabolite chaetopyranin (110), together with ten known compounds, including two benzaldehyde congeners, 2-(2' ,3-epoxy-1' ,3'-heptadienyl)-6-hydroxy-5-(3-methyl-2-butenyl)benzaldehyde (111) and isotetrahydroauroglaucin (112), two anthraquinone derivatives, erythroglaucin (113) and parietin (114), five asperentin derivatives including asperentin (115), 5'-hydroxy-asperentin-8-methylether (116), asperentin-8-methylether (117), 4'hydroxyasperentin (118) and 5'-hydroxyasperentin (119) (Fig. 7). Compounds 110-113 were evidenced to have moderate DPPH radical-scavenging properties. Compound 110 was also found to have cytotoxicity toward several tumor cell lines [72]. Successive fractionation of the marine fungal Chaetomium sp. resulted in obtaining a novel benzonaphthyridinedione derivative, chaetominedione (120), and two known fungal metabolites, 2furancarboxylic acid (121) and 5-(hydroxymethyl)-2-furancarboxylic acid (122) (Fig. 7). Compounds 120 and 122 showed significant inhibitory activity toward TK p56lck tyrosine kinase [73].
