# micromachines An Overview of the Strategies for Tin Selenide Advancement in Thermoelectric Application

CorpusID: 245475343 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/75c6e060eaa79aff3e75b40bfc707509ab699356)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Many vital concerns related to environmental degradation and depletion of energy resources provide renewable energy as the best approach to solve these problems. The approach reduces the use of fossil fuels that are responsible for the crisis. Given the demand for clean energy with high performance, there is a need to develop renewable green energy instruments to address the energy problems and prevent further environmental pollution [1,2]. Solar panels, fuel cells, thermal generators, and wind turbines have significantly been considered in the last several decades and have shown reliable power generation efficiency. Besides the aforementioned renewable energy technologies, TE is among current renewable energy technology that is quite attractive due to the technology's ability to directly convert between heat and electrical energy without moving components, fluids, or emitting greenhouse gases. As a result, it provides paths to silent, durable, clean, and green technology [3][4][5]. TE generators are environmentally stable and mechanically efficient electronic devices [6]. In addition, TE devices have high potential for energy conversion technologies in many fields, including aerospace, biomedical, air conditioning, power generators, and cooling devices [7]. However, thermoelectric generators (TEGs) are still immature, and many scientists are putting their efforts in enhancing efficiency through material modifications and/or device optimizations.

(p0.1) Many scientists have been working on the development of TE materials in recent years. For operating temperatures, TE materials are commonly divided into three groups [4,8], namely (a) low or near ambient TE materials (300 K-500 K), bismuth telluride (Bi 2 Te 3 ) and its
## (s2) SnSe
(p2.0) SnSe is a semiconductor with an environmentally safe composition and one of the most promising and fascinating materials in the realm of TE. SnSe-based materials have recently been identified as outstanding TE materials due to their ultralow κ lat due to the anharmonic scattering mechanism caused by lone s-pair electrons, which has been observed in a variety of chalcogenides [61,62] and the Cu ion liquid-like behavior in Cu 2 Se [63]. 
## (s3) Characteristics of SnSe
(p3.0) The TE group ignored SnSe because of its high electrical resistivity (between 10 1 -10 5 Ω cm [59], with a bandgap of 0.86 eV [59,69,70]. SnSe only received attention from researchers in 2014, when along with a particular crystallographic direction, Zhao et al., recorded the zT value of approximately 2.6 at 923 K, along the b-axis of a single crystal, which is a new record in bulk materials [38]. In 2018, a research by Chang et al. demonstrated that the Br-doped n-type SnSe crystals had a zT of 2.8 at 773 K along the a-axis [71]. According to recent research by Zhou et al., hole-doped SnSe polycrystalline samples made with properly purified reagents and stripped of tin oxides had approximately zT of about 3.1 at 783 K [25].
## (s5) Band Structure
(p5.0) SnSe studies on the optoelectronic properties and bandgap (Eg) show its applications in the optical field, i.e., as photovoltaic (PV) and photodetector [79]. Most IV-VI compounds have a narrow bandgap. Literatures disclosed that bulk SnSe has a direct Eg of 0.9 eV and indirect Eg of 1.30 eV, respectively. As a consequence of quantum confining, the direct bandgap of bulk is less than that of thin films [80,81]. Besides the Eg parameter, electronic structures, density of state (DOS) structure of the bands, and effective mass of SnSe-based materials, are strongly linked to their TE performance [82,83].

(p5.1) The material band structures define the available electron energy levels, which are usually available due to the periodicity of lattice within the reciprocal space. These electrical transport properties of Fermi levels adjacent band structures can be determined directly. The work on TE materials from the band structure perspective showed that both the microscopic and macroscopic extremes of electrical transport are with the corresponding model case [84].
## (s6) Band Structure
(p6.0) SnSe studies on the optoelectronic properties and bandgap (Eg) show its applications in the optical field, i.e., as photovoltaic (PV) and photodetector [79]. Most IV-VI compounds have a narrow bandgap. Literatures disclosed that bulk SnSe has a direct Eg of 0.9 eV and indirect Eg of 1.30 eV, respectively. As a consequence of quantum confining, the direct bandgap of bulk is less than that of thin films [80,81]. Besides the Eg parameter, electronic structures, density of state (DOS) structure of the bands, and effective mass of SnSe-based materials, are strongly linked to their TE performance [82,83].

(p6.1) The material band structures define the available electron energy levels, which are usually available due to the periodicity of lattice within the reciprocal space. These electrical transport properties of Fermi levels adjacent band structures can be determined directly.
## (s8) Synthesis of SnSe
(p8.0) As mentioned earlier, the SnSe monocrystalline structure has fascinating TE properties. However, due to its poor mechanical properties, expensiveness, and rigid crystal growth conditions, the single crystals are restricted in their industrial-scale production [63]. Many researchers have concentrated on fabricating polycrystalline SnSe to avoid the slow process of single crystal growth. Melting and mechanical alloying are the two widely practiced ways to produce the polycrystalline SnSe, particularly in the case of melting routes.

(p8.1) In the following section, some commonly used methods for producing single crystal and polycrystal of SnSe TE materials were reported, i.e., Bridgman method, temperature gradient method, mechanical alloying method, hydrothermal/solvothermal (HT/ST) method, spark plasma sintering technique (SPS), and hot-pressing (HP) technology.
## (s11) Temperature Gradient Growth Method
(p11.0) The temperature gradient method is used to produce 2D single-crystal semiconductors by using the same melting principle. This technique uses convective phenomena and the differences in heating element density to form a temperature gradient. A schematic diagram of the vertical furnace temperature gradient is shown in Figure 4. In this technique, a temperature controller controls the heat. Sn and Se powders will first be mixed and placed into quartz ampoules for the growth process, whereby the ampoules are then evacuated and sealed. The ampoule is often enclosed in another evacuated large quartz ampoule to avoid air oxidation of the sample if the inner ampoule breaks. The ampoules are placed into a vertical furnace and gradually heated at a high temperature over the melting point of SnSe. The ampoule is held at a high temperature for a long time to complete the reaction. Then, ampoules are continuously cooled to the melting point of the compound and quickly decreased to room temperature.

(p11.1) After the melting process is completed, annealing is often executed, followed by the process of cooling down to room temperature to improve the hardness and ductility of the final SnSe obtained. Furthermore, the annealing leads to a realignment of crystalline domains and an increase in the Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity [97].

(p11.2) In research by Zhao et al. [98], stoichiometric amounts of high purity Sn, Se, Ag, Ge were mixed and sealed under vacuum (<10 −4 Torr) in quartz tubes. The tubes were gradually heated to 1223 K within 12 h and held for 12 h, then cooled down to 793 K and held for 6 h. The tubes were left in the furnace to cool to room temperature. The ingots were pulverized and then sintered with a spark plasma sintering method. Meanwhile, in a study by Yang et al. [99], the Sn, Se, and NaCl weighted compositions were mixed and placed into vacuum-evacuated, sealed quartz tubes. Then, an induction furnace was used to heat the quartz tubes for 10 min at approximately 800 • C. It was held for 10 min and gradually cooled to room temperature. The ingots obtained were hand-ground into a fine powder and sintered by the rapid hot-pressing method (RHP).
## (s12) Temperature Gradient Growth Method
(p12.0) The temperature gradient method is used to produce 2D single-crystal semiconductors by using the same melting principle. This technique uses convective phenomena and the differences in heating element density to form a temperature gradient. A schematic diagram of the vertical furnace temperature gradient is shown in Figure 4. In this technique, a temperature controller controls the heat. Sn and Se powders will first be mixed and placed into quartz ampoules for the growth process, whereby the ampoules are then evacuated and sealed. The ampoule is often enclosed in another evacuated large quartz ampoule to avoid air oxidation of the sample if the inner ampoule breaks. The ampoules are placed into a vertical furnace and gradually heated at a high temperature over the melting point of SnSe. The ampoule is held at a high temperature for a long time to complete the reaction. Then, ampoules are continuously cooled to the melting point of the compound and quickly decreased to room temperature. After the melting process is completed, annealing is often executed, followed by the process of cooling down to room temperature to improve the hardness and ductility of the final SnSe obtained. Furthermore, the annealing leads to a realignment of crystalline domains and an increase in the Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity [97].

(p12.1) In research by Zhao et al. [98], stoichiometric amounts of high purity Sn, Se, Ag, Ge were mixed and sealed under vacuum (<10 −4 Torr) in quartz tubes. The tubes were gradually heated to 1223 K within 12 h and held for 12 h, then cooled down to 793 K and held for 6 h. The tubes were left in the furnace to cool to room temperature. The ingots were pulverized and then sintered with a spark plasma sintering method. Meanwhile, in a study by Yang et al. [99], the Sn, Se, and NaCl weighted compositions were mixed and placed into vacuum-evacuated, sealed quartz tubes. Then, an induction furnace was used to heat the quartz tubes for 10 min at approximately 800 °C. It was held for 10 min and gradually cooled to room temperature. The ingots obtained were hand-ground into a fine powder and sintered by the rapid hot-pressing method (RHP). 
## (s14) Mechanical Alloying
(p14.0) Mechanical alloying, particularly in ball milling (BM), has received extensive interest in synthesizing nanoparticle powders [100] since it is simple. A homogenous SnSe product is produced by blending the SnSe powder precursors with a high-energy ball mill [82]. In BM, elemental powders or intermetallic compounds are placed into a container of balls made of stainless steel, tungsten carbides, or zirconia. During the process, powders are milled in the argon atmosphere to prevent oxidation. The powders would be subjected to various ball-to-ball and ball-to-wall collisions [101]. The powders are continuously cold-welded and shattered during ball milling, resulting in nanostructured domains [102]. Moreover, mechanical alloying has often been considered a process after melting.

(p14.1) For example, BM was performed to synthesize n-type polycrystalline SnSe with titanium (Ti), Pb co-doping by Li et al. [76]. The milling was carried out for 6 h at 450 rpm with a powder-to-balls mass ratio of 1:20 in a planetary ball mill. In a 10 mmdiameter graphite mold, the BM-derivative powders were subsequently sintered at a uniaxial pressure of 50 MPa by SPS at 773 K for 5 min.
## (s16) Post-Treatment Synthesis Sintering
(p16.0) The synthesized powders should be consolidated into the densified small pellets for further characterization. Three methods typically used to densify the nanostructured materials are cold pressing (followed by sintering), HP, and SPS [101]. Since the polycrystalline SnSe showed a low TE performance using the cold pressing technique, HP and SPS are two of the most commonly utilized methods for fabricating polycrystalline SnSe materials.
## (s18) Advantages and Disadvantages of Synthesis and Post-treatment Synthesis Methods
(p18.0) From the literature discussed, many methods are used to fabricate SnSe crystals, including synthesis and sintering. Most of these methods require moderate and high temperatures to produce high-quality SnSe crystals for TE applications. However, each method has its pros and cons. Table 2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of each method that was described in the literature. The details can be obtained from the cited references. • The lack of stoichiometry control [101]. • Materials can be hard to sinter [101,120]. [107][108][109] Hot pressing • Pressure increases density at a specific temperature and can be achieved in shorter periods and at lower temperatures than conventional sintering [125]. • Increase homogeneity in density, structure, and composition with increased processing stability [120].
## (s21) •
(p21.0) The fast densification by SPS reduces the contact time between the sintering material and the graphite die and reduces the potential for unwanted product formation [130]. • High energy efficiency [130]. • Easy operation [131].
## (s22) Strategies to Improve the Thermoelectric Performance of SnSe
(p22.0) The performance of a TE materials is dependent on the electrical conductivity, thermal conductivity, and Seebeck coefficient of the material. Enhanced zT values are generally the result of high power factor values combined with low thermal conductivity. Moreover, a high power factor comes from a high electrical conductivity and a high Seebeck coefficient. Furthermore, electrical conductivity is dependent on carrier mobility and carrier density, which is determined by the electronic structure. Meanwhile, the Seebeck coefficient depends on the gradient of DOS of the conduction band near the Fermi level [86]. The lattice thermal conductivity could be significantly suppressed through proper modulating of the material microstructure [133]. However, the electronic thermal conductivity still depends very much on the electronic structure [86]. Consequently, several methods were investigated and divided into three: increasing power factor, reducing thermal conductivity and retaining a high power factor, and reducing thermal conductivity to improve TE performance.

(p22.1) For TE materials, texturing and doping are two significant methods of enhancing the TE performance of polycrystalline SnSe [82]. Even though single crystals are thermally conductive than polycrystals [134], SnSe, in its single crystalline form, is not ideal for TE devices because of high production costs, poor cleaving properties, and special requirements of the crystal-growth process [135]. Thus, polycrystalline SnSe is a popular alternative candidate for practical applications because it is machinable and scalable [109]. The highest zT in pristine polycrystalline SnSe is considerably below its single crystalline counterpart. Polycrystalline samples have low carrier mobility, high anisotropic nature, and high thermal conductivity, due to the presence of Sn oxides [136,137]. Many researchers have concentrated on increasing the performance via form transitions, metal doping, and hole doping [138]. Doping is shown to be an efficient way to optimize the power factor by tuning the carrier concentration. Furthermore, doping can cause point defects and nano-precipitates to reduce lattice thermal conductivity [139].
## (s23) Enhancing the Power Factor
(p23.0) The undoped SnSe exhibits a carrier concentration of approximately 10 17 cm −3 [36], significantly lower than the optimum TE material (between 10 19 and 10 21 cm −3 ) [20,140]. Both intrinsic and extrinsic factors affect the TE materials' power factors. The intrinsic factors include doping elements solubility and band structure profiles near the Fermi stage. However, it is more apparent how power factors can also be improved via the extrinsic route by improving sample quality and optimizing the carrier concentration [2]. Then, chemical doping is used to increase carrier concentrations and boost SnSe TE performance.

(p23.1) The relation between the electrical transport parameters, electrical conductivity, and the Seebeck coefficient is complicated [141]. Developing high-performance TE materials while maintaining low thermal conductivity depends on enhancing or maintaining of power factor. A high power factor means that the system can generate large voltage and current. However, successful methods to increase the Seebeck coefficient ultimately reduce the electrical conductivity and vice versa. For example, electrical conductivity determines the potential of the material to produce electricity. It shall be written as Equation (6):
## (s25) Reducing the Thermal Conductivity
(p25.0) TE performance can also be enhanced by reducing thermal conductivity. The intricate relation between TE parameters accentuates the lattice thermal conductivity as the only parameter independent of carrier concentration. Consequently, reducing lattice thermal conductivity is an effective strategy to gain high TE performance [92,141]. Table 4 summarizes the effect of thermal conductivity reductions and enhancement of zT for SnSe by dopants. Optimally, to minimize the lattice thermal conductivity that can be accomplished by combining many forms of scattering mechanism, a full-spectrum phonon scattering strategy for heat-carrying phonons across several frequencies is required [2]. One of the most effective lattice thermal conductivity reduction approaches is all-scale hierarchical architecture [141]. It is successfully implemented in many TE material systems with high lattice thermal conductivity, such as tin chalcogenides and lead chalcogenides. In the sample Cu 0.01 Sn 0.99 Se, the lattice thermal conductivity was 0.2 Wm −1 K −1 , and zT approximately 1.2 at 873 K [152]. The hydrothermal synthesis was used to prepare the polycrystalline SnSe samples. The behavior of mesoscale grains and nanoscale precipitates interpreted all-scale hierarchical architectures to scatter phonons. Furthermore, atomic point-defect scattering of copper (Cu) played a crucial part in minimizing the lattice thermal conductivity.

(p25.1) Besides that, efforts were made to minimize thermal conductivity by introducing phonon scattering by dislocation, point defects, boundaries/interfaces, and resonant rattlers. Point defect scattering is one of the most effective phonon scattering techniques for reducing the lattice thermal conductivity [2,153]. This is based on the fundamental argument of physics that phonons are more prone to be scattered by point defects than electrical carriers, reducing the effect on carrier mobility [2]. The mechanism for reducing thermal conductivity through point defects is due to large mass and significant strain variations between host and guest atoms. Such fluctuations can be enhanced by creating vacancies, using interstitial atoms, or substituting atoms in TE materials [153]. As a result of the mass and strain fluctuation of polycrystalline n-type SnSe with Ti and Pb co-doping, the lattice thermal conductivity was significantly reduced [76].

(p25.2) Besides, exploring crystals with low lattice thermal conductivity is another technique in achieving high zT materials like lattice with good anharmonicity, low-symmetry, complex structure, and liquid-like lattice [154]. Many TE materials, such as SnSe, are highly anharmonic and have extremely low thermal conductivity [2,155,156]. With layered structures characteristic of the van der Waals force, two-dimensional materials have also been used because of their high TE performance and low lattice thermal conductivity. Taking advantage of layered structures, SnSe is showing promising TE performance [2]. SnSe doped with 2 at.% of Cu had a zT of 0.7 at 773 K. Average zT could be due to the SnSe intrinsic nanostructure formation integrated with the presence of the second phase of Cu 2 Se and ultralow thermal conductivity [4]. Table 4. TE properties and synthesis of SnSe with reduction of thermal conductivity approaches.
## (s27) Important Correlation of Power Factor and Lattice Thermal Conductivity
(p27.0) The individual and synergetic methods are of great importance to boost the electrical and thermal properties of TE materials [160]. Table 5 summarizes the synthesis methods and approaches used to simultaneously increase power factors and reduce thermal conductivity in SnSe materials. New concepts like band-alignment and nanostructure with compositional alloys offer an intelligent way of reducing lattice thermal conductivity while retaining a high power factor. In 2019, the power factor of polycrystalline SnSe was strengthened by Ge alloying and Ag doping to 1 mWm −1 K −2 . Consequently, a peak zT value of approximately 1.5 was reached at 793 K. The carrier concentration was increased by Ag doping, while the Seebeck coefficient was increased by Ge alloying due to enhancing the effective band mass and reducing the bandgap. Furthermore, Ge alloying greatly decreased lattice thermal conductivity via scattering phonons due to point defects [98].

(p27.1) In samarium (Sm) doped SnSe polycrystalline for the composition Sn 0.97 Sm 0.03, the integration of power factor enhancement and thermal conductivity reduction was seen. Dopant Sm can improve electrical conduction by raising its carrier concentration at room temperature to 12.71 × 10 16 cm −3 from 3.65 × 10 16 cm −3 for Sn 0.97 Sm 0.03 Se. This leads to a power factor increment to 214 µWm −1 K −2 , with a value of zT max of 0.55 at 823 K [161]. The doping approach also has been applied to the polycrystalline SnSe p-type doped with NaCl. The NaCl dopant increases the SnSe electrical conductivity and carrier concentration, with a maximum power factor of~4.14 µWcm −1 K −2 at 810 K is achieved.

(p27.2) Chlorine (Cl) helps in achieving a low lattice thermal conductivity of~0.27 Wm −1 K −1 at 810 K. A maximum zT value of 0.84 was achieved at 810 K for the sample of Na 0.005 Sn 0.995 SeCl 0.005 . Another group reported that the power factor was improved by adding the layered MoS 2 /graphene (MoS 2 /G) to the p-type SnSe. The maximum power factor was 4.68 µWcm −1 K −2 with SnSe + 3.2 wt% MoS 2 /G. A low lattice thermal conductivity was obtained as a result of the layered MoS 2 /G due to phonons scattering at grain boundaries [129]. The maximum zT was 0.98 at 810 K.

(p27.3) The synthesis method has recently allowed the control of decreased graphene oxide (rGO) concentrations in the nanocomposites. With the implementation of just 0.3% rGO, lattice thermal conductivity was substantially reduced at a minimum of 0.36 Wm −1 K −1 at 773 K. This was because of the numerous SnSe/rGO interfaces and SnSe grain boundaries that could disperse phonons effectively. An elevated carrier concentration supported the electrical conductivity at low temperatures, which resulted in a zT of 0.91 for SnSe/rGO-0.3 at 823 K [162]. When Ge-doped SnSe was synthesized by a hydrothermal method and SPS, 3 mol% Ge doping enhanced the carrier concentration, resulting in high electrical conductivity of 50 Scm −1 and a power factor of 5.1 µWcm −1 K −2 . In conjunction with the ultralow lattice thermal conductivity of approximately 0.18 Wm −1 K −1 , Chandra and Biswas [163] reported the zT value of 2.1 at 873 K.

(p27.4) Meanwhile, Hong et al. [164] recorded a high zT of 1.1 at 800 K in the p-type SnSe nanoplates alloying with TE through band engineering. Sintered pellets have improved TE performance significantly due to increased power factor in temperature ranges of 300 K to 800 K and reduced thermal conductivity at the same time. The enhanced power factor was due to the high texture and enhanced carrier concentration. The increased phonon scattering due to point defect caused the decreased thermal conductivity by replacing Se-sites in Sn. The composition was prepared by melting synthesis and high-pressure sintering techniques. Cu-doping p-type SnSe polycrystalline zT was stated to be 0.79 at 823 K [165]. The results showed that electrical conductivity increased with increased Cu content. All samples decreased their total thermal conductivity as the temperature increased and reached their minimum values at 773 K. Table 5. TE properties and synthesis of SnSe by simultaneously increasing power factor and reducing lattice thermal conductivity approaches.
## (s29) Applications
(p29.0) Single-crystal SnSe, allows for efficient heat-to-electricity conversion and vice-versa, suitable for applications such as microgenerators, heaters or coolers. However, it is just too bulky for applications that demand flexible, wearable devices. The manufacture of 2D flexible TEGs is made possible by the design and fabrication of SnSe nanocrystals. Typically, there are two main approaches to achieve this goal [63]: (1) by fabricating SnSe-based thin films using drop-casting processes and assembling them with flexible substrates, and (2) fabricating organic/inorganic composite films containing SnSe nanocrystals as fillers.
## (s30) Thin Film
(p30.0) SnSe nanosheets are suitable raw materials for the fabrication of SnSe thin films. Rongione et al. [105] demonstrated a low-cost, scalable solution approach for producing a nanostructured SnSe thin film. Drop casting was used to deposit a thin film of SnSe nanosheets over a 1 cm 2 area of copper tape substrate. Near the nanosheet interfaces, phonon scattering results in high thermal boundary resistance and an ultralow thermal conductivity of 0.09 Wm −1 K −1 . The produced SnSe thin film was coated on a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate to achieve a certain level of flexibility. According to the result, the SnSe thin film may be easily applied on flexible plastic substrates and maintain its outstanding TE performance through 1000 bending cycles.

(p30.1) Heo et al. [175] designed highly textured and hole-doped SnSe thin films to further enhance the anisotropy and boost the TE performance of SnSe thin films. A high S 2 σ of ≈4.3 µWcm −1 K −2 was achieved at 550 K. The current SnSe ink solution could also be used to fabricate SnSe thick films and flexible TEGs using a more practical solution process.
## (s31) Organic/Inorganic Composite
(p31.0) Inorganic fiber-based TEs outperform organic or inorganic/organic hybrid TEs in terms of TE performance and designability, which can be attributed to their appropriate electronic structures and low lattice thermal conductivity. Therefore, various low-dimensional TE materials, such as nano or micro-based fibers, have been used in flexible TE generators or miniatured TE devices.

(p31.1) A solution processing procedure was used by Ju et al. [176] to fabricate flexible TE composite films made of conductive polyaniline (PANI)-coated SnSe 0.8 S 0.2 nanosheets (NSs) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). Incorporating a modest amount of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) into the composite film can improve its TE properties even more. The CSA-PANI-coated SnSe 0.8 S 0.2 NS/PVDF/CNT composite film has a maximum TE power factor of 297 mWm −1 K −2 at 400 K, which is much greater than the CSA-PANI-coated SnSe 0.8 S 0.2 NS/PVDF composite film without CNTs.

(p31.2) Zhang et al. [177] used the thermal drawing procedure to produce an ultralong singlecrystal SnSe wire with a diameter ranging from micro to nanoscale. This process begins by thermally drawing SnSe into a polycrystalline, very flexible, ultralong, and mechanically stable flexible fiber-like substrate. Then the SnSe core is recrystallized to single-crystal over the whole fiber using a CO 2 laser. The CO 2 laser taper procedure may produce flexible SnSe fiber with various diameters while maintaining its single-crystal properties. When placed on the human body, such materials woven with functional SnSe fibers allow covered areas to breathe. This facile and low-cost technique paves the way for fiber-shaped single-crystal materials in various applications, from 1D fiber devices to multidimensional wearable fabrics.
