# Biobanking in dentistry: A review-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 245603885 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/731fd80328f3ed2297a559a0d4e52ade5b6aa08d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/731fd80328f3ed2297a559a0d4e52ade5b6aa08d)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Biological
(p1.0) Information coming from self-administered, structured questionnaires, possibly matched with other records (e.g. oral examinations) can also be stored and serve as a source of data for large-scale studies on oral and systemic diseases [9][10][11][12][13] (Fig. 1).

(p1.1) At this time, biobanking is a topic of growing interest to the scientific community, and also of economic interest, but a systematic description of the structure and potential of this resource in dentistry still seems to be lacking. The aim of the present review is to describe biobanking applications in dentistry. It covers articles that report on the pathological and healthy samples involved, and the related information on the donors, before going on to discuss possible future developments.
## (s2) Biobanks of pathological oral samples
(p2.0) Several biobanks for specific purposes have been developed. The Malaysian Oral Cancer Database and Tissue Bank System (MOCDTBS) [14], and the Malaysian Periodontal Database and Biobank System (MPDBS) were established to collect samples and data from patients with oral disorders. Data and samples are collected from patients with malignant and pre-malignant oral lesions and from healthy subjects. The specimens collected, processed and stored by the MOCDTBS include oral tissues, blood, saliva and buccal cells. Part of the tissue specimens are immediately placed and frozen in liquid nitrogen, while another part is fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin. Blood, saliva and buccal cells are centrifuged and temporarily stored at −20 • C at the collection centers, then processed for RNA and DNA extraction at the main storage center. The database includes clinical, pathological and sociodemographic data, as well as information about contributors' lifestyle and diet [15]. The MOCDTBS resources have facilitated studies on the role of genetic susceptibility in the pathogenesis of oral cancer, and how this can be influenced by etiological factors [16][17][18][19][20]. Moreover, several molecules, such as hypermethylated dual specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1) and dimethylarginine dimethylamino hydrolase (DDAH2) genes, cyclin D1, matrix metalloproteinase 13 (MMP13) and discoidin domain receptor 1 (DDR1), have been identified as potential biomarkers for oral cancer as diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic targets [21][22][23][24][25][26][27]. In addition, studies utilizing specimens and data available from MOCDTBS provide interesting results on risk factors, protection against oral cancer risk, the effect of the disease on the quality of life and survival for Malaysian oral cancer patients. In particular betel quid chewing habit has been shown to be associated with oral preneoplastic disorders in Southern Asian populations and HPV16-specific IgG and IgM antibodies could represent a significant indicator of risk factors in oral squamous cell carcinoma in female patients [28][29][30]. Conversely, high serum levels of retinol and ␣-tocopherol affords protection against oral cancer risk, and patient survival and prognostic indicators are not influenced by ethnicity [15,31,32].

(p2.1) Saleh et al. conducted a study to identify genes differentially expressed between cancerous and normal oral tissues. To do so, they combined data from microarray experiments on formalinfixed, paraffin-embedded tissues and data in the MOCDTBS. The gene expression microarrays obtained on biobanked oral cancer specimens revealed genes that were involved in regulating apoptosis, the cell cycle, metastasis and cell adhesion, including BCL2A1, BIRC5, MMP1, MMP9 and ITGB4 [33].

(p2.2) The NETherlands QUality of life and BIomedical Cohort (NET-QUBIC) was described as a longitudinal observational cohort study in the field of head and neck cancer [34]. A biobank was established in parallel with the data collection. Frozen tissues, blood components and oral rinses were collected at the baseline, and at 6, 12 and 24 months. Multiple oral rinse and saliva samples were obtained. Saliva was collected with salivettes, which were centrifuged at 2000 g for 10 min, aliquoted and stored at −20 • C. By the time of publication (in 2019), 739 patients with cancer and 262 informal caregivers had been recruited at 5 of the 8 centers in the Netherlands. Data and samples were stored according to FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable, re-usable) principles. By granting researchers access to the NET-QUBIC data warehouse and biobank, the mission is to enable new research lines in clinical (e.g. optimizing treatment for elderly patients), biological (e.g. liquid biopsy analysis for detecting relapses), health-related quality of life (e.g. the impact of toxicity on quality of life), and interrelated research (e.g. health-related quality of life in relation to biomarkers and survival).

(p2.3) The University of Malaya started the Malaysian Periodontal Database and Biobank System (MPDBS) to facilitate studies on periodontitis. Using a validated classification system, data and biospecimens were obtained from 400 patients with chronic periodontitis (300 of them with a severe form), and 100 healthy controls. Blood and subgingival plaque samples were collected and processed from the start of the study, while saliva sampling was added later. Sample collection was accompanied by the acquisition of data on patients' demographics, medical history, clinical periodontal parameters, anthropometric measurements, socioeconomic status, habits, impact on oral health-related quality of life, and prostheses [4]. The data and specimens collected are intended for use in studies focusing on research questions relating to genetic, microbiological and immunological aspects of chronic periodontitis. MPDBS resources have already contributed to demonstrating that immunoglobulin M (IgM) from sera of patients with severe chronic periodontitis could be used as biomarkers of the disease [3]. A cross-sectional study on obese subjects (who made up a significant number of the patients contributing to the MPDBS) found a very high prevalence of periodontitis (73.9%) among obese Malaysians [35].

(p2.4) The Tohoku Medical Megabank Organization baseline oral microbiome study involved 1349 participants, who underwent physiological measurements and an oral examination, completed a dental questionnaire, and provided biospecimens (saliva and dental plaque) [36]. Whole saliva (without centrifugation), supernatant saliva, salivary sediment, supragingival plaque from right molar teeth, supragingival plaque from left molar teeth, and tongue swabs were collected and stored in the Tohoku Medical Megabank at −80 • C. Saliva and plaque microbiotas were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Differences in microbial composition and community structure were found in saliva and plaque. A greater diversity of the species in saliva and plaque coincided with more severe periodontal disease. Co-occurrence network analysis revealed strong positive and negative associations for microbial taxa in plaque and saliva with periodontitis-associated biofilm formation. The Actinobacteria and Bacilli classes showed a positive correlation in saliva.
## (s3) Biobanks of healthy oral samples
(p3.0) Biospecimens stored in a biobank may come from healthy donors as well as from patients. In the former case, the samples derive from biological material that would normally be discarded, such as umbilical cord blood or the placenta. The focus of this type of biobank is often prevention, involving efforts to associate exposure to various factors with diseases that might develop later on. This is the approach of a biobank collecting exfoliated deciduous teeth established as part of the Norwegian Mother and Child Cohort Study (MoBa) in 2008 [44]. The collection of teeth has become a powerful resource for obtaining important information on environmental exposure and nutrition in fetal life and early infancy. It has been demonstrated that traces of toxic and essential elements can become incorporated in the dental tissue during tooth formation, and they could serve as biomarkers of disease and nutritional status. By 2011, the MoBa tooth biobank had collected 9798 deciduous teeth from 7400 children at a mean age of 6.75 years, from among the 108,000 participants in the MoBa study during the years from 2008 to 2016 (with a response rate around 24%). Parents collected deciduous teeth in polypropylene tubes, after rinsing them in water without any use of detergents and drying them overnight. They then sent them, together with a signed informed consent form to the MoBa biobank, where they were registered and stored in dry conditions at room temperature. One or more types of deciduous teeth from the same donor without selection for a specific tooth type were collected at the MoBa. Teeth with caries or abrasions, and signs of root resorption were also included.

(p3.1) In recent years, several studies have demonstrated that biological material stored in biobanks can be a promising resource for therapeutic applications too. Stem cells have shown great potential for clinical applications in the field of regenerative medicine. Dental tissues -including pulp, apical papillae, follicles and periodontal ligaments -are a rich source of multipotent stem cells [8,45,46]. Stem cells from human exfoliated deciduous teeth have a strong capacity for proliferation and multilineage differentiation, and they can be accessed easily and noninvasively. They also remain undifferentiated and stable after long-term cryopreservation at the biobank, making them a potentially valuable source for tissue engineering and cell-based regenerative therapies [47]. In vitro and in vivo research has shown that dental stem cells can differentiate under certain conditions into odontoblast-like cells, and can be used for dental tissue engineering purposes, for pulp tissue restoration, lost periodontal ligament regeneration, and tooth structure generation [48]. Recently, stem cells of the apical papilla (SCAPs) have demonstrated regenerative properties when implanted in vivo using an organotypic model composed of human root segments. Indeed, de novo formation of dentin-like and pulp-like tissue were observed in the empty canal space of root segments after injection of SCAPs embedded in a platelet-rich plasma (PRP) scaffold and implanted in immunodeficient rats [49]. Dental stem cells can also regenerate into adipocytes, neuron-like cells, glial cells, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, melanocytes, myotubes, and endothelial cells. This would point to their potential clinical applications not only in dentistry, but also in many other situations [50]. Dental stem cells might be used, for instance, in the treatment of neurological and neurodegenerative pathologies, liver dysfunction, cardiovascular diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, and autoimmune diseases, minimizing the risk of rejection [51]. Table 3 UK Biobank approved research in the field of dentistry. Data retrieved from the UK Biobank website using specific queries regarding main dental terms (https://www. ukbiobank.ac.uk/enable-your-research/approved-research, retrieved on 30 March 2021). Thanks to their versatility, the ready accessibility of the tissue of origin (obtained during routine procedures, and from material that is usually discarded), dental stem cells have an appeal that has led to the development of numerous biobanks specializing in their collection. The first tooth bank, named "Three Brackets" was established at Hiroshima University in 2005. This was followed by the opening of other institutional centers or private companies for storing autologous dental stem cells. The largest and most experienced dental stem cell banks are currently located in the USA (BioEden, Stem Save, Store-a-Tooth), Europe (Bergen, Future Health), India (Stemade Biotech, Store your cells), Japan (Teeth Bank, Advanced Center of Tissue Engineering, Hiroshima University), Taipei (Taipei Medical University), and China (National Dental Stem Cells Bank) [52,53]. Dental stem cell banking has so far focused on cells contained in the pulp of human deciduous and permanent teeth, and wisdom teeth especially. SHED have demonstrated a minimal risk of oncogenesis and a higher proliferation and survival rate than adult dental pulp stem cells [54]. Not all teeth are suitable for stem cell recovery, however. They should have a red-colored pulp (a sign of cell viability), and no evidence of disease, such as apical abscesses, tumors or cysts [51]. Stem cells are preferably extracted from healthy teeth. They could be isolated from carious teeth too, albeit with a lower cell recovery and a higher expression of inflammatory molecules [55,56]. Deciduous incisors and canines are recommended for optimal results, while deciduous teeth distal to the canines and molars are generally not used for dental stem cell harvesting [51].
## (s5) Future perspectives
(p5.0) It is very important not to consider biobanks as static archives of samples and data. They are a dynamic resource, continuously evolving, improving and innovating, developing new techniques and serving new scientific requirements. The overall future goals of the development of biobanks should include an ever-increasing international networking and sharing of data and samples. As an example, the BBMRI-ERICs (BBMRI-European Research Infrastructure Consortium) Sample Locator (retrieved as a "request sample" link at https://directory.bbmri-eric.eu, 16 March 2021) is a federated tool enabling researchers to query biobanks about individual-level data stored in the Connectors of different biobanks in order to find out which biobanks host the samples and/or sample-related data meeting the researchers' needs. A Minimum Information About Biobank Data Sharing (MIABIS) terminology has been developed to describe samples, sample donors, and events [61].

(p5.1) Specifically as regards biobanks in dentistry, some aspects need to be further explored. Not all the biological material recoverable in dentistry is currently stored in repositories. The chances of retrieving further data and valuable samples could be increased by developing new biobanks for collecting uncommon biospecimens, such as alveolar bone, periodontal ligament, loose and adherent gum. Cells derived from these tissues may provide hope for future applications not only in bone and periodontal regeneration, but even for treating various systemic diseases [62].

(p5.2) It is also worth mentioning that the collection or use of oral samples from biobanks in everyday clinical work is still not feasible because some issues have yet to be fully addressed. For example, how long oral samples should be stored remains to be seen, and ethical regulations are still needed on the use of biospecimens (especially dental stem cells). Although biobanking is certified for long-term preservation, samples may change with time, and the analyses conducted on them when they were collected may no longer exactly reflect their condition. In the case of stem cells, whether they could still be used effectively after very long-term cryopreservation remains to be established.
