# State of art bio-materials as scale inhibitors in recirculating cooling water system: a review article Uncorrected Proof

CorpusID: 246408105 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/264ae659adc11cbe9ccbc86ead7e8697b099e41a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/264ae659adc11cbe9ccbc86ead7e8697b099e41a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) The constant composition method
(p3.0) The constant composition method was pioneered by (Tomson & Nancollas 1978) in 1978 who investigated compositions of calcium phosphate by maintaining solution pH constant, during the whole reaction, in order to maintain stability of solution composition and pH, automatic titrators are applied in against the influence of CaCO 3 precipitates, the precipitation phenomenon triggers two mechanically coupled burettes to add a suitable amount of salt solutions, hence, the crystal growth rate can be accurately obtained from the recorder of titrant traces as a function of time, the antiscaling capacity of a reagent can be further derived (Chhim et al. 2017), making the constant composition method being suitable for evaluating the antiscaling capacity of scale inhibitors with quickness and high accuracy (Beck et al. 2013).
## (s5) vapor diffusion method
(p5.0) Scale crystallization occurs in the millisecond range in the process of vapor diffusion method, which shows significant attractivity in the research of CaCO 3 crystallization (Addadi et al. 1987;Gehrke et al. 2005;Tourney & Ngwenya 2009). Generally, its key distinction with other methods is that CaCO 3 crystals are precipitated from experimental solution which gradually supersaturates under the continuously decomposing ammonium carbonate in a closed container, according to the following  

(p5.1) The vapor diffusion method is appropriate for slow CaCO 3 crystallization benefits from the relatively stable gas-liquid phase contributes to eliminate the interference of other factors, this promotes well-facetted calcite crystals' formation for further microscopic observations (Gehrke et al. 2005;Liu et al. 2016a).
## (s9) Electrochemical methods
(p9.0) Electrochemical techniques, including chronoamperometry (CA), chronoelectrogravimetry, and impedancimetry, have proven very useful in the study of scale processes in a range of media (Belarbi et al. 2016;Menzri et al. 2017;Piri & Arefinia 2018), with the cathodic potential applied, the reduction of dissolved dioxygen form hydroxyl ions leading the electrode interfacial pH to increase, this accelerate CaCO 3 deposition according to the following equations: 
## (s10) Uncorrected Proof
(p10.0) The non-conductive calcareous deposition on the electrode surface reduces the current density which is simultaneously recorded by chronoamperometric measurements, it reaches to the scaling time when the electrode surface is completely covered by the insulating layer of CaCO 3 , which represents the scaling condition of a sampling solution. Generally, among these electrochemical techniques, chronoamperometric is more basic and commonly used to evaluate scale inhibition efficiency while electrochemical impedance measurements allow observing the nucleation, growth, and total surface coverage of the deposition (Ketrane et al. 2009;Zuo et al. 2020).
## (s11) Dynamic tube blocking test
(p11.0) Dynamic tube blocking test is one of the main testing methodologies to evaluate the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) required to prevent the formation of scale under dynamic flow condition. In principle, it involves measurements of the increasing pressure caused by scale deposition on the test tube wall. Scale inhibition efficiency is represented by the ratio of the time needs to obstruct the tube flow in the presence and the absence of the inhibitors (Macedo et al. 2019;Sanni et al. 2019).
## (s12) Pilot plant test
(p12.0) The pilot plant tests are conducted in a recirculating cooling water system or in a simulating device to test the field application performance of a scale inhibitor (Neveux et al. 2016;Chen et al. 2019). Comparing to other methods, pilot plant test can not only offer a flexible operation as the system can be directly controlled by computer, but also directly obtain the feasibility of the tested agent. However, such experiment condition of pilot plant tests is difficult to achieve in general laboratories.
## (s14) Phosphorus-containing scale inhibitors
(p14.0) Inorganic phosphonates and organophosphorus are mainly phosphorous-containing scale inhibitors that have been used for many years. Inorganic phosphonates, mainly refer as sodium triphosphate (Na 5 P 3 O 10 ) and sodium hexametaphosphate (NaPO 3 ) 6 , are effective scale inhibitors due to the presence of phosphate group (-PO 3 ) (Lin & Singer 2005). Their application as antiscalants has been limited because of low solubility and lower thermal stabilities. However, organophosphorus, such as aminotrimethylenephosphonicacid (ATMP), polyamino polyether methylenephosphonate (PAPEMP), and diethylenetriaminepentamethylene phosphonic acid (DETPMP), overcome this shortcoming due to C-P bonds in its molecular are more stable than O-P-O bonds at higher temperatures (Ghani & Al-Deffeeri 2010;Mpelwa & Tang 2019).

(p14.1) Phosphorus-containing scale inhibitors display a high strong scale inhibition action by sequestering scalants through a threshold effect at sub-stoichiometric amounts. However, on account of phosphorus-based inhibitors serve as nutrients after discharge, which will lead to eutrophication difficulties, therefore, high levels of phosphorus-containing scale inhibitors in industrial applications are becoming increasingly restricted (Rahman 2013).
## (s15) Polycarboxylates scale inhibitors
(p15.0) Polycarboxylates scale inhibitors possess functional carboxyl groups (-COOH) in its molecular structure, making them have strong chelating and dispersing abilities on Ca 2þ . During CaCO 3 crystallization process, polycarboxylates can significantly inhibit CaCO 3 crystal growth by adsorption on crystal surface, modify the regular CaCO 3 crystal morphology (Wada et al. 2001). Widely known polycarboxylates scale inhibitors are poly-maleic acid, polyacrylic acid and poly (methacrylic acid) due to their high performance-price ratio. Moreover, polycarboxylates scale inhibitors are also reported to copolymerized with other functional groups for better performance (-NH 2 , -OH, -COOH, -SO 3 H and so on.) (Shakkthivel & Vasudevan 2006;Yang et al. 2017;Dong et al. 2018), in the cases of monomers embedded to polymer molecules, multiple functional groups acted synergistically to enhance both dispersion and adsorption capacity when polymer preventing scale nucleation and growth.
## (s16) Organic Green scale inhibitors
(p16.0) With the severe restriction of waste water discharge to the environment, green chemistry demands scale inhibitors to move towards the direction of environmentally friendly, which is readily biodegradability, no-bioaccumulation, and non-toxic. Broadly speaking, polyaspartic acid (PASP), polyepoxysuccinic acid (PESA) andcarboxymethylinulin (CMI) are three typical representatives of green inhibitors, their antiscaling performances have been well documented as well as toxicity, solubility, biodegradability, and synthetic routes, their non-nitrogenous, non-phosphorus and environmental acceptability together with excellent antiscaling properties allow them to be the most promising alternatives to conventional scale inhibitors (Hasson et al. 2011;Chaussemier et al. 2015;Kumar et al. 2018;Mpelwa & Tang 2019).

(p16.1) Among the above-mentioned scale inhibitors, several recent studies modified PASP with B-cyclodextrin (Fu et al. 2020), urea (Zhang et al. 2016a(Zhang et al. , 2016b, glycine (Migahed et al. 2016), tyrosine (Tyr) and tryptophan (Trp)  by grafting copolymerization, such modifications improved its scale inhibition efficiency in different degrees, giving PASPbased copolymer inhibitors a superior performance in against CaCO 3 , CaSO 4 and Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 . Moreover, molecular dynamics simulations indicated that scale inhibition ability by sulfamic/amino modified PASP came from preventing the growth of CaSO 4 crystal planes ( (040), (041) and (113)) , this provided an in-depth study on its scale inhibition mechanism at atomistic level.

(p16.2) PESA as a green scale inhibitor was first synthesized in the beginning of 1990s in USA, its nonhazardous and highly biodegradable properties enable it to displace traditional scale inhibitors. In a previous work, PESA was regarded as the alternative scale inhibitor of PASP due to the better performance in against CaCO 3 deposition . In a recent study (Huang et al. 2019), PESA with hyper-branched structure showed a stronger antiscaling performance than linear PESA, the relate scale inhibition mechanisms include prolonging the CaCO 3 crystal nucleation and reducing the number of crystal nucleus.

(p16.3) In addition, carboxymethylinulin (CMI) is a polysaccharide-based polycarboxylate isolated from the roots of Inula helenium, benefits from carboxylic acid groups in its molecular structure, CMI possesses remarkable antiscaling property in preventing calcium carbonate crystallization. Study from (Kırboga & Öner 2012) indicated negatively charged functional groups in CMI molecular assumed the main responsibility in retarding CaCO 3 precipitation. Moreover, CMI molecules can interact closely with the calcite crystal surfaces of (012), (104), (11 À 0) and (110) through Van Der Waals intermolecular interactions, electrostatic interactions, and hydrogen-bonding interaction, consequently leads a high efficiency in inhibiting the growth of the calcite (Zhang et al. 2016a(Zhang et al. , 2016b.
## (s17) Blending scale inhibitors
(p17.0) Specifically, a blending scale inhibitor usually functions more efficiently than any single inhibitor. For an enhanced synergistic inhibition, blended scale inhibitors should be adopted according to a certain proportion and guarantee the concentration of each component not below the minimum inhibitor concentration. It's worth noting that the synergistic action of blending scale inhibitors usually occurs under the circumstances when each component possesses different scale inhibition mechanisms. Synergistic effect between some scale inhibitors have been found in some literatures, for example ATMP and DTPMPA (Zeino et al. 2018), PBTCA, HEDP and ATMP (Li et al. 2014), sodium gluconate (SG) and PBTC (Ou & Chiang Hsieh 2016).
## (s19) Proteins and amino acids molecules as scale inhibitors
(p19.0) Except polyaspartic acid, various proteins and amino acids have proven excellent anti-scaling capacity. In a previous study (Kumar et al. 2010), a type of water-soluble vitamin M, Pteroyl-L-glutamic acid (PGLU), was conducted as scale inhibitor, 120 mg/L of PGLU showed 100% CaCO 3 scale inhibition efficiency according to static jar tests at 70°C. Dynamic tube blocking tests also showed the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) required for scale inhibition at 110°C is 160 mg/L, it is therefore concluded that PGLU could be a favorable green scale inhibitor. Besides PGLU, a mixture of another two vitamins, RS1066 (Thiamine and Pyridoxine), was applied as scale inhibitor by (Menzri et al. 2017), they conducted CO 2 degasification method and chronoamperometry experiments to test its anti-scaling performance. As a result of CO 2 degassing by stirring, 160 mg/L RS1600 inhibited calcite scale via delaying the nucleation time from 30 to 72 min in tested Hamma hard water. The chronoamperometry showed the scaling time increased 2 times under the presence of 40 mg/L of RS1600, corresponded a 66.78% inhibition efficiency. The FTIR, XRD and Raman spectroscopy demonstrated the vitamins blending scale inhibitor, RS1600, modified the crystalline structure and made the calcite crystalline to form a metastable phase to inhibit the calcite crystal formation. In a previous study, a 48-amino-acid-long peptide, cysteine-rich Mdm2 peptide, was tested as a scale inhibitor (Dalas et al. 2006) by constant composition method to investigated the calcite inhibition by cysteine-rich Mdm2 peptide. For a total calcium concentration range of 80-120 mg/L, Mdm2 peptide reached a maximum inhibition of 58% on calcite crystal growth. Side terminal carboxyl groups of Mdm2 peptide fragment were regarded as binding sites which interact with calcite surface through hydrogen bonding, making the crystal surface grow sites blocked.

(p19.1) Recently, (Mady & Kelland 2017) investigated the barium sulfate and calcium carbonate inhibition performance of a series natural proteins, in their dynamic tube blocking tests, variation of tube pressure indicates tube flux changes was regarded to represent antiscaling performance. The inhibitor dosage when rapid tube blocking occurs was also recorded as fail inhibitor concentration (FIC). As a result, under a pH range of 5 À 7 at 100°C and 80 bar, peptone plus 19544, casein peptone N1 19516, and tryptone N1 19553 exhibited excellent performance on preventing barium sulfate scaling in heat pipe, corresponding a FIC of 50, 50 and 20 ppm, respectively. For calcium carbonate scaling inhibition, casein peptone N1 19516 and tryptone N1 19553 were superior than commercial scale inhibitors (ATMP and DTPMP), their FIC was 5 ppm for each 8 min run.

(p19.2) Besides, citric acid has long been proven to be a scale inhibitor (Reddy & Hoch 2001;Wada et al. 2001), however, recent antiscaling researches have lay emphasis on its derivatives, such as poly (citric acid) (Zhao et al. 2016), citrate (Tobler et al. 2015) and polymerized citric acid (Yuan et al. 2020). In the study of (Zhao et al. 2016), the calcium sulfate inhibition performance of poly (citric acid) was investigated by static jar tests according to Chinese standard GB/T16632-2008. With a total hardness of 2,040 mg/L, 2.5 mg/L poly (citric acid) showed an CaSO 4 inhibition rate over 90%, which eventually up to 98.8% when the dosage reached 25 mg/L, such antiscaling performance is preeminent. Moreover, for higher concentration of 6,000 mg/L Ca 2þ and 7,000 mg/L SO 4 2À , 25 mg/L poly (citric acid) possessed an 80% scale inhibition rate, indicated poly (citric acid) was a suitable scale inhibitor for high hardness. The scale inhibition mechanism carried from SEM, FTIR and XRD indicated that suspended carboxylic groups on the PCA molecules could maintain Ca 2þ ions free in solution by complexation, making PCA molecules easy to absorbed on active sites of growing CaSO 4 crystals. That consequently, distorted the CaSO 4 crystal lattice and inhibited the CaSO 4 scale deposition. The deprotonated form of citric acid, citrate (CIT), is a well-known complexing agent for dissolving calcium and inhibiting CaCO 3 growth, its excellent biodegradability making it a promising green scale inhibitor. During the process of CaCO 3 crystallization, the presence of CIT could effectively retard calcium carbonate nucleation, the nucleating induction period increased with an increase in CIT/Ca ratio, from 1 min at CIT/Ca ¼ 0% (pure system) to 30 min at 100% CIT/Ca (Montanari et al. 2017), such remarkable scaling prevention performance was closely related to hydroxyl and carboxyl groups which absorbed on crystal surfaces, led calcite crystals with modified morphologies and sizes (Tobler et al. 2015). In a recent study, sodium citrate (SC) was found to cooperate with 10-Methylacridinium iodide (MAI) as a blending scale inhibitor , the authors conducted static jar tests to evaluate the antiscsaling performance of MAI-SC mixture in guidance of GB/T 16632-2008, an enhanced CaCO 3 scale inhibition effect was found as MAI-SC mixture (MAI 50 mg/L and SC 150 mg/L) reached a peak antiscaling efficiency of 98.3% at 60°C, the morphology of CaCO 3 crystals was changed and the crystal form was altered. Such scale inhibition mechanism tends to be like interaction between -COOH/-OH and Ca 2þ allowed the antiscalants adsorbed on calcium carbonate scale surface, a further quantum chemical calculation demonstrated such absorption mainly take place on (104) and (102) faces for calcite, (002) and (020) faces for vaterite respectively, thanks to this, MAI-SC mixture could therefore occupy the active growth sites of calcium carbonate deposition in solution and hinder the further growth of the crystals.

(p19.3) Another recent research reported (Yuan et al. 2020) a new polymer of citric acid, curcumin-citric acid-aspartic acid (PCCA), acted as a suitable antiscalant for both CaSO 4 and CaCO 3 scale. According to static jar tests, PCCA owned a maximum inhibition efficiency of 99.7% with merely 4 mg/L dosage in against CaSO 4 , even when Ca 2þ ions reached up to 16,000 mg/L, the inhibition efficiency remained 90.7% at 10 mg/L dosage. Moreover, PCCA also possessed outstanding capacity in against CaCO 3 , a 20 mg/L dosage of PPCA exhibited 98.8% calcite inhibition efficiency under a tested water containing 500 mg/L high calcium bicarbonate at 80°C.
## (s21) Chitosan
(p21.0) Chitosan (CTS), a widely distributed biopolymer in nature, has been chemically modified and shown the potential of green scale inhibitor due to its nontoxic, CTS and its derivatives with broad areas of application had been reported in many studies as scale inhibitor. Previously (Guo et al. 2012), chitosan was copolymerized with maleic anhydride (MA), styrene sulfonic sodium (SSS), and acrylic amide (AM) to prepare CTS-MA-SSS-AM, which was highly effective as a CaCO 3 scale inhibitor, according to static jar tests (GB/T 16632-2008) at 70°, with an advanced CaCO 3 inhibition efficiency of 95.62%, 0.2 g/L CTS-MA-SSS-AM was capable in against Ca 2þ 0.006 mol/L and HCO 3 À 0.0045 mol/L precipitated into calcite scale. Recent research reported chitosan biguanidine hydrochloride (CG), obtained by modified chitosan with guanidine group, showed a good performance in retarding scale formation during real membrane desalinating application (with cross-flow unit for 6 h) (Maher et al. 2020), with only flux declines of 2.6 and 5% for CaSO 4 and CaCO 3 in feed water under concentrations of 10 and 15 mg/L respectively. Moreover, SEM analysis showed that CG strongly changed the precipitated scale crystals morphology, the initial needle-like CaSO 4 crystal structure was modified and transformed into an irregular structure while cubic CaCO 3 crystals were regulated to be cracked and distorted. The authors explained the antiscaling mechanism of CG that introducing chitosan backbone with guanidinium group increased its cationic charges, made CG can strongly combine with scalants along with anionic charges on its surfaces and consequently inhibited scale growth.

(p21.1) Another derivate of chitosan, carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS) was also found to mediate the crystal growth of calcium carbonate previously (Liang et al. 2004), SEM and XRD demonstrated that high CMCS dosage of 1,000 mg/L significantly changed the crystal morphology of precipitated CaCO 3 crystals and facilitated them transfer to calcite form. In a dynamic tube block tests according to (NACE International 2005) NACE TM3110, carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS) was functioned as a scale inhibitor of CaCO 3 under synthetic brine solution (Macedo et al. 2019). It was found that CMCS significantly reduced the scaling tendency of tested water, the precipitation time was obviously extended from 18 to 50 min under 50 mg/L of CMC, the minimum inhibitor concentration (MIC) of CMCS was 170 ppm for preventing scale formation at T ¼ 70°C and 1,000 psi. SEM along with infrared spectroscopy analysis showed CMCS effectively interacted with calcium ions through its carboxylate ions and lone pair of electrons on -OH and -NH 2 groups, which resulted in deforming the CaCO 3 crystal morphology and made the scaling ions hard to organize and preventing the scale formation.

(p21.2) These results showed consistency with previously results by (Yang et al. 2010), who investigated the impact of CMCS on CaCO 3 crystallization by vapor diffusion method, at 40°, they found the presence of CMCS obviously reduced the size of CaCO 3 particles from a particles range of 9-25 to 1.5-17 μm. From surface characterization results on obtained CaCO 3 particles, the authors suggested that during CaCO 3 crystallization, CMCS complexed with Ca 2þ ions by -COOÀ groups in its molecule, generated CMCS/Ca 2þ complexes to reduce Ca 2þ ions participated in CaCO 3 precipitation, led lattice distortion, and inhibited the growth of CaCO 3 nanoparticles.

(p21.3) Except carboxymethyl chitosan (CMCS), O-(hydroxyisopropyl) chitosan (HPCHS), which was obtained by modified chitosan with poly (ethyleneoxide)-poly (propyleneoxide)-poly (ethyleneoxide) (EO) 20 -(PO) 72 -(EO) 20 , also exhibited a regulation effect on CaCO 3 particle sizes distribution and morphology (Yang et al. 2009), the CaCO 3 precipitates were first obtained under the presence of HPCHS and then characterized by SEM, XRD and TGA methods, results showed the increased HPCHS dosage decreased the particle size and roughened the crystal surfaces. Based on the results of molecular dynamic simulation, the authors proposed a mechanism that under the presence of lone pair electrons of nitrogen atoms, HPCHS molecules could adsorb on the (104) surface and the edge of the CaCO 3 particles, thus achieved a regulatory effect on CaCO 3 formation.
## (s22) Cellulose
(p22.0) Cellulose is also a widely distributed polysaccharide in nature with nontoxic, easy degradation and biocompatibility, cellulose and its derivatives are widely used in food, medicine, detergent, paper, energy, and environmental protection. Cellulose possesses remarkable potential to be effective scale inhibitor benefits from the abundant hydroxyl and carboxyl groups in its molecular, in a recent research , sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (SCMC) was applied as a scale inhibitor in industrial circulating water system. Several methods were conducted to evaluated scale inhibition performance of SCMC, including pH displacement method (by measuring pH change of the test solution before and after scaling), electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), and real application tests, the results showed consistency that SCMC possessed a promising prospect on fouling inhibition. Under a concentration range of 50-200 mg/L, SCMC exhibited 93 and 75% inhibition efficiency by pH displacement method and EIS study, respectively, while in real simulated dynamic circulating cooling water system, SCMC reached a scale inhibition efficiency of 93.2% under 200 mg/L (determined by fouling resistance changes). Based on these results, a further study of molecular dynamics simulation was carried out to explore the scale inhibition mechanism , results indicated there was a strong interaction between oxygen atoms in SCMC and calcium ions in calcite (104) crystal planes, such strong interaction would distort and deform the plane of calcite and further hinder the normal growth of calcite crystal. (Gan et al. 2018) Another multifunctional cellulose derivative, borated aminated cellulose citrate (BACC), showed excellent scale inhibition performance in a simulated cooling water, in which the Ca 2þ was concentrated twice contrasted with original brine described in Chinese National Standard method GB/T-16632, as a result, an 91.57% CaCO 3 inhibition efficiency was obtained under the presence of 150 mg/L BACC at 70°C. The characterization results on deposited crystals suggested the active functional groups (-C ¼ O, À OH, N-C ¼ O, and B À O) in BACC molecular structure played an important role in forming stable Ca 2þ À BACC complexes and further prevented scale deposition.
## (s23) Glucose based polysaccharides
(p23.0) Glucose is one of the most widely distributed and important monosaccharide in nature, its derivatives, starch (St) and sodium gluconate (SG) have been identified as effective threshold CaCO 3 scale inhibitors in several recent studies. Recently, sodium gluconate (SG) showed an obvious synergistic effect with 2-phosphonobutane-1,2,4-tricarboxylic acid (PBTC) on preventing CaCO 3 deposition (Ou & Chiang Hsieh 2016). Light-scattering experiment for investigating the scale inhibition kinetics and mechanisms was carried out in "synthetic" water which containing 600 mg/L Ca 2þ under mixed SG/PBTC for 10 and 1 ppm respectively. As a result, in the presence of SG/PBTC, the formation kinetics of CaCO 3 is 4 times lower than that of PBTC alone, while the SEM, XRD and particle size distribution (PSD) analysis identified that the scale inhibition occurred through forming dissoluble Ca-complex, stabilizing the metastable phase of aragonite and vaterite and distorting the CaCO 3 crystal morphology.

(p23.1) Another polysaccharides with widespread availability and environmental friendly was starch (St), starch is a type of natural polymer which mainly composed of polyhydric glucose, due to abundant oxygen-containing functional groups in its molecular framework, St is talented in scale inhibition, however, St is usually modified with other molecules rather than directly used as a scale inhibitor, a suitable modification can significantly improve its antiscaling performance, according to static jar tests described in National Standard of China GB/T 16632-2008, after a water bath at 70°for 10 h, MA-SSS-OS (prepared by oxidized starch (OS) copolymerized with maleic anhydride (MA) styrene sulfonic sodium (SSS)) showed a noteworthy increasement on CaCO 3 antiscaling efficiency from 65.26% to 98.87% in a dosage range of 0.2 g/L to 0.8 g/L , CMS (6) performed a high inhibition efficiency of 89.80% in against CaCO3 under a concentration of 60 mg/L while St-g-PAA exhibited an antiscaling performance of 95.79% inhibition efficiency under a concentration of 40 mg/L (Wang et al. 2017;Yu et al. 2018), these results proved starch-based polymers have great potential in scale inhibition.

(p23.2) β-Cyclodextrin (β-CD), which is a kind of starch that consists of seven glucose units linked by a-1,4 glucosidic bonds, was regarded as effective scale inhibitor, in a previous study (Liu et al. 2016), β-CD was modified with polyethylene glycol to obtain a novel scale inhibitor namely polyethylene glycol modified β-cyclodextrin (β-CD-PEG), the CaCO 3 inhibition performance of β-CD-PEG was evaluated by static jar tests, the results showed 180 mg/L β-CD-PEG reached a peak scaling inhibition efficiency of 89.1% in against 200 mg/L Ca 2þ at 40°C. SEM and XRD analyses suggested that cyclodextrin cavity, -OH and -Oin the copolymer had strong chelating capacity to disperse the Ca 2þ ions, the scale inhibitor molecules could also absorb on crystal surfaces and occupy key points of crystal structure. However, β-CD-MA-SSS(synthesized by β-CD, maleic anhydride(MA) and styrene p-sulfonic sodium(SSS) monomers) acted more effectively towards calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate formation (Gu et al. 2013). According to static jar tests, for a total Ca 2þ of 200 mg/L at pH range of 5.0-6.0 and 70°C, 10.3 mg/L β-CD-MA-SSS terpolymer exhibited nearly 99.9% of scale inhibition efficiency for CaCO 3 and 95.5% for Ca 3 (PO 4 ) 2 . The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) microscopy displayed a morphologic change on CaCO 3 deposits under the impact of β-CD-MA-SSS, from regular cubic shape with a compact arrangement to flower patterns with floppy accumulation, this was ascribed to carboxyl, anhydride, cyclodextrins cavity and sulfonic acid groups in β-CD-MA-SSS which could easily chelate with Ca 2þ and altered oriented crystal growth.

(p23.3) In an earlier research, sodium lignosulfonate (SL), another glucose-based polysaccharide, was copolymerized with other monomer for scale inhibition in cooling water system (Ouyang et al. 2006), according to static jar tests (Ca 2þ concentration of 240 mg/L at 60°C for 6 h), SL had nearly no scale inhibition capacity of which the inhibition efficiency range was 1.0 to 2.5% under a SL dosage of 4 to 50 mg/L, a limited scale inhibition efficiency was obtained after SL modified with acrylic acid, which was 30.7 and 45.2% at the dosages of 20 and 50 mg/L, respectively, suggested an enhancement on CaCO 3 inhibition capability happened after SL modified with acrylic acid, the authors attributed this effect to the existence of both carboxyl and sulfonic groups allowed modified SL to strongly absorb onto CaCO 3 crystalline substrate and leading a lattice distortion.
## (s24) Plant extracts as scale inhibitors
(p24.0) In this direction, there have been many studies on applying plant extracts as scale inhibitors, although some were reviewed before (Chaussemier et al. 2015;Kumar et al. 2018), recent years, novel antiscalants derived from several different plant extracts have emerged, we have followed up with the latest research on applying plant extracts as antiscalants, their antiscaling performances along with the mechanisms are described in detail.

(p24.1) In a few studies, FCP (fast controlled precipitation) method along with CA were conducted to assess the scale inhibition performance of several plant extracts, including Herniaria glabra (Horner et al. 2017), Spergularia rubra, Parietaria officinalis (Cheap-Charpentier et al. 2016) and Hylocereus undatus (Lourteau et al. 2019). The FCP method was conducted at 30°C in synthetic water (Ca 2þ ¼ 100 mg/L) with 850 rpm stirring rate. The results showed that among the four plant extracts, Hylocereus undatus was the most efficient scale inhibitor with the lowest dosage of 24 mg/L to completely inhibit CaCO 3 formation (reached an efficiency of 100% as determined by FCP resistivity response), followed by 30 mg/L for Spergularia rubra and 50 mg/L for Herniaria glabra, the least effective was P. officinalis, for which a dosage up to 100 mg/L was required for complete scale inhibition. However, in CA experiments, a higher dosage of plant extracts was generally required for preventing extra CaCO 3 deposition on the electrode surface. Among the four plant extracts, the n-butanolic extract of H. glabra with a minimum dose of 75 mg/L was able to totally inhibit the precipitation of CaCO 3 , however, to achieve the same effect using Hylocereus.undatus extract, a slightly higher concentration of 180 mg/L was required while large doses of 300 and 700 mg/L were needed by S. rubra and P. officinalis respectively. SEM and XRD characterization indicated the crystal morphology became irregular and the vaterite polymorph was preferentially favored to form. The authors suggested surface complexation between the carboxylate groups of these plant extract molecules and calcium atoms on the CaCO 3 surface led an adsorption effect on the calcite crystal surface, reduced the crystal growth, and modified its geometry.

(p24.2) In two recent reports, the scale inhibition performance of Mazuj gall and Bistorta Officinalis extract were both evaluated by static beaker tests (Mohammadi & Rahsepar 2018;Mohammadi & Rahsepar 2019). The CaCO 3 crystallization process was kept in a 50°water bath for 18 h at pH ¼ 8.5 after the extracts was incubated, residual Ca 2þ concentration within the filtrate was determined by EDTA titration. Consequently, 1,000 ppm of Mazuj gall extract provided a high inhibition efficiency of 97.2% in against 592 ppm total hardness while Bistorta Officinalis extract provided a slightly enhanced scale inhibition efficiency of 99.5% under the same experimental condition, it was thus concluded that both Mazuj gall and Bistorta Officinalis extracts could be used as effective antiscaling additives in cooling water solution.

(p24.3) Previously, Gambier extract from Uncaria gambier Roxb leaves was reported as a green inhibitor for CaCO 3 formation (Suharso et al. 2011), by bottle-roller batch method, they found 200 ppm Gambier extract brought 70-80% CaCO 3 inhibition efficiency at 80°C. Subsequently, the authors modified Gambier extract with benzoic and citric acid at a ratio of (Gambier extract: benzoic acid: citric acid/2:1:2) to strengthen its antiscaing capability (Suharsoa 2017). Consequently, modified Gambier extract showed an inhibition efficiency of 12-92% under the concentration range of 50-300 ppm, such antiscaling effect was slightly diminished compared with original Gambier extract, which showed an inhibition efficiency of 60-100% under the concentration range of 50-250 ppm. SEM and particle size distribution analyses indicated both Gambier extract and its modified product could not only induce irregular changes on CaCO 3 morphology but also reduce particle sizes, it was suggested that inhibitor molecules like tannic acid, catechin and quercetin from the Gambier extract could interfere with Ca 2þ at the active growth sites of the CaCO 3 micro-crystals to block calcite crystal growth. Nayunigari et al. (2016) reported using curcumin, which is naturally abundant in Turmeric plant (Curcuma longa), copolymerized with malic acid in order to control scaling problems in cooling water treatment. Static jar tests were conducted to evaluate the antiscaling capacity of synthetic poly (curcumin-malic acid) with 7,500 mg/L of Ca 2þ and 10,200 mg/L of SO 4 2À for 16

(p24.4) hours, at a temperature range of 65-70°C and pH 8.0. Poly (curcumin-malic acid) showed the highest CaSO 4 scale inhibition rate of 95.0% at 10 ppm. FTIR, XRD and SEM suggested that functional oxygen species, such as superoxide and hydroxyl radical anions brought by curcumin gave an improvement on blocking growth sites of scale crystal and haltered the precipitation process, making curcumin-based copolymer be a promising alternative for CaSO 4 scale inhibition in cooling water systems.
