# A Review on Microplastics -An Indelible Ubiquitous Pollutant

CorpusID: 248094369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74bc3aaf58d937ebad683e07336923dbdae7fff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74bc3aaf58d937ebad683e07336923dbdae7fff)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s15) Detection of microplastics.
(p15.0) Micro-and nanoplastic particles are extremely complex and diverse in terms of their size, shape, density, polymer type, surface properties, etc. [82]. The characterization of micro/macro plastics is important to determine their distribution and impact on the environment. The dense plastic debris in contact collides with a higher impact with sediment particles than lighter microplastics. The variation between these smaller plastics arises due to their multiple shapes, size, origins, and surface characteristics of microplastics. The modern instrument techniques for the characterization of microplastics are Raman and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopies and microscopy; pyrolysis and thermal desorption by gas chromatography and other imaging techniques [21]. For microplastic characterization and identification, mass-based and particlebased techniques are frequently employed. Mass-based techniques include thermal extraction desorption-gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (TED-GC/MS), Pyrolysis gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (Py-GC/MS), Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization -Time of Flight -Mass spectroscopy (MALDI-ToF -MS), quantitative Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (qNMR), Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) are employed. Particle-based techniques include Attenuated total reflection-Fourier transform Infrared spectrometry (ATR-FTIR), micro -Fourier transform Infrared spectrometry (μ-FTIR), μ-Raman spectroscopy, Coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering (CARS), Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIR), Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS), and Time of Flight -Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) [82,83].
## (s20) Mitigating Microplastic Pollution
(p20.0) Several strategies need to be implemented to control the amount of microplastic reaching the environment and clean up the microplastics that already exist in the environment. Few of the strategies are discussed here.

(p20.1) Dawson et al. [20] reported an Antarctic krill that has the capability to degrade the polyethylene type of microplastics by decreasing its size via digestion. The data showed that the ingested microplastics were around 31.5 µm in size. The digested fragments measured less than 1 µm in diameter. This physical size alteration of microplastics to nano plastics introduces the significant connection between zooplanktons and microplastic degradation. Microplastics that are present in the air are being inhaled by humans during breathing [60]. This can greatly impair the respiratory health of the individual. It was found that wearing N-95 masks considerably decreased the inhalation of spherical and fiber microplastics even after the disinfectant treatment. N-95 masks reduced the inhalation of spherical type microplastics significantly by twenty-five times compared to the exposure without a mask [56].

(p20.2) Wastewater contains a considerable amount of microplastics. The wastewater treatment plants process the wastewater for the production of biosolids. This involves several processing steps such as drying, pasteurization, composting, etc. But these steps were found to be quite ineffective in removing microplastics [100]. But on the other hand, Laboratory scale treatment of wastewater treatment showed some promising leads. The application of a combination of coagulation and ultrafiltration processes effectively removed microplastics, thereby preventing them from reaching the have the freshwater ecosystem [21]. Removal of Microplastics from wastewater streams using electro-coagulation (EC) technique had been evaluated using Polyethylene microbeads. It was observed that the polyethylene microbeads were removed with a removal efficiency of > 90%. The maximum removal (99.24%) was observed at pH 7.5 [101].
