# Clinical Evidence on the Use of Chinese Herbal Medicine for Acute Infectious Diseases: An Overview of Systematic Reviews

CorpusID: 247085886 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c943ead617069fafd49e81ed63f286a1c0742d5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c943ead617069fafd49e81ed63f286a1c0742d5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Methodological Quality and Level of Evidence Assessment
(p1.0) The methodological quality of the included studies was evaluated independently by two authors using A MeaSurement Tool to Assess systematic Reviews (AMSTAR 2) (Shea et al., 2017), and a third author assisted in the judgement in cases of disagreement. The methodological quality of AMSTAR2 for systematic review is divided into 16 entries, among which item 2, item 4, item 7, item 9, item 10, item 11, item 13 and item 15 are recommended critical items for determine methodological quality. Considering the specificity of TCM research, we made the following adjustments to the key items. Since some systematic reviews were published before the establishment of the registration platform and the registration platform does not have a Chinese registration language, it was difficult to obtain the protocols of these previous Chinese systematic reviews, so we did not include item 2 as a key entry. Chinese medicine research is mainly published in Chinese language, and most Chinese journal submission systems do not support the presentation of a list of excluded studies, so item 7 was not considered a key entry.

(p1.1) The final evaluation results were classified as 1) "high quality" when there was no or one non-critical weakness, 2) "medium quality" when there was more than one non-critical weakness, 3) "low quality" when there was one critical flaw with or without non-critical weaknesses, or 4) "very low quality" when there was more than one critical flaw with or without non-critical weaknesses.
## (s13) Mumps
(p13.0) One moderate-quality SR including 11 RCTs (Wu et al., 2015) evaluated the effectiveness of the combined use of Chuanhuning Injection versus anti-virus pharmacotherapy ribavirin, and the results suggested that the combined use of Chuanhuning Injection and routine care better improved the overall effectiveness, shortened the time to fever and cheek swelling reduction, and reduced the occurrence of complications in children with mumps over ribavirin combined with routine care. In terms of safety, no adverse events occurred in the intervention group compared with the control including 4 cases of adverse events.
## (s14) Hand-Foot-And-Mouth Disease
(p14.0) A moderate-quality SR (Xiong et al., 2019) evaluated the effectiveness of proprietary CHM injections alone or in combination with conventional treatment, and the results suggested the monotherapy or the adjunct use of CHM injections reduced the time to fever and rash reduction, and improved the overall clinical effectiveness in children with HFMD. However, there was no difference in the incidence of adverse events and severe case conversion rate between treatments.

(p14.1) A moderate-quality SR including 24 RCTs  evaluated the effectiveness of using oral proprietary CHM drug Lanqin Oral Solution in addition to conventional treatment, and the results suggested that the combination treatment better reduced the time to fever and rash reduction and oral ulcer healing and shortened the total duration of illness in children with HFMD. In terms of safety, there was no difference in the incidence of adverse events between treatments.
