# Literature Review on History and Pharmacotherapy of Parkinson`s Disease

CorpusID: 243469487 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c38ebf2f997bfe89e3bb97c3691cf67d79d077b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c38ebf2f997bfe89e3bb97c3691cf67d79d077b)

Fields: History, Medicine

## (s15) THERAPIES FOR ADVANCED STAGES
(p15.0) In patients in whom conventional oral pharmacotherapy has been exhausted and cannot be optimized, three main device assisted therapies should be considered, all of them based on the concept of CDS: (1) continuous subcutaneous infusion of apomorphine; (2) intraintestinal infusion of levodopa carbidopa gel (LCIG); and (3) deep-brain stimulation (DBS). The optimal timing for initiating these advanced therapies to improve of quality of life (QoL) and prevent complications is critical and requires that patients and caregivers be informed early about the evolution to later stages of the disease with their complications. As the decision to initiate any of these therapies should be made by a MD specialist and a multi-disciplinary team, the role of the GN in timely referral is critical for adequate patient management. Apomorphine, a D1 and D2 dopamine receptor agonist, has rapid onset of action and is used in earlier stages as rescue injections during "off" periods. In advanced PD, it is delivered as a continuous subcutaneous infusion by means of a portable pump. It has shown effectiveness in treating MS and some NMS in advanced stages of the disease. LCIG is delivered directly to the proximal jejunum via a percutaneous gastrojejunostomy (PEG-J) tube connected to a portable infusion pump. This therapy is used to avoid erratic gastric emptying and to improve intestinal absorption. LCIG is an effective treatment for reducing motor fluctuations, improving "on" time without dyskinesia and improving health-related quality of life (HRQoL) in advanced PD [12].

(p15.1) In January 2015, the FDA approved a carbidopa/levodopa enteral suspension that is infused into the jejunum by a portable pump. The efficacy of the enteral suspension to decrease off-time and increase on-time was shown in a multicentre, international study [13].
