# Outcomes of bipolar TURP compared to monopolar TURP: A comprehensive literature review

CorpusID: 246529029 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09867808ad42cdb3de2e5a590d70fec257cabf4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/09867808ad42cdb3de2e5a590d70fec257cabf4d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Fall in Hematocrit and Blood Transfusions
(p6.0) Hemorrhage is a known complication of TURP. The hypothesis behind BTURP causing less intra-/postoperative hemorrhage is that it has a local "cut and seal" mechanism rather than the current passing through the patient's body. This in turn should be reducing the need for blood transfusion. Studies analyzed these with the outcome pointing toward BTURP having a reduced need for blood transfusion as compared to MTURP (Figure 1).

(p6.1) Of the 11 studies, one 7 showed a significantly higher blood transfusion with MTURP. 2,3,6-9,12-15,17 A significant fall in hematocrit was seen in three 3,5,7 of the nine studies with MTURP. 2,3,[5][6][7][8]12,14,15 Although there were no significant differences in the incidence of clot retention across the two groups, 5,12,13,17 between 1-5 cases were recorded in BTURP group and between 2-12 cases were recorded in MTURP group across studies. Table 4 shows in a tabular manner the findings from all the papers.

(p6.2) Alexander et al 19 from their study suggest that there is a possibility of reduced need for blood transfusion with a risk ratio of 0.42, 95% confidence interval 0.30-0.59. Fagerstrom et al 7 found a statistically significant reduction in total blood loss with a P value of <.001 with mean blood loss of 855 mL and 472 mL in MTURP and BTURP, respectively. Yoon et al 2 found that 3.8% and 2% patients of MTURP and BTURP, respectively, needed re-surgery due to ongoing hemorrhage, but statistical significance was not available for this.  MTURP arm or BTURP arm was not specified. Komura et al 12 found a statistically significant reduction in indwelling catheter duration in BTURP arm as compared to MTURP with 20.6 hours (SD 8.8) vs 35.8 hours (SD 54.6) (P ¼ .042), with a significant reduction in length of stay (3.4 days vs 2.4 days, P ¼ .045). Yee et al 14 compared LOS against age, prostate volume, preoperative foley catheter, and surgical intervention, and only the surgical group had significance with an odds ratio of 3.13 with a confidence interval of 95% and P ¼ .002. These three studies 6,12,14 found a statistically significant shorter LOS for BTURP patients as compared to MTURP patients. Méndez-Probst et al 8 found that seven patients from the BTURP arm were discharged on the same date of surgery as compared to three in MTURP arm, but this was not statistically significant.
## (s8) IPSS score and QoL (Quality of Life) Assessment
(p8.0) The effect of BPH is measured via IPSS score which the patients fill out along with a QoL assessment. These help guide the clinicians toward the need for intervention and assess postoperative quality of intervention. Eight studies focused on the IPSS, Qmax, Uroflow, and PVR outcomes post TURP surgery and compared the findings between MTURP and BTURP. This differed between 3-6 weeks, 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, and 48 months in various studies.

(p8.1) Of the studies included, there was only some significant difference in early IPSS scores, Qmax, Uroflow, and PVR lasting 3-6 weeks, but this was not statistically significant according to Skolarikos et al 6 Beyond this, there was not any significance in difference of improvement in symptoms for patients in both arms. Fagerstrom et al 7 showed that recovery occurred quicker in BTURP as compared to MTURP when compared at 3 and 6 weeks, (P < .05). But at 18 months, they canceled each other out and the outcomes were equivocal. Stucki et al 13 mention no significant difference in IPSS score improvement in MTURP and BTURP arms with both arms showing individual improvement in IPSS scores on a follow-up at 3 and 12 months. The longest follow-up was at 48 months in Autorino et al 4 but this showed no difference in improvement, and therefore, there does not seem to be the need for longer follow-up to assess the difference in improvement between the two available options.
## (s12) Discussion
(p12.0) We found that BTURP has significantly less reduction in serum sodium postoperatively when compared to MTURP. Various theories have been postulated for this, one of which is that 0.9% Sodium Chloride is a physiological fluid and therefore causes less tissue toxicity and also helps with replacing any fluid losses as stated by El-Assmy et al 18 Also, the "cut and seal" mechanism offered by BTURP which leads to nonpassage of current through patient's body and rather through the loop could cause lesser interaction between irrigating fluid and the microvascular channels created intraoperatively. This could also be attributed to a wider knowledge of TUR syndrome and therefore surgeons being more aware of time restrictions for MTURP.

(p12.1) We also did not find a significant drop in Hematocrit post BTURP, which could also possibly be attributed to the cut and seal mechanism as it helps coagulate while resecting. The concomitant vaporization and hemostasis are also postulated to help improve intraoperative vision as stated by Ene et al 23 There have been concerns about BTURP causing more thermal injury and therefore causing a higher risk of urethral strictures.

(p12.2) Abdelwahab et al 24 found an incidence of 11% in their randomized prospective trial with BTURP. Méndez-Probst et al 8 compared tissue with thermal injury and classified it as degree of thermal artifact in resected tissue as: grade I: 0% injury, grade II: <25% injury, grade III: 25%-50% injury, grade IV: 50%-75% injury, and grade V: >75%. They compared BTURP with MTURP in a randomized prospective trial and found no significant difference in thermal injury in both the arms. We did not find any significant increase in urethral strictures or bladder neck injury between the two arms in our review.

(p12.3) Komura et al 12 used only one surgeon for all their cases to remove surgeon bias and found an increase in operative time with BTURP, but this again did not translate into any significant drop in hemoglobin, serum sodium levels, or need for peri-operative transfusions. Although our study found an increase in operative time with BTRUP as compared to MTURP, it did not reflect in any of the postoperative outcomes and so the increased time did not make a difference in the postoperative outcome.

(p12.4) BTURP offers certain advantages when compared to MTURP with regard to drop in serum sodium and fall in hematocrit, although it did not always translate to a difference in clinical outcomes. It seems that perhaps more needs to be done to assess the cost-effectiveness, reimbursement, and quality of life considering it is different across various parts of the world. Although the paper includes randomized control trials comparing both BTURP And MTURP, there are certain limitations of the paper. A formal risk of bias assessment was not carried out and some papers had a certain aspect of outcomes missing with a degree of heterogeneity of the included study endpoints. There is global variation regarding length of stay, reimbursements, and personal practices with regard to the duration of indwelling catheter which have not been looked at in the paper. As with any comparative study on technology assessment, there will also be an inherent publication bias which has not been appraised in the paper. The heterogeneity of the included study endpoints

(p12.5) In conclusion, both BTURP and MTURP improve urinary symptoms, although BTURP is associated with less risk of hyponatremia, TUR syndrome, and blood loss compared to MTURP, Figure 2 gives a summary of these findings. There does not seem to be any significant difference in length of stay, urethral stricture, quality of life, and operative duration between these two procedures. Financial Disclosure: The authors declared that this study has received no financial support.
