# Photometric Redshifts for Next-Generation Surveys

CorpusID: 249334966 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65b268ac6d96ce15b3bbf2a75e491bb34b96e9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c65b268ac6d96ce15b3bbf2a75e491bb34b96e9e)

Fields: Physics

## (s33) A VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF PHOTOMETRIC REDSHIFTS
(p33.0) In the previous section, we have considered challenges that may affect applications of photometric redshifts to near-future projects. Figure 12 summarizes the current state of the art on those challenges which will impact the characterization of redshift distributions, a major source of systematic uncertainty for dark energy experiments. Considerable progress will need to be made in many areas for future experiments to reach their full potential.  Figure 11: An illustration of the impact of weak lensing magnification on cross-correlation measurements that could be used to reconstruct redshift distributions. The black line shows the expected cross-correlation signal, wsp, between a spectroscopic sample at redshift z = zs with a photometric sample having a Gaussian distribution in redshift, plotted as a function of zs (black line); it is this signal that can be used to reconstruct redshift distributions, for a simple toy model scenario (detailed in Matthews 2014). The cross-correlation signals that result from objects in the photometric sample being lensed by objects in a given spectroscopic redshift bin are shown as blue lines corresponding to different values of the faint-end Schechter function slope α. This signal is comparatively weak, as the lensing effect is null for the typical faint-end slope of α = −1. Finally, red curves show the signal resulting from comparatively bright spectroscopic objects being lensed by the photometric objects; this effect is much stronger as the density of bright galaxies drops exponentially with increasing luminosity, making counts at the bright end sensitive to lensing contamination. Figure reproduced with permission from Matthews (2014).
## (s75) A VISION FOR THE FUTURE OF PHOTOMETRIC REDSHIFTS
(p75.0) In the previous section, we have considered challenges that may affect applications of photometric redshifts to near-future projects. Figure 12 summarizes the current state of the art on those challenges which will impact the characterization of redshift distributions, a major source of systematic uncertainty for dark energy experiments. Considerable progress will need to be made in many areas for future experiments to reach their full potential.  Figure 11: An illustration of the impact of weak lensing magnification on cross-correlation measurements that could be used to reconstruct redshift distributions. The black line shows the expected cross-correlation signal, wsp, between a spectroscopic sample at redshift z = zs with a photometric sample having a Gaussian distribution in redshift, plotted as a function of zs (black line); it is this signal that can be used to reconstruct redshift distributions, for a simple toy model scenario (detailed in Matthews 2014). The cross-correlation signals that result from objects in the photometric sample being lensed by objects in a given spectroscopic redshift bin are shown as blue lines corresponding to different values of the faint-end Schechter function slope α. This signal is comparatively weak, as the lensing effect is null for the typical faint-end slope of α = −1. Finally, red curves show the signal resulting from comparatively bright spectroscopic objects being lensed by the photometric objects; this effect is much stronger as the density of bright galaxies drops exponentially with increasing luminosity, making counts at the bright end sensitive to lensing contamination. Figure reproduced with permission from Matthews (2014).
