# Neural Mechanisms of Prism Adaptation in Healthy Adults and Individuals with Spatial Neglect after Unilateral Stroke: A Review of fMRI Studies

CorpusID: 243927088 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd200199216b538965e10044705b231128a0acee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd200199216b538965e10044705b231128a0acee)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Among stroke survivors in the acute and subacute inpatient settings, approximately 30% have spatial neglect, which is more common after right than left brain damage (RBD and LBD, respectively) [1]. Spatial neglect can occur in individuals with other types of brain injury as well [2][3][4]. Spatial neglect is a neuropsychological syndrome that results from damage to the neural networks critical to the processing of spatial information and the control of attention [5,6]. The syndrome typically induces abnormal bias toward the space ipsilateral to the injured cerebral hemisphere, and hence, affected individuals pay insufficient or no attention to the contralesional side, which cannot be attributed to primary sensory or motor defects [7,8]. Symptoms of spatial neglect can be observed across domains (perception, representation, memory, movement planning, and motor control) and perceptual modalities (visual, auditory, tactile, proprioceptive) [9][10][11][12].

(p0.1) Spatial neglect has a significant clinical impact as it hinders rehabilitation progress and outcomes [13][14][15][16]. Prism adaptation treatment (PAT) is one of the interventions that can reduce symptoms of spatial neglect and improve functional outcomes [17,18]. However, the results of randomized sham-controlled trials in stroke patients are mixed with respect to unequivocal benefits of this treatment for all stroke patients [19][20][21][22][23]. It is unknown what determines the short-term beneficial effects and long-term therapeutic effects of PAT. In this article, we reviewed theoretical accounts for PAT mechanisms, conducted a series of
## (s4) Neural Mechanisms of Prism Adaptation (PA)
(p4.0) PA is a sensorimotor phenomenon achieved through two hypothetical stages of recalibration and realignment. Recalibration reflects the strategic adjustment of spatially coded movement commands aimed at rapidly reducing reaching errors, whereas realignment is a slower process of progressive remapping between visual and proprioceptive coordinate frames [49]. The neural bases of PA and its two stages have been studied in individuals with spatial neglect and in healthy participants using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). However, the findings are inconclusive. The paradigms used in these studies and their findings vary. For example, studies differed with respect to the types of prism goggles used during PA (neutral, leftward, or rightward deviating prisms, 5-20 • shift of visual angle) and the nature of the pointing movement (e.g., finger pointing, laser pointing, or imaginary finger pointing), as well as at what timepoint brain activity was recorded (before, after, or during PA) and in which participants (healthy controls or stroke patients). Some studies in healthy individuals implicate the parietal cortex playing a key role in recalibration during the early phase of PA and the cerebellum in realignment of coordinate systems during the later phase of PA [50,51]. In contrast, some studies suggest the involvement of both the cerebellum and the posterior parietal areas in all phases of PA [51][52][53], with possible sub-specialization of parts of the cerebellum and parietal cortex (e.g., lobule VIII, IX involved in early strategic learning; lobule VI involved in later realignment) [53].
## (s5) Present Study
(p5.0) Based on the currently available evidence, we hypothesize that PA in healthy individuals relies on the right posterior parietal areas and bilateral cerebellum, with potentially different parts of the cerebellum engaged by early strategic recalibration and later progressive realignment of sensorimotor systems. Furthermore, among patients with spatial neglect, PA effects are hypothetically associated with one of two previously proposed processes: (1) a shift of hemispheric dominance within the ventral attentional system, which would restore the ventral attentional input to the dorsal attentional system via the intact contralesional occipito-temporal and inferior parietal cortex [57] or (2) an adjustment of the common reference frame for coordinated systems supported by parieto-cerebellar circuitry which serves to compensate for the failure of strategic setting of spatial parameters [58]. The aims of the present study were to examine the hypotheses stated above through a systematic evaluation of the published fMRI studies and to refine the theoretical framework for PA and PAT.
## (s6) Materials and Methods
(p6.0) We performed a scoping review and meta-analysis of the available literature on the neural bases of PA and PAT using fMRI. A PubMed search of "fMRI" and "prism adaptation" yielded a total of 50 published papers. We considered fMRI activation studies for cluster-based meta-analyses and resting state functional connectivity studies (rsFC) for qualitative review. The reason for excluding rsFC studies from the meta-analysis was that rsFC studies consider connectivity among pairs of brain regions or voxels, and thus, it was not possible to evaluate these studies using a cluster-based approach. Upon abstract review, 10 fMRI activation studies and 4 rsFC studies were selected. Following full text review, we eliminated 2 studies due to not having fMRI data or reviewing findings published elsewhere. Three additional fMRI studies were identified during the process of full text review. Each author conducted quality assessment of the included studies.

(p6.1) A meta-analysis was performed on fMRI studies that shared common factors (e.g., participant population) if the number of studies was 2 or greater. For studies that did not meet this criterion, a comprehensive review of the studies was performed. We planned to conduct 4 cluster-based meta-analyses: (1) PA effects (pre-PA vs. post-PA) in healthy neurotypical participants (or healthy controls; HC), (2) PA effects in RBD patients, (3) PA mechanisms in HC using in-scanner PA, and (4) PA effects in LBD patients. In addition, we conducted 4 exploratory meta-analyses to study the neural correlates of PA separately for right deviating and left deviating prism goggles. A study could provide data in more than one category. Activation coordinates were extracted for each contrast related to prism exposure (pre > post) and to different PA phases (early vs. late). Whenever coordinates were not available from a published paper, we reached out to the corresponding author and requested them. A full list of activation coordinates is provided in the Supplementary Materials. All foci not already in the Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space were converted and submitted for analysis using the Brainmap GingerALE software version 3.0.2 [59,60]. A voxelwise thresholding of activation likelihood maps using family wise error (FWE) rate of 0.01 and 1000 permutations were used. The minimal cluster size threshold was set at 200 mm 3 .
## (s11) Meta-Analysis 3: Progressive Change in Brain Activity during PA in HC
(p11.0) Four studies were included [50,51,53,64]. The meta-analysis included 39 foci from 12 contrasts and 156 participants (50 unique individuals participating in repeated-measures experiments). The meta-analysis identified two significant clusters of activation. The first cluster was in the right cerebellum, with a peak coordinate centered on x = 18, y = −66, z = −36 (z = 6.58, p < 0.01 FWE, cluster size = 392 mm 3 ) (see Figure 2). The studies contributing to this cluster indicated that this cluster was active during both early and late PA but more active during the earlier period of PA [53]. The second cluster was found in the right inferior parietal lobule (IPL, BA 40), with a peak coordinate centered on x = 42, y = −50, z = 46 (z = 6.37, p < 0.01 FWE, cluster size = 264 mm 3 ). The studies contributing to this cluster indicated that this cluster was active during both the early and the late phases of PA but was significantly more active during the later phase (e.g., [51]). Like in Meta-Analysis 1, we conducted two additional exploratory meta-analyses using the strict statistical threshold to separate the effects of rightward compared to leftward PA. Our results qualified the findings of the overall meta-analysis, suggesting that a large activation cluster in the right anterior cerebellum (peak coordinate centered on x = 18, y = −66, z = −36, z = 7.00, p < 0.01 FWE, cluster size = 584 mm 3 ) was primarily linked with rightward PA, while an activation cluster in the right inferior parietal lobe (peak coordinate centered on x = 42, y = −50, z = 46, z = 7.04, p < 0.05 FWE, cluster size = 264 mm 3 ) was primarily linked with leftward PA.
## (s12) PA Effects in LBD Patients
(p12.0) Only one study considered in this review examined the effects of PA among LBD patients with right-sided neglect [61]. The study examined brain activity in the right hemisphere. In nine LBD patients, who performed an in-scanner visual detection task with left, center, and right targets, before and after wearing 10 • leftward shifting prisms, a decrease in activation was observed when the stimuli were presented centrally and, in the left, non-neglected visual field. This decrease was found in four right hemisphere clusters, including (1) posterior middle and inferior temporal gyri (MTG, ITG) extending to IOG and middle occipital gyrus (MOG), (2) temporal pole, (3) the insula, and (4) a small cluster in the angular gyrus. The study also included 14 HC, in whom PA produced an increase in IPL activation to right stimuli, and a decrease in temporal and prefrontal pole activation to center and right stimuli. The differences in activation between stroke and healthy participants were not compared statistically.
## (s13) Resting State Functional Connectivity (rsFC) fMRI Studies
(p13.0) The four rsFC studies (Table 2) were reviewed qualitatively [56,[65][66][67]. These four published studies had three HC cohorts, asked different questions (rightward PA vs. control; rightward vs. leftward PA; before vs. after rightward PA), and used different connectivity analysis techniques (e.g., global connectivity, seed-based connectivity, correlation of connectivity strength with behavioral data). Studies employing seed-based functional connectivity analyses used bilateral intraparietal sulci (IPS), frontal eye fields (FEF), primary motor cortex (M1), cerebellum, left IPL, medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC), or anterior insula (aIns) as seeds. Decreased connectivity was observed between the parietal seeds (IPS, left IPL) and bilateral superior temporal and inferior frontal cortices following PA, between the parietal seeds and bilateral cerebellum (following right PA) and additionally between the parietal seeds and right middle frontal, superior, and inferior parietal cortex following leftward PA (See Table 2). Similarly, connectivity of frontal seeds (FEF, mPFC) with IPS, right superior temporal sulcus (STS), left middle and right inferior frontal, left superior parietal areas and aIns decreased following PA. Conversely, connectivity of the frontal seeds with anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) transitively increased following PA. Increased connectivity was also found between bilateral M1 seeds. IPS also increased connectivity with bilateral IPL and right middle frontal gyrus (MFG) following rightward PA. Thus, fronto-parietal connectivity decreased after PA, with one exception of increased IPS to IPL and MFG connectivity after rightward PA. Connectivity strength increased following PA within the motor cortex and between parietal seeds and the limbic cortex. • Second fMRI, one hour after PA, allowed evaluating the duration of connectivity changes Weakness:

(p13.1) • Narrow field of view (four slices) • Analyses limited to connectivity between specific, pre-determined seeds • Instructions to participants in scanner were not described • Both global and seed-based connectivity changes were considered Weakness:

(p13.2) • Seed-based connectivity analysis only considered seeds significant in the global connectivity analysis, which may create inflated effects • No direct comparison between the PA and control groups in rs-fMRI analyses
## (s14) Discussion
(p14.0) PAT is an effective treatment for functional disabilities induced by spatial neglect [68]. However, despite ample evidence for PAT effectiveness, about 25% of studies fail to show the beneficial effects of PAT on daily function in individual participants with spatial neglect [17]. This conundrum is yet to be explained, as we do not fully understand the neural mechanisms underlying PAT responsiveness. Without such knowledge, our ability to maximize treatment effectiveness remains limited. In this review, we sought to elucidate the potential neuro-rehabilitative mechanisms of PAT by analyzing the currently available evidence for the neural mechanisms supporting PA. We employed qualitative and quantitative analytic approaches to determine what brain areas and brain networks become engaged before, during, and after PA, as evidenced by task-based and resting state fMRI studies in healthy adults and stroke patients with spatial neglect after unilateral brain damage. Our findings suggest that areas engaged during PA only partly overlap with areas that become more activated after PA. Moreover, the areas supporting PA effects among healthy controls differ from those among stroke patients, and the neural correlates of PA effects differ between RBD and LBD patients. While activity in most PA-supporting regions increases, rsFC among those regions predominantly decreases following PA. We review these findings below and conclude with a theoretical framework for interpreting these results in the context of what is known about oculomotor and attention networks.
## (s17) Brain Activity during Prism Adaptation
(p17.0) Meta-Analysis 3 included some of the earliest landmark PA fMRI studies [50,51,53,64], which showed a circumscribed set of areas involved in online PA (Table 1). These areas include PPC, superior temporal cortex, and the cerebellum. While the superior temporal cortex is thought to support the transfer of PA effects to other cognitive domains as discussed earlier [51], there is some disagreement between the studies with respect to the specific role that PPC and the cerebellum play in PA. For example, Luauté et al. [50] reported that anterior IPL/IPS were engaged in the early phase of PA for recalibration, whereas cerebellum lobules IV and V were involved in the later phase of PA for the process of realignment. In contrast, Chapman et al. [51] implicated right angular gyrus in realignment, and Küper et al. [53] found that posterior cerebellum lobules VIII and IX were important for recalibration, whereas lobule VI was involved in realignment. Together, these studies had one thing in common: They had a relatively small number (<25) of visuomotor movements during PA in the scanner as compared to studies having PA outside the scanner (>50). As a result, the network of brain areas identified in these studies [50,51,53,64] is likely weighted toward earlier prism exposure effects. Thus, the results of Meta-Analysis 3 suggest that in healthy adults, PPC and the cerebellum play significant roles during PA, potentially, the early phase of PA ( Figure 2). Specifically, among individuals who experience leftward PA (rightward after-effects), the mismatch between the visual input about target location and target-directed movement triggers rapid online correction of pointing errors and slower learning-based recalibration of visuomotor connectivity. Both processes are initially supported by the posterior cerebellum and involve cerebellar-parietal connectivity. Cerebellar activation subsides toward a later part of early PA, and recalibration is finalized through activity in the right IPL.
## (s18) Neural Mechanisms of Prism Adaptation in Patients with Unilateral Stroke
(p18.0) Post-stroke visuospatial deficits are associated with decreased connectivity of the ventral and dorsal fronto-parietal and temporal networks [6,46,48,72]. In contrast, increased functional connectivity and task-related activation of these networks is strongly coupled with spatial neglect recovery [47,73,74]. Much less understood are the neural bases of recovery associated with PAT (e.g., a treatment course of multiple sessions of PA) or the lack of improved outcomes at the deficit or functional level. There are mixed results in studies using similar protocols, e.g., 20-diopter lenses, one session a day for 10 sessions over two weeks [20][21][22]75]. Studies that doubled the sessions per day found positive effects in improving neglect [76] and rehabilitation outcomes [19]. Other trials reduced the course duration, such as one session a day over 4 days [77], or spaced out sessions, such as one to two sessions over 7-12 days [78], and improvements were limited on some but not all neuropsychological tests. Nonetheless, there is no prospective study looking into the neural mechanisms underlying PAT effects after a different number of sessions. Thus, we remain unable to determine the neural bases of recovery associated with PAT. However, growing evidence using different brain imaging and stimulation techniques offers credible hypotheses.
