# Molecular Sciences High Molecular Weight Kininogen: A Review of the Structural Literature

CorpusID: 245211283 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45a2bb2bb59b58215cd41c564a67f2ca26a095dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45a2bb2bb59b58215cd41c564a67f2ca26a095dc)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Kininogens or Fitzgerald factors are multidomain glycoproteins found in the blood of most vertebrates [1][2][3][4]. The orthological proteins (kininogen-1, UniProt ID: P01042 for human) are produced by splicing of the KNG1 gene transcript. High molecular weight kininogen (HK) is one of the members of the kallikrein-Kinin system (KKS). Together with coagulation factor (f)XI, the KKS form the contact activation system of blood coagulation (CAS) or more commonly known as the intrinsic pathway of coagulation contributing to thrombin generation primarily under pathologic conditions. CAS can operate independently from the tissue factor (TF) extrinsic pathway ( Figure 1). As a class, kininogens have been studied for decades, nonetheless, the atomic arrangement of full length kininogen or its fragments are still unknown for all species with no coordinates in Protein Data Bank (PDB). A protein Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BlastP) applied with human kininogen amino acid sequence against PDB returns only proteins containing homologous cystatin domains with identity around 30% (Table 1).  Moreover, entering the keyword "kininogen" in the database search engine returns only structures containing polypeptide fragments referred to as "inserts of kininogen peptides", "peptides derived from kininogen" or bradykinin (BK) derived peptides (Table 2). The purpose of this review article is to summarize the finding of structural studies that involve kininogens and emphasize how a good-quality spatial structure would allow for a better understanding of their role in disease and as therapeutic targets.
## (s1) HK Biochemical and Evolutionary Characterization
(p1.0) The human high molecular weight kininogen (huHK) is a 626 amino acid glycoprotein (devoid of signal peptide). The molecular mass is only 70 kDa, but because it undergoes numerous post-translational modifications, the real mass is much higher and it run~120 KDa on SDS-PAGE under non-reducing conditions [1][2][3][4]. huHK circulates in plasma at a concentration of approximately 70 µg/mL. The protein is mostly expressed by hepatocytes and secreted into the blood. huHK theoretical isoelectric point based on amino acid sequence was calculated using Compute pI/Mw tool (https://web.expasy.org/compute_pi/, accessed on 29 October 2021) to be 6.23, however the experimental reported pI is 4.9 ± 0.2 because of high sialic acid content. The sialic acid constitutes almost 42% of HK molecular mass content. A highly purified human kininogen has been established to be about 8.6 mol/mol (50 kDa) [5]. This explains the discrepancy between the theoretical mass from the amino acid sequence and the experimental values of HK weight.
## (s2) The Importance of Kininogen in Civilization and Infectious Diseases
(p2.0) HK significance, beyond physiological BK production, is participation in thrombotic disorders as it participates as cofactor for the contact activation system on many negatively charged surfaces (e.g., silica, nucleic acids, polyphosphates of different origins, misfolded proteins, collagen, bacteria, or viruses). Thrombosis and embolism are significant problems connected to civilization diseases related to the circulatory system where the role of HK should not be neglected. Thrombotic complications and coagulation disorders appear frequently secondary to infections with various pathogens where contact activation is triggered. BK released from HK during either contact activation or as part of the KKS contribute to the pathology of many inflammatory diseases like hereditary angioedema. Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 the virus causing COVID-19 pandemic is known to bind Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2 (ACE2). Such binding increases BK release which promotes inflammation in the lungs, causing cough and fever, as well as further activation of the coagulation and the complement system. Emerging thrombotic complications associated with COVID-19 infection and reports of post-vaccination thrombotic reactions indicate the need to investigate the relationship within the hemostatic system, including contact factors [44,45]. Understanding the structure of HK is important for a better understanding of the changes and processes it undergoes not only in physiological state, but pathological situations like thrombotic disorders accompanying various civilization and infectious diseases, with the activation of the immune system, inflammation, and coagulation.
## (s3) Literature Describing the Structure of Kininogen
(p3.0) Although images of huHK were made many years ago by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using various negative staining techniques, they do not shed much light on the actual shape of the kininogen [3,13,14]. In the oldest work by Weisel et al. (1994) [3], where TEM images of human kininogen were taken, the samples were applied to a substrate from mica with tungsten shading and an 80 kV Philips 400 microscope was used to obtain pictures at 60,000× magnification. Using the scale provided by the authors, 3 domains of the kininogen seem to have a total of 130-180 Å, while one domain was 50-90 Å. In this work, together with HK images, IgG antibodies (mass~150 kDa, length 100-150 Å) were visualized in some figures. Based on these data (Supplementary Figure S2), it can be calculated that the length of the antibody is about 150 Å, and the kininogen associated with this antibody is~180 Å long. Perhaps what the authors of this study showed were not individual kininogen molecules, but rather their aggregates, where a single domain is actually one kininogen molecule.

(p3.1) In 2001, Herwald et al. (2001) [44] used 5 µL of sample with a concentration of 5-19 µg per mL in 50 mM Tris. HCl, pH 7.4 buffer plus 150 mM NaCl to carry negative stain imaging on a glow discharged carbon-coated copper grids using JEOL 1200 EX 60 kV transmission electron microscope. In this work, according to the scale given in some figures, the cation-free (EDTA treated) or Mg 2+ treated protein molecules have estimated dimensions of 95 ± 30 Å (width) and 150 ± 30 Å (length) (Supplementary Figure S3A-C) with two larger domains (55 ± 20 Å) and three smaller domains (35 ± 20 Å) of 130-150 Å, and the substructure (subdomain) were visible. In the presence of Zn 2+ ions, the protein was more spherical and compact, with the dimensions reduced to 90 ± 30 Å (width) and 110 ± 30 Å (length) (Supplementary Figure S3D).

(p3.2) In 2009, Oehmcke, Mörgelin, and Herwald reported TEM images of HK [45], and according to the image scale (Supplementary Figure S4), the molecule should have only about 45 Å diameter. The internal structures corresponding to five to six domains were visible in those images. The dimensions of a given domain are only 15-20 Å. The authors did not describe the TEM methodology in the paper but referred to an earlier work by the group [44], and they did not provide numerical dimensions. In this study, the scale appears to underestimate the results and is not in agreement with previous reports.

(p3.3) In conclusion, based on the available literature with published TEM results of kininogen, there is no clarity and consistency as to the size of this molecule and its domains. This underscores the need for microscopic examination using more modern techniques than those from more than a decade ago.

(p3.4) The failure to publish the structure of HK may be due to the difficulty of its crystallization even in parts and inability to use the NMR technique, as the protein is too large. Unfortunately, all classic structure prediction methods, based on homology, threading, and de novo (ab initio), have failed. In the first two cases, it was due to the lack of appropriate, similar enough templates, and in the last, it was due to the huge size of this protein. did not describe the TEM methodology in the paper but referred to an earlier work by the group [44], and they did not provide numerical dimensions. In this study, the scale appears to underestimate the results and is not in agreement with previous reports.

(p3.5) In conclusion, based on the available literature with published TEM results of kininogen, there is no clarity and consistency as to the size of this molecule and its domains. This underscores the need for microscopic examination using more modern techniques than those from more than a decade ago.

(p3.6) The failure to publish the structure of HK may be due to the difficulty of its crystallization even in parts and inability to use the NMR technique, as the protein is too large. Unfortunately, all classic structure prediction methods, based on homology, threading, and de novo (ab initio), have failed. In the first two cases, it was due to the lack of appropriate, similar enough templates, and in the last, it was due to the huge size of this protein.
