# Potential therapeutic effect of Shufeng Jiedu capsule and its major herbs on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): A review

CorpusID: 245582870 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/13e633fc63aa4f94894f3f1794b1392f0e83f703)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Chemical composition of SFJDC
(p1.0) The primary analytical approach implemented in phytochemical studies includes the separation and identification of active components, which is crucial for the modernization of traditional Chinese medicine. Recently, ultra-performance chromatography (UPLC/ Q-TOF) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS) methods have been established to characterize the chemical profile of extracts from SFJDC. A total of 94 compounds, including 1 carbohydrate, 7 amino acids, 1 coumarin, 11 phenylethanoid glycosides, 4 phenolic acids, 5 plant lignins, 25 flavonoids, 6 anthraquinones, 5 alkaloids, 18 triterpenoid saponins, 1 iridoid, and 7 glycosides were tentatively identified (8). The identification of these components may serve as a foundation for future studies on the pharmacological effects of SFJDC.
## (s3) Bupleurum chinense
(p3.0) Bupleurum chinense is a perennial herb belonging to the Umbelliferae family (9). Bupleurum chinense is widely used in TCM because of its multiple pharmacological effects. In TCM, Radix Bupleuri, the dried root of Bupleurum chinense, has been employed for more than two thousand years in China (10). According to modern pharmacological studies, Radix Bupleuri possesses a wide range of bioactive properties, including antipyretic, antiinflammatory, hepatoprotective, antibacterial, antiviral, immune regulation, and antiplatelet agglutination functions (11). Among the complex constituents of Radix Bupleuri, saikosaponins have been identified as the major biologically active constituents using modern techniques (12).  pharmacological activities, such as anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, antioxidant, antiulcer, hepatoprogenic, and neuroprotective activities (25)(26)(27).
## (s5) Isatis indigotica
(p5.0) Isatis indigotica is a biennial herbaceous plant belonging to the Cruciferae family (28). Isatis indigotica is distributed across China, and Radix Isatidis, the dried roots of Isatis indigotica, are widely employed in the prevention and treatment of a wide range of viral infections, including fever, influenza, epidemic hepatitis, and bacterial infection for thousands of years (29). Based on recent clinical data, Radix Isatidis has clinical effects on severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and H1N1-influenza (30,31). Numerous phytochemical studies have led to the isolation of valuable bioactive compounds, such as alkaloids, phenolic compounds, polysaccharides, glucosinolates, carotenoids, volatile constituents, and fatty acids, among which alkaloids are the dominant compounds (29). Owing to numerous studies, these ingredients have been identified to have antiviral, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects (32-34).
## (s6) Patrinia scabiosaefolia
(p6.0) Patrinia scabiosaefolia is a herbaceous perennial plant belonging to the Valerianaceae family. Patrinia scabiosaefolia is a Chinese herbal medicine with high nutritional and medicinal value, and is mainly distributed in mainland China (35). Modern pharmacological studies have shown that Patrinia scabiosaefolia has various effects, including anti-cancer, anti-inflammatory, anti-pathogenic, anti-oxidation, sedation, and hypnosis (36). According to previous phytochemical investigations, this genus contains a variety of components, including triterpenes, iridoids, saponins, sesquiterpenes, flavonoids, coumarins, and lignans (37). Among them, triterpenoid aglycones and triterpenoid saponins are considered the main active constituents of Patrinia scabiosaefolia (36). Typical representatives of triterpenoid aglycones in Patrinia scabiosaefolia include ursolic acid, hederagenin, and oleanolic acid.
## (s7) Phragmites australis
(p7.0) Phragmites australis is a species belonging to the family, Poaceae (38). Phragmites australis found in wetlands throughout the temperate and tropical regions of the world. The root of Phragmites australis is used as a perennial Chinese herbal medicine (39) and the rhizoma of Phragmites australis has been used clinically for patients with pulmonary diseases throughout the long history of TCM use (40). The roots of Phragmites australis have been reported to have a
## (s8) Fallopia japonica
(p8.0) Fallopia japonica is a perennial herb belonging to the Polygonaceae family (13). Fallopia japonica, a traditional Chinese medicinal herb, is widely distributed in southern China and Japan. According to numerous studies, the root of Fallopia japonica has a wide range of pharmacological activities, including lipidregulating, anti-shock, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anticancer, hepatoprotective, antiviral, antibacterial, and antifungal effects (14)(15)(16). More than 67 chemical compounds have been isolated from Fallopia japonica, and its major components have been determined to be quinones, stilbenes, flavonoids, counmarins, and ligans (13). Among the chemical compounds, resveratrol, piceid, and emodin have been found to exhibit various biological activities. Resveratrol and piceid have been shown to possess antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, anti-aging, and cardioprotective properties (17). Emodin has been shown to exert anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, and antineoplastic activities (18-20).
## (s9) Forsythia suspensa
(p9.0) Forsythia suspensa is a flowering plant belonging to the Oleaceae family (21). Forsythia suspensa is widely distributed in China, Southeast Asia, and many European countries (22). Fructus Forsythiae, the seeds of Forsythia suspensa, exhibits high pharmacological activity and is documented in every edition of the Chinese Pharmacopoeia. In fact, a total of 114 Chinese medicinal preparations containing Fructus Forsythiae are listed in the 2015 edition of the Chinese Pharmacopoeia. Based on modern pharmacological studies, Fructus Forsythiae exerts anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anti-bacterial, anti-cancer, anti-viral, anti-allergy, and neuroprotective effects (23). To date, approximately 210 compounds have been identified from Forsythia suspensa, including phenylethanoid glycosides, lignans, flavonoids, phenolic acids, terpenoids, cyclohexylethanol derivatives, and others (23). Among them, lignans and phenylethanoid glycosides, such as forsythiaside, phillyrin, rutin, and phillygenin, are considered the characteristic and active constituents of this herb (23).
## (s10) Glycyrrhiza uralensis
(p10.0) Glycyrrhiza uralensis is a medicinal herb that belongs to the Leguminaceae family (24). Glycyrrhiza uralensis is found in southern Europe (Glycyrrhiza glabra) and East Asia (Glycyrrhiza uralensis), and has been used for traditional medicinal purposes for almost two thousand years (24). According to phytochemical studies, the main bioactive constituents of Glycyrrhiza uralensis are flavonoids and triterpenoid saponins, including licochalcone A, glycyrrhizic acid, isoliquiritigenin, liquiritigenin, and liquiritin, which exhibit a variety of wide range of pharmacological activities, including antiasthmatic, antiemetic, antipyretic, antitussive, depurative, diuretic, febrifuge, lithontriptic, sedative, sialogogue, and stomachic (39). Phytochemical investigations have proven that this genus is rich in terpenoids, flavonoids, coumarins, acetylenes, caffeoylquinic acids, sterols, and amylase (40).
## (s13) Potential therapeutic effect of SFJDC on COVID-19
(p13.0) Currently, SARS-CoV-2 infection and immune dysfunction are believed to be the two main factors driving the pathogenesis of COVID-19 (53). In the early course of infection, the manifestation of the disease is primarily driven by the replication cycle of SARS-CoV-2. In the late course of infection, the severity of the disease is driven by a remarkable inflammatory/immune response to the virus. Thus, the anti-viral and antiinflammatory/anti-oxidative capabilities and properties of SFJDC might act in tandem to improve the outcomes of infected patients. The potential therapeutic effects of SFJDC on SARS-CoV-2 are summarized in Figure 3. 
## (s15) Active ingredients of SFJDC with antiviral activity
(p15.0) The acetone extract of Radix Bupleuri (the dried roots of Bupleurum chinense) has been reported to exhibit a significant antiviral effect on acute respiratory tract infections with H1N1 virus infection, the mechanism of which may be related to its suppression of influenza A virus-induced regulation of activation normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES) secretion (55). Moreover, saikosaponins (a, b 2 , c, and d), the main active ingredient of Radix Bupleuri, exerted definitive antiviral activity against human coronavirus-229E by interfering with the early stage of viral replication, including absorption and penetration of the virus (56). These results suggest that Radix Bupleuri may have therapeutic benefits for the treatment of viral infectionassociated diseases.

(p15.1) Fallopia japonica and its active components, resveratrol and emodin, have been shown to suppress influenza virus replication in A549 cells (57). Moreover, they preferentially inhibit the replication of multiple subtypes of influenza A virus. Mechanistically, Fallopia japonica, emodin, and resveratrol could upregulate the expression of interferon beta (IFN-β) through Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) and downregulate the expression of hemagglutinin and neuraminidase (57). Additionally, the anti-viral activity of resveratrol was abolished when supplemented with neutralizing anti-IFN-β antibodies or a TLR9 inhibitor in A549 cells, indicating that resveratrol may inhibit influenza virus replication by acting synergistically with IFN-β.

(p15.2) Forsythoside A is a major active constituent of Forsythia suspensa fruits. The antiviral activity of forsythoside A was confirmed by infecting primary chicken embryo kidney cells with infectious bronchitis virus (IBV) infection. The results indicate that forsythoside A inhibited the replication of avian IBV infection in vitro in a dose-dependent manner (58).

(p15.3) Glycyrrhizin is an active component of Glycyrrhiza uralensis. High concentrations of glycyrrhizin (4,000 mg/L) have been demonstrated to completely block SARS-CoV-2 replication (59,60). Glycyrrhizin can also inhibit the adsorption and penetration of the virus (59).

(p15.4) Indirubin, a bisindole alkaloid, is the main active ingredient in Isatis indigotica. A previous study demonstrated that indirubin significantly decreased the susceptibility of restrained mice to influenza H1N1 virus owing to the lowered mortality and reduced viral replication in the lungs (31). Mechanistically, indirubin maintained the morphology and function of mitochondria following influenza A virus infection and enhanced IFN-β production by promoting the mitochondrial antiviral signaling pathway (31). 6.2. Potential anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities of SFJDC on the inflammatory/immune response to SARS-CoV-2
## (s16) Anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative activities of SFJDC
(p16.0) The anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties of SFJDC have been demonstrated in several studies. Some active compounds of SFJDC, including forsythiaside (61), vitexin (62), and emodin (63), have been reported to possess anti-inflammatory effects. Tao et al. used an LPS-induced ALI rat model to investigate the anti-inflammatory effect of SFJDC (64). Based on the results, SFJDC can alleviate LPS-induced stress injury and inhibit inflammation in lung tissue by suppressing the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)/nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) signaling pathway (64). Recently, target prediction and RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) based on transcriptome analysis have been used to clarify the inflammation-eliminating mechanism of SFJDC (65). According to the results, various ingredients of SFJDC, especially verbenalin, phillyrin, and emodin, could ameliorate Pseudomonas aeruginosa-induced acute lung injury, among which the extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK) pathway was identified as a key pathway related to its anti-inflammatory effect (65). Similarly, airway inflammation and lung injury in IAV-infected rats could be controlled by the combination of SFJDC and oseltamivir by modulating the nucleotidebinding oligomerization domain (NOD)-like receptors containing pyrin domain 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome and subsequently downregulating interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and IL-18 levels (54).
## (s18) Network pharmacology tools to analyze the mechanism of SFJDC prevention and treatment of COVID-19
(p18.0) More recently, to identify new candidates with potential activity against SARS-CoV-2 viral targets, several studies employed computer modeling to explore the mechanism of SFJDC using network pharmacology and molecular docking technology. In this section, the active ingredients of SFJDC for the treatment of COVID-19 were predicted by network pharmacology methods, including quercetin, resveratrol, emodin, and phillyrin.

(p18.1) Among the viral proteins of SARS-CoV-2, 3C-like protease (3CLpro), a protease highly conserved among coronaviruses, is an attractive target for antiviral inhibitors owing to its indispensable role in viral replication and gene expression of viral proteins (78). Thus, molecules that can inhibit SARS-CoV-2 3CLpro would hinder viral replication and represent appropriate candidates for the development of low-toxicity drugs against this devastating pathogen. Quercetin has been reported to interact with 3CLpro using biophysical techniques and bind to the active site in molecular simulations (79). In particular, the study revealed a significant inhibition by quercetin of 3CLpro with a docking binding energy corresponding to -6.25 kcal/ mol (79). Consistently, protein-chemical interactions suggest quercetin is a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 and other SARS-like viral infections (80).

(p18.2) Recently, network pharmacology and bioinformatics analysis were conducted to uncover the pharmacological mechanisms of resveratrol against COVID-19 (81). A significant overlap in geneontology (GO) terms and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways was found between SFJDC targets and SARS-CoV-2 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (81). The shared targets were highly enriched in inflammationrelated pathways, including the IL-17 signaling pathway, NF-κB signaling pathway, and TNF signaling pathway (81). Resveratrol has also been suggested to be a promising drug candidate against COVID-19 through protein-chemical interactions (80). Collectively, these studies revealed that resveratrol is a promising therapeutic candidate for COVID-19 and highlighted the probable key targets and pathways involved.
