# THE IMPACT OF KEY AUDIT MATTERS DISCLOSURE ON COMMUNICATIVE VALUE OF THE AUDITOR'S REPORT: A SYSTEMATIC LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 243965245 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cede87e2ca349d38b972ae7ecf305bd877bcb32](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cede87e2ca349d38b972ae7ecf305bd877bcb32)

Fields: Business, Law

## (s1) METHODOLOGY
(p1.0) This study filtered articles through several stages, from determining search terms, the database to be used for searching, and criteria for selecting papers that would be excluded/included (Snyder 2019). In the first stage, we determined the search terms/keywords being searched on the specified database. According to Snyder (2019), search terms should be based on words and concepts that are directly related to the research question. Therefore, to find articles relevant to the research questions, we employed the following keyword: "key audit matters" and "communicative value". The search databases used were Google Scholar and Web of Science. Google Scholar was used due to its capacity to identify highly-cited documents effectively (Martin-Martin et al. 2017). Furthermore, Martin-Martin et al. (2017) stated that it has a broad search scope without limiting the type and source of search results documents. Moreover, Google Scholar can also be used as the first choice and is sufficient to serve as the sole source for conducting systematic review (Jean-Francois et al. 2013). Ginieis et al. (2012) also use Google Scholar, which is open access, as one of the databases in his systematic literature review research.

(p1.1) This research decided to include only articles that were published between 2012 and 2020. 2012 was determined as the limitation because in that year, the IAASB began to disseminate the Invitation to Comment: Improving Auditor's Report in which the term key audit matters" was introduced in June 2012 to solicit responses from stakeholders. Furthermore, in 2013 the IAASB has disseminated the Exposure Draft of ISA 701 on Communicating Key Audit Matters in the Independent Auditor's Report. Therefore, research related to key audit matters may have been started in 2012. While the determination of the end of 2020 is intended to obtain the latest relevant articles. Based on the search criteria, 197 articles were obtained (October 30, 2020). The search pairing KAM with communicative value in Indonesianlanguage keywords i.e.: "key audit matters" and "nilai komunikatif"; "hal audit utama" and "nilai komunikatif"; or "hal audit utama" and "communicative value" did not generate any articles (October 30, 2020). It indicated that there was no research yet conducted in the Indonesian language or Indonesia-related topic.

(p1.2) In the second stage, having collected 197 articles, screening was conducted according to the article's title and/or abstract. The purpose was to determine the English-language articles that discussed key audit matters and/or communicative value so that they did not only contain the phrase "key audit matters" and/or " communicative value" in the article and/or reference section. Based on these criteria, this stage generates 91 articles.
