# Overview of the advantages and limitations of maize-soybean intercropping in sustainable agriculture and future prospects: A review

CorpusID: 247457505 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4b3590ca630131ed8709bf14c587a3c8059679b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a4b3590ca630131ed8709bf14c587a3c8059679b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Intercropping is an agricultural technique used to grow two or more different crops in alternate rows on a given plot of farmland at the same time during their growing season or in a growing period (Lithourgidis et al., 2011;Mousavi and Eskandari, 2011;Federer, 2012). A tall crop is often intercropped with a short crop in this farming system (Oseni, 2010;Undie et al., 2012), such as intercropping a legume and cereal (Undie et al., 2012).
## (s3) Mixed intercropping
(p3.0) This type of intercropping involves growing multiple crops all at once with no definite row layout ( Figure 2). This method of intercropping is widespread in labor-intensive subsistence farming and is suitable for grass-legume intercropping in pastures (Ofori and Stern, 1987;Maitra et al., 2019). Studies using totally mixed intercropping have been reported to raise farmer income, improve diversity and ecosystem functions, alter soil biota, protect and improve soil quality, match feed preferences and cultural expectations, and increase variety and ecosystem functions (Finn et al., 2013;Duchene et al., 2017;Bi et al., 2019). In addition, mixed intercropping has been linked to various ecological benefits such as enhanced resource use in total niche space (niche differentiation), positive interspecific interactions, diversification effects, and collection effects (Bi et al., 2019).
## (s8) Effects of pests, disease, and weed management on intercropping
(p8.0) Pests, disease, and weeds stifle productivity in MSI, causing high larval density at an early stage, particularly in maize monocropping. This is evidenced by its tunneled stem and broken cobs, thus reducing maize yield. Therefore, pesticides and herbicides have been used, but they have produced harmful effects on the environment and human health (Paoletti and Pimentel, 2000). Research aimed at reducing the impact of weeds, pests, and illnesses has gained momentum (Ramert et al., 2002;Mousavi and Eskandari, 2011;Iqbal et al., 2019).
## (s13) LIMITATIONS OF MAIZE-SOYBEAN INTERCROPPING
(p13.0) Intercropping has several drawbacks, including a restriction in the use of machinery for seeding, weeding, and harvesting. It is difficult to manage individual crops in intercropping, for example, fertilizer management and herbicide use to contain weeds. Intercropping also needs more labor per unit area, and it can decrease the production of each crop if not effectively managed (Aye and Howeler, 2012).
## (s15) Effect on plants
(p15.0) Regarding the performance of maize functioning and the plant as a whole, MSI has increased plant height, stem, chlorophyll content, fodder production, and grain yield (Ren et al., 2017;Zaeem et al., 2019). On the contrary, MSI using different spatial patterns frequently results in different shade and light environments above the soybean canopy, which directly affects soybean leaf structure (anatomic) and photosynthetic fluorescence properties . The light environment of the lower soybean plant is affected by the deficiency in the quantity and quality of light caused by shade from the taller maize plant. This could result in variations in internode length, plant height, leaf diameter, and branching in the soybean crop, and growth variations in LUE, growth rate, harvest index (Liu et al., 2017a), and grain yield (Ren et al., 2017). A study by Nawar et al. (2020), in which sunflower was intercropped with soybean, showed that the shading effect caused by the development of the sunflower canopy resulted in an unfavorable growth environment around the soybean plants, which enhanced some hormonal activity and led to more node formation and stem elongation. Stem elongation was reported as one of the mechanisms used by plants to increase their ability to capture more solar radiation. On the long run, this decreases the stem diameter of soybean and reduces its ability to resist lodging. Liu et al. (2017a) found that poor light intensity caused soybean growth to slow down, resulting in smaller leaf size and stem circumference and leading to decreased soybean production in MSI. These soybean-related restrictions are obviously linked to maize canopy development (Chui and Shibles, 1984;Liu et al., 2017a). In addition, maize shade affects the stem circumference of soybean and lowers its lodging susceptibility (Liu et al., 2016;Raza et al., 2019a;Cheng et al., 2020). Low PAR and the ratio of red light to far red light, which decreased because of the maize canopy, also produce soybean stem vining in maize-soybean relay strip intercropping. This results in a long, thin stem with less lodging resistance (Liu et al., 2015;Hussain et al., 2019).
## (s16) Effect on soil
(p16.0) Intercropping is a successful and attractive method to promote soil health and quality, yield, fertilizer use efficiency, and long-term agricultural production (Fu et al., 2019;Zaeem et al., 2019). The soil nutrient balance and active microbial communities can be used to analyze data concerning soil health. An experiment conducted in the cool environment of the boreal ecosystem (Zaeem et al., 2019) discovered that silage maize planted with forage soybean were suitable to increase forage cultivation. When cultivated on Podzols in a cool temperature boreal habitat, this is accomplished through enhancing active biological processes, rhizosphere soil acid phosphatase activity, and accessible P. Zaeem et al. (2019) found that rhizosphere soil acid phosphatase activity was significantly (p < 0.05) higher, especially in the intercropping treatment compared with monocropping; this implies that intercropped maize planted on Podzols can use organic P more efficiently than monocropped maize. Fu et al. (2019) revealed that the N uptake of maize grain was superior in MSI than in maize monocropping. Moreover, Chen et al. (2017) stated that a maximum maize yield can be achieved even with limited soil N treatment with MSI. This is because maize is less competitive for soil N, allowing it to use more soil N for growth, whereas soybean relies on atmospheric nitrification (Fan et al., 2018).
## (s17) Effect on roots
(p17.0) Root growth is a major factor in MSI production. Stronger root development can explore a larger soil volume to adequately exploit the water resource in the soil profile and increase intercrop transpiration. Intercropping benefits the root density of maize. Ren et al. (2017) indicated that MSI increased root length density in both maize and soybean when compared to monocropping. Zhang et al. (2020) also found that intercropping improved the ability of maize root exudate to identify zoospores, inhibit zoospore motility, and decrease cystospore formation in a dosing system.

(p17.1) Fusarium root rot has been identified as one of the most devastating soil-borne infections that affects soybean growth and output, resulting in a significant economic loss (Arias et al., 2013;Chang et al., 2020). On the contrary, intercropping favors the impact on soil microbial populations, lessens pathogen attacks, and prevents soil-borne disease (Boudreau, 2013;Gao et al., 2014;Chang et al., 2020). Chang et al. (2020) also mentioned that intercropping maize-soybean relay strips decreases soybean root rot and modifies the variety and virulence of Fusarium species. As a result of maize-soybean relay strip intercropping, it was detected that F. fujikuroi, F. proliferatum, and F. verticillioides are mildly virulent (Chang et al., 2020). This suggests that intercropping maize and soybean is critical for reducing soybean root disease. It would also increase root formation in soybean, as evidenced by the root length density of intercropped soybean that is higher than in monocrops (Gao et al., 2010). Some of the advantages and disadvantages of intercropping are shown in Table 1.
## (s20) Plant
(p20.0) Soil Roots activity, acidification, competition-induced modifications of root architecture, exudation of growth-promoting chemicals, and bio fumigation, all of which can be quite useful to pursue research (Hauggaard-Nielsen and Jensen, 2005). Due to significant interspecific competition for plant growth components, these root-facilitating interactions are particularly important in nutrient-poor soils and low input agro-environments (Ehrmann and Ritz, 2014).
## (s21) Improved genetically modified breeds
(p21.0) In a typical intercropping system, maize provides shade for the shorter crop, which is soybean in this case. When grown in the shade, most soybean cultivars display stem elongation, lodging, and reduced leaf size, all of which result in lower yields (Liu et al., 2016). Most shade-sensitive soybean strains in a maize-soybean strip intercropping system exhibit stem elongation and lodging, which directly influence soybean yield according to several analyses (Liu et al., 2015). As a consequence of their shade-tolerant traits, a growing number of soybean landraces have been found. Several landraces are being used to breed cultivars for intercropping models in various regions worldwide, including China. Using a variety of semi-dwarf but high-yielding maize hybrids can also help reduce the shade effect on intercropped soybean (Gong et al., 2014). Semi-dwarf cultivars allow proximity planting, which reduces the differences in biomass and leaf area index among maize and soybean intercropping systems (Yang et al., 2014). The density of strip-crop intercropping is maximized when used with compact planting practices.
## (s22) Improved mechanized systems
(p22.0) Agricultural machinery for sowing, fertilizing, and harvesting can be designed or modified for numerous intercropping practices. A combination of seed drill and fertilizer drill for a typical maize-soybean strip intercropping system in the field is a good idea for future research. Using agricultural machines designed for this approach would considerably increase labor productivity. These ground-breaking advances in our modified intercropping strategy have the possibility to significantly increase soybean productivity in China and other developing countries (Du et al., 2018).
## (s23) Improved planting density and distance
(p23.0) Careful management of the planting density, which is controlled by the planting ratio and distance, can improve intercropping. This could be accomplished by designing the planting pattern in narrow and wide rows, which allows maize plants to grow in narrow rows and soybean plants to grow in wide rows all the while preserving the appropriate distance for soybean plants to receive adequate light for optimal growth and development. Designing an efficient intercropping planting setup with a maximum shade density ranging from 20% to 30% (Raza et al., 2019b) to increase the soybean crop seed production in an intercropping system could be a promising future research topic.

(p23.1) The compact maize 'Zhendan-958' has a smaller shade area, making it better for relay cropping. Compact type maize cultivars were found to be more useful to reinforce production, which help to create better light conditions for sweet potato development (Yulong et al., 2017).
