# A Review of Evolutionary Multi-objective Clustering Approaches

CorpusID: 247922834 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38e32086eb4cf4ca169d72643a590d5fae55f39e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38e32086eb4cf4ca169d72643a590d5fae55f39e)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Clustering is a type of unsupervised learning whose goal is to find the underlying structure composed of clusters (groups or categories) in which objects or observations belonging to each cluster should share some relevant property (similarity) regarding the data domain. Clustering analysis is widely adopted in different fields of application (e.g. marketing, medicine, bioinformatics) considering different research subjects, such as pattern analysis, decision making, data mining, and image segmentation [49,60].
## (s3) Clustering Validation
(p3.0) The clustering approaches are evaluated regarding Clustering Validity Indices (CVIs), which define how well a partition fits the structure underlying the data. There are three types of criteria [11]: relative, internal, and external.

(p3.1) Relative criteria are based on comparisons of partitions generated by the same algorithm with different parameters or different subsets of the data. Internal criteria refer to quality measures based on calculating properties of the resulting clusters, establishing the validity of a cluster-based exclusively on the dataset itself, for example, how much a cluster is justified by means of the proximity matrix. External criteria lie in prior knowledge of structures in the dataset to evaluate the given partitions generated by an algorithm in contrast with a model partition or labeled data, denominated True Partition 1 , provided by specialists. In Section 3.2.1, we detail the CVIs and their application in EMOC approaches.
## (s4) Performance in multi-objective optimization
(p4.0) There are a variety of quality indicators applied to MOO, as presented in [94]. These indicators are used to determine the convergence and diversity of the solution. Convergence is to measure the ability to attain a global Pareto front, and diversity is to measure the distribution along the Pareto front. Here, we introduce two popular indicators, IGD -Inverted Generational Distance and HV -Hypervolume.

(p4.1) The IGD index is computed in the objective space, which can be viewed as an approximate distance from the Pareto front to the solution set in the objective space. So, given a set of solutions S and a set of R uniformly distributed 1 The True Partition or ground truth is the labeled data that form the real partition, the underlying structure of the data.
## (s6) Optimization:
(p6.0) The initial population is taken as an input to multi-objective evolutionary optimization, in which iteratively the objective functions are minimized (or maximized) to generate a final population. In general, the existing EMOC algorithms rely on general-purpose MOEAs in the optimization flow, in which most approaches consider the standard features of a particular MOEA, while using a specific set of objective functions and different combinations of crossover and mutation operators. In section 3.2, we detail the optimization phase, in which we present some traditional MOEAs and introduce other types of multi-objective approaches that consider other aspects in the selection besides Pareto dominance. Furthermore, we point out the main aspects of the objective functions and the evolutionary operators applied in EMOC.

(p6.1) 3. Selection: MOO approaches may generate large sets of efficient solutions using Pareto dominance. Thus, this module is applied to determine the final set of solutions to be presented to the data experts. According to prior criteria, a suitable number of solutions, s , is selected from the final population in this phase. The partition selection is a specific subject in clustering, in which it is possible to find studies focused on this subject. Therefore, this module is not considered mandatory in the design of EMOC approaches. In Section 3.3, we present some strategies applied to EMOC partition selection.

(p6.2) In the following, we present the main concepts and elements of each module of evolutionary multi-objective clustering by introducing the main features of the EMOC approaches described in Section 5. (c) Locus-based adjacency graph (LAG) representation corresponds to a graph containing a vertex for each data point, and the links between two data points represent the edges. The linked objects represent the clusters in the solution.

(p6.3) In particular, some approaches use a binary representation to define the labels or prototypes instead of using numerical values. In [98,97], each chromosome includes n · k bits, and each reserved k bits provides the cluster number of the corresponding instance. In [91], each data point is a candidate center, and a binary encoding is applied to define whether a data point is a center or not. Besides that, it is possible to consider other aspects of the clustering problem in the representation. For example, in [17], FCM parameters and feature weights are applied to represent the solution. In [128,119,121], they use the center information associated with a center weight to encode the solutions.

(p6.4) In [18,129], the fuzzy membership matrix and the center information are designed to represent each solution. In [65], they consider an input as a linear combination of base elements (e.g., parameters or coefficients), which are chosen from an over-complete dictionary to design the sparse-based representation.

(p6.5) Regarding the initialization, a common practice in EMOC approaches is to use random generators to assign labels or choose the initial centers of the clusters in the partition. The random initialization generally provides unfavorable partitions since the clusters are likely to be mixed up to a high degree. However, this strategy is very popular because of its simplicity and effectiveness in testing the algorithms against hard evaluation scenarios [46].
## (s8) Objective Functions
(p8.0) In general, CVIs (see Section 2.2) that consider internal and relative criteria are used as clustering objective functions. On the other hand, specific objective functions designed for multi-objective clustering, such as the sparsity (S P) and reconstruction error (RE) designed for spectral clustering, can be used in EMOCs [65].
## (s9) Crossover and Mutation Operators
(p9.0) Evolutionary optimization relies on crossover and mutation operators to generate new solutions. In the literature, we can find approaches using traditional evolutionary operators and clustering designed operators. The most popular traditional operators used in EMOC approaches are:

(p9.1) (a) One-Point crossover: one crossover point is considered along the length of the parents' chromosomes, and the genes following the crossover point in one parent are swapped with the genes in the other parent [46].
## (s11) Evaluation of the EMOC algorithms
(p11.0) In terms of evaluating clustering results, most EMOC approaches consider an external validity index, such as the adjusted Rand index (ARI) [90], to evaluate the set of final solutions. ARI is a corrected-for-chance version of the Rand index [47], computes the probability of two objects of two partitions belong to the same cluster or different clusters, as defined in Equation (4), where n i j is the number of common objects between the clusters c i in π a and c j in π b , n i is the number of objects in the cluster c i in p a , e n j is the number of objects in the cluster c j in π b , k a and k b are the number of clusters in the partitions π a and π b .

(p11.1) Besides that, the analysis of internal criteria can also be applied to investigate specific data structures. For example, in [92,93], H, S ep A L, Dunn, and Dev are evaluated to analyze the general behavior of the EMOC approaches regarding each criterion. In [21,22], they compare their approaches with other ones based on the DB, H, and S ep AL .

(p11.2) It is important to observe that, rather than only using the CVIs (See Section 2.2) to analyze the algorithm performance, the evaluation of the optimizer can generate essential information regarding the modeled problem. The quality indicators of the multi-objective optimization (see Section 2.3) measure how well the final population reaches the goal of obtaining a converging and diverse set of solutions compared to the initial population.
## (s14) General-purpose EMOCs algorithms
(p14.0) First, we present general-purpose EMOC approaches divided in: MOCK-based works, EMOC for categorical data, EMOC for bi-clustering, EMOC for subspace clustering, ensemble-based EMOC, fuzzy clustering-based EMOC, spectral clustering-based EMOC, multiple distance measures-based EMOC, multi-k-clustering-based EMOC, EMOC with specific MOEA, and other EMOC approaches. MOEA/DD [58] and RVEA [12]) instead of MOEA (NSGA-II). In general, these approaches are applied to detect clusters in heterogeneous structured data, considering a continuous data type and crisp clustering.
## (s15) EMOC for Categorical Data
(p15.0) In particular, some EMOC approaches were designed for categorical data clustering, where the data objects are defined over categorical attributes (instead of using the continuous data type that is applied in most of the other approaches). For example, Handl and Knowles [41] presented the MOCK-medoid, a MOCK extension for multiobjective clustering around medoids for categorical data. Mukhopadhyay and Maulik [72] also introduced a medoid- 
## (s20) Multi-k-clustering-based EMOC
(p20.0) Other approaches consider multi-k-clustering with the a posteriori method, where k is taken as an objective function, differing from the automatic data clustering methods, such as MOCK, that consider k an inner aspect of the decision variable, obtained by the optimization of clustering criteria. For that, Du et al. [19] introduced a specific solution representation, the linked-list based encoding. The authors used the fellowship between the objects instead of the label-based relationship to define the clusters, in which each cluster has all its elements linked, similar to the relationship of the nodes presented by Handl and Knowles [41]. This representation was applied in the MOGA-LL [19], an EMOC approach that optimizes the T WCV and k as objective functions in the NPGA, considering two particular operators: (i) an adapted one-point crossover, which allows different clusters to exchange partial contents and may split a cluster into two; (ii) link-replacement mutation, in which a sub-group of objects is associated with another cluster instead of just a different node.

(p20.1) Wang et al. [115] proposed the EMO-KC (Evolutionary Multi-objective k-clustering) to demonstrate the importance of the conflict between the objective functions to obtain a diverse set of final solutions with a different number of clusters. They showed evidence that Var and k are not always conflicting between two individuals and introduced a transformation of the variance (Var) formulation, (1 − exp −1.Var ) − k, to solve this problem. In [113], this same pair of objective functions was explored in a new MOEA that considers a constrained decomposition with grids (CCDG-K).
## (s21) Specific MOEA for EMOC
(p21.0) As previously presented, Dutta et al. [21,22] provided a specific MOEA, the Hybrid MOGA designed for categorical data. Besides that, another particular approach is the VRJGGA -Variable-length Real Jumping Genes Genetic Algorithm introduced by Ripon et al. [92]. The VRJGGA is an EMOC algorithm that extends the Jumping Genes Genetic Algorithm (JGGA) [67] and applies the survival selection of the NSGA-II. The JGGA considers jumping gene operations before evolutionary operators to improve the diversity of solutions. VRJGGA uses a centroid-based encoding associated with the modulo crossover [107] (an adapted one-point crossover, where each child is a set of completely specified sub-solutions) and the polynomial mutation, to optimize the Ent and S ep A L. In [93], the authors provided new features to VRJGGA, introducing two local search methods, probabilistic cluster merging, and splitting for clustering improvement. Ripon and Siddique [91] also applied the extended version of the JGGA to EMOC, introducing the EMCOC -Evolutionary Multi-objective Clustering for detecting overlapping clusters. EMCOC introduces a new chromosome representation and cluster-assignment method in which each data point is a candidate center and a binary encoding is applied to define whether a data point is a center or not.
## (s22) Other MOC approaches
(p22.0) Some works consider other objective functions and provide other features in the design of the EMOC approaches. Besides the above-mentioned works, we also found specific approaches, in which their main features consider some particular methods, as follows.Özyer and Alhaj [80] applied the divide and conquer approach in an iterative way to handle the clustering process and improve the performance of the evolutionary algorithm. Zheng et al. [127] extended algebraic operations of gene expression to propose a multi-objective gene expression programming for clustering. Garcia-Piquer [33], focused on reducing the impact of the volume of data in the EA by means of the stratification of the complete data set into disjoint strata and alternating them in each cycle of the GA. Liu et al. [61] improved the performance of multi-objective soft subspace clustering algorithms for clustering high-dimensional data by using a transfer learning-assisted multi-objective evolutionary clustering framework with MOEA/D.
## (s25) Association rule learning
(p25.0) Association rule learning is a rule-based machine learning method for discovering interesting relations between variables in large databases. Alhajj and Kaya [50,1] provided an EMOC approach for fuzzy association rules mining to automatically cluster values of a given quantitative attribute to obtain a high number of large itemsets in low duration (time).
## (s26) Document clustering
(p26.0) Document clustering is a data/text mining technique that makes use of text clustering to divide documents according to various topics. Lee et al. [54] proposed a method of enhancing multi-objective genetic algorithms for document clustering with parallel programming. Wahid et al. [112] presented a new approach for document clustering based on SPEA-II, that explores the concept of multiple views to generate multiple clustering solutions with diversity.
## (s27) Gene/micro-array analysis
(p27.0) The Gene/Micro-array clustering analysis is applied to discover groups of correlated genes potentially co-regulated or associated with the disease or conditions under investigation. Romero-Zaliz et al. [95] provided an EMOC to identify conceptual models in structured datasets that can explain and predict phenotypes in the immune inflammatory response problem, similar to those provided by gene expression or other genetic markers. Li et al. [57] provided a new ensemble operator to improve the data clustering in gene expression datasets in IMOCLE [62]. Mukhopadhyay et al. [77] provide an approach that simultaneously selects relevant genes and clusters the input dataset. Mukhopadhyay et al. [78] presented an interactive approach to multi-objective clustering of gene expression patterns considering an adapted NSGA-II, in which inputs from the human decision-maker (DM) are taken to learn which objective functions are more suitable for the datasets. Dutta and Saha [24] presented an EMOC approach to identify gene clusters from a given expression dataset; in which apart from utilizing the gene expression values of the individual genes, the corresponding protein-protein interaction scores are also used while clustering the set of genes.
## (s28) Image Segmentation
(p28.0) Image segmentation consists of the process by which a digital image is partitioned into various subgroups (multiple parts or regions), often based on the characteristics of the pixels in the image. Qian et al. [86] presented a multi-objective evolutionary ensemble algorithm to perform texture image segmentation. Shirakawa and Nagao [101] introduced a variation of the MOCK [42] improving its general features for its application in image segmentation.

(p28.1) Zhang et al. [122] provided a multi-objective evolutionary fuzzy clustering for image segmentation, considering the original FCM energy function to preserve image details and a function based on local information to restrain noise, both minimized by MOEA/D. Zhao et al. [124,125] introduced the use of the concepts of intuitionistic fuzzy set (IFS) and multiple spatial information to generate an EMOC approach to overcome the effect of noise in image segmentation.
## (s30) Network community detection
(p30.0) Network community detection refers to the procedure of identifying groups of interacting vertices in a network depending upon their structural properties to unveil the dynamic behaviors of networks. Folino and Pizzuti [30] provided an approach for the detection of communities with temporal smoothness formulated as an EMOC. Hariz et al. [2] reformulate the community detection problem as an EMOC model that can simultaneously capture the intra and inter-community structures based on functions inspired by different types of node neighborhood relations. Shang et al. [99] introduced an EMOC approach based on k-nodes update policy and a similarity matrix for mining communities in social networks. Pizzuti and Socievole [84] provided a framework for detecting community structure in attributed networks, introducing a post-processing local search procedure that identifies those communities that can be merged to provide higher quality community divisions.
## (s32) WSN -Wireless Sensor Network topology management
(p32.0) There are several challenges in designing WSN because the sensor nodes have limited resources of energy, processing power, and memory. In this context, the clustering technique can organize nodes into a set of groups based on a set of pre-defined criteria to improve their usage. Peiravi et.al [83] provided an EMOC approach whose goal was to obtain clustering schemes in which the network lifetime was optimized for different delay values. Hacioglu et al. [37] presented an EMOC approach that can extend network lifetime while enabling high coverage and data.
## (s33) Other applications
(p33.0) Wang et al. [116] proposed an approach to solve the circuit clustering problem in field-programmable gate array computer-aided design flow. Bandyopadhyay et al. [73] introduced a multi-objective genetic clustering approach for pixel classification in remote sensing imagery. Wang et al. [114] and Li et al. [56] provided a multi-objective fuzzy clustering approach for change detection in Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) images. Liu et al. [63] presented an approach to automatic clustering of shapes considering a multi-objective optimization with decomposition and improvement in the shape descriptor and diffusion process (that was applied to transform the similarity distance matrix among total shapes of a dataset into a weighted graph).
## (s34) Conclusion
(p34.0) In this paper, we presented a review of the EMOC studies, focused on a general architecture of evolutionary multi- In terms of an evolutionary multi-objective approach, we can note the wide use of the NSGA-II as MOEAs over the years. In recent years, the use of MaOEAs has been verified [130,129], in contrast to other works [98,97,62] that considered the optimization of more than three objective functions in MOEAs (NSGA/NSGA-II). However, there are limited studies that analyze the behavior of the other MOEAs/MaOEAs, or even other categories of multi-objective methods (see Section 3). For example, the use of diversity-based MOEAs/MaOEAs in approaches that seek more diversity, as Liu et al. [62].

(p34.1) Another concern in this field is regarding real applications and large-scale clustering problems. Some works, as [33,35,129] improve the scalability on designing more efficient multi-objective evolutionary algorithms; however, most of the existing multi-objective evolutionary clustering algorithms are not well scalable to real-life applications that generate a huge amount of data. According to Mukhopadhyay et al. [79] it is a challenge for researchers to devise fast, scalable algorithms for multi-objective clustering.

(p34.2) Regarding the final selection, we note that some approaches do not provide a final selection method, providing only an evaluation regarding the clustering process in comparison to other approaches. Thus, the decision-maker has to use another tool to select the best solutions from among these approaches. The choice of which mechanisms to use to select the best solution or set of solutions is also a challenge that requires more studies.
