# Towards Evaluation of Autonomously Generated Musical Compositions: A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 248085540 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53a3b593e91b8b737208c8d1bb1805206de2969d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53a3b593e91b8b737208c8d1bb1805206de2969d)

Fields: Engineering, Art, Computer Science

## (s1) Evaluation using a tone attractor
(p1.0) We can find certain satisfaction in Eduard R. Miranda (Miranda 2004), who in his text describes the only factor that an artificially generated composition must meet in order to be described as creative: surprise. He illustrates this idea with a model based on the virtual world of artificial composers and critics: while composers have the task of creating melodies, critics evaluate these melodies and then decide with whom to link reproduction. The algorithm uses a virtual form of selective pressure to support the evolution of suitable composers of melodies. This model draws inspiration from the bird world, where some singers use melodies to attract a mating partner. Although this model uses heuristics of evolutionary algorithms, we can apply similar procedures to current programs based on deep neural networks. As already mentioned in the introduction, the problem of autonomous musical composition falls among the time series models; this applies not only to models based on artificial intelligence, but also to genetic algorithms.

(p1.1) The interesting thing about this model is that in order to achieve a high evaluation score, the composer must first raise expectations, then violate this assumption. Thus, there is a constant tension between the expected sequence and the moment of surprise, but only surprising transitions are highly valued. This selective process ensures that the genotype representing the highest quality "tone attractor" advances to the next generation. The taxonomy of the offspring is selected at random and one third of the population is subsequently removed. This model clearly uses Darwin's principle of survival of the fittest, which can support the development of coherent melody repertoires in the virtual world of agents. The problem with this model may be the strictness of critics who only blindly follow a set of probabilities and their deviations using the coefficients of the Markov chain.
## (s2) Aesthetic and musicological evaluation of the created work
(p2.0) The reception of music is influenced by a number of factors, and these factors are also subject to an objective but also subjective nature. The perception of the components of the composition is often derived from personal experiences and feelings, which only further complicates the possibility of aesthetic evaluation. (Schindler et al. 2017) Since it seems almost impossible to find a method that would fully take into account the general subjective evaluation of the artistic values of musical works, we are offered a questionnaire survey, which could verify based on lay and professional interest, whether the composition follows certain rules of musical composition, or whether it is even possible to label the resulting composition as a creative act. In the case of automated systems for algorithmic composition, which are to reproduce human creativity in some way, there is a problem with the evaluation of their performance: the concept of artistic creativity escapes a formal, unambiguous and effective definition. This makes it difficult to evaluate these systems quite thoroughly.
