# materials Dynamic Behavior of Sandwich Structures with Magnetorheological Elastomer: A Review

CorpusID: 244506574 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29439acd7a379efb538bad7c74525ad563fc3443](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/29439acd7a379efb538bad7c74525ad563fc3443)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Materials Science

## (s4) General Linear Viscoelastic Model
(p4.0) Weiss et al. [64] theoretically studied the rheological properties of MR materials. The results show the stress-strain relationship of MR material divided into three regions (preyield region, yield region, and post-yield region); in the pre-yield region, MR materials performance depending on the viscoelastic properties. The linear viscoelastic theory can be utilized to explain the viscoelastic properties, that is:
## (s12) The Influence of The Applied Field on The Natural Frequencies of MRE Sandwich Structures
(p12.0) The magnetic/electric field increases as the natural frequencies of the structures increase. This effect, which has been seen in numerous investigations, is caused by an increase in the MRE's complex shear modulus as the applied field is increased. Several investigations, however, found that when the applied magnetic field rose, the natural frequencies of MR-based sandwich beam structures decreased. A hybrid magnetic system and a self-sensing laminated MRE structure were used to build and test a self-sensing MRE vibration absorber in a study by Sun et al. [78]. The findings of the experiments showed that the suggested absorber's natural frequency changed from 8.5 Hz at 0 A to 4.8 Hz at 3 A and 11.3 Hz at 3 A. Compared to a passive 
## (s14) The Influence of The Applied Field on The Natural Frequencies of MRE Sandwich Structures
(p14.0) The magnetic/electric field increases as the natural frequencies of the structures increase. This effect, which has been seen in numerous investigations, is caused by an increase in the MRE s complex shear modulus as the applied field is increased. Several investigations, however, found that when the applied magnetic field rose, the natural frequencies of MR-based sandwich beam structures decreased. A hybrid magnetic system and a self-sensing laminated MRE structure were used to build and test a self-sensing MRE vibration absorber in a study by Sun et al. [78]. The findings of the experiments showed that the suggested absorber s natural frequency changed from 8.5 Hz at 0 A to 4.8 Hz at 3 A and 11.3 Hz at 3 A. Compared to a passive MRE absorber, the suggested self-sensing MRE absorber improved vibration controllability.

(p14.1) According to Deng et al. [79], a magnetic field influenced the modulus of an ATVA made of MREs. At two different end-supported circumstances, the natural frequencies of the ATVA were theoretically studied and experimentally confirmed. The frequency shift of the developed ATVA can be seen in Figure 6, which surpasses the traditional passive absorber.
## (s16) Effect of The Applied Field on MRE Sandwich Structures Loss Factors and Deflection
(p16.0) In terms of loss factor, the damping properties of adaptable sandwich structures hav received a lot of attention. The ratio of imaginary-to-real components of complex eigen values is defined as the loss factor. The viscoelastic behavior of MRE composed of RT silicone rubber and carbonyl iron powder (CIP) was studied by Bellan and Bossis [96]. Th applied magnetic field conditions were discovered to have an effect on the shear storag and shear loss modulus. Gong et al. [97] examined the rheological characteristics and m crostructures of several isotropic MRE sample assemblies. MRE samples are made up CIP, silicon rubber, and silicone oil in varying weight percentages. Experiments indicate that mixtures comprising 60% CIP, 20% silicone oil, and 100% silicone rubber have th Figure 11. Variation of the natural frequency for different modes considering the magnetic field applied on sandwich structure with MRE honeycomb core of ABS and PLA honeycomb.
## (s17) Effect of The Applied Field on MRE Sandwich Structures Loss Factors and Deflection
(p17.0) In terms of loss factor, the damping properties of adaptable sandwich structures have received a lot of attention. The ratio of imaginary-to-real components of complex eigenvalues is defined as the loss factor. The viscoelastic behavior of MRE composed of RTV silicone rubber and carbonyl iron powder (CIP) was studied by Bellan and Bossis [96]. The applied magnetic field conditions were discovered to have an effect on the shear storage and shear loss modulus. Gong et al. [97] examined the rheological characteristics and microstructures of several isotropic MRE sample assemblies. MRE samples are made up of CIP, silicon rubber, and silicone oil in varying weight percentages. Experiments indicated that mixtures comprising 60% CIP, 20% silicone oil, and 100% silicone rubber have the best MR effect. Chen et al. [98] investigated the shear characteristics of anisotropic MREs and observed that the shear modulus of MREs increases as magnetic fields increase.

(p17.1) The higher-order sandwich beam theory was used by Choi et al. [99] to analyze the dynamic response of a sandwich beam with face skins of steel and an MRE core layer. Experiments using natural frequencies verified the numerical results. The Figure 12 demonstrates the effect on the damping of MRE sandwich structures by applied magnetic fields.

(p17.2) Wang et al. [100] examined the transient vibration response of primary systems attached to MRE-based dynamic vibration absorbers under impulse excitation. By adjusting the stiffness of the vibration absorber, the system s transient vibration was reduced.
## (s18) MRE Sandwich Structures Dynamic Responses under Different Parameters
(p18.0) Apart from the applied magnetic field, additional parameters, such as the material and layer thickness of the face layers, the layer thickness of the core layer, boundary conditions, external disturbances, modes of vibration, and temperature, may have an impact on the natural frequencies, loss factors, and vibration amplitude of the MRE-based sandwich structures. Some of the related studies are mentioned below.

(p18.1) Mikhasev et al. [109] investigated magnetic fields effect on the free and forced vibrations of laminated cylindrical shells comprising a variety of MREs. Figures 14 and 15 show the effect of the magnetic field, opening angles, and thickness ratios on the amplitudefrequency features of sandwich cylindrical shells. Mikhasev et al. [109] investigated magnetic fields' effect on the free and forced vibrations of laminated cylindrical shells comprising a variety of MREs. Figures 14 and 15 show the effect of the magnetic field, opening angles, and thickness ratios on the amplitudefrequency features of sandwich cylindrical shells.    The free vibrations of a rotating MR doubly tapered sandwich beam were investigated by Navazzi et al. [110], who presented the effects of the taper ratio, induced The free vibrations of a rotating MR doubly tapered sandwich beam were investigated by Navazzi et al. [110], who presented the effects of the taper ratio, induced rotational speed, setting angle, and magnetic field intensity. Bornassi et al. [111] conducted a theoretical analysis of the free vibration of a rotating MRE sandwich beam in the sideways direction, taking into account the effects of core thickness, rotational speed, setting angle, hub radius, and applied magnetic field intensity. They also looked into the torsional vibrations of the tapered MRE sandwich beam while it was rotating. [112] The effect of magnetic field on natural frequencies for the first four modes on the non-rotating uniform cross section beam is shown in Figure 16. rotational speed, setting angle, and magnetic field intensity. Bornassi et al. [111] conducted a theoretical analysis of the free vibration of a rotating MRE sandwich beam in the sideways direction, taking into account the effects of core thickness, rotational speed, setting angle, hub radius, and applied magnetic field intensity. They also looked into the torsional vibrations of the tapered MRE sandwich beam while it was rotating. [112] The effect of magnetic field on natural frequencies for the first four modes on the non-rotating uniform cross section beam is shown in Figure 16. Vemuluri and Rajamohan [113] used the composite laminated plate theory (CLPT) in FE formulation to derive the governing equations of motion for tapered composite MRE sandwich plates. In order to verify the effectiveness of the FE formulation, experimental measures and comparison with previous results found by Ramamoorthy et al. were used. With the effects of an applied magnetic field, face layer ply orientation, taper angle, aspect ratios, and the stiffness and loss factors of tapered MRE sandwich structures may be modified, according to the parametric studies. Vemuluri and Rajamohan [113] used the composite laminated plate theory (CLPT) in FE formulation to derive the governing equations of motion for tapered composite MRE sandwich plates. In order to verify the effectiveness of the FE formulation, experimental measures and comparison with previous results found by Ramamoorthy et al. were used. With the effects of an applied magnetic field, face layer ply orientation, taper angle, aspect ratios, and the stiffness and loss factors of tapered MRE sandwich structures may be modified, according to the parametric studies.

(p18.2) Nanoparticles are currently gaining popularity among researchers due to their high rigidity, low density aspect ratio, and damping characteristics. MR materials can benefit from the addition of nanoparticles or fillers, which boost their magnetic resonance effects, sedimentation stability, stiffness, and damping. Some scientists studied the magnetic resonance impacts of nanoparticles augmented with MR materials to see how they behaved. However, adjusting the quantity and size of nanoparticles in MR materials yielded the greatest effects. Nanoparticles have recently been shown to improve the mechanical and dynamic behavior of MR materials, according to new study. Chena et al. [114] examined the mechanical behavior of MRE infused with several weight ratios of (0-7%) carbon black. Due to weak bonding between MRE and carbon, adding carbon black to MRE enhances the MR effect and tensile strength while reducing the damping ratio. Using black carbon as an injectant, Nayak et al. [115] investigated the mechanical behavior of MRE. Adding carbon black to MRE was found to boost the MR effect, improve tensile strength, and decrease the damping ratio because of the poor bonding between MRE and carbon.

(p18.3) The vibration responses for MRE sandwich beam composed of composite face sheets reinforced with functionally graded carbon nano tubes (CNT) were numerically analyzed by Fadaee and Talebitooti [116] using DQM. CNT distribution patterns with varying thicknesses were investigated. The natural frequencies and loss factors of sandwich beams were investigated in relation to the effects of magnetic fields, boundary conditions, CNT distributions and MRE core thickness. Using magnetoelastic loads, the dynamic behavior of the MRE-based sandwich beam with elastic face layers was investigated by Rokn Abadi et al. [117]. For various boundary conditions, the effect of magnetoelastic loads became more noticeable with higher magnetic fields and beam length.
## (s19) Non-Linear Behavior of MRE Sandwich Structures
(p19.0) Nonlinear behaviors in MRE sandwich structures have been observed, despite the fact that previous research indicated that MRE sandwich structures had a core operating in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam s stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the magnetic field rose, beam bending reduced, as illustrated in Figure 20 [126].

(p19.1) The addition of carbon black fillers to MRE enhances the bonding with the elastomer ma-trix, resulting in the improved viscoelastic characteristics of MRE materials and an improved MR effect. In contrast, adding CNTs to the MRE enhances the storage modulus, loss factor, and MR effect. Additionally, the CNTs filled in the micron-sized gaps between the CIP enhanced the matrix's interaction with them. With and without magnetic field enhancements, the rheological features of MRE materials have an impact on the matrix properties and interfaces between them. Figure 18. Effect of magnetic field on damping ratio. Figure 18. Effect of magnetic field on damping ratio.  Figure 19. Effect of magnetic field on natural frequency.
## (s20) Non-Linear Behavior of MRE Sandwich Structures.
(p20.0) Nonlinear behaviors in MRE sandwich structures have been observed, despite the fact that previous research indicated that MRE sandwich structures had a core operating in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam's stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the mag- in the pre-yield zone. The first-order natural frequency of a geometrically flawed MRE sandwich rose in response to an increasing external magnetic field [125]. Aguib observed the nonlinear static behavior of MRE sandwich beams made of composite materials. When the magnetic field was altered, the beam's stiffness and damping properties changed. The strains and stresses rose in direct proportion to the magnetic field strength. As the magnetic field rose, beam bending reduced, as illustrated in Figure 20 
## (s21) Dynamic Characteristics and Optimum Design of Partially Treated MRE Sandwich Structures
(p21.0) A study of the literature shows that the stiffness and damping characteristics of sandwich structures fully treated with the MRE layer increase significantly as the applied field rises. For their part, the MRE-layered sandwich structures are heavier due to their elastomer s high weight density. Applying the same magnetic field throughout a whole structure is also a difficulty. In order to obtain extreme controllability with a relatively slight treatment area and minimal energy consumption, partial MRE treatments are highly desired, especially when administered in the most optimum places. MRE partial segments are used in the core layer of sandwich structures that have been partially treated.

(p21.1) Regarding the characteristics of partly treated MRE sandwich constructions, different elastomer and structural factors, such as core layer thickness and complex shear modulus, have a significant impact. Furthermore, partial treatments, both in number and position, have a major impact on structural dynamics. No matter what the design, the end circumstances, or the modes of vibration are, partial treatments result in lower natural frequencies of the sandwich structure than untreated ones. Since the fully treated structure has a larger mass, this is a result of that. It is generally accepted that raising the applied field increases natural frequencies.

(p21.2) According to popular belief, the loss factors of fully treated sandwich structures are generally higher than those of partially treated sandwich structures. This is due to the latter structure s lower dissipated energy. However, under certain boundary conditions and geometries, some studies found that partially treated sandwich structures had a higher loss factor than fully treated sandwich structures.

(p21.3) The benefit of partially treated sandwich structures over fully treated sandwich structures is that they can achieve a suitable layout with minimal treatments while providing nearly the same concert as fully treated sandwich structures. The design of a partially treated MRE sandwich structure necessitates determining a suitable treatment formation that yields the structure s extreme controllability and vibration clampdown capability in terms of stiffness and damping. Several optimization problems in MRE sandwich structures have been developed for this purpose.

(p21.4) Some numerical studies have been conducted to investigate the vibration characteristics of partially treated MRE sandwich structures. Zhou and Wang [127] investigated the MRE sandwich constructions that have been partially treated for vibrational properties.

(p21.5) The numerical vibration responses of the sandwich beam with MRE and non-MRE sections were studied by Zhou and Wang [128]. The computational findings indicate that the sandwich beam s flexural stiffness may be influenced by a magnetic field. Dwivedy et al. [129] statistically examined the instability areas on the sandwich beam with and without the MRE patch under periodic axial loads. A partially treated MRE sandwich beam in a magnetic field is shown in Figure 21. The application of the MRE patch and applied magnetic fields greatly enhanced the structural stability at varied boundary conditions. Free vibration characteristics of a sandwich beam with conductive face sheets and a viscoelastic and MRE core were studied by Nayak et al. [130]. When compared to a viscoelastic-cored sandwich beam, the MRE sandwich beam reduced vibration by as much as 30%. They also found that increasing the quantity of MRE patches reduced vibration more effectively. The dynamic stability of different MRE sandwich beam designs was studied by Nayak et al. [75] using the FEM and harmonic balancing technique. They discovered that the MRE sandwich beam's stability was impacted by applied magnetic fields. For tapered composite partly treated MRE sandwich plates, the governing equations of motion were derived using CLPT in FE formulation by Vemuluri et al. [131]. When the MRE pockets were divided into four sections, the peak natural frequencies increased. This was also observed with the tapered, partly treated MRE sandwiches. For all boundary conditions, a small change in the taper angle resulted in substantial variance in natural frequencies. The frequency response data are shown in Figure 22, which may be seen below. Partially treated MRE segments were utilized by Vemuluri et al. [132] in different tapered composite sandwich plates. From this, it can be deduced that the best sites for MRE treatment have a substantial influence on the dynamic characteristics under boundary conditions. Free vibration characteristics of a sandwich beam with conductive face sheets and a viscoelastic and MRE core were studied by Nayak et al. [130]. When compared to a viscoelastic-cored sandwich beam, the MRE sandwich beam reduced vibration by as much as 30%. They also found that increasing the quantity of MRE patches reduced vibration more effectively. The dynamic stability of different MRE sandwich beam designs was studied by Nayak et al. [75] using the FEM and harmonic balancing technique. They discovered that the MRE sandwich beam s stability was impacted by applied magnetic fields. For tapered composite partly treated MRE sandwich plates, the governing equations of motion were derived using CLPT in FE formulation by Vemuluri et al. [131]. When the MRE pockets were divided into four sections, the peak natural frequencies increased. This was also observed with the tapered, partly treated MRE sandwiches. For all boundary conditions, a small change in the taper angle resulted in substantial variance in natural frequencies. The frequency response data are shown in Figure 22, which may be seen below. Partially treated MRE segments were utilized by Vemuluri et al. [132] in different tapered composite sandwich plates. From this, it can be deduced that the best sites for MRE treatment have a substantial influence on the dynamic characteristics under boundary conditions. 
