# Mechanism of action of metformin as an anti-aging agent: a literature review

CorpusID: 246884303 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4441887c051c98e47403bab71f4a6a992138d70a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4441887c051c98e47403bab71f4a6a992138d70a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) PHARMACOKINETICS OF METFORMIN
(p3.0) Food will decrease the absorption rate of metformin. The peak plasma time for metformin preparations is 2-3 hours, while the plasma peak time for longterm release is 4-8 hours. A stable plasma concentration can be assessed for 24 to 48 hours, usually <1 µg/mL. In clinical trials, if metformin hydrochloride tablets are taken at the maximum dose, the maximum plasma level does not exceed 5 mcg/ml for conventional doses, the maximum effect of metformin may appear in 2 weeks. 24,25, 26 Metformin binding to plasma proteins is minimal or almost absent and can be distributed in red blood cells.

(p3.1) Metformin does not have a first-pass effect on the liver. The renal clearance rate is approximately 3.5 times the creatinine clearance rate. Renal cleansing of about 450-540 mL/minute. 24,25, 26 Ninety percent of metformin occurs in the urine in an unchanged form. In the first 24 hours after oral metformin, approximately 90% of the absorbed drug dose is excreted in the urine. The half-life of the plasma is approximately 6.2 hours. The half-life in the blood is 17.6 hours because the clot of red blood cells can be part of the distribution of the drug. 20,27,21
## (s5) METFORMIN AS A CONVENTIONAL DRUG FOR DIABETES
(p5.0) Metformin is the first-line oral antidiabetes that is most widely used in the treatment of type 2 diabetes. 17 As a biguanide agent, metformin plays a role in lowering basal and postprandial plasma glucose (PPG). Metformin can be used REVIEW results of other studies that contradict the effect of metformin on aging namely on cell survival were carried out by in vitro and in vivo tests with the results that metformin can shorten the life span and limit cell survival when given to old cells as opposed to the neonatal effect in studies with rat. Mechanistically, metformin worsens aging-associated mitochondrial function leading to respiratory failure, exacerbated by adenosine triphosphate (ATP) exhaustion due to the inability of senescent cells to regulate glycolysis in response to metformin. The beneficial dietary restriction effect of metformin on lipid stores is abolished in aged animals, contributing to metabolic failure. 11 Various studies relating to the effects of metformin on aging have been obtained with different mechanisms of action. In humans, metformin treatment using low doses can prolong the life of diploid fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells. Aging human cells have decreased levels of glutathione peroxidase 7 (GPx7) expression. Low levels of GPx7 lead to premature cellular senescence. Nuclear accumulation of nuclear factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) is increased in the presence of metformin. Nuclear accumulation of erythroid factor 2 associated nuclear 2-factor 2 (Nrf2) binds to antioxidant response elements in the promoter of the GPx7 gene to induce its expression. 32 In human studies over 70 years of age, metformin has significant metabolic and non-metabolic associations effects with aging include pyruvate metabolism and repair of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in muscles and peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling and sterolregulating element-binding protein (SREBP), oxidation of mitochondrial fatty acids, and trimerization of collagen in adipose. 33 Several studies report the effects metformin can induce on aging activation of the Nrf2 target gene. 8, 33 Metformin also activates the AMPK signaling pathway. 30 The mechanism of action of metformin is 
## (s8) Affects mitochondrial function
(p8.0) Studies on C. elegans reported that metformin worsened mitochondrial function that causes ATP fatigue in old age so that metformin does not prolong life, but instead shortens life. 11 The mechanism of action of metformin as an anti-aging agent can be carried out by changing the intrinsic function of mitochondria and mitochondrial protein synthesis. 28 This explanation describes the effect of metformin based on the age of the studied subjects. In addition, the effect of metformin as an anti-aging agent is influenced by the dose used this is related to the toxicity effect of metformin.

(p8.1) Research on flies the anti-aging effects of metformin resulted in the use of low doses of metformin, but not at high doses. High doses of metformin cause severe mitochondrial dysfunction that damages cells. 9 Low doses of metformin cause mild mitochondrial dysfunction due to an adaptive hormonal response capable of tolerating toxic agents. In addition, mild mitochondrial dysfunction can induce a low energy state thereby activating AMPK. Both of these mechanisms can lengthen the age. 34
## (s11) Antioxidants
(p11.0) Metformin carries out its role as an antioxidant through several mechanisms, namely directly capturing hydroxyl radicals and increasing the endogenous antioxidant system, including antioxidant enzymes such as glutathione reductase, catalase, and superoxide dismutase, or GSH content and by downregulating NADPH oxidase. 40 Metformin has been shown to restore paraoxonase 1 (PON 1) activity, a circulating antioxidant associated with high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and hydrolyzes lipid peroxides in lipoproteins, predominantly low-density lipoprotein LDL. 41 Metformin's action as an antioxidant can be explained with regard to oxidative stress. Metformin's action in delaying aging can be explained by the Nrf2 -GPx7 pathway. Nrf2 is a major transcription factor for modulating cellular antioxidant responses. By binding to antioxidant response elements (ARE), Nrf2 stimulates the expression of various antioxidant enzymes, including GPx7. 32 In young cells, sufficient Nrf2 transcription induces GPx7 expression to maintain oxidative stress. In old cells, the expression of Nrf2 and GPx7 are reduced and oxidative stress accumulates. The expression level of GPx7 decreases in aging human cells, and GPx7 depletion causes premature cellular aging. 32 The use of low-dose metformin can increase Nrf2 core translocation to increase GPx7 expression to reduce cell aging. Low-dose metformin treatment prolongs the life of human diploid fibroblasts and mesenchymal stem cells. Metformin regulates the endoplasmic reticulum GPx7. The expression level of GPx7 decreases in aging human cells, and GPx7 depletion causes premature cellular aging. 32
