# Efficacy and Safety of Diet Therapies in Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analysis

CorpusID: 247412575 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12ec55dd20da4685d6c95993f6f49c75e6aab657](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12ec55dd20da4685d6c95993f6f49c75e6aab657)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) INTRODUCTION
(p1.0) Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder, which affects several spheres of normal mental development with an onset in the first few years of life, usually prior to age 3 (1)(2)(3). Children with ASD are characterized by deficits in social interaction and social communication, together with the presence of repetitive, restricted patterns of behavior, interests, or activities present during early periods of development (4). Otherwise, gastrointestinal (GI) disorders are a common comorbidity in patients with ASD. American Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that about 1 in 54 children has been identified with ASD (or 18.5 per 1,000 8-year-olds), with a male-to-female ratio of 4-to-1 (5). It is challenging and costly work to care for children with ASD, with an estimated lifetime cost per affected child of $2.4 million in the US (6). Hence, the growing incidence of people classed on the ASD brings a great challenge to families, schools, medical systems, and society.

(p1.1) As for ASD treatment for children and adolescents, the education and behavioral services therapies are primarily treated, and medication is the important adjunct (7). Behavioral interventions include high-intensity applied behavior analysis (ABA), early intensive behavioral intervention (EIBI), and social skills interventions (3). Currently, there are no drugs approved for the treatment of core symptoms of ASD, and it has been reported that children with ASD are generally more susceptible to side effects of psychoactive medications than their agematched, neurodevelopmentally normal peers (8). Despite this, psychopharmacological interventions are undertaken by nearly half of diagnosed children with ASD, most commonly with stimulants, alpha-2 agonists, antipsychotics, anticonvulsants, and antidepressants (9). Therefore, alternative therapies are needed. Dietary interventions, including gluten-free and casein-free diet (GFCF), gluten-free diet (GFD), and ketogenic diet (KD), come into view as an alternative therapy for ASD. It is generally believed that a specific diet can help to alleviate gastrointestinal and behavioral symptoms for children with ASD.
## (s2) METHODS
(p2.0) This systematic review and meta-analysis was carried out corresponding to the Cochrane Collaboration recommendations (26) and performed according to the GRADE (Grades of Recommendation, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation approach) (27), as well as adheres to the PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) guidelines (28,29) (PRISMA checklist is provided in the Supplementary Table S1). Moreover, The PICOS (Participants, Intervention/exposure, Comparison, Outcomes, Study design) criteria were used to structure this systematic (30). The protocol of the study was registered on PROSPERO (CRD42021277565).
## (s5) Study Selection and Data Extraction
(p5.0) According to the inclusion and exclusion criteria, two authors screened titles and abstracts independently to identify potential articles. Another two authors selected and decided the final studies included in the analysis by screening the full texts of the potential articles.

(p5.1) Two researchers evaluated study details from all included studies and extracted data using standardized forms. The data included the following items: first author, year of publication, country, sample size, age, gender, interventions, study design, diagnostic criteria utilized, exclusion criteria of patients, followup, outcomes, mean and standard deviation, and side effects. In crossover trials the latter period after crossover was excluded, to avoid the potential presence of carryover effects of treatment from the first period (26).
## (s6) Quality Assessment and Risk of Bias
(p6.0) The quality and risk of bias critical appraisals of included studies were assessed independently with conflicts resolved through discussion by three researchers on the basis of the Cochrane risk of bias tool for RCTs (31). The Cochrane Collaboration's tool provides seven quality domains: random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and personnel, blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective reporting, and other bias. Funnel plots were used to investigate publication bias.
