# Different Respiratory Samples for COVID-19 Detection by Standard and Direct Quantitative RT-PCR: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 244602955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID- 19) is an acute and high transmissible respiratory disease with severe morbidities and high mortality rates, caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (1-3). Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) is the most extensively used diagnostic method for detecting SARS-CoV-2 infection, which can be done on different samples (2,3). The respiratory tract samples for COVID-19 detection are divided into the upper (nasopharyngeal swab (NPS)/oropharyngeal swab (OPS), NP wash or saliva) and the lower (sputum, tracheal aspirate, bronchoscopic brushing or bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BLF)) parts ( Figure 1) (4). Upper respiratory tract sampling is less invasive and decreases the risk of aerosolization and transmission to healthcare workers (HCWs). Therefore, world health organization (WHO) guidelines stated the superiority of upper respiratory tract sampling in ambulant, asymptomatic or mild cases (4). It was found that the sampling from the upper respiratory tract during the first week after illness onset causes a significantly higher viral load. NPS and OPS are the most widely used samples for COVID-19 detection using RT-qPCR. However, the problem of falsenegative results in upper respiratory samples taken from asymptomatic individuals or mild cases and the need for repeat sampling and tests still exists (4). Negative results do not rule out COVID-19 infection (2). Although the use of NPS for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR is a common method, some studies have applied other samples, including rectal swabs, lower respiratory tract (LRT) and sputum for diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2 (5,6). Herein, in addition to NPS, OPS, sputum and saliva, mouth rinse/gargle as an alternative sample for SARS-CoV-2 diagnosing using RT-qPCR were discussed. In this study, we aimed to compare the performance of RT-qPCR conducted on different respiratory tract samples.

(p0.1) Quick and early detection of positive cases for COVID-19 infection is the most important aspect of disease control. One approach to achieve control is to train patients to collect their own samples at home and deliver them to medical laboratories for diagnosis. This method causes wider availability with lower costs, prevents close contact in healthcare settings, decreases the risk of exposure to the virus, recognizes asymptomatic but infective carriers and causes focusing of potential medical care on critically ill patients (7,8). Although, data on the diagnostic performance of self-collected swabs for COVID-19 detection testing are not sufficient, national health service (NHS, United Kingdom) and centers for disease control and prevention (CDC, USA) approved self-collection as an initial diagnostic testing method for diagnosing SARS-CoV-2 (9). Herein, the studies focused on the comparison between self-collected and clinician-collected swabs were also reviewed.

(p0.2) Usually, three steps before performing quantitative PCR, including 1) purification of total RNA from the sample, 2) elution and  possible concentration of the material, and 3) synthesis of complementary DNA (cDNA) from the template RNA are performed (10). Combining RT and PCR using a single reaction kit is common. However, RNA extraction is laborious, expensive, timeconsuming and needs manual handling, which may cause experimental errors. Altogether, RNA purification is rate-limiting compared to the downstream RT-qPCR analysis (10,11). Many studies focused on avoiding RNA extraction in COVID-19 detection (10). In the current study, different methods of RNA extraction free-SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR were also reviewed.
## (s2) Comparison between self-collected and clinician-collected swabs
(p2.0) The studies that compared self-collected and clinician-collected swabs for COVID-19 detection using RT-qPCR were reported and described in Table 1. Some studies reported that the results of RT-qPCR using cliniciancollected swabs are comparable to selfcollected swabs, especially in cases with higher viral loads (17). Therchilsen et al. reported the acceptable agreement and almost equivalent sensitivity (84.2% for self-and 89.5% for HCWcollected samples) between mobile-phone Table 1. Comparison between self-collected swabs and clinical-collected swabs for diagnosing SARS-CoV-2 using RT-qPCR.
## (s3) Country
(p3.0) No  video-instructed self-collected oropharyngeal as well as nasal samples and HCW-collected oropharyngeal samples (9). In another study, the sensitivity and specificity of self-collected midnasal swabs and clinician swabs were reported 80.0% and 97.9%, respectively. Furthermore, false-negative results in patients with low primary viral loads were seen (17). However, Abdollahi et al. reported moderate agreement between RT-qPCR results of the NPS and OPS samples obtained by the patients and those collected by the lab technicians (18). Overall, future studies should examine the diagnostic accuracy and cost-effectiveness of self-testing methods in a larger and more heterogeneous cohort of patients (9).
## (s5) Saliva samples
(p5.0) SARS-CoV-2 can be presented in saliva via three potential routes, including upper respiratory tract, blood and infection of the major and minor salivary glands (15). Some studies have suggested the application of saliva samples for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR, which compared to swabs, are less invasive, simpler, and can be collected quickly by HCWs with less contact or by own patients or children's parents. Therefore, the risk of infection can be potentially reduced. In addition, this method is less costly due to the absence of swabs or viral transport media in saliva collection (15). Additionally, saliva can be used as a possible sample for screening and detecting COVID-19 in children (21). It was also found that viral RNA load in saliva samples is stable when stored at room temperature (RT) for 1 day (22) or 2 days (23). Saliva storage at RT did not affect the test sensitivity (24). However, the sensitivity of saliva samples for SARS-CoV-2 detection in literature is variable and further studies in larger cohorts are required. Clear protocols for saliva sample collection may eliminate some of the variations reported in different studies. Furthermore, consistent results of different studies support the clinical application of saliva samples in a healthcare setting (25).
## (s6) Mouth rinse/gargle
(p6.0) The anatomic region in the pharynx gargle is the same as throat swabs. Application of pharynx gargle samples is an accepted method for molecular detection of common respiratory infections. Pharynx gargle samples can be easily self-collected without close contact between patients and HCWs (26). The users are explained to squeeze the contents of the sterile vial containing saline into their open mouth. Next, they are asked to perform a swish/gargle cycle three times and then throw the saline out into a sterile empty container (23). It was reported that detection of viral RNA in saline mouth rinse/gargle is stable after 2 days storage at RT (23).
## (s8) Sputum
(p8.0) A higher level of viral load can be detected in samples from LRT compared to NPS and OPS. Furthermore, positive relation between sputum viral load and severity of COVID-19 as well as the risk of progression was reported (35). However, coughing up is necessary to collect sputum from the lower airways. Therefore, all patients, especially elderly or asymptomatic patients, cannot produce sputum (35). CDC stated that LRT samples, such as sputum, are allowed for patients with a productive cough or under particular situations (e.g., invasive mechanical ventilation). Due to the production of aerosols during sputum acquisition, induced sputum was not suggested by the CDC. However, endotracheal sputum aspirates or self-collected sputum (with proper instructions) can be beneficial. Sputum samples can be suitable for patients with a traumatic fracture or anatomic anomaly in the facial/nasal area and patients with productive cough and negative test results using NPS. The presence of mucus in sputum samples is problematic, which can be overcome by CDC guidelines for sputum preparation (36). CDC has suggested pretreating sputum with DTT for COVID-19 detection. In the study of Peng et al., sputum pretreatment using saline, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NALC), proteinase K (PK), and DTT were compared. A higher COVID-19 detection rate was achieved by pretreatment of sputum samples using PK and DTT compared to their pretreatment with NALC or saline (37). Taken together, PK or DTT pretreated sputum samples can be validated on both manual and automated platforms (36,37).
## (s10) Different methods for COVID-19 detection using direct RT-qPCR
(p10.0) Generally, COVID-19 testing is performed when symptoms are apparent. At that time, viral load is usually high (42). Direct RT-qPCR, which eliminates the viral RNA isolation step, is performed faster and simpler than tests requiring an initial RNA extraction step ( Figure 2). Therefore, direct RT-qPCR can be used in resource-limited regions with moderate access to RNA purification kit. This approach will cause widespread testing in these regions while saving time and cost (11). However, due to the presence of inhibitors of RT-qPCR in biological samples and RNA loss caused by heating and/or RNases, the use of pre-treated samples directly in RT-qPCR is challenging (43). Therefore, many studies focused on developing different direct RT-qPCR methods to obtain equivalent results to the established method that involves RNA extraction (Table 5).

(p10.1) Many kit-free protocols consider physical (heat inactivation) or chemical (PK treatment) methods. Heat inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 can be performed at 60 ºC for 32.5 min, at 80 ºC for 3.7 min, and at 100 ºC for 0.5 min. Application of internal control for real-time RT-qPCR reaction confirmed that these temperatures, which are used during amplification by real-time RT-qPCR, do not affect the quality of genetic materials of the samples. PK prevents contamination from  compared to that at 65 ºC for 30 min. Due to the cleavage of RNA into shorter fragments by heat inactivation, it is very important to consider primer and probe in hid-RT-PCR. It was found that the primer-probe set with the shortest amplicon is the best in hid-RT-PCR. Furthermore, because of possible inhibition from the sample, it is necessary to optimize the amount of sample input in hid-RT-PCR. It was demonstrated that an input of 1-4 μL sample in a 20 μL RT-qPCR reaction is optimal. A strong correlation between Ct values of extracted and heat-inactivated samples was observed. However, higher Ct values for hid-RT-PCR on frozen samples compared to fresh RNA eluates of the same samples were reported (10). In the study of Bruce et al., the best sensitivity for COVID-19 detection using direct RT-qPCR was obtained when 3 μL of Figure 2. Schematic representation of standard and direct RT-qPCR. In standard RT-qPCR, respiratory samples were collected, and in the case of swabs, they were transferred into a transport medium. Then, viral RNA was extracted, and an RT-qPCR reaction was performed. In direct RT-qPCR, the virus was inactivated by different methods, including heating, proteinase K treatment, pH changing, and then these inactivated samples were used for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR.

(p10.2) In this process, time and cost were saved. Figure 2. Schematic representation of standard and direct RT-qPCR. In standard RT-qPCR, respiratory samples were collected, and in the case of swabs, they were transferred into a transport medium. Then, viral RNA was extracted, and an RT-qPCR reaction was performed. In direct RT-qPCR, the virus was inactivated by different methods, including heating, proteinase K treatment, pH changing, and then these inactivated samples were used for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR. In this process, time and cost were saved.   Chomczynski et al. developed a method, named alkaline-glycol processing (AG processing), in which a biological sample of COVID-19 patients, such as saliva or a swabcollected suspension, was incubated in an alkaline-glycol solution (pH 12.2 to 12.8) at RT for 5 to 30 min and then evaluated for the presence of a viral RNA by direct RT-qPCR. It was found that concentrated polyglycols in alkaline aqueous solution lyses viruses and decrease the effect of inhibitors. The LOD was 300 viral copies per mL of initial saliva specimen (47). In another direct RT-qPCR test for detecting SARS-CoV-2 RNA, named DIRECT-PCR, saliva was treated with DTT and inhibitor-resistant enzymes. As few as six RNA copies per reaction of N gene can be detected from respiratory samples such as sputum and nasal exudate in less than an hour by this one-step assay, in which viral lysis, reverse transcription, amplification, and detection are performed in a single-tube homogeneous reaction (48).

(p10.3) In another approach, NPSs were treated with PK (3 μg/μL, 56 ºC for 10 min) and thermal shock (98 ºC for 5 min followed by 4 ºC for 2 min). The concordance between the samples extracted using an RNA extraction commercial kit and the established in-house method was 100%. There was no significant difference between the RNA extraction method using a commercial kit and inhouse PK, followed by thermal shock (44). In the study of Michel et al., dry swabs were resuspended in normal saline, treated with PK, centrifuged and incubated in a dry thermal block at 56 ºC for 3 min and then at 95 ºC for 3 min to inactivate the proteinase. The developed method, named COVIDquick-DET, demonstrated a sensitivity of 94.6% compared to RNA extraction kit-based methods. COVID-quick-DET provided RNA for quantitative PCR analysis in appx. 90 min vs. 280 min kit-based per 100 samples and its detection limit was Ct value around 31-33 (49).

(p10.4) Overall, it is required to optimize direct RT-qPCR protocol in order to reduce cost and processing time. Therefore, examining adequate samples in developing countries will be possible using the optimized RT-qPCR protocol (44). Furthermore, the consequence of an extraction-free method strongly relates to proper transport medium and detection kit. As the efficiency of the PCR may be reduced by extraction-free methods, it is very important to select a proper sensitive RT-qPCR kit (50).
