# 17 Telemedicine in sleep-related breathing disorders and treatment with positive airway pressure devices Telemedicine in sleep-related breathing disorders and treatment with positive airway pressure devices. Learnings from SARS-CoV-2 pandemic times OVERVIEWS

CorpusID: 248843198 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae25664272acab749bed2b739189021c56c6fb8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ae25664272acab749bed2b739189021c56c6fb8)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s7) Treatment with CPAP devices
(p7.0) Beginning of the treatment with telemonitored CPAP The first step in the treatment segment would consist of providing training on the device features, on the right use of the interface; and on how to use and manage the thermal humidifier, if it was prescribed to the patient. This telematic procedure could be supported by surveys addressed to patients in order to assess the patients' level of understanding and the need to reevaluate actions.

(p7.1) An assignment describes remote CPAP titration by means of a telemetry unit on the CPAP device, which would prevent any probable calibration failures 19 . Remote calibration testing has not been set for the devices available to us 20 , except in delayed mode. See Table 1 steps in the use of telemedicine in sleep-related breathing disorders and treatment with positive airway pressure devices.
## (s8) Treatment follow-up
(p8.0) It is worth remembering the definition of adherence to therapy: 4 hours of nightly CPAP usage for 70% of the nights is considered adequate adherence to therapy. However, CPAP use above 6 hours/night contributed in reducing blood pressure and drowsiness 21 .
## (s11) Telediagnosis
(p11.0) Polygraphy (PR) tests conducted at patients' homes and compressed data transmission by staff trained on data management for uploading purposes on a central server or platform to count on the studies for processing purposes. The file storage system is available even on different polygraphy devices. Patients will be able to receive a video that shows how to use the device to simplify its placement.

(p11.1) Polysomnography (PSG) may be conducted as out-of-laboratory tests, and up to this date, there are no devices featured to transfer data on line. Two different suggestions can be made, as with PR tests: In the first place, remote recording demands that a technician place the sensors. Data collection may be performed on the following day. The data collected is zipped and sent to the platform. Another option to consider is to use an online centralized control with both computers being connected thru Team Viewer, which enables remote access to the record-taking and monitoring screen. A simple call can indicate anybody accompanying the patient how to correct any sensor positions 30 .
