# Comparison of Clinical Manifestations in Rheumatoid Arthritis vs. Spondyloarthritis: A Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 245504490 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56b1104e87a5c529ea279177358fc74d40cfe396](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56b1104e87a5c529ea279177358fc74d40cfe396)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Data Extraction and Quality Assessment
(p3.0) Data from the final list of included publications were extracted by one reviewer and validated by a second independent reviewer; any discrepancies were resolved by a third reviewer. For each record, the study title, year of publication, study design, total study population, objective, inclusion/exclusion criteria, baseline patient data, outcomes assessed, and authors' conclusions were extracted. Baseline patient data collected included age, sex, geographic region, race/ethnicity, proportion of patients with rheumatoid factor (RF) and anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) expression, and disease and symptom duration. Outcomes extracted comprised current and historical SpArelated clinical manifestations, imaging, laboratory tests, and disease activity measures. Clinical manifestation outcomes included oligoarthritis, polyarthritis, IBP, peripheral arthritis, enthesitis, uveitis, dactylitis, psoriasis, nail disease (psoriatic nail psoriasis or nail psoriasis), inflammatory bowel disease (specifically Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis), and good response to nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Imaging outcomes consisted of sacroiliitis on imaging, active (acute) inflammation on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggestive of sacroiliitis, definitive radiographic sacroiliitis, structural damage, hip involvement, and spinal deformities. Laboratory tests comprised HLA-B27 expression and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. Subjective measures of disease activity included physician global assessment (PGA); patient-reported outcome (PRO) measures were pain and fatigue on a visual analog Publications not relevant to the study objective scale such as patient global assessment (PtGA) of disease activity. The procedural quality of each publication was evaluated using the Downs and Black Quality Index for evaluating risk of bias [20]. Briefly, study methodology was assessed using 26 questions examining the characteristics of study reporting, external validity, and internal validity (bias and confounding) ( Table S2). The total possible score on the Downs and Black scale was 27, with higher numbers indicating higher methodological quality or lower risk of bias.
## (s7) Psoriasis and/or Nail Psoriasis
(p7.0) Overall, 15 studies reported data on psoriasis and/or nail psoriasis (Fig. 2). Three focused their analyses on this clinical manifestation, comparing them among patients with PsA and RA; all three studies concluded that psoriasis and/or nail psoriasis occurred exclusively in patients with PsA vs. RA (Table 3) [23,54,59]. Of patients initially diagnosed with early seronegative RA, 25% were reclassified as having early PsA after presenting with cutaneous or nail psoriasis upon further rheumatology-dermatology evaluation [23]. One patient initially presented with seronegative oligoarthritis, and a diagnosis of PsA was suspected because of a family history of psoriasis; this patient was then formally diagnosed with PsA with the subsequent development of skin lesions [24].
## (s9) No
(p9.0) Grosse et al. [75] RA serostatus comparison CCP ? and/or RF ? (S ? ) vs. CCPor RF -(S -) Radiography (mean total modified Sharp erosion score) and ultrasonography (total ultrasonography score for erosions; presence of C 2 eroded joint facets) were (OR) 4.4 and 3.7 times higher among patients with CCP ? vs. CCP -RA, respectively

(p9.1) The most discriminating joint between the two groups was MTP5, especially in cases with bilateral erosion (P \ 0.001); both radiography and ultrasonography findings of bilateral erosions in the MTP5 joints were highly discriminant for patients with CCP ? RA (P \ 0.001) CCP ? RA was associated independently with more severe erosive disease vs. CCP -RA on both radiography and ultrasonography    Patients with S ? RA showed more inflammation of the peripheral joints of hand and foot, but only inflammation of PIP joints was statistically significant, compared with those with S -RA (P \ 0.01)

(p9.2) With longer duration of disease, the ' 'buttonhole' ' joint deformity was more prevalent among patients with S ? RA than those with S -RA (P \ 0.05), and the ' 'fibular deviation' ' joint deformity was more prevalent among those with S -RA than those with S ? RA (P \ 0.01) Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index and Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index. Only one study evaluated IBP as a primary focus of the investigation (Table 3)-patients with axSpA had significantly higher Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index and Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index scores than those with RA [38].
## (s11) Dactylitis
(p11.0) A total of nine studies reported data on dactylitis (Fig. 2). Three studies focused their evaluation on dactylitis among patients with PsA and RA; of these studies, the authors reported that dactylitis occurred exclusively in patients with PsA vs. RA (Table 3) [21,33,73].
