# Systematic review The indirect health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on children and adolescents: A review

CorpusID: 247383794 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97406d5911f9b31bc6c586d80855eea33b50e023](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/97406d5911f9b31bc6c586d80855eea33b50e023)

Fields: Medicine

## (s12) Mental health
(p12.0) The most evaluated impact of the COVID-19 pandemic was on young people's mental health. However, studies were limited by cross-sectional study design, infrequent and inconsistent use of validated measures, and the reporting of various outcomes meant that comparison across studies was constrained. Despite these limitations, it is evident that young people are vulnerable to the onset of mental health conditions, and this may be exacerbated or accelerated due to COVID-19 (Fegert et al., 2020).
## (s15) Vaccination rates and health care use
(p15.0) This review shows that vaccination rates and the use of paediatric health care materially decreased during the pandemic. Research on prior health care crises showed similar findings, such as reductions in vaccine coverage during the Ebola outbreak in 2014 (Elston et al., 2017) and lower PED visit rates during the SARS epidemic in 2003 (Chu et al., 2008). To improve the understanding of the impacts on health care, the full spectrum of paediatric health care should be assessed. For example, reorganisation of patient care in hospitals, away from the emergency department, could have impacted visits rates to the emergency department. Likewise, parents might have preferred to take their children to local clinics instead of PED for minor injuries due to fear of exposure to COVID-19 in the emergency department. Furthermore, fracture cases could have been treated by adult orthopaedic surgeons, because paediatric orthopaedic surgeons were not available at the nearest health care facility.
