# An Overview of Pavement Degradation Prediction Models

CorpusID: 246505694 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ddb9dbf3437d34c66ce3884eda6998c31f019eb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2ddb9dbf3437d34c66ce3884eda6998c31f019eb)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s2) Applied Methodology
(p2.0) Researchers agreed that the optimum method to accurately monitor the pavement condition performance is by forecasting and using prediction models [22]. ese models have the ability to describe the minimum and maximum changes in road pavement performance. Different types of performance prediction models are used to provide ultimate accuracy and precision. e subsequent sections describe the prediction models that are used to estimate the performance of pavement conditions. In the subsequent sections, there are time-series models that are used to predict pavement condition performance, which can be divided into two main categories, including probabilistic reasoning and shallow machine learning models. Figure 2 shows the selected timeseries modeling.
## (s3) 2
(p3.0) Journal of Advanced Transportation 3.1. Probabilistic Reasoning. Probabilistic reasoning is a way of logic exploration and representation according to a series of uncertain events and situations that depends on probabilities. In prediction performance, probabilistic reasoning algorithms have been widely used to predict pavement conditions' performance for short-and long-term statues.

(p3.1) 3.1.1. Mechanistic Empirical Models. ese models can be used for the prediction of existing and future pavement degradation and maintenance activities. Also, mechanisticempirical models are able to provide more reliable predictions with the future pavement condition. In addition, these models focus on the properties and qualities of pavement material. PCI and IRI are used to provide valuable information on pavement health status in this model type [23].

(p3.2) In 1989, George et al. [23] used a mechanistic-empirical model to predict future pavement performance. An empirical mechanistic model was developed based on PCI values. ey used the PCI values over two years and approximately 2000 miles of road in Mississippi, USA, for three categories of asphalt surface state (flexible pavement with no overlay, with overlay, and composite pavement). Furthermore, the model focused on assessing the different types of degradation and distress of pavement surfaces and how they affect maintenance plans.

(p3.3) eir study used six main parameters to develop a road pavement performance model, including traffic volume, pavement age, pavement structural number, material quality, and surface deflection measurements. A performance indicator was developed in their research to describe the interaction between the pavement roughness (PR) data and distress rating (DR) as follows:

(p3.4) (1) e following condition performance prediction models include time-series pavement condition data with no overlay, with overlay, and the composite pavement is shown from equations (2) to (4), respectively [23].

(p3.5) where a, b, and c are constants and are equivalent single axle loads ESAL, structural number SN, and the thickness of the last overlay T, respectively. In their study, George et al. [23] used the most significant and most effective variables like the pavement age.   
## (s4) Journal of Advanced Transportation
(p4.0) Sidess et al. [24] proposed a model based on the combination of the empirical-mechanistic and the regressive empirical approach to predict IRI. Data were collected from the pavements, and a total of 165 road segments of 287.5 km of data were used in this model. e IRI degradation model was calculated as follows:

(p4.1) where K and c are regression coefficients, which are the functions of subgrade modulus, structural number at the time of pavement construction, and asphalt thickness. (W 0 ) is the cumulative number of (130 kN) equivalent single axle loads ESAL applications leading to the increase of the IRI from (1.10 m/km) to (IRI ini ), where IRI ini is IRI of the section at the time (t ini ), and W t is a cumulative number of (130 kN) equivalent single axle loads ESAL applications applied until time t. (R 2 > 0.9) for the predicted and measured data. Sidess et al. [24] had developed a similar model for predicting PCI degradation. e characteristics of mechanistic models are summarized in Table 1.
## (s5) Empirical Models.
(p5.0) Empirical models mainly depend on the results of experiments or field observations. Empirical models are known as models that relate the causes and effects. ese models are more accurate at network-level analysis. In terms of evaluating future pavement performance, many studies have been conducted to predict the performance of pavement conditions. e online data and field observation are suitable for developing empirical models. e specifications of empirical models are summarized in Table 1. Figure 3 shows the categories of empirical models.

(p5.1) (1) Statistical Models. Statistical models use data from experiments or field measurements to make statements about the future changes of the experiment outcome. ese statistical methods provided real-time solutions to complex problems. Attoh-Okine [25] and Marcelino et al. [26] studied statistical prediction models to measure and evaluate the future performance of pavement conditions. Also, the accuracy of statistical models was compared with artificial neural networks (ANN) [25]. e results show that statistical models are capable of generalizing and providing accurate road pavement performance models. e R 2 value obtained was approximately 40%, and the standard error of IRI was 1.88.
## (s6) Fuzzy Logic.
(p6.0) Several studies focused on developing an innovative IRI prediction model based on fuzzy-based timeseries and particle swarm optimization (PSO) techniques [31,32]. In their study, Li et al. [33] revealed the importance of using PSO techniques to enhance the results of the performance models and future IRI prediction models. Furthermore, in their study, Li et al. [33] used an LTTP database to extract the IRI values for some urban roads in Canada. e methodology of this study focused on dividing the IRI values into granular spaces. For more illustration, they divided the IRI data into factors and subfactors. e factors section used the average IRI values from the longterm pavement performance database, while the subfactors data were measured in the left and right wheel path [34]. Moreover, a second-order fuzzy trend model was used to predict the performance of the IRI factors and subfactors data. Consequently, the fuzzy trend model was defined as follows:

(p6.1) where U � {U1, U2, . . ., Un} is defined as a universe of discourse, A is a fuzzy set, fA is a membership function of the fuzzy set A, and fA (Un) is a membership degree of Un. By comparing the innovative IRI prediction method with other modeling approaches, such as polynomial fitting, autoregression integrated moving average (ARIMA), and backpropagation neural network (BPNN). e results showed that the IRI prediction model achieved high accurate forecasting compared with other modeling approaches. e IRI prediction error of the proposed model was identified using root mean square error (RMSE) and relative error (RE) to evaluate the ability of each model to provide accurate performance prediction. e results revealed that the IRI prediction model was accurate enough with the smallest error values compared with other modeling approaches. [35] focused on using probabilistic models to describe the change in pavement status and performance with time. ey mainly used significant variables, such as average annual daily traffic, pavement layers thickness, layers air voids, layers liquid limits, layers asphalt content, and annual rainfall, to build an accurate prediction model. Abed et al. [9] developed a probabilistic prediction model of flexible pavement, where the thickness and stiffness of the pavement layers were used as variables. Besides, the mean values, standard deviations, and probability distribution functions of these two parameters were considered to be variables. For this study, a road section in Nottingham, U.K., was selected as the case study.
## (s8) Journal of Advanced Transportation
(p8.0) Moreover, the importance of using TPMs was to predict pavement performance in the subsequent specific years. At the same time, significant variables were used, including the thickness of pavement layers, structural number, and the number of wheel passes per unit strength of the pavement.

(p8.1) e Markov prediction performance model results revealed that using the probabilistic model in predicting pavement performance during a specific time is reliable. Moreover, the TPM results showed more accurate pavement performance prediction, as the percentage of the errors will be minimized after applying the optimization techniques. One of the main advantages of using this probabilistic model is the ease of modeling pavement degradation and the ability of these models to help decision-makers for better planning and management (see Table 1). [37] published a research paper on the evaluation of IRI based on the pavement degradation prediction model, which depends on four different deterministic models, including the Al Omari-Darter model, Dubai model, and the Transportation Research Board's National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP) model. is comparison between the models was performed to identify the most accurate deterministic model in predicting pavement performance based on two main effective variables, including pavement age and thickness of pavement layers. Furthermore, Chen and Zhang [37] obtained the IRI data and other models related to data from the LTPP database in New Mexico. e IRI-based pavement degradation prediction model is divided into two main classifications, prediction of IRI (Al Omari-Darter and Dubai models), and prediction of other performance predictions based on IRI (NCHRP model). In the selected deterministic models, Al-Suleiman and Shiyab [34] developed a new prediction model (Dubai model) based on pavement age. e IRI data that was conducted in the left and right wheel path during vehicle movement, and the following equation (7) presents the Dubai model. e goodness of fit, R 2 , was 0.801, which is relatively high and provides a good indication of the pavement condition.
## (s12) IRI LTPP MSE MAE and RMSE
(p12.0) Kargah-Ostadi and Stoffels [67] years. Also, the full pavement life cycle prediction was carried out as the long-term prediction performance. Furthermore, Ziari et al. [49] used the IRI values from the database of the PMS datasets in the U.S., and they selected nine effective variables to indicate the performance of pavement conditions. e nine variables were selected carefully to provide clear indications of the condition of pavement surfaces and the affected factors.

(p12.1) e R 2 and RMSE were used to assess the quality and ability of the models to provide accurate and validated results. Furthermore, three more error indicators were examined, including mean absolute presenting error (MAPE), correction factor (CF), and variance account for (VAF) to identify errors in the proposed models and to provide optimum correlations for ANNs and group method for data processing models. e benefit of using the GMDH is that it focuses on predicting a complex system without the need for assumptions.

(p12.2) ANN models have specific features compared to other models. For instance, they have a high ability to work with and predict complex systems. Moreover, these models are more efficient and provide high-accuracy pavement condition predictions. Ziari et al. [49] mentioned that the ANN models always provide minimum error values compared with other models. Moreover, clear illustrations of the effect of each variable and parameter on the performance of pavement conditions are always provided in the modeling results, which represent one of the many advantages of using ANN models. Consequently, the results showed that the ANN model is important and accurate in predicting shortand long-term performance, while the group method for data processing model is unable to be used with the IRI values and the nine significant variables to predict the paving condition performance in neither the short-term nor the long-term pavement life cycle.

(p12.3) (1) Back Propagation Neural Network Model. Lin et al. [50] elevated the accuracy of using the backpropagation neural network model in pavement performance prediction. e model showed that there was a variation in correlation values, and the best value was approximately 0.94. Moreover, the results indicated that potholes, rutting, and patching presented the highest correlation coefficient, implying a clear correlation with IRI values. However, concerning other types of pavement distress, such as cracking, alligator cracking, and bleeding, they showed a low correlation with IRI values, which means less ability to correlate the types of pavement distress and IRI values. As Lin et al. [50] stated, this type of model is easy to implement and can simplify pavement inspection for transport agencies. It also provides clear information on the relationship between the type of distress and IRI values during long-term performance prediction. However, using this model was deficient in relating some type of pavement distresses with the conducted IRI values. e characteristics of the backpropagation neural network model are summarized in Table 2.
## (s13) Machine Learning Algorithms.
(p13.0) Machine Learning (ML) methods are an area of artificial intelligence. ML techniques are widely used in pavement performance prediction because of high-precision results. ML techniques can be divided into two main categories, including support vector machine and hybrid machine learning ( Figure 5).

(p13.1) Piryonesi and EL-Diraby [29] developed a cost-effective prediction model using a machine learning algorithm and LTPP database. is prediction model focused on estimating the pavement condition and surface distress using PCI over 2, 3, 5, and 6 years. In the study, different attributes were used to simplify the proposed model used by transport agencies and governments with minimum operating costs. Moreover, the researchers tried to change the PCI rating scale to be a 7-class scale instead of a 5-class scale. is attribute was applied as a trial to enhance the evaluation procedure of PCI. Furthermore, many attempts were made to measure the PCI values using the 7-class scale and a prediction model that was performed to evaluate the PCI measurements in both class scales over the selected years. e study also used influential variables, such as the age of pavement, type of pavement, AADT, average daily maximum and minimum temperature, climate condition, and functional class of the pavement ( Table 2).

(p13.2) (1) Support Vector Machine (SVM). Wang et al. [52] used a combination of grey relation analysis (GRA) and support the vector machine regression (SVR) for the prediction of asphalt pavement performance. GRA was conducted to select major factors affecting pavement performance, and SVR was done using those factors to predict pavement performance. Data were collected from Guangyun Expressway. Road temperature, humidity, and wind speed data were collected from the installed weather station. Temperature and humidity sensors were installed inside pavement layers and on the pavement surface. During the GRA analysis, twelve factors were found to be more influential than others. ese were equivalent single axle loads, maintenance funds, pavement structure strength ratio, a mean value of soil moisture, the highest temperature in the middle surface, the highest temperature in the road surface, annual cumulative total radiation, annual average rainfall, the lowest temperature in the middle surface, the highest temperature in the upper surface, the lowest temperature of the upper surface, and the highest temperature in the lower surface. Finally, GRA-SVR, grey method (GM), genetic algorithm-backpropagation (GA-BP), and pavement performance index (PPI) models were applied to predict the rutting depth index (RDI). Compared with the other three, GRA-SVR was found highly accurate and time-independent though the modeling process was complex.

(p13.3) On the other hand, Ziari et al. [53] performed a support vector machine model to predict pavement performance conditions based on IRI measurements and LTPP, and a mathematical approach was used at the same time to prepare the existing data to validate the model and to investigate the interaction between the performance model and the model variables. eir research paper used the dataset consisting of five kernels types of the support vector machine algorithms and IRI data. e five kernels were tested, including the polynomial kernel with degrees 1 to 3, Pearson VII universal kernel, and the radial basis function. Moreover, the nine variables include the pavement layers thickness, equivalent single axle load, annual average daily traffic, average daily traffic, annual average daily truck traffic, environment changes, annual average temperature, pavement age, and annual average precipitation. ey are formed to build the prediction model, see Table 2.
## (s15) Discussion and Research Gaps
(p15.0) e main reason for the focus on the limitations of pavement prediction models is the importance and significance of these performance models in estimating the health status of pavement degradation. Once the researchers decided to develop a performance model, they must be very careful to find and select an appropriate prediction model. ey also must have clear information and adequate knowledge on the model inputs, outputs, parameters, and affective variables to be used. Forming model functions and equations is a significant step in developing any prediction model. erefore, boundary conditions must govern the equations, depending on the performance models' purpose.

(p15.1) In pavement prediction, performance models must have the growth of pavement degradation, distresses, and damages, or pavement performance indexes such as roughness index, serviceability index, and pavement condition rating [4]. Finding appropriate variables to be used in prediction models is considered one of the main constraints that faced many researchers. As known, the accuracy of any model is mainly related to the chosen variables. e selection of key variables depends mainly on the type of prediction model and the forecast condition. Moreover, the pavement condition variables are divided into the following main categories based on the conditions affecting pavement surfaces: traffic level, environmental condition, material quality, and paving structure.

(p15.2) Furthermore, many studies claimed that not all variables are available in the LTPP database or are easy to obtain. It is considered a significant problem for the model's developer [30,41,64,66]. At the end of the preparation, all elements, such as physical and mathematical boundaries, dependent and independent variables, and raw and prepared data, must be ready to be obtained and used in the developed prediction models.

(p15.3) is review paper presents the most significant time-series prediction models, including mechanistic-empirical, empirical, regression, support vector machine, fuzzy logic, and others. Figure 7 below presents the accuracy values depending on each prediction model's confinement of determination R 2 value. MEM: mechanistic-empirical models, EM: empirical models, FL: fuzzy logic, PM: probabilistic modeling, DM: deterministic models, ANNs: artificial neural network models, MLAs: machine learning algorithms, and RM: regression models. According to Figure 7, the ANNs, MLA, and RM accuracy show a high accuracy value in predicting, classifying, and detecting pavement damage conditions. Using DM offers low accuracy to predict the actual health status of pavement, especially the NCHRP models.

(p15.4) Mechanistic and mechanistic-empirical performance models can estimate and extrapolate the pavement performance data. Furthermore, these models need more data to be calibrated, however, at the same time, they have simplification advantages compared with other prediction models like the empirical models [10]. However, in empirical models, George [23] claimed that selecting appropriate prediction equations is significant for developing the best performance model. To develop empirical models, the researchers should have a large dataset on pavement conditions and identify mathematical and physical boundaries of the equations to build a clear and accurate model and avoid significant errors [26].
