# A review for the noise source identification methods based microphone array

CorpusID: 248333129 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7bba73bfdfc1daf72ef99d64d1cddf5cc07032e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a7bba73bfdfc1daf72ef99d64d1cddf5cc07032e)

Fields: Engineering, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.

(p0.1) With the continuous development of information technology, sound source identification methods based on signal processing and image identification technology are developed to overcome the defects of traditional sound source identification technology, which can be called sound field visualization methods. These methods employ microphone array arranged in a certain way to collect the phase, amplitude, orientation and other information of the noise source, and then process the data and apply visual graphics to realize the noise source identification. Compared with the traditional identification method, the visualization method of sound field is easy to operate, and corresponding processing methods can be selected for different signals with different characteristics. The visualization method can not only identify surface sound source and internal sound source, but also identify different frequency components of the same sound source. No matter for stationary vibration signal or non-stationary vibration signal, it has good recognition effect.

(p0.2) The sound field visualization methods mainly include beamforming and acoustic holography methods [15]. Beamforming is a very simple and practical array signal processing algorithm in acoustic imaging technology, which is suitable for identification of medium and high frequency sound source and measurement of medium and long distance. But this method is limited by the number of array elements and array aperture, so the mainlobe of the synthesized beam is wider and its resolution is limited by Rayleigh resolution criterion [16]. Although beamforming technology has some limitations, such as the need for a large number of sensors and high cost, it has great engineering application value. Acoustic holography is to measure the sound pressure hologram through the holographic measuring surface surrounding the sound source, and then reconstruct the sound field from the sound pressure of the holographic surface based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface [17]. This method has strong anti-interference ability, can identify the main noise sources and their frequency characteristics on the object surface in complex sound field environment, which is suitable for the identification of low-frequency noise sources, but the identification ability of high-frequency signals needs to be further improved [18]. At present, sound field visualization methods are widely used in engineering, for instance, used in the fault diagnosis field combining signal processing and image processing technology [19] (as shown in Fig. 1) which can establish a complete array identification system and achieved good results. To sum up, traditional identification methods are cumbersome, inefficient and inaccurate, and are difficult to diagnose the faults of precision instruments. The sound field visualization methods have improved the identification efficiency and accuracy and have the advantages of high robustness, strong identification ability, clearly and intuitive identification results. In this paper, the beamforming, acoustic holography and hybrid acoustic holography method are mainly discussed. Firstly, the development process of microphone array and the applicable scenarios of different array types are introduced, then the beamforming algorithm and application examples are discussed; secondly, the development of generalized inverse beamforming is discussed combined with practical cases; thirdly, the basic theory of acoustic holography which focuses on the equivalent source method, static sound source identification and moving sound source identification is introduced; and then the hybrid acoustic holography methods and its advantages and disadvantages in solving practical problems are discussed, which come from the combination of the beamforming, acoustic holography and wave superposition; finally, the development of noise source identification methods based on microphone array is summarized.

(p0.3) The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 introduce the beamforming and acoustic holography methods in detail. In Section 4, the hybrid acoustic holography is discussed. The paper ends with the summary.

(p0.4) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.

(p0.5) With the continuous development of information technology, sound source identification methods based on signal processing and image identification technology are developed to overcome the defects of traditional sound source identification technology, which can be called sound field visualization methods. These methods employ microphone array arranged in a certain way to collect the phase, amplitude, orientation and other information of the noise source, and then process the data and apply visual graphics to realize the noise source identification. Compared with the traditional identification method, the visualization method of sound field is easy to operate, and corresponding processing methods can be selected for different signals with different characteristics. The visualization method can not only identify surface sound source and internal sound source, but also identify different frequency components of the same sound source. No matter for stationary vibration signal or non-stationary vibration signal, it has good recognition effect.

(p0.6) The sound field visualization methods mainly include beamforming and acoustic holography methods [15]. Beamforming is a very simple and practical array signal processing algorithm in acoustic imaging technology, which is suitable for identification of medium and high frequency sound source and measurement of medium and long distance. But this method is limited by the number of array elements and array aperture, so the mainlobe of the synthesized beam is wider and its resolution is limited by Rayleigh resolution criterion [16]. Although beamforming technology has some limitations, such as the need for a large number of sensors and high cost, it has great engineering application value. Acoustic holography is to measure the sound pressure hologram through the holographic measuring surface surrounding the sound source, and then reconstruct the sound field from the sound pressure of the holographic surface based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface [17]. This method has strong anti-interference ability, can identify the main noise sources and their frequency characteristics on the object surface in complex sound field environment, which is suitable for the identification of low-frequency noise sources, but the identification ability of high-frequency signals needs to be further improved [18]. At present, sound field visualization methods are widely used in engineering, for instance, used in the fault diagnosis field combining signal processing and image processing technology [19] (as shown in Fig. 1) which can establish a complete array identification system and achieved good results. To sum up, traditional identification methods are cumbersome, inefficient and inaccurate, and are difficult to diagnose the faults of precision instruments. The sound field visualization methods have improved the identification efficiency and accuracy and have the advantages of high robustness, strong identification ability, clearly and intuitive identification results. In this paper, the beamforming, acoustic holography and hybrid acoustic holography method are mainly discussed. Firstly, the development process of microphone array and the applicable scenarios of different array types are introduced, then the beamforming algorithm and application examples are discussed; secondly, the development of generalized inverse beamforming is discussed combined with practical cases; thirdly, the basic theory of acoustic holography which focuses on the equivalent source method, static sound source identification and moving sound source identification is introduced; and then the hybrid acoustic holography methods and its advantages and disadvantages in solving practical problems are discussed, which come from the combination of the beamforming, acoustic holography and wave superposition; finally, the development of noise source identification methods based on microphone array is summarized.

(p0.7) The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 introduce the beamforming and acoustic holography methods in detail. In Section 4, the hybrid acoustic holography is discussed. The paper ends with the summary.
## (s1) Microphone array
(p1.0) Microphone array is the basis of sound field visualization, which can receive various sound signals and combine these signals with corresponding algorithms to realize the recognition and location of sound source. Sound field visualization technology uses the sound field analysis method for reverse reconstruction, by displaying the reconstruction results in the corresponding image to express the abstract sound field, the location and sound field characteristics of the noise source are directly reflected, which provides convenience for the application of sound source identification in practical engineering. In the following part, the microphone arrays and several common sound field visualization methods are described in detail.

(p1.1) The microphone array is first developed as air defense equipment during World War I. And then, other scholars demonstrated the feasibility of this approach in beamforming through experiments [20]. The experiment results show that different microphone array arrangement produce different degrees of sidelobe effect, and the stronger the sidelobe effect is, the greater the influence on the measurement accuracy. A large number of scholars have adjusted the structure of the sensor array (such as cross ( Fig. 2(a)), ring ( Fig. 2(b)), rectangle ( Fig. 2(c)), etc.). On this basis, Bertsch et al [21] have developed the coordinates of a group of microphone arrays with the function of weakening the sidelobe effect through Monte Carlo simulation, and used the array for noise measurement during aircraft landing. The results show that the phenomenon of false sound source is improved under the weaker sidelobe effect and the array's ability to identify noise source is improved effectively. In addition, to explore the relationship between sidelobe effect and measurement accuracy, Hald et al. [22] have designed several groups of two-dimensional microphone arrays with strong sidelobe suppression ability on the basis of orthogonal optimization algorithm; to obtain the fan-shaped wheel array, Hald et al. have optimized the wheel-shaped array in two-dimensional microphone arrays [22,23], which create hardware conditions for the combination of acoustic holography and beamforming technology; Barsikow et al. [24] have applied the fan-shaped wheel microphone arrays to identify the noise sources of moving trains, and verified the feasibility of the method through experiments, which laid a foundation for the identification of moving sound sources by hybrid acoustic holography. In addition, a technology for acoustic measurement of large equipment using a small number of microphones has been developed, which partly solve the problem of data processing difficulties caused by a large number of arrays. Shah et al [25] have used this technology to measure the body noise of an airbus aircraft model made according to 1:11 and obtained ideal identification results. Starting from the perspective of frequency domain analysis, Harvey et al. [26] have used the frequency domain beamforming algorithm as the theoretical basis, and use the two-dimensional microphone array to measure the noise caused by stable airflow in different environments and realize the sound source location. The measurement results are consistent with the facts, which prove the practicability of the frequency domain method. Although the two-dimensional microphone array can shield the signal interference in the direction of noise source, it can't achieve good weakening effect on the reflection and background interference behind the array [27]. Therefore, the two-dimensional microphone array is mostly used for indoor sound source identification with silencing equipment.
## (s5) Acoustic holography
(p5.0) Based on the concept of optical holography, the hypothesis of acoustic holography was put forward in the 1960s, and the acoustic holography method was formed by constructing a general theoretical framework. The method uses the intensity and phase of sound source to identify the sound source, which has strong anti-interference ability and good robustness in complex acoustic measurement environment. Acoustic holography can be divided into conventional acoustic holography, near-field acoustic holography (NAH) and far-field acoustic holography, the sound pressure on the sound source surface can be reconstructed by the following formula:

(p5.1) when in the above formula is replaced by , the sound pressure at any position in the space can be reconstructed, the represents the two-dimensional Fourier transform, represents the inverse two-dimensional Fourier transform; and are the wave numbers in and directions, respectively;

(p5.2) is the inverse of . Both acoustic holography and beamforming are noise source identification methods with microphone array as hardware equipment, but acoustic holography pays more attention to the phase and amplitude information of the sound wave emitted by the sound source. In NAH, sound pressure is measured by the holographic measuring surface surrounding the source, based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface, the sound field of the source surface is reconstructed by the sound pressure of the holographic surface. NAH measurement is close to the surface of sound source and retains evanescent wave components, so that the reconstruction accuracy of sound field greatly exceeds Rayleigh resolution criterion, which is incomparable to beamforming technology. The spatial transformation method of sound field signal is shown in Fig. 6. In the practical application of acoustic holography testing technology, we first need to assume two virtual planes: reconstruction plane and holographic plane (or sampling plane). The sound field information such as the amplitude and phase of the noise source is transmitted to the holographic plane through the air and collected by the microphone array. Then the sound field is reconstructed according to the information collected. NAH technology is especially suitable for the identification of low-frequency field source characteristics, the study of scatterer structure surface characteristics and structural modal vibration, as well as the prediction of source radiation power and far-field directivity of large structures. Komine [46] have used NAH to analyze aerodynamic noise. Yuan et al. [47] have developed a method for comprehensive testing and analysis technology, including reference microphone position selection, characteristic identification of incoherent source signals, and visualization of propagation paths of sound sources, contribution evaluation and output prediction of sound sources to system output. Experimental results show that this method is suitable for complex engineering practice.
## (s6) . Wave superposition method
(p6.0) Wave superposition method was first proposed by Koopmann [54] as a robust algorithm in the full wave-number domain. It mainly studies modern image processing technology and visualization technology, and is used to analyze the radiation and scattering of sound (its principle is shown in Fig. 7), and overcomes two difficulties in solving the non-unique and singular integrals of the equation by the boundary element method based on the Helmholtz integral equation.
## (s7) HELS method
(p7.0) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.

(p7.1) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.
## (s8) Static sound source identification
(p8.0) Theoretically, far-field acoustic holography can calculate acoustic quantities at any position outside the radiation source, while its resolution is limited by half wavelength ( /2), it is only sensitive to the propagating wave components of low and medium frequency in space, and it is easy to ignore the evanescent wave components with high frequency information. Far field acoustic holography is often used to identify the sound source of large radiation sources such as trains or difficult to access sound generators. Some scholars have applied the method to calculate the distribution of noise sources. Aiming at the problem of low recognition accuracy due to aperture limitation of acoustic holography, an optimization scheme of microphone array and recognition algorithm has been proposed. Lu [67] has introduced grey relational clustering technology on the basis of traditional acoustic fault diagnosis to remove the extracted redundant sound source information. The optimized diagnosis technology has significantly improved the identification efficiency and algorithm robustness. On this basis, he has developed a high identification rate method for weak fault conditions of three-dimensional space sound field. After comparing the actual performance of several vehicle noise source identification methods, Zhao et al. [68] have optimized the algorithm according to the problems existing in the experimental data. The optimized experimental results have significantly improved the performance compared with the original reconstruction algorithm.
## (s9) Moving sound source identification
(p9.0) According to the Doppler effect, when the sound source and the measuring point move relative to each other, if the sound source is close to the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be greater than the actual frequency of the sound source; if the sound source is far away from the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be less than the actual frequency of the sound source. Consequently, traditional measurement methods such as sound pressure measurement, sound intensity measurement and coherence function method can only identify the noise source in the static state, but cannot give the measurement results for the moving sound source.

(p9.1) As shown in Fig. 8, a sound source with radiation frequency moves from point A to point B with a constant speed at the initial moment, the measurement point is located at point P. After time , the sound signal reaches point B, and at the same time, the sound wave with phase is radiated, and is the included angle between BP and the motion direction. After time , the sound wave front of this phase reaches the sound receiving point P, the propagation distance is the length ( ) of BP. Then, the frequency of the sound wave with phase radiated from the sound source at time t 1 received by the sound receiving point P at time is:

(p9.2) in which, is the ratio of the sound velocity to . Sarkissian et al. [71] have tried to measure and analyze the noise of moving vehicles by using sound source identification technologies such as microphone array measurement and holographic measurement, but the results of sound field reconstruction and sound source identification are not accurate due to the influence of Doppler-effect. Starting from the Doppler phenomenon of wave, Yang et al. [72] have proposed a theoretical method to eliminate Doppler effect by designing a data acquisition and measurement device and using acoustic holography to deal with motion noise. This method can accurately establish the sound field distribution model of the object surface under the background of the noise generated by the high-speed motion of the object, and provide a new basis and solution for the analysis and improvement of the motion noise. This method can eliminate the Doppler-effect in the frequency domain and locate the sound source in the process of object movement, but it can't carry out quantitative analysis of sound source. Yang et al. [73] have used the theory of NAH to study the identification of moving sound source again, realized the reconstruction of holographic surface, and eliminated the Doppler-effect in time domain. The new method has higher calculation accuracy and identification efficiency, and improves the disadvantages of over reliance on sound source frequency information in the preliminary work but can only be used for the analysis of single frequency sound sources. However, there is still no effective solution to the problems of sidelobe effect and false sound sources. Some scholars use wavelet transform to analyze the Doppler-effect in the process of moving sound source identification, and put forward corresponding solutions, which breaks the limitation that the identification method needs to predict the real frequency of sound source to eliminate the Doppler-effect, and provides a new idea for solving this kind of problem [74]. Such as Miao et al. [75] put forward a new solution to solve the problem of moving sound source, which can more accurately determine the position and sound pressure of moving sound source. Therefore, this method can also get rid of the limitations of sound source frequency and number, and have no longer need to eliminate Doppler-effect one by one for different frequencies and different sound sources. Vehicle noise measurement experiments show that the acoustic holography reconstruction method of moving sound source can accurately reconstruct the sound field of high-speed moving sound source with different frequency components, which provides a valuable basis for its practical application.

(p9.3) According to the Doppler effect, when the sound source and the measuring point move relative to each other, if the sound source is close to the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be greater than the actual frequency of the sound source; if the sound source is far away from the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be less than the actual frequency of the sound source. Consequently, traditional measurement methods such as sound pressure measurement, sound intensity measurement and coherence function method can only identify the noise source in the static state, but cannot give the measurement results for the moving sound source.

(p9.4) As shown in Fig. 8, a sound source with radiation frequency moves from point A to point B with a constant speed at the initial moment, the measurement point is located at point P. After time , the sound signal reaches point B, and at the same time, the sound wave with phase is radiated, and is the included angle between BP and the motion direction. After time , the sound wave front of this phase reaches the sound receiving point P, the propagation distance is the length ( ) of BP. Then, the frequency of the sound wave with phase radiated from the sound source at time t 1 received by the sound receiving point P at time is:

(p9.5) in which, is the ratio of the sound velocity to . Sarkissian et al. [71] have tried to measure and analyze the noise of moving vehicles by using sound source identification technologies such as microphone array measurement and holographic measurement, but the results of sound field reconstruction and sound source identification are not accurate due to the influence of Doppler-effect. Starting from the Doppler phenomenon of wave, Yang et al. [72] have proposed a theoretical method to eliminate Doppler effect by designing a data acquisition and measurement device and using acoustic holography to deal with motion noise. This method can accurately establish the sound field distribution model of the object surface under the background of the noise generated by the high-speed motion of the object, and provide a new basis and solution for the analysis and improvement of the motion noise. This method can eliminate the Doppler-effect in the frequency domain and locate the sound source in the process of object movement, but it can't carry out quantitative analysis of sound source. Yang et al. [73] have used the theory of NAH to study the identification of moving sound source again, realized the reconstruction of holographic surface, and eliminated the Doppler-effect in time domain. The new method has higher calculation accuracy and identification efficiency, and improves the disadvantages of over reliance on sound source frequency information in the preliminary work but can only be used for the analysis of single frequency sound sources. However, there is still no effective solution to the problems of sidelobe effect and false sound sources. Some scholars use wavelet transform to analyze the Doppler-effect in the process of moving sound source identification, and put forward corresponding solutions, which breaks the limitation that the identification method needs to predict the real frequency of sound source to eliminate the Doppler-effect, and provides a new idea for solving this kind of problem [74]. Such as Miao et al. [75] put forward a new solution to solve the problem of moving sound source, which can more accurately determine the position and sound pressure of moving sound source. Therefore, this method can also get rid of the limitations of sound source frequency and number, and have no longer need to eliminate Doppler-effect one by one for different frequencies and different sound sources. Vehicle noise measurement experiments show that the acoustic holography reconstruction method of moving sound source can accurately reconstruct the sound field of high-speed moving sound source with different frequency components, which provides a valuable basis for its practical application.
## (s22) Introduction
(p22.0) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.

(p22.1) With the continuous development of information technology, sound source identification methods based on signal processing and image identification technology are developed to overcome the defects of traditional sound source identification technology, which can be called sound field visualization methods. These methods employ microphone array arranged in a certain way to collect the phase, amplitude, orientation and other information of the noise source, and then process the data and apply visual graphics to realize the noise source identification. Compared with the traditional identification method, the visualization method of sound field is easy to operate, and corresponding processing methods can be selected for different signals with different characteristics. The visualization method can not only identify surface sound source and internal sound source, but also identify different frequency components of the same sound source. No matter for stationary vibration signal or non-stationary vibration signal, it has good recognition effect.

(p22.2) The sound field visualization methods mainly include beamforming and acoustic holography methods [15]. Beamforming is a very simple and practical array signal processing algorithm in acoustic imaging technology, which is suitable for identification of medium and high frequency sound source and measurement of medium and long distance. But this method is limited by the number of array elements and array aperture, so the mainlobe of the synthesized beam is wider and its resolution is limited by Rayleigh resolution criterion [16]. Although beamforming technology has some limitations, such as the need for a large number of sensors and high cost, it has great engineering application value. Acoustic holography is to measure the sound pressure hologram through the holographic measuring surface surrounding the sound source, and then reconstruct the sound field from the sound pressure of the holographic surface based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface [17]. This method has strong anti-interference ability, can identify the main noise sources and their frequency characteristics on the object surface in complex sound field environment, which is suitable for the identification of low-frequency noise sources, but the identification ability of high-frequency signals needs to be further improved [18]. At present, sound field visualization methods are widely used in engineering, for instance, used in the fault diagnosis field combining signal processing and image processing technology [19] (as shown in Fig. 1) which can establish a complete array identification system and achieved good results. To sum up, traditional identification methods are cumbersome, inefficient and inaccurate, and are difficult to diagnose the faults of precision instruments. The sound field visualization methods have improved the identification efficiency and accuracy and have the advantages of high robustness, strong identification ability, clearly and intuitive identification results. In this paper, the beamforming, acoustic holography and hybrid acoustic holography method are mainly discussed. Firstly, the development process of microphone array and the applicable scenarios of different array types are introduced, then the beamforming algorithm and application examples are discussed; secondly, the development of generalized inverse beamforming is discussed combined with practical cases; thirdly, the basic theory of acoustic holography which focuses on the equivalent source method, static sound source identification and moving sound source identification is introduced; and then the hybrid acoustic holography methods and its advantages and disadvantages in solving practical problems are discussed, which come from the combination of the beamforming, acoustic holography and wave superposition; finally, the development of noise source identification methods based on microphone array is summarized.

(p22.3) The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 introduce the beamforming and acoustic holography methods in detail. In Section 4, the hybrid acoustic holography is discussed. The paper ends with the summary.

(p22.4) Mechanical vibration of objects is one of the main sources of sound in industrial production, it is particularly important to identify the sound source accurately for noise analysis and control. As the convenience of calculating acoustic information and realizing the location of component sound source, the sound source identification technology is widely used in engineering, such as military, medicine, ocean exploration, electronic communication and so on [1][2][3][4][5]. At present, there are many methods for sound source identification, which can be divided into traditional identification method (such as sound intensity method, surface vibration method, etc.), sound field visualization technology, etc. [6][7][8]. The traditional identification methods mainly include subjective identification method, lead covering method, partial operation method and surface vibration velocity method. Subjective identification method is greatly affected by human factors, and it is difficult to give quantitative analysis when multiple sound sources exist simultaneously [9]. Lead covering method uses lead plate (sound absorbing material) to cover all sound sources, and then opens a small opening on the sound source to expose it to achieve the purpose of measuring specific sound sources. This method is only suitable for medium and high frequency sources [10]. The partial operation method firstly measures the overall noise condition under the condition that all the components are running at the same time, and then stops the operation of the components to be observed one by one, and calculates the noise contribution of each measured component through theoretical derivation. The operation process of this method is cumbersome, and part of the acoustic contribution may be caused by the noise generated by the consistent natural frequency between components, so the measurement results are unstable and it is easy to get conclusions contrary to the facts [11]. Surface vibration velocity method is to arrange acceleration sensors on the surface of the object that produces vibration, and determine the noise size by the normal vibration velocity and amplitude [12]. As the operation process of traditional identification method is cumbersome, and the measurement results are easy to be disturbed by external factors, additional processing such as sensor arrangement is needed to achieve better noise source identification effect [13,14], this method has been gradually phased out.

(p22.5) With the continuous development of information technology, sound source identification methods based on signal processing and image identification technology are developed to overcome the defects of traditional sound source identification technology, which can be called sound field visualization methods. These methods employ microphone array arranged in a certain way to collect the phase, amplitude, orientation and other information of the noise source, and then process the data and apply visual graphics to realize the noise source identification. Compared with the traditional identification method, the visualization method of sound field is easy to operate, and corresponding processing methods can be selected for different signals with different characteristics. The visualization method can not only identify surface sound source and internal sound source, but also identify different frequency components of the same sound source. No matter for stationary vibration signal or non-stationary vibration signal, it has good recognition effect.

(p22.6) The sound field visualization methods mainly include beamforming and acoustic holography methods [15]. Beamforming is a very simple and practical array signal processing algorithm in acoustic imaging technology, which is suitable for identification of medium and high frequency sound source and measurement of medium and long distance. But this method is limited by the number of array elements and array aperture, so the mainlobe of the synthesized beam is wider and its resolution is limited by Rayleigh resolution criterion [16]. Although beamforming technology has some limitations, such as the need for a large number of sensors and high cost, it has great engineering application value. Acoustic holography is to measure the sound pressure hologram through the holographic measuring surface surrounding the sound source, and then reconstruct the sound field from the sound pressure of the holographic surface based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface [17]. This method has strong anti-interference ability, can identify the main noise sources and their frequency characteristics on the object surface in complex sound field environment, which is suitable for the identification of low-frequency noise sources, but the identification ability of high-frequency signals needs to be further improved [18]. At present, sound field visualization methods are widely used in engineering, for instance, used in the fault diagnosis field combining signal processing and image processing technology [19] (as shown in Fig. 1) which can establish a complete array identification system and achieved good results. To sum up, traditional identification methods are cumbersome, inefficient and inaccurate, and are difficult to diagnose the faults of precision instruments. The sound field visualization methods have improved the identification efficiency and accuracy and have the advantages of high robustness, strong identification ability, clearly and intuitive identification results. In this paper, the beamforming, acoustic holography and hybrid acoustic holography method are mainly discussed. Firstly, the development process of microphone array and the applicable scenarios of different array types are introduced, then the beamforming algorithm and application examples are discussed; secondly, the development of generalized inverse beamforming is discussed combined with practical cases; thirdly, the basic theory of acoustic holography which focuses on the equivalent source method, static sound source identification and moving sound source identification is introduced; and then the hybrid acoustic holography methods and its advantages and disadvantages in solving practical problems are discussed, which come from the combination of the beamforming, acoustic holography and wave superposition; finally, the development of noise source identification methods based on microphone array is summarized.

(p22.7) The outline of the paper is as follows: Section 2 and Section 3 introduce the beamforming and acoustic holography methods in detail. In Section 4, the hybrid acoustic holography is discussed. The paper ends with the summary.
## (s23) Microphone array
(p23.0) Microphone array is the basis of sound field visualization, which can receive various sound signals and combine these signals with corresponding algorithms to realize the recognition and location of sound source. Sound field visualization technology uses the sound field analysis method for reverse reconstruction, by displaying the reconstruction results in the corresponding image to express the abstract sound field, the location and sound field characteristics of the noise source are directly reflected, which provides convenience for the application of sound source identification in practical engineering. In the following part, the microphone arrays and several common sound field visualization methods are described in detail.

(p23.1) The microphone array is first developed as air defense equipment during World War I. And then, other scholars demonstrated the feasibility of this approach in beamforming through experiments [20]. The experiment results show that different microphone array arrangement produce different degrees of sidelobe effect, and the stronger the sidelobe effect is, the greater the influence on the measurement accuracy. A large number of scholars have adjusted the structure of the sensor array (such as cross ( Fig. 2(a)), ring ( Fig. 2(b)), rectangle ( Fig. 2(c)), etc.). On this basis, Bertsch et al [21] have developed the coordinates of a group of microphone arrays with the function of weakening the sidelobe effect through Monte Carlo simulation, and used the array for noise measurement during aircraft landing. The results show that the phenomenon of false sound source is improved under the weaker sidelobe effect and the array's ability to identify noise source is improved effectively. In addition, to explore the relationship between sidelobe effect and measurement accuracy, Hald et al. [22] have designed several groups of two-dimensional microphone arrays with strong sidelobe suppression ability on the basis of orthogonal optimization algorithm; to obtain the fan-shaped wheel array, Hald et al. have optimized the wheel-shaped array in two-dimensional microphone arrays [22,23], which create hardware conditions for the combination of acoustic holography and beamforming technology; Barsikow et al. [24] have applied the fan-shaped wheel microphone arrays to identify the noise sources of moving trains, and verified the feasibility of the method through experiments, which laid a foundation for the identification of moving sound sources by hybrid acoustic holography. In addition, a technology for acoustic measurement of large equipment using a small number of microphones has been developed, which partly solve the problem of data processing difficulties caused by a large number of arrays. Shah et al [25] have used this technology to measure the body noise of an airbus aircraft model made according to 1:11 and obtained ideal identification results. Starting from the perspective of frequency domain analysis, Harvey et al. [26] have used the frequency domain beamforming algorithm as the theoretical basis, and use the two-dimensional microphone array to measure the noise caused by stable airflow in different environments and realize the sound source location. The measurement results are consistent with the facts, which prove the practicability of the frequency domain method. Although the two-dimensional microphone array can shield the signal interference in the direction of noise source, it can't achieve good weakening effect on the reflection and background interference behind the array [27]. Therefore, the two-dimensional microphone array is mostly used for indoor sound source identification with silencing equipment.
## (s27) Acoustic holography
(p27.0) Based on the concept of optical holography, the hypothesis of acoustic holography was put forward in the 1960s, and the acoustic holography method was formed by constructing a general theoretical framework. The method uses the intensity and phase of sound source to identify the sound source, which has strong anti-interference ability and good robustness in complex acoustic measurement environment. Acoustic holography can be divided into conventional acoustic holography, near-field acoustic holography (NAH) and far-field acoustic holography, the sound pressure on the sound source surface can be reconstructed by the following formula:

(p27.1) when in the above formula is replaced by , the sound pressure at any position in the space can be reconstructed, the represents the two-dimensional Fourier transform, represents the inverse two-dimensional Fourier transform; and are the wave numbers in and directions, respectively;

(p27.2) is the inverse of . Both acoustic holography and beamforming are noise source identification methods with microphone array as hardware equipment, but acoustic holography pays more attention to the phase and amplitude information of the sound wave emitted by the sound source. In NAH, sound pressure is measured by the holographic measuring surface surrounding the source, based on the spatial field transformation relationship between the source surface and the holographic surface, the sound field of the source surface is reconstructed by the sound pressure of the holographic surface. NAH measurement is close to the surface of sound source and retains evanescent wave components, so that the reconstruction accuracy of sound field greatly exceeds Rayleigh resolution criterion, which is incomparable to beamforming technology. The spatial transformation method of sound field signal is shown in Fig. 6. In the practical application of acoustic holography testing technology, we first need to assume two virtual planes: reconstruction plane and holographic plane (or sampling plane). The sound field information such as the amplitude and phase of the noise source is transmitted to the holographic plane through the air and collected by the microphone array. Then the sound field is reconstructed according to the information collected. NAH technology is especially suitable for the identification of low-frequency field source characteristics, the study of scatterer structure surface characteristics and structural modal vibration, as well as the prediction of source radiation power and far-field directivity of large structures. Komine [46] have used NAH to analyze aerodynamic noise. Yuan et al. [47] have developed a method for comprehensive testing and analysis technology, including reference microphone position selection, characteristic identification of incoherent source signals, and visualization of propagation paths of sound sources, contribution evaluation and output prediction of sound sources to system output. Experimental results show that this method is suitable for complex engineering practice.
## (s28) . Wave superposition method
(p28.0) Wave superposition method was first proposed by Koopmann [54] as a robust algorithm in the full wave-number domain. It mainly studies modern image processing technology and visualization technology, and is used to analyze the radiation and scattering of sound (its principle is shown in Fig. 7), and overcomes two difficulties in solving the non-unique and singular integrals of the equation by the boundary element method based on the Helmholtz integral equation.
## (s29) HELS method
(p29.0) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.

(p29.1) The implicit least square method (LSM) solves the problems of low efficiency of sound field reconstruction, non-unique equation solution and singular integral in the NAH method based on constant element and boundary element. LSM and wave superposition are numerical calculation methods developed from the idea of equivalent source, but their solutions are obviously different. HELS is a least square method based on Helmholtz equation. When this method was first proposed, it can only provide accurate solutions for the reconstruction points outside the smallest sphere covering irregular sound sources, but only approximate analysis for the inner region of the sphere. Subsequently, a large number of scholars have studied the orthogonal function adaptation approximation of HELS. Dastour [63] have given a general construction method of the fourthorder finite difference scheme for Helmholtz equation based on point weight strategy. Cao et al [64] have proposed the generalized eigenvalue method and standard eigenvalue method for function approximation based on Chebyshev polynomials to solve the eigenvalues of helmholtz equation. The expansion term of the basis function has a direct influence on the results of sound field reconstruction, so the reasonable selection of the number of measurement points and expansion terms is particularly critical. Dwarka [65] and Macklin [66] have combined geometric analysis from the perspective of scalability, analyzed the sound field in the smallest sphere covering irregular sound source with trigonometric function and spherical function as basis function, and obtained the scalable convergence of HELS.
## (s30) Static sound source identification
(p30.0) Theoretically, far-field acoustic holography can calculate acoustic quantities at any position outside the radiation source, while its resolution is limited by half wavelength ( /2), it is only sensitive to the propagating wave components of low and medium frequency in space, and it is easy to ignore the evanescent wave components with high frequency information. Far field acoustic holography is often used to identify the sound source of large radiation sources such as trains or difficult to access sound generators. Some scholars have applied the method to calculate the distribution of noise sources. Aiming at the problem of low recognition accuracy due to aperture limitation of acoustic holography, an optimization scheme of microphone array and recognition algorithm has been proposed. Lu [67] has introduced grey relational clustering technology on the basis of traditional acoustic fault diagnosis to remove the extracted redundant sound source information. The optimized diagnosis technology has significantly improved the identification efficiency and algorithm robustness. On this basis, he has developed a high identification rate method for weak fault conditions of three-dimensional space sound field. After comparing the actual performance of several vehicle noise source identification methods, Zhao et al. [68] have optimized the algorithm according to the problems existing in the experimental data. The optimized experimental results have significantly improved the performance compared with the original reconstruction algorithm.
## (s31) Moving sound source identification
(p31.0) According to the Doppler effect, when the sound source and the measuring point move relative to each other, if the sound source is close to the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be greater than the actual frequency of the sound source; if the sound source is far away from the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be less than the actual frequency of the sound source. Consequently, traditional measurement methods such as sound pressure measurement, sound intensity measurement and coherence function method can only identify the noise source in the static state, but cannot give the measurement results for the moving sound source.

(p31.1) As shown in Fig. 8, a sound source with radiation frequency moves from point A to point B with a constant speed at the initial moment, the measurement point is located at point P. After time , the sound signal reaches point B, and at the same time, the sound wave with phase is radiated, and is the included angle between BP and the motion direction. After time , the sound wave front of this phase reaches the sound receiving point P, the propagation distance is the length ( ) of BP. Then, the frequency of the sound wave with phase radiated from the sound source at time t 1 received by the sound receiving point P at time is:

(p31.2) in which, is the ratio of the sound velocity to . Sarkissian et al. [71] have tried to measure and analyze the noise of moving vehicles by using sound source identification technologies such as microphone array measurement and holographic measurement, but the results of sound field reconstruction and sound source identification are not accurate due to the influence of Doppler-effect. Starting from the Doppler phenomenon of wave, Yang et al. [72] have proposed a theoretical method to eliminate Doppler effect by designing a data acquisition and measurement device and using acoustic holography to deal with motion noise. This method can accurately establish the sound field distribution model of the object surface under the background of the noise generated by the high-speed motion of the object, and provide a new basis and solution for the analysis and improvement of the motion noise. This method can eliminate the Doppler-effect in the frequency domain and locate the sound source in the process of object movement, but it can't carry out quantitative analysis of sound source. Yang et al. [73] have used the theory of NAH to study the identification of moving sound source again, realized the reconstruction of holographic surface, and eliminated the Doppler-effect in time domain. The new method has higher calculation accuracy and identification efficiency, and improves the disadvantages of over reliance on sound source frequency information in the preliminary work but can only be used for the analysis of single frequency sound sources. However, there is still no effective solution to the problems of sidelobe effect and false sound sources. Some scholars use wavelet transform to analyze the Doppler-effect in the process of moving sound source identification, and put forward corresponding solutions, which breaks the limitation that the identification method needs to predict the real frequency of sound source to eliminate the Doppler-effect, and provides a new idea for solving this kind of problem [74]. Such as Miao et al. [75] put forward a new solution to solve the problem of moving sound source, which can more accurately determine the position and sound pressure of moving sound source. Therefore, this method can also get rid of the limitations of sound source frequency and number, and have no longer need to eliminate Doppler-effect one by one for different frequencies and different sound sources. Vehicle noise measurement experiments show that the acoustic holography reconstruction method of moving sound source can accurately reconstruct the sound field of high-speed moving sound source with different frequency components, which provides a valuable basis for its practical application.

(p31.3) According to the Doppler effect, when the sound source and the measuring point move relative to each other, if the sound source is close to the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be greater than the actual frequency of the sound source; if the sound source is far away from the measuring point, the frequency received by the microphone will be less than the actual frequency of the sound source. Consequently, traditional measurement methods such as sound pressure measurement, sound intensity measurement and coherence function method can only identify the noise source in the static state, but cannot give the measurement results for the moving sound source.

(p31.4) As shown in Fig. 8, a sound source with radiation frequency moves from point A to point B with a constant speed at the initial moment, the measurement point is located at point P. After time , the sound signal reaches point B, and at the same time, the sound wave with phase is radiated, and is the included angle between BP and the motion direction. After time , the sound wave front of this phase reaches the sound receiving point P, the propagation distance is the length ( ) of BP. Then, the frequency of the sound wave with phase radiated from the sound source at time t 1 received by the sound receiving point P at time is:

(p31.5) in which, is the ratio of the sound velocity to . Sarkissian et al. [71] have tried to measure and analyze the noise of moving vehicles by using sound source identification technologies such as microphone array measurement and holographic measurement, but the results of sound field reconstruction and sound source identification are not accurate due to the influence of Doppler-effect. Starting from the Doppler phenomenon of wave, Yang et al. [72] have proposed a theoretical method to eliminate Doppler effect by designing a data acquisition and measurement device and using acoustic holography to deal with motion noise. This method can accurately establish the sound field distribution model of the object surface under the background of the noise generated by the high-speed motion of the object, and provide a new basis and solution for the analysis and improvement of the motion noise. This method can eliminate the Doppler-effect in the frequency domain and locate the sound source in the process of object movement, but it can't carry out quantitative analysis of sound source. Yang et al. [73] have used the theory of NAH to study the identification of moving sound source again, realized the reconstruction of holographic surface, and eliminated the Doppler-effect in time domain. The new method has higher calculation accuracy and identification efficiency, and improves the disadvantages of over reliance on sound source frequency information in the preliminary work but can only be used for the analysis of single frequency sound sources. However, there is still no effective solution to the problems of sidelobe effect and false sound sources. Some scholars use wavelet transform to analyze the Doppler-effect in the process of moving sound source identification, and put forward corresponding solutions, which breaks the limitation that the identification method needs to predict the real frequency of sound source to eliminate the Doppler-effect, and provides a new idea for solving this kind of problem [74]. Such as Miao et al. [75] put forward a new solution to solve the problem of moving sound source, which can more accurately determine the position and sound pressure of moving sound source. Therefore, this method can also get rid of the limitations of sound source frequency and number, and have no longer need to eliminate Doppler-effect one by one for different frequencies and different sound sources. Vehicle noise measurement experiments show that the acoustic holography reconstruction method of moving sound source can accurately reconstruct the sound field of high-speed moving sound source with different frequency components, which provides a valuable basis for its practical application.
