# Rate constants of chlorine atom reactions with organic molecules in aqueous solutions, an overview

CorpusID: 249551296 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eae487b62bb6e22be6a08f10c322afcd88c515c7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eae487b62bb6e22be6a08f10c322afcd88c515c7)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) Production of Cl • in aqueous solution and methods of rate constant determination
(p1.0) The techniques used for rate constant determination differ in many respects. In some of the techniques, Clserves as source of Cl • , in others chlorine containing organic or inorganic compounds are used in Cl • production (chloroacetone, chloramine).

(p1.1) There are two basic techniques for the determination of aqueous-phase rate constants of reactions between radicals and target molecules: the direct and the indirect methods. These techniques have been reviewed and compared in a recent paper published by Ma et al. (2021). When transient techniques (direct method), pulse radiolysis or (laser) flash photolysis
## (s3) Simple oxidized molecules
(p3.0) A large number of rate constants are available on Cl • reactions with simple oxidized molecules (Scheme 1) (Gilbert et al. 1988;Mertens and von Sonntag 1995;Buxton et al. 2000;Wicktor et al. 2003): all values are in the 10 8 -10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 range ( Table 2). In the experiments of Gilbert et al. (1988), Cl • was generated in the reaction (24) Cl • + H 2 O ⇌ ClOH • + H + k 24 H 2 O = 2.5 × 10 5 s −1 (-24) k −24 = 2.6 × 0.6 × 10 10 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 (25) ClOH •− ⇌ • OH + Cl − k 25 = 6.1 ± 0.8 × 10 9 s −1

(p3.1) •and H 2 PO 4 •obtained by metal-catalyzed decomposition of the appropriate peroxides. Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) used the laser flash photolysis (LFP) technique for Cl • production in chloroacetone photodecomposition and they calculated the rate constants using the decay of Cl • absorbance. Mertens and von Sonntag (1995) determined the k Cl• values in competitive reactions. Minakata et al. (2017) conducted detailed quantum mechanical calculations on the mechanisms. In the case of several molecules, e.g., methanol, ethanol, similar rate constants were measured in two or three laboratories. Generally, the values agreed with each other within one order of magnitude. The authors suggested H-abstraction and Cl-adduct formation as the main mechanisms. Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) published k Cl• =1 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 for methanol (Scheme 1). For alcohols with a higher C-atom number, the values seem to be somewhat bigger. The average of the k Cl• values published by Gilbert et al. (1988), Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) for the reaction of ethanol is 2 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 . The values published by Mertens and von Sonntag (1995), Buxton et al. (2000) and Wicktor et al. (2003) for 2-propanol are highly different, they are 6 × 10 9 , 1.5 ± 0.1 × 10 9 and 3.2 ± 0.7 × 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively. The same is true for tert-butanol: the values of Mertens and von Sonntag (1995) and Buxton et al. (2000) are 3 × 10 8 and 6.2 ± 0.3 × 10 8 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively, whereas the values of Gilbert et al. (1988) and Wicktor et al. (2003) are 2.2 ± 0.3 × 10 9 and 1.1 ± 0.1 × 10 8 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively. 1-Propanol and 2-butanol react with k Cl• values of 2.2 ± 0.4 × 10 9 and 5.0 ± 0.6× 10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 , respectively (Wicktor et al. 2003).
## (s4) Alcohols
(p4.0) The H-abstraction from ethanol may take place from both the α and β carbon atom; Gilbert et al. (1988) suggest a 2:1 ratio of the two reactions (bond-strength effect). In the case of tert-butanol, Cl • reacts with the H-atoms on the methyl groups and with the alcoholic OH in 2:1 ratio. The abstraction reaction from OH proceeds with an electron transfer mechanism (a process in which the aqueous environment would be expected to stabilize the incipient charges). The reaction is suggested to proceed in the following way:
## (s8) Simple aromatic molecules
(p8.0) Most of the pharmaceutical, pesticide, personal care, etc., compounds contain benzene ring in their structures. Here, in this chapter we discuss the reactions of Cl • with relatively simple aromatic molecules (Scheme 4). Mártire et al. (2001) reported the same k •Cl values for toluene, chlorobenzene and benzoic acid: 1.8 ± 0.3×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Table 4). In their former publication, these authors for benzene gave a value of 6.0×10 9 ≤ k Cl• ≤ 1.2×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Alegre et al. 2000). Watts and Linden (2007) analyzing the reactions in complex aqueous systems containing organic molecules assumed that nitrobenzene reacts with negligible rate with Cl • , at the same time it is highly reactive toward • OH. According to the recent experiments of Lei et al. (2021), the rate constant of the Cl • + nitrobenzene reaction is not negligible, but rather high, 1.01×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 .

(p8.1) Three mechanisms are considered in Cl • reactions with these simple aromatic molecules: single-electron-transfer (SET) from the ring to Cl • , H-abstraction from the aromatic ring or from the alkyl side chain, and radical addition to the aromatic ring. The SET reaction pathway was disregarded in the cases of benzene, toluene and benzoic acid, since the expected final products in this mechanism, phenol derivatives were not observed (Mártire et al. 2001). Based on the theoretical calculations of Minakata et al. (2017), H-abstraction from the benzene ring is a minor reaction. In the reaction of toluene, the transient absorption spectrum shows sharp bands around 300 nm characteristic to the benzyl type radical. However, as Mártire et al. (2001) mention benzyl type radical may not necessarily form in H-abstraction from the methyl group, but it can also be produced by HCl elimination from an intermediate radical. In the • OH + toluene system, only 6% of • OH produces benzyl radical (Sehested et al. 1975).

(p8.2) Absorption spectra of the transients in laser and conventional flash photolysis experiments (Alegre et al. 2000;Mártire et al. 2001) reveal that Cl • addition to the aromatic rings forming chlorocyclohexadienyl radicals is the predominant mechanism in agreement with the results of theoretical calculations. • OH reacts with aromatic molecules also in radical addition (Homlok et al. 2020). The reaction may occur in one or two steps. In the two-step process, first a π-complex forms: the radical is not stabilized to a single bond, in the second step the radical may stabilize at one of the double bonds giving the σ-complex. In the one-step process, the σ-complex forms directly. In the experiments of Alegre et al. (2000) and Mártire et al. (2001), with the applied time resolution (50 ns) no π-complex was observed. The addition (localization) may take place to any of the carbon atoms in the ring. Some of these radicals are expected to transform to chlorinated stable products in disproportionation reaction. In air saturated solution of benzene chlorobenzene represented less than 10% of the consumed benzene (Alegre et al. 2000).

(p8.3) In the reactions of substituted benzenes (e.g., toluene, benzoic acid), some selectivity in the sites of radical addition is expected, similarly to the reactions of • OH (Homlok et al. 2020). Due to the lack of stereochemical identification of the individual products, the preferred reaction sites are not reported in the relevant works, the authors simply assume, that the observed transient absorption spectra belong to mixtures of the various chlorocyclohexadienyl type radicals. In the reaction of benzoic acid, chlorobenzoic acid isomers and also chlorobenzene were identified as final products. The latter involves a mechanism with COOH→Cl exchange.

(p8.4) In the reaction of chlorobenzene, chlorinated phenols were detected (Mártire et al. 2001): they may form through electron transfer from chlorobenzene to Cl • (SET mechanism). The chlorobenzene cation is suggested to undergo a rapid hydration to hydroxycyclohexadienyl radical. This radical in the subsequent reaction may transform to chlorinated phenols. SET mechanism was proven by Lei et al. (2019) in the Cl • reaction of several substituted aromatic molecules, e.g., 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene (k Cl• ≈ 1.0×10 10 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 ). Under acidic conditions, these radical cations were shown to be long-lived enough to be detected by the usual transient kinetics techniques. At neutral and alkaline pH, they undergo very fast decomposition.
## (s9) Pesticides
(p9.0) Fluconazole and climbazole are used as fungicides (Scheme 5, Table 5). In fluconazole the two electron withdrawing F-atoms decrease the reactivity with the aromatic ring, and the published rate constant, 5.5×10 9 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 (Cai et al. 2020) is smaller than the values of Mártire et al. (2001) published for simple aromatic molecules. The value for climbazole (6.3±1.5×10 10 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 , Cai et al. 2019) is unrealistically high. The rate constant was determined in the UV/free chlorine system, in which both Cl • and • OH were reacting radicals and nitrobenzene was used as scavenger of OH. Atrazine reacts with a much smaller rate constant of 6.87×10 9 mol -1 dm 3 s -1 (Kong et al. 2020). Cl • is expected to abstract H-atom from the alkyl side chains.

(p9.1) The structure of triclosan (fungicide) shows some similarity to that of clofibric acid (discussed later), the high reactivity of triclosan, k Cl• = 2.76 ± 0.44×10 10 mol −1 dm 3 s −1 , is probably due to the two aromatic rings in the molecule ).
## (s16) Reaction mechanisms
(p16.0) Very few mechanistic studies were conducted in connection with the Cl • reaction to determine the elementary reaction steps of radical attack on organic molecules, e.g., on identifying the primary organic intermediates. This is because many rate constant determinations were made under steady-state conditions (e.g., using the UV/chlorine processes) which give no possibilities to observe the elementary processes. In the transient kinetic experiments (pulse radiolysis, (laser) flash photolysis) the absorbances of Cl • and Cl 2

(p16.1) •complicate the observations of transient organic intermediates (see in the Introduction). However, there are important exceptions, such as 1,3,5-trimethoxybenzene (TMB). In the low pH range, the reaction with Cl • gives radical cation (TMB •+ ):

(p16.2) This radical cation has a pK a value between pH 3.0 and 5.0 and exhibits strong transient absorbance with λ max = 580 nm . Based on the intensity of the absorbance, the authors estimated a single-electron-transfer (28) Cl • + TMB → Cl − + TMB •+ (SET) contribution of 62.4% to the Cl • + TMB reaction. SET also had important contributions to the degradation of some other molecules, such as the sulfonamides. In the transient spectra of these molecules, strong absorptions were observed in the 400-440 nm range, which were attributed to the formation of aniline type radical cations (C 6 H 5 NH 3

(p16.3) •+ ). Reaction with SET mechanism is suggested also in the reactions of several inorganic ions and alcohols with Cl • (Gilbert et al. 1988). SET reaction pathway was disregarded in the cases of benzene, toluene and benzoic acid, since the expected final products in this mechanism, the phenol derivatives were not observed (Mártire et al. 2001).

(p16.4) The most often suggested reaction between Cl • and organic molecules with unsaturated bonds including also aromatics is the radical addition to the double bond (Minakata et al. 2017). This reaction is similar to the reaction of • OH, but Cl • reactions show less selectivity as those of • OH. Cl • addition to the aromatic ring yields chlorocyclohexadienyl radicals with absorption bands in the 300-350 nm range (Alegre et al. 2000;Mártire et al. 2001;Lei et al. 2019). The aqueous medium seems to stabilize the radical adducts and they decay on much longer timescale as Cl • . This stabilization does not exist in the gas phase (Mártire et al. 2001). In contrast to the non-aqueous systems π-complex formation was not observed in aqueous solutions.
