# The impact of endometrial preparation for frozen embryo transfer on maternal and neonatal outcomes: a review

CorpusID: 247147760 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aea56d6a85b7c656214e203d3344aea81957a61c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aea56d6a85b7c656214e203d3344aea81957a61c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Since the first infant was delivered after in vitro fertilization (IVF) in 1978, there has been a consistent increase in availability and utilization of assisted reproductive technology (ART). Simultaneously, developments and enhancements of many important laboratory technologies have transformed the field, including the introduction embryo cryopreservation in the early 1980s [1][2][3]. Globally, the frequency of frozen embryo transfers (FET) continues to increase, likely due to improvements in embryo survival with the introduction of vitrification, implementation of guidelines promoting single embryo transfer and therefore increased cryopreservation of supernumerary embryos, efforts to reduce rates of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS), utilization of preimplantation genetic testing, and the increase in embryo cryopreservation for fertility preservation [1,[4][5][6][7][8].
## (s3) Maternal and neonatal outcomes by method of endometrial preparation
(p3.0) The last several years has seen an influx of studies exploring differences in perinatal outcomes between different endometrial preparation techniques in frozen embryo transfer. Nine studies dedicated to this topic were selected by the authors based on knowledge of the existing literature and are outlined in this review. They are also summarized in Table 2.

(p3.1) One of the first studies to report an association with hypertensive disorders of pregnancy with method of FET preparation was a prospective cohort study comparing outcomes in woman from the United States (U.S.) undergoing programmed FET and modified natural FET. The overall study stratified women by number of corpus luteum and included spontaneous pregnancies and fresh transfers, however when analysis was restricted to only FET cycles, pregnancies after programmed FET cycle were associated with higher risks for preeclampsia (12.8% vs. 3.9%, adjusted odds ratio (aOR) 3.55, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.20-11.94) and preeclampsia with severe features (9.6% vs. 0.8%, aOR 15.05, 95% CI 2.59-286.27) compared with a modified natural-cycle FET after adjusting for the effect of age, nulliparity, history of hypertension, body mass index, polycystic ovary syndrome, and diabetes mellitus [28]. A parallel study also examined the role of the corpus luteum in maternal circulatory adaptations to pregnancy and will be addressed later in this review.

(p3.2) Shortly after, in 2019, two large retrospective studies were published comparing maternal and neonatal outcomes based on method of endometrial preparation [30,31]. The first by Saito and colleagues used data from the Japanese Assisted Reproductive Technology Registry to compare outcomes in over 100,000 patients undergoing natural cycle FET and hormone replacement cycle, or programmed, FET. Of note, the natural cycle group included those where an hCG trigger or supplemental luteal progesterone were used. Pregnancies conceived in a hormone replacement cycle had an increased odds of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy (4% vs. 3%, aOR 1.43; 95% CI, 1.14-1.80], placenta accreta (0.9% vs 0.1%, aOR 6.91; 95% CI, 2.87-16.66) and cesarean section (44.5% vs. 33.7%, aOR 1.69; 95% CI, 1.55-1.84). Pre and post term delivery were also increased in hormone replacement cycles but there was a decreased odds of gestational diabetes mellitus (1.5% vs. 3.3%, aOR 0.52; 95% CI, 0.40-0.68) [30]. Authors considered maternal age, embryo stage at transfer, number of embryos transferred, use of assisted hatching and indication for ART in the adjusted analysis.
## (s4) Strengths and limitations
(p4.0) There are several strengths of the available studies observing differences in maternal and neonatal outcomes based on method of FET preparation. Many studies include large sample sizes with similar proportions of subjects having transfers in ovulatory and programmed cycles. Additionally, the two studies completed in Sweden and Japan used national used data from national registries which included an almost complete evaluation of individuals undergoing ART in their country of interest, limiting selection bias, and providing information on exposures and outcomes for the entire population [30,31,36]. Though the studies are heterogenous in outcome measures studied, in all studies that evaluated rates of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in their analysis, programmed cycles had a higher risk of this diagnosis further suggesting but not confirming a causal relationship between programmed FET and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy [15,[28][29][30][31][33][34][35].

(p4.1) Important limitations to the available data comparing maternal and neonatal outcomes across different endometrial preparation methods must be considered when deriving conclusions. In the available studies, the method of endometrial preparation is selected based on provider and patient preference or individual clinic policy, introducing the potential for significant differences between groups despite adjustments in analysis to account for potential underlying confounders. While programmed cycles share similar protocols across studies, the included and excluded ovulatory cycles vary from study to study (natural cycle, modified natural cycle, stimulated cycle). For example, modified natural cycle were considered "natural cycles" in the study by Saito et al. and categorized as "stimulated cycles" by Ginström Ernstad et al [30,31].

(p4.2) .In addition, quantification of outcomes in these studies often relies on registry data or patient reported outcomes which can be limited by variation in coding or classification by those inputting data, missing data, and limited information about important confounders [36]. The investigations are heterogenous in outcomes reported and definitions used to categorize each outcome, and inclusion and exclusion criteria vary. Even hypertensive disorders of pregnancy, the most consistent outcome measure throughout the study, is considered as one group in some studies and stratified into different diagnoses (gestational hypertension, preeclampsia, etc.) in others. Extended time periods included in some analyses include embryos frozen by older slow freezing protocols or newer vitrification protocols and there is variation in number of embryos transferred and stage of embryo at time of transfer.

(p4.3) Most of the data available is retrospective and nonrandomized and therefore subject to unrecognized confounding. The follow up study to the ANTARTICA randomized control trial by Zaat et al. is the only study where patients were randomized which limits confounding bias but is limited by small sample size and some data presented in this study was collected retrospectively. Moreover, odds ratios are generally < 2 and therefore may lack clinical significance [37]. Statistically significant findings reported in the current studies might have reflected the large sample sizes, selection bias and residual confounding rather than a true causal association. Lastly, though many of the presented findings showed significant relative differences between endometrial preparation method as represented by adjusted odds ratios, the absolute differences in adverse events between protocol groups is often modest ( Table 2). One must therefore interpret these results with caution given that small absolute differences noted between protocols are potentially of limited clinical importance to the individual patient and may not justify changes in clinical practice.
## (s5) Proposed mechanisms
(p5.0) There are three key proposed causes for the differences in the above maternal and neonatal outcomes reported. Although all studies attempt to control for possible confounders, the selection of endometrial preparation may be based on underlying factors that may contribute to differences in outcomes between the study groups. For example, if women in the hormone replacement group were more likely to have endocrine disturbances including hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance or dyslipidemia as seen in the study by Zong et al., this could drive the observed differences in pregnancy outcomes rather than role of endometrial preparation [33,38,39].
## (s7) Future directions
(p7.0) Available data consistently identifies differences in rates of hypertensive disorders of pregnancy in programmed cycles [15,28,30,31,[33][34][35]. Hypertensive disorders of pregnancy including gestational hypertension and preeclampsia, are pregnancy-specific hypertensive disorders that contribute significantly to maternal and perinatal mortality worldwide [48]. Risk factors include multifetal gestation, nulliparity, chronic hypertension and diabetes, obesity, maternal age over 35 and pregnancy from assisted reproduction, among others. Though incompletely understood, proposed pathophysiologic mechanisms include abnormal placentation, impaired angiogenesis leading to increased resistance at the uteroplacental interface contributing to downstream endothelial dysfunction. Other immunologic, inflammatory, environmental, or genetic factors likely also contribute to a variety of vascular, hematologic, hepatic, and renal changes seen in the spectrum of disease [48]. The window of implantation and early development of pregnancy are key areas that could play a role in the development of this spectrum of conditions. Diagnosis during pregnancy is also associated with long term cardiovascular disease risk, and prevention strategies are limited and include secondary prevention with aspirin for patients with identified risk factors [49,50]. More knowledge regarding differences in the environment in which a pregnancy is established in the ART population have implications for the general obstetric population as well. Identifying modifiable risk factors, including method FET preparation, are crucial to reducing the burden of disease in ART conceived persons.

(p7.1) While hypertensive disorders of pregnancy are reported to be significantly increased in programmed cycles consistently, other key outcomes studied include increased cesarean delivery rate increased in four of the six studies where it was addressed ( Table 2). Cesarean delivery increases the risk for severe maternal morbidity and has implications for a patient's future reproductive health [51]. Reducing the rate of unnecessary cesarean delivery is one step toward improving maternal safety [52]. Additional reported difference includes significant an increase in extremes of fetal growth, disorders of placentation including placenta accreta and preterm delivery in programmed cycles. Each of these proposed differences has important implications for short and long term maternal and child health and warrant further investigation.

(p7.2) Currently, the method of endometrial preparation is chosen based on provider preference or in line with clinic policy with consideration for the patient's underlying diagnosis. While programmed cycles allow for greater control over monitoring visits and transfer timing, transfers in natural cycles provide less flexibility, more frequent and less predictable ultrasound and hormone monitoring [42]. Clinics that primarily use programmed cycles to time transfer would need to make the necessary adjustments, including to laboratory workflow and provider availability, to adequately adapt to this type of preparation if supported by future studies. Method of frozen embryo transfer preparation may also become important variables in national surveillance systems to track outcomes prospectively.

(p7.3) Even if future data supports embryo transfer in ovulatory cycles, some patients will remain ineligible for this type of transfer, including patients with premature ovarian insufficiency, postmenopausal patients, and those without ovarian tissue either due to iatrogenic or congenital causes. As we learn more about the differences between programmed and ovulatory cycles, including the potential role of the corpus luteum and its secretions, it is possible that the programmed cycle could be further enhanced for these populations to help mitigate potential increased risks [53].

(p7.4) The ideal study required to determine the best method of endometrial preparation is a prospective multi-center randomized control trial with standard endometrial preparation protocols and definitions across all sites. Clinically relevant outcomes measured have consistent definitions determined in collaboration with obstetric and pediatric providers. Furthermore, attention must be given to the comparison of different types of ovulatory FET preparations, again with standard protocols, to understand the potential contribution of ovulation induction, hCG trigger and luteal progesterone supplementation. Clinical trials such as the "Impact of Corpus Luteum Presence or Absence in the Incidence of Preeclampsia After Frozen Embryo Transfer" (NCT04092829) and "Natural Versus Programmed Frozen Embryo Transfer (NatPro)" (NCT04551807) will offer promising insight into these important questions.
