# Generalized Modeling: A survey and guide

CorpusID: 244773321 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2903d69957a831ae2d47035f1304efc13afb8409](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2903d69957a831ae2d47035f1304efc13afb8409)

Fields: Biology, Physics

## (s2) Food Web Models
(p2.0) The first GM was a simple predator-prey model proposed by Wolfgang Ebenhöh in 2003. An analysis of this model was eventually published in . The predator-prey model was subsequently expanded into a general food-chain model. Analysis of this model revealed minor details in the shape of the functions used in conventional food-chain models can have a strong impact on stability properties , the same insight was discovered almost simultaneously in a different way in Fussmann and Blasius (2005). A similar GM setting, exploring the so-called paradox of enrichment, was recently studied in Awender et al. (2021).

(p2.1) While GM was initially viewed as a trick that worked in one particular model, the subsequent extensions implemented in Gross et al. (2005) made clear that the approach is generally applicable. This lead to an early paper that presented the GM as a general methodology (Gross and Feudel, 2006). This paper concluded by deriving a general food-web model, but did not analyze it in any detail.
## (s4) Other applications and similar approaches
(p4.0) In the medicine, GM were used to identify an early warning signal for critical transitions in systemic inflammation (Scheff et al., 2013) GMs were also applied to study questions in social dynamics and management. Gross and Feudel (2006)  A similar approach to GM is the analysis applied in Kisdi et al. (2013), that uses unspecified evolutionary trade-off curves to identify trade-off functions that lead to stable limit cycles in eco-evolutionary models. Another related method is the general structural sensitivity analysis proposed by Adamson and Morozov (2014b), that considers the infinite-dimensional neighborhood of model functions to determine the sensitivity with regards to the local stability of steady states. Thereby, they provide a method to conduct bifurcation analysis under uncertainty in model functions and to determine probabilities of certain bifurcations (Adamson and Morozov, 2014a). Their framework shares the use of unspecified functions, the steady-state treatment and the in-cooperation of the values of unknown functions as parameters in the Jacobian with the GM approach.
## (s15) Conservation laws
(p15.0) Conservation laws can be imposed on a GM in a similar way as the conditions, discussed above. However, there are two different ways in which a conservation law can be used, leading to slightly different notions of stability.

(p15.1) For the purpose of illustration consider that we have a two-dimensional system subject to one conservation law. We could then use the conservation law to reduce the number of variables to one even before normalization. Subsequently the normalization can be carried out normally. Alternatively, we can normalize the system and the conservation law and then interpret the conservation law as a constraint on the generalized parameters.

(p15.2) Both of these approaches are valid, but in the first case we arrive at a Jacobian of size 1 × 1, whereas in the latter case we arrive at a Jacobian of size 2 × 2. Both of these Jacobians describe the stability of steady states in the system, but in the former case only perturbations that respect the conservation law are allowed (hence the one-dimensional eigenspace), whereas in the latter also those perturbations are considered that violate the conservation law, leading to a slightly stricter notion of stability.

(p15.3) For most systems the second alternative provides the better notion of stability, unless the system is fundamentally closed and no perturbation from the outside is imaginable. The second alternative is also often simpler to implement as the simpler internal structure more than compensates for the slightly larger size of the Jacobian.

(p15.4) Even if we take the second route, conservation laws will impose some constraints on scale parameters, which is normally harmless, but can become complicated if we have to deal with many such constraints. This happens for example in metabolic models where the number of atoms of different elements are conserved. In such a case some additional machinery is needed to help us manage our scale parameters. A convenient solution is to represent the scale parameters as a linear combination of a set of fundamental flux modes that obey all constraints. This is explained in detail in Steuer et al. (2007).
## (s18) Numerical stability analysis
(p18.0) The main output of GM are Jacobian matrices. Hence the analysis of GMs is generally based on the analysis of Jacobians. The most direct application of these matrices is stability analysis. Given a specific set of generalized parameters, we can substitute the parameters into the Jacobian and then check the stability of the corresponding steady state by numerically computing the leading eigenvalue.

(p18.1) Leading eigenvalues can be computed highly efficiently using iterative eigensolvers. We can take advantage of this efficiency to explore the parameter space spanned by the generalized parameters by random sampling. For this purpose, we constrain all parameters to plausible ranges, which is possible as the parameters are generally easy to interpret. For example we may decide to set the parameter f x to cover the whole range from constant to quadratic response, i.e. the same range of possibilities that would be covered by a Holling type-III functional response in conventional models (Holling, 1959).

(p18.2) Once every parameter is thus constrained we can draw an ensemble of random data sets and evaluate their stability. We can then get a first impression of the behavior of a system by correlating the individual parameters with a stability.

(p18.3) Suppose we have a system with P generalized parameters and we draw M sets of values for these parameters. We can then denote the m'th realization of parameter i as p m i where i ∈ [1, P ] and m ∈ [1, M ]. Furthermore, we can denote the stability of the steady state described by the parameter set m as s m .

(p18.4) It is tempting to define s m as −Re(λ 0 ), where λ 0 is the leading eigenvalue of the Jacobian. However, this can be misleading in large networks as instabilities can often arise on very different timescales, such that the eigenvalue that is the leading one in most of the parameter space is not the one that causes the instability once stability is lost.
## (s20) Mathematical stability analysis and bifurcation theory
(p20.0) Because GM avoids the computation of steady states, the elements of the matrix are often simple expressions, which are convenient for pen and paper math.  At the intersection of these lines a codimension-2 double-Hopf bifurcation point is located. Observing this bifurcation in the GM points to a chaotic parameter region nearby. Indeed, this region can be discovered by numerical calculation of Lyapunov exponents in a conventional model (right). In the region where the GM predicts stability of the steady state the conventional model is stationary (dashed), in the unstable regions we observe oscillations (dark grey), quasiperiodicity (light and medium grey) and chaos (black). Figure adapted from Gross et al. (2005).
