# Growth Factors in Wound Healing -A Review

CorpusID: 243458317 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4691a25ac3dcddc50a70f1891b74856c1be4561d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4691a25ac3dcddc50a70f1891b74856c1be4561d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Role of growth factors in wound healing
(p0.0) Wound healing is a complex yet organized process of restoration of the functional structures lost during wounding, due to trauma, post-surgical complications, burns or otherwise. It is a natural repertoire of ordered overlapping series of cellular and vascular events, inflammation, proliferation, epithelialization, granulation tissue formation, maturation, matrix and tissue remodeling, which are triggered by a wide range of mediators from histamine to growth factors like TGF-b and vascular factors like VEGF 4 from the wound microenvironment. On occurrence of a wound, a complex interplay of cells and proteins take place, the blood platelets aggregate and bind with collagen to prevent blood loss by forming a clot 5 . The incidence of the wound creates a hypoxic environment that promotes inflammation by releasing proinflammatory mediators, the molecular signals that manifold the inflammatory activities, example, by recruiting leukocytes and monocytes which differentiate into tissue macrophages 6 . Neutrophils are the predominant and prime inflammatory cells. Once activated they release enzymes like elastase, protease and collagenase which degrade and remove damaged tissues at the wound site. 10 Platelets also initiate inflammation by producing EGF, PDGF, TGF b1 and IL-1. These attract neutrophils to the wound site; TGFb induces selective differentiation of monocytes to macrophages which also contribute to the inflammation. Also the monocyte chemotactic protein, TGF-b1 recruits mast cells to the wound site which releases histamines, proteoglycans, proteases and platelet activating factor. Unresolved or prolonged inflammation leads to chronic non healing wounds. Once active the inflammatory cells synthesize TGFb1 & IL-4 which in turn suppress them leading to reversal of inflammation (Fig. 1).

(p0.1) TNF-a and IL-1 produced by macrophages initiate and regulate proliferation of fibroblasts and endothelial cells. Upon activation the fibroblasts release collagen and other glycosaminoglycans which deposit with fibronectin and forms the ECM, the major component of the granulation tissue. The further growth of the granulation tissue requires angiogenesis, which is initiated by the bFGF and VEGF produced by the endothelial cell, keratinocytes and macrophages. PDGF released by the degranulating platelets holds the important role of increasing the structural integrity of blood vessels during angiogenesis. The balance between the collagen synthesis and breakdown forms an essential part of the remodeling of the collagen fibres. During remodeling the granulation tissue is slowly replaced by the connective tissue which contributes to the elasticity and tensile properties of the otherwise intact skin, the major contribution being from the connective tissue growth factors (Fig. 2).
## (s1) Epidermal growth factor (EGF)
(p1.0) Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) is a growth factor that stimulates cell growth, proliferation and differentiation by binding to the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR). The protein was initially found among nerve growth factors extracted from mouse submandibular gland 26 . The family consists of other members including Transforming growth factor-치, heparin binding EGF (HB-EGF), amphiregulin, epiregulin, neuregulin and beta-cellulin 7 . EGF is a key regulator of epithelial cell motility thereby influencing the rate of re-epithelialization. It aids wound contraction by stimulating fibroblasts proliferation and migration and induces dermal maturation by binding with the EGFR in the cells at the wound site 14 . Topical application of EGF is considered to be a useful therapy for cutaneous wounds. Analysis of the wound fluid gave the first ever evidence of EGF at the wound site. It was studied that EGF exhibited a synergistic role with Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) in stimulating in-vitro proliferation of keratinocytes 7 (Fig. 3).
## (s4) Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF)
(p4.0) Platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) is a helping hand in regulating a lot of cellular activities related to wound healing process including mitogenesis of fibroblasts and many cells, angiogenesis and chemotaxis. The protein is made of A and B polypeptide chains, combining to generate three isoforms, AA, AB and BB. Located on the chromosomes 7 and 22, the genes for A and B chains express to generate proteins of varying degrees of affinities to cell surface receptors belonging to the tyrosine kinase family 38 . The expression if stimulated by conditions like low oxygen tension, thrombin levels and presence of other growth factors or cytokines. PDGF binds to the specific receptors and activate them through ligand-induced dimerization of 치 and 칙 receptors, forming homo-and heterodimers of different signaling strengths. Receptor dimerization induces autophosphorylation of intracellular receptor components, change in conformation in-turn and activation 39 . Activation of the PDGF receptors tend to induce chemotaxis in certain cell types, however PDGF 치 receptors are studied to inhibit chemotaxis of a few selected cell types like the fibroblasts and the smooth muscle cells. Both the receptor types induce increase in intracellular Ca 2+ concentrations. In connection with this the receptors are understood to inhibit communication between cells through gap junctions and present an anti-apoptotic effect. A group of intracellular adaptor molecules involve in interacting with the receptor molecule including PI3-K, Src, Stat5, Grb2, Grb7, Nck, Crk etc. These molecules contain the conserved SH2 domain which binds with a phosphorylated tyrosine, which is achieved in this case by ligand dimerization 40 .
