# Periodontitis and cardiovascular disease: A literature review

CorpusID: 247449634 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67603643c8647d711cefece10b94416f77b21c53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67603643c8647d711cefece10b94416f77b21c53)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s6) Arterial fibrillation (AF)
(p6.0) AF is the most typical cardiac arrhythmia worldwide. 77 Inflammation is known to have a potential role in AF development. 78 About AF and periodontal disease, there are limited studies which found out this relationship. Chen et al. conducted a cohort study and concluded that there was an increased risk of AF or flutter in the periodontal disease group compared with the patients without the periodontal disease. 79 Chang et al. conducted another study among 161286 subjects from the National Health Insurance Service-Health Screening Cohort (NHIS-HEALS) which had no medical history of AF, HF, or cardiac valvular diseases. To assess oral hygiene, they evaluated the presence of periodontal disease, any dental visit, number of missing teeth, etc. They concluded that oral hygiene enhancement resulted in decreasing the risk of AF. They also suggested that subjects with good oral hygiene might have a reduced risk of AF. 80 About the other types of arrhythmia, there are not enough studies that assess this association with periodontal disease.
## (s8) Other CVDs
(p8.0) Karhunen et al. conducted a study through 300 middle-aged men who were the victims of sudden death and subjected to medico-legal autopsy and they carried out the panoramic X-ray which can indicate dental lesions. They concluded that men who suffer from sudden cardiac death in early middle age seem to present a higher rate of dental pathology. The result showed 72.1% horizontal bone loss and 30.9% vertical pockets, which are signs of periodontitis. 84 Due to the lack of studies in this field, further study is needed to be done to obtain more accurate conclusions. There are not enough studies on other types of CVD.
