# Review Article Tissue Regeneration with Hydrogel Encapsulation: A Review of Developments in Plants and Animals

CorpusID: 244797442 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81f59fe2649fade25aaf868e6cbd151b57c541b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81f59fe2649fade25aaf868e6cbd151b57c541b1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Materials Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) Hydrogel-Based Cell Encapsulation, Protoplast Regeneration as Use Case for Plant Cells
(p3.0) A key motivation behind the utilization of hydrogel encapsulation methods in plant sciences are aimed at fundamental studies on processes associated with cell and tissue regeneration, which include the recovery of cell walls, reentry of cell cycles, formation of calli, acquisition of pluripotency, and de novo tissue regeneration [26]. Specifically, cells do not have high proliferation in liquid suspension cultures and are also not an adequate platform for studying the molecular mechanisms that influence the regeneration of cells [27]. Hydrogel encapsulation within thin alginate layers and thin alginate films (thickness < 10 μm) have been utilized for the immobilization of Daucus carota protoplasts. This allowed for the study of the effects of various culture conditions on the embryogenesis of these protoplasts [28]. Sinha and Caligari have shown the enhanced rate of protoplast division of recalcitrant lupin protoplasts when encapsulated within hydrogel droplets when compared to suspension cultures [22]. Specifically, protoplasts were isolated from cotyledons of two-week-old Lupinus albus 2

(p3.1) BioDesign Research seedlings and cultured in four different culture modes, as illustrated in Figure 2, to compare development in liquid suspension with hydrogel encapsulation: (i) suspension over a rigid substrate, (ii) suspension over an agarose layer, (iii) protoplasts embedded within a single layer of agarose hydrogel, and (iv) protoplasts encapsulated within agarose droplets. Subsequently, the division and the morphology of the protoplasts in the different aforementioned cases were quantified. Moreover, protoplasts encapsulated in additional hydrogels with different gelation kinetics were also compared, including different concentrations of gellan gum and sodium alginate. It was found that agarose at low concentrations were more conducive to protoplast division than other hydrogels, and it was postulated that there might be a direct relationship between hydrogel firmness and area of contact between the protoplasts and surrounding matrix. Generally, it was found that encapsulation within agarose droplets resulted in higher rates of mitosis, while alginate embedding inhibited protoplast division. It was suggested that the utilization of a continuous matrix as provided by hydrogel droplets mimics a meristematic tissue and the natural immobility of plant cells within the tissue. Similar results were noted by Deryckere et al. when they compared three different modalities of encapsulation for plantlet regeneration of Cichorium protoplasts (i.e., solid media, liquid suspension, and encapsulated beads) and demonstrated enhanced regeneration in low melting point agarose beads compared to the other two modalities [29]. Specifically, the protoplasts from leaves of 11 Cichorium genotypes were isolated and cultured independently in the three aforementioned encapsulation methods, after which the cell viability and cell division was tracked. The cells in the liquid suspension clustered together, which in turn reduced cell viability due to the transfer of toxic compounds from one cell to another within the clusters. This was also confirmed by the detection of the build-up of anthocyanins in the liquid suspension. The fully solid agar media was impacted by the inability to be regularly refreshed, and this caused a lowering of osmotic potential due to dehydration, which lowered viability and prevented any cell division from happening. On the other hand, the cells that were encapsulated in the agar beads thrived optimally and showed the highest rates of division, due to being able to be refreshed with fresh media regularly, and the homogenous distribution of cells in the agar beads prevented cluster formation from happening. This shows that hydrogel encapsulation requires a multifaceted consideration of factors such as mode of encapsulation and may also potentially be a method to control cell-to-cell interactions, such as cluster formation.

(p3.2) Another aspect of hydrogel encapsulation that might influence the growth of encapsulated protoplasts is the choice of hydrogel material used for encapsulation, and the genotype from which the protoplasts are isolated. For instance, Prange et al. established a regeneration protocol from protoplasts of three wild species of Cyclamen, Cyclamen graecum, Cyclamen mirabile, and Cyclamen alpinum and compared the cell growth responses in two different embedding agents, agarose and alginate, and observed different cell responses from protoplasts of different genotypes [30]. The key results from this study are illustrated in . Cyclamen alpinum cells showed normal development in alginate but were elongated and bulged in agarose, with irregular cell wall strengths. However, microcalli formation was only observed after 6-10 weeks of culture in both embedding media. Cyclamen graecum protoplasts exhibited similar circular morphology in both alginate and agarose and showed similar rates of division and high formation of microcalli within a few days. In contrast, Cyclamen mirabile protoplasts showed significantly higher division rates in agarose when compared with alginate and showed irregular cell wall regeneration in agarose. This highlights the need to use a system-level approach to selecting a hydrogel material for the encapsulation of protoplasts-a specific hydrogel may elicit a different outcome in different genotypes of even the same species of plant, and it is necessary to make careful consideration of the desired outcome prior to the selection and utilization of a hydrogel material. Moreover, hydrogel selection is not a trivial choice and requires further celllevel studies to understand the effect of different hydrogels on protoplast behavior of different species and genotypes.
## (s4) BioDesign Research
(p4.0) be activated during regeneration due to mechanical injury to plant organs [33]. However, no PLT activation was observed during protoplast isolation, which indicated that wall digestion was the primary cause of gene expression, rather than mechanical damage to the leaves that are required prior to protoplast isolation. Additionally, prior studies have established WUS expression as being essential to shoot regeneration by establishing a stem cell niche [34].    
## (s5) Potential Challenges with Hydrogel Encapsulation Methods
(p5.0) While the aforementioned studies show the potential of utilizing hydrogel encapsulation as a tool for plant cell culture, there are some critical disadvantages associated with the technique that need to be considered. For instance, hydrogel encapsulation may potentially hinder downstream processes such as transcriptomic profiling due to the need to release encapsulated cells. This may require additional enzymatic degradation of the bulk matrix, such as agarases on agarose-derived hydrogels [35], or collagenases on collagen-derived hydrogels [36]. The release of encapsulated cells may also be facilitated by utilizing reversible crosslinking methods, which may allow for relatively simple liquefaction of crosslinked hydrogels. For instance, alginates are crosslinked using ionic crosslinking strategies, which are reversible by using calcium chelators such as sodium citrate [37]. Similarly, thermally crosslinked gelatin, and other related hydrogels, can be liquefied by simply varying the external temperature to the liquefaction temperature [38]. However, changes in temperature outside of an optimal window is known to cause changes in gene expression in protoplasts [39], and this must be considered before utilizing temperature-based liquefaction methods. One of the key motivations behind using hydrogel encapsulation is being able to achieve high rates of cell division in encapsulated protoplasts and cells. However, the presence of a solid matrix may also hinder the rate of division and proliferation of some protoplasts of some species. For instance, Chrysanthemum indicum protoplasts have been documented to have significantly higher rates of proliferation in liquid culture when compared to hydrogel encapsulation. This may also be potentially due to accumulation of cellular waste within the hydrogel matrices [40]. Similarly, regeneration of plants from Populus×beijingensis was also found to be significantly higher in liquid culture, due to the ability to easily replenish fresh media. This allows for the reduction of medium osmolarity while also supplying new nutrients for the cells, which in turn can enhance division frequency [41]. Similar results were observed in the cultivation of Kalanchoe blossfeldiana protoplasts for plant regeneration, with the liquid culture offering a more direct approach to replenishing nutrients [42], and in the culture of leaf-and calli-derived protoplasts of Albizia julibrissin which showed improved division and regeneration in liquid suspension as opposed to hydrogel encapsulation in agar [43]. Thus, cases such as these may require the utilization of additional media supplantation around hydrogel constructs in order to dilute such molecules.
