# biomolecules A Review on Microbial Products and Their Perspective Application as Antimicrobial Agents

CorpusID: 245213230 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af99cb079f68c5892716b28c39cd1e8a34cfed01)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Bacteria
(p2.0) Bacterial antimicrobial compounds have been used traditionally for numerous reasons, including delaying the spoilage of food material or crops by plant pathogens in agriculture, and extending the shelf life of products in the food industry [12]. Compared to terrestrial bacteria, marine bacteria have many unique secondary metabolites due to their more complex and biologically competitive environment and their unique pressure, temperature, salinity, oxygen, light, and pH conditions. These factors make them a rich source of effective antibiotics.
## (s6) Non-Ribosomal Synthesized Peptides (NRPs) and Polyketides (PKs)
(p6.0) NRPs and PKs include a range of cyclic, linear, and branched compounds, synthesized by composite enzymes viz. non-ribosomal peptide synthetases (NRPS), polyketide synthetases (PKS), and hybrid of NRPS/PKS, respectively [22,54]. Lipopeptides (LPs) are NRPs produced by Bacillales; LPs have significant antimicrobial activity [55]. LAB is considered the primary producer of ribosomally synthesized antimicrobial peptides, as reviewed by Alvarez-Sieiro et al. [53] and Pircalabioru et al. [30]. However, the classification scheme for antimicrobial compounds produced by Bacillus is not explored in comparison to LAB. Caulier et al. [22] reviewed and updated the antimicrobial metabolites classification from the B. subtilis group based on biosynthetic pathway and chemical nature. Zhao et al. [21] acknowledged 31 types of PKs, NRPs, and NRPS/PKS hybrid synthesized antimicrobials using antiSMASH.
## (s9) B. subtilis
(p9.0) Act as bioagents showing hypocholesterolemic activities, immunomodulators; antibiotics, antiviral, and antitumor agents; toxins; and enzyme inhibitors [60] Surfactins, a cyclic heptapeptide that formulates a lactone bridge with β-hydroxy fatty acids, are the most potent biosurfactant. They display an array of activities including hemolytic, antiviral, anti-mycoplasma, and antibacterial [61]. Surfactin WH1 fungin from Bacillus amyloliquefaciens WH1 is an antifungal inhibiting glucan synthase that reduces the synthesis of callose on the fungal cell wall and binds to ATPase on the mitochondrial membrane, ultimately inducing apoptotic markers to stimulate the extracellular apoptotic pathway [62]. Many researchers claim that after inserting into the lipid bilayers, surfactin acts by forming voltage-independent channels in biofilms, distorting the membrane integrity and permeability of ions, i.e., K + and Ca 2+ , causing membrane disruption [63].

(p9.1) Iturins are comprised of A, C, D, and E isoforms, bacillomycin D, F and L, and mycosubtilin that inhibit bacterial growth in the same manner as class I and class II bacteriocins [64]. A marine-derived Bacillus velezensis 11-5 produced a cyclic lipopeptide (CLP) iturin A, which is considered an antagonist against Magnaporthe oryzae, a rice pathogen [65]. Fengycin, an anti-fungal lipopeptide, isolated from Bacillus sp. is also called plipastatin. Both iturins and fengycins act as biocontrol agents preventing plant diseases and inhibiting the progression of a wide variety of plant fungal pathogens including Aspergillus flavus, Rhizoctonia solani, Fusarium graminearum, Botritis cinerea, and Penicillium expansum [66]. However, there is no doubt that LPs are a novel class of antibiotics exhibiting a wide range of activities. Therefore, detailed structural and functional knowledge is required to exploit them as potent antimicrobials, feed additives, and drug delivery systems.
## (s12) Archaea
(p12.0) Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sul-Antibacterial, antifungal and anticancer activity [90] Streptomyces sp. YIM66017
## (s14) Archaea
(p14.0) Archaeocins, is a proteinaceous antibiotic produced from archaea which mark the chronicled beginning in the series of antimicrobial compounds. The term "archaeocin" was used to differentiate the archaeal peptide and protein-based antibiotics from those produced by bacteria [95]. Only two phylogenetic groups have produced archaeocins (Table 4); one is euryarchaeal producing "halocins", whereas the other group is crenarchaeal genus Sulfolobus producing "sulfolobicin" [96]. Valera et al. [97] reported halocins, the first proteinaceous antimicrobial compound from halophilic members of the archaeal domain. Archaeal protein VLL-28, from Sulfolobus islandicus, is the first archaeal antimicrobial peptide, possessing a broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity [98]. Until recently, very few reports were available on the characterization of antimicrobial compounds from archaea. Besse et al. [99] comprehensively reviewed the archaeocins and sulfolobicins antimicrobial peptides ribosomally-synthesized by archaea belonging to the order Halobacteriales and Sulfolobales, respectively. However, until recently halocin A4, 
## (s17) Fungi
(p17.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s18) Endophytic Fungi
(p18.0) Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table 5. produced by other domains. Nowadays, when archaea gain more attention, it becomes necessary to explore their metabolites', biosynthetic pathways, mode of action, etc., using the latest available technology.
## (s19) Fungi
(p19.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s20) Endophytic Fungi
(p20.0) Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table  5. produced by other domains. Nowadays, when archaea gain more attention, it becomes necessary to explore their metabolites', biosynthetic pathways, mode of action, etc., using the latest available technology.
## (s21) Fungi
(p21.0) In 1929, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold juice 'Penicillin' from Penicillium notatum fungus with an antibacterial activity [120]. Afterwards, several researchers started to search for a better strain to attain higher yields in easier growth conditions. After extensive research, Penicillium chrysogenum strains were considered for the commercial production of penicillin [121]. Revilla reported in 1986 the formation of the intermediate isopenicillin N in the course of penicillin G production in P. chrysogenum cultures [122], thereafter the formation of isopenicillin N/penicillin N and its late transformation to cephalosporin C in Acremonium chrysogenum [123]. Cephalosporins, a known antimicrobial agent, were purified from a marine fungus, Cephalosporium acremonium [124]. Recently, Li et al. [125] reported that pneumocandins, a lipohexapeptides of the echinocandin family, were produced by wild-type fungi Glarea lozoyensis and Pezicula (Cryptosporiopsis) species. Pneumocandins non-competitively bind to a catalytic unit of β-1,3-glucan synthase, resulting in osmotic uncertainty and cell lysis.
## (s22) Endophytic Fungi
(p22.0) Huang et al. [126] discovered ten-membered lactones from endophytic fungus Phomopsis sp. YM 311483, with antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, Fusarium, and Botrytis cinere. Endophytic Fusarium sp. from Selaginella pollescens collected from the Guanacaste conservation area of Costa Rica inhibit C. albicans [127]. The number of antimicrobial compounds were reported from the endophytic fungi, some of which are listed in Table  5.  
## (s23) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p23.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s24) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p24.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s25) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p25.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s26) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p26.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity. 
## (s27) Marine-Derived Fungi
(p27.0) In 2015 Meng et al. [133] discovered pyranonigrin F from fungus Penicillium brocae MA-231 allied with the Avicennia marina, a marine mangrove plant. Pyranonigrin F inhibits S. aureus (Gram-positive), Vibrio harveyi, and Vibrio parahemolyticus (Gram-negative bacteria), with considerably lower MIC values in comparison to the positive control (chloromycetin). Likewise, it is active against plant fungal pathogens Alternaria brassicae and Colletotrichum gloeosprioides, with improved MIC values compared to the positive control (bleomycin). Wu et al. [134] discovered Lindgomycin from Lindgomyces strains LF327 and KF970, reported from a sponge in the Baltic Sea, Germany, and Antarctica, respectively. Lindgomycin displayed antimicrobial activity against S. aureus, S. epidermidis, and methicillin-resistant S. epidermidis (MRSE). However, the inhibiting potential was two times less than the positive control chloramphenicol. It also constrains plant pathogenic bacterium Xanthomonas campestris. There is a never-ending list of antimicrobial compounds from marine fungi; a few of which are listed in Table 6, which displays their host, producer species, and bioactivity.   
## (s28) Colletotrichum asianum
(p28.0) Marine sponge Callyspongia sp. [154] Peniciadametizine A and Peniciadametizine B derivative of thiolated diketopiperazine was isolated from sponges-associated Penicillium sp. viz. Penicillium adametzioides AS-53 and Penicillium sp. LS54, respectively. Both derivatives inhibit A. brassicae (pathogenic fungus) with a MIC of 4.0 µg/mL and 32.0 µg/mL, respectively [138]. Communol A, G, and F extracted from P. commune 518 displayed antibacterial activities against E. coli with MIC values of 4.1, 23.8, and 6.4µM, respectively, and also against E. aerogenes [136]. Pyrrospirones were produced by marine-derived fungus Penicillium sp. ZZ380, isolated from Pachygrapsus crassipes which is a wild crab found on the seaside rocks of Putuo Mountain (Zhoushan, China). Pyrrospirones C-F, H, and I inhibit MRSA and E. coli having MIC values of 2.0-19.0 µg/mL [155]. Song et al. [156], following the previous lead, separated penicipyrrodiether A from a cultured marine fungal strain Penicillium sp. ZZ380 which inhibits E. coli and S. aureus with MIC of 34.0 and 5.0 µg/mL, respectively. These laboratory studies need to be directed toward developing the efficiency and effectiveness of isolated compounds that could benefit society in the long-term.
## (s30) Filamentous Fungi
(p30.0) Yeasts mainly occur in milk, meat, food, and products such as fruit, yogurt, jams, sausage, and cheeses. Generally, antimicrobial compounds produced from yeasts inhibit the evolution/growth of pathogenic organisms (bacteria or molds) in food products. Some classes of yeasts secrete toxins, thereby naming them killer yeasts. Killer yeasts naturally occur in rotten vegetables and fruits and constrain the growth of other yeast strains and also inhibit microbial growth [167]. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast), unicellular yeast, is the most widely studied microorganisms involved in many biotechnological practices because of its good fermentation capacity [168]. The inhibitory mechanism of S. cerevisiae killer strains was discovered in 1963 by Bevan and co-worker's, and the phenomenon is related to the secretion of a protein toxin, k1, and k28 from the host that kills sensitive target pathogenic cells in a receptor-mediated approach without direct cell-to-cell contact [169]. Other genera producing killer toxins include Cryptococcus, Candida, Kluyveromyces, Williopsis, Pichia, Debaromyces, and Zygosaccharomyces [170]. The anti-bacterial capability of S. cerevisiae is attributed to: Sequential re-pitching of Saccharomyces biomass is a common process during brewing. Therefore, yeast is reused many times before its final dumping [171]. Hence, yeast develops an adaptive response against oxidative stress like that of human cells, leading to the accumulation of vitamins (B6 and B12) and minerals (enzyme co-factors including zinc, manganese, and copper) in the yeast cell. Phenolic compounds are also adsorbed by Saccharomyces from the exterior medium, which increases the phenolic content and antioxidant activity within yeast cells [172]. Efficient means are required to disrupt yeast cell walls and separate the products of interest, which are further used for food applications. However, increasing consumer' fears regarding the toxicity of killer yeast strains present in food and milk products constitutes a direct risk to public health.
## (s32) Discussion and Future Prospects
(p32.0) One of the significant challenges healthcare services face worldwide is the excessive use of antibiotics in medicine and food production, leading to microbiome disruption. With the outburst of antimicrobial resistance strains, there is a continuous decline in the antimicrobial drug pipeline, and it has become necessary to discover and develop new agents/metabolites to tackle antibiotic resistance. Novel compounds that target microbial resistance can be developed to regulate the huge risk posed by multi-drug resistance. However, the production cost needs to be reduced by isolating these compounds from natural sources such as microorganisms and then synthesizing them or modifying derivative compounds. Along with this, further research into their toxicity against human cells, their mode of action, in vivo effects, and their interactions with commonly available antibiotics must be conducted. After the discovery of penicillin, many drug discoveries from microbial sources were reported. In addition, the advancement of techniques such as genetic engineering during the 1970s opened the door to the ignored source, i.e., microbial metabolites [188].

(p32.1) Ample research is being conducted to search for novel antimicrobial agents from biological sources, including bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, yeast, etc. Table 8 depicts selected commercially available antimicrobial products alongside their uses.  [194] LAB producing bacteriocins are a promising candidate for the food industry as they help to extend shelf life and safeguarde consumers' health. Actinomycetes, particularly Streptomyces spp., exhibited effective antagonistic activity and played a significant role in drug discovery and development.

(p32.2) In the ongoing rearch for novel antibiotics, archaeocins have generally been overlooked, and further studies on purifications and characterizations of archaeocins and sulfolobicins are in progress, resulting in the economical production of bioactive compounds for pharmaceutical applications. It is desirable to expand our understanding of the effectiveness and use of other naturally occurring ribosomally-synthesized peptide antimicrobials to understand their implantation and survival strategies, and to quantitatively estimate their efficacy for future applications in the pharmaceutical and health care sectors.

(p32.3) Fungi synthesized small quantities of bioactive compounds in response to explicit environmental conditions which cannot be reproduced easily in the laboratory. Therefore, to develop new antimicrobial drugs from these fungal metabolites, commercial-scale synthesis must be accomplished potentially through strain improvement, optimizing growth conditions, and incorporating techniques, such as metabolomics, genomics, and pathway engineering. Endophytic, filamentous, and marine-derived fungi also offer a suitable substitute against toxic, ineffective, and expensive antimicrobial drugs because they act as a warehouse filled with bioactive compounds with endless potential for biological properties. Antimicrobials, isolated from mushrooms, act as essential substitutes to synthetic drugs and preservatives, whose protection and influence on the health of humans, animals, and food are still uncertain. Although there are many edible mushrooms, the mushroom species identified have antimicrobial properties which are quite small. The current review demonstrates potent bioactive substances with antimicrobial activities from edible mushrooms. Hence, they must not be considered only as a culinary delicacy, but also taken as therapeutic agents. However, methods for isolation, purification, identification, and characterization of antimicrobial compounds from mushrooms need to be developed.

(p32.4) Microalgae are a promising source of high-value products, and large-scale screening programs have been conducted to discover the antimicrobial potential of microalgal extracts against pathogenic and foodborne organisms. However, major antibacterial and antifungal activity reports were predominantly from the Chlorella sp. and Chlamydomonas sp. Many hurdles exist in developing the marine product, including resource supply issues, large-scale production, production cost, and determination of the efficacy target. These obstacles must be bypassed by optimizing mass culturing conditions, utilizing biotechnological techniques, etc. Along with these measures, extensive clinical trials will be needed to determine the in vivo fortune of antimicrobials from microbial extracts on mammalian cells.

(p32.5) Therefore, developing and using robust screening and high-throughput methods will be essential to study their antimicrobial activity, thereby increasing the chances of discovering and identifying new antibiotic molecules. To achieve this goal, the experimental design must include all possible variables, such as recovering both intra-and extracellular extracts produced by microorganisms under variable growth conditions, utilizing potential inducers of antimicrobial activity, and testing these compounds against a more significant number of targets. In recent years, nanoencapsulation has gained much attention. It is a technique used for formulating and stacking a compound in nanosized carriers that can carry and deliver the molecules to the targeted site. Nanoencapsulation allows the conservation and controlled release of bioactive compounds, followed by resistance to pH and temperature variations, lesser product contamination, economic viability, and stability. Chromatographic separation techniques were used recently for purifying antimicrobials, followed by their chemical characterization using spectroscopic techniques, and response surface methodology (RSM) to predict the yield of the crude antimicrobial extract. Detailed functional and structural knowledge would explain antimicrobials' mode of action and performance at cellular and molecular levels. However, for this, a better understanding of the structure, function and, existing mode of action of newly identified antimicrobials is required.
