# Issue 1 (2022) | JCMR-3(1)-049 | Review Article Citation: Goldberg M. The Alveolar Bone Provides Support to Teeth and Other Function: A Review

CorpusID: 247285443 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8eec06e1177b5ff6bb542c9988b299445a635d5c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8eec06e1177b5ff6bb542c9988b299445a635d5c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Cellular Components
(p6.0) Osteoblasts arise from mesenchymal stem cells. They express parathyroid hormone receptors. They are derived from pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells differentiation controlled by RUNX2 (also known as CBFA1 (OB-cadherin). They are generating new bone matrix. They secrete various secretory vesicles, MMPs and TIMPs, cytokines and growth factors. They have a cuboidal or columnar shape. Osteoblasts: express parathyroid hormone (PTH), controlled by the master transcription factor RUNX2, also known as CBFA1 (core binding factor A1). The cells are cuboidal or have columnar shape. They attach to plasma membrane attachment plaque. They bind to collagen, attach to the underlying bone via integrins. TUNEL-positive structures have been observed inside osteoblasts vacuoles, demonstrating that osteoblasts engulf and degrade apoptotic bodies during alveolar bone formation. They produce Osteoprotegerin (OPG) and the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-B ligand (RANKL). Bone is rebuilt by osteoblasts and brocken down by osteoclasts both communicating through cytokine signaling (TGF-β, IGF) [8].

(p6.1) Osteocytes are osteoblasts entrapped into the bone lacunae during bone deposition. They serve as endocrine cells and regulate the phosphate homeostasis. They control bone remodeling through regulation of both osteoclasts and osteoblasts. They act as mechanosensors [11]. They target distant organs such as kidney, muscle and other tissues [12]. Among the functions attributed to osteocytes, the regulation of phosphate metabolism is important [13] ( Fig. 12). During bone remodeling there are intricate communication among bone cells. Osteocyte apoptosis is followed by osteoclastic bone resorption [14].   Bone lining cells (bordering cells) cover inactive bone surfaces: surface osteocytes, inactive osteoblasts, and flattened mesenchyme cells. These cells are joined by adherens junctions. The primary function of these cells is mechanosensation [16].
## (s7) Non-Collagenous Extracellular Matrix Components of Alveolar Bone
(p7.0) Genes such as Msx-1 and Msx-2, DLx (DlX1/2, Dlx -5/6 and Runx-2) regulate the expression of osteocalcin. RUNX activate the expression of collagen type 1, BSP, osteocalcin and osteopontin [17].

(p7.1) Reciprocal interactions between the epithelium and mesenchyme play a key role, mediated by seven signaling pathways: WNT, BMP, FGF, SHH, EDA, TNF and NOTCH, which affect gene expression networks regulated by Transcription Factors (TF).
## (s8) Proteins
(p8.0) PHEX and DMP1 contribute to hypophosphatemic rickets. Alkaline phosphatase, sclerostin (blocking the stimulatory actions of BMP-2, -4, -5, -6 and BMP-7 or blockage of Wnt signalling and MEPE [18][19][20]. Phospho 1 is a phosphatase enriched synthetized by osteoblasts.
## (s9) Extracellular Matrix Proteins
(p9.0) Proteoglycans  Heparan sulfate include a variety of biological activities, developmental processes, angiogenesis, blood coagulation and tumor metastasis.  Chondroitin sulfate affect neuroplasticity  Keratan sulfate is present in cornea, cartilage, bones, horns of animals  Hyaluronic acid control the swelling of bonny tissues.  Small proteoglycans (decorin and biglycan), gamma carboxyglutamic acid proteins (Matrix gla protein and osteocalcin (bone gla protein) facilitate the attachment of bone cells.  Bone sialoprotein and osteopontin are the last PGs of the list [22][23][24]  Enzymes such as Sclerostin and DKK1: are osteocyte
