# R E V I E W A R T I C L E -M E C H A N I C A L E N G I N E E R I N G Recent Advances in Unmanned Aerial Vehicles: A Review

CorpusID: 248388227 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/573d8de7883253bfb590114c914c5ba8f416fa4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/573d8de7883253bfb590114c914c5ba8f416fa4e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Types/Categories of UAVs/Drones
(p3.0) UAVs are generally classified by their flying principle because of their aerodynamic structure. UAV's having heavier mass will depend on propulsive thrust to fly into the air. Further, they are categorized into two types, i.e., 'rotor' and 'wing' type. Rotor UAV will depend on multiple rotors and propellers attached to them to generate the required amount of thrust to lift upwards. Similarly, UAVs with wing types will depend on their wings to produce the aerodynamic effect for lifting upwards into the air. This is classified further into three sub-categories, i.e., flapping-wing, fixed-wing and flyingwing. The UAV with a light weight like a parachute, balloons and blimps will rely on forces of buoyancy to fly in the air.

(p3.1) Floreano et al. [13] discussed the different categories of UAV/Drones. Wherein, drones are categorized based on their mass and flight time. UAVs with heavier mass will have the capability to carry heavy payload and can perform autonomous and multiple tasks. Fixed-wing and Rotor-type UAVs are heavier in mass and relatively big in structure. Considering the aerodynamic efficiency, fixed-wing UAVs can have more flight time compared to rotor-type.

(p3.2) The structure of this manuscript is organized as follows: Sect. 1 gives a brief introduction to the current study and evaluation of UAV in various applications. In Sect. 2 the methodology followed to identify research articles in the field of UAVs are briefly explained. Section 3 describes the architecture and different components of UAVs. Section 4 shows an overview of UAVs yearly distribution, and types of UAV/drones with growth and need of autonomy. Finally, Sect. 5 concludes the manuscript with a glimpse of upcoming developments.
## (s8) Drone/Quad-Copter
(p8.0) Drones are also categorized depending on their structure and weight, i.e. Macro aerial Vehicle, Micro Aerial Vehicle (MAV) and Nano Aerial Vehicle (NAV). Kumar et al. [16] carried research on quad-copters and discussed their flight time challenges.

(p8.1) In addition, the main quad-copter is equipped with different components for high-level functioning in different applications such as path and trajectory planning, inspection and evaluation, etc. The structure is mainly divided into data collection, data processing and data actuation or evaluation. The data collection system handles the functioning of onboard sensors, cameras, battery and smart devices. The data collected by these devices is processed by the central core unit of UAV for defined tasks like path planning, surveillance, inspection and detection, localization, etc. Figure 8 depicts the area covered by components and sensors of UAV. These hardware onboard components cover the area of different applications such as path planning, collision avoidance and inspection, etc. during the hovering of UAV. LIDAR and infrared devices are mainly used for collision avoidance and mapping, whereas camera and GPS are used for surveillance of particular area or path of the UAV in front and rear direction. The central core system actuates the UAV for real-world environment applications as shown in Fig. 9. UAVs are equipped with various components such as Electronic Speed Controller (ESC), Camera & Gimbal, Flight controller and Lithium-ion battery (LiPo), etc. as explained below.
## (s11) Flight and Radio Controllers (FC and RC)
(p11.0) The flight controller plays a key role in UAV during hovering in the mid-air. Improper calibration of flight controllers will lead to crashes or non-stability in the flight of the drone. A highly configured radio controller with switchable sticks will lead to maintaining connectivity for long-range and to attain vertical take-off landing. Lim et. al. [17] discussed the importance of flight controllers in quad-copters and carried a survey of FC's available in the market. According to their survey, the open-source FC's are KK 2.1.5, Arducopter, Aeroquad, Pixhawk, Multiwii, Arduino and Raspberry pi. Apart from the FC's their survey also provides information about the structure and cost estimation of open-source FC's. Development in FC's has gradually increased over the past five years in terms of programming and operation. Pixhawk recently has released a more stable FC into the market known as Pixhawk-cube for Quad, Hexa and Octa-copters. For more information and survey regarding FC & RC for multiplecopters, researchers are suggested to go through this given reference for knowledge on the selection of components and controllers [18,19].
## (s13) First Person View (FPV) of UAV
(p13.0) Lupashin et al. [21] have demonstrated a video of quadcopters and their motion of flight indoor and outdoor. They have further used the technique of motion capture for explaining the topics of rhythmic flight, aggressive adaptive flight, unstable flight, iterative learning and balance of quad-copter for a perfect flight. Ollero et al. [22] also explained about a video and results of UAV from four European projects. Mellinger et al. [23] discussed the techniques of capturing motion, manipulation, perching and flying through the window with the quad-copter.
## (s14) Development of UAV's and Types
(p14.0) The information regarding types of UAV's and growth are collected from the past two decades by observing in the results of Web of Science and Scopus [24]. The information is framed into a graph for better understanding as shown in Table 2 Some examples of quad-copter system parts and advanced accessories used in modern commercial drones  
## (s17) i. UAV with flapping-wing
(p17.0) In various domains of robotics, BIOMIMETIC robots are one of the most lucrative domains across the globe. The unique aviation concept used in Flapping-wing micro aerial vehicles (FWMAVs) has received a lot of attention for improving aviation quality. It is being accepted for a wide range of possible uses in military and civic domains, including catastrophe investigation, intelligence collection, anti-terrorism reconnaissance, etc. They are characterized by good maneuverability, camouflage ability and high flight efficiency [30]. Approximately 1000 flapping-wing flying robots with stable flight performance have been produced so far. They were employed for a variety of purposes, including scientific study, flight testing and high-tech entertainment at parties [31]. UAVs with flapping wings in the shape of insects are most common and they are also known as 'Ornithopter' and are about hand size. Ma et al. [32] have developed a novel based flapping-wing UAV (Fig. 13a) in the shape of Bee with a mass of 380 mg. This mini UAV was hovering with stability in the air. Peterson et al. [33] fabricated a model known as 'BOLT'-flapping-wing UAV and also known as a bipedal robot as it can move on the ground surface and can fly in the air (Fig. 13b). Paranjape et al. [34] have designed a unique type of UAV with wing articulation for controlling the head angles and flight path of UAV. This type of UAV can perch naturally on a human hand or chair (Fig. 13c). Rose et al.   [35] have demonstrated a flapping-wing UAV with a bird shape known as H 2 bird (Fig. 14d). It is widely used for comparing the data from wind tunnels and free flight with aerodynamic modelling. In general, birds are the inspiration for developing FWMAV and fixed-wing aircraft. When a bird is flying, the actual airspeed experienced by its wings is a mix of forwarding movement of the body and flapping motion of the wings. The airflow over wings will be altered by the combination of these two types of motion, allowing the birds to fully utilize the high lift devices (Fig. 14).

(p17.1) The air flow surrounding the birds and FWMAV inflight differs significantly resulting in improvement of flying efficiency and performance. He et al. [36] presented a boundary control approach for controlling the two links rigid-flexible wing for FWMAV. It's design is based on the bionics idea to improve aircraft movement and flexibility. The modelling and vibration restraint of a rigid-flexible wing are investigated in this study. The proposed control technique by the author solves these challenges and the controllers are seen to be built to suppress vibrations  [36] and deformations. In addition, the angular error appears to be decreasing.
## (s21) Need of Autonomy in UAVs
(p21.0) In a dynamic environment, UAVs might collide with obstacles while performing different operations in various applications. The present technologies are not capable of overcoming these issues. So there is a need for autonomy implementation in UAV or aerial robotics sector. Autonomy is used in different applications such as inspection, path planning, communication, delivery system, task scheduling, etc. [72]. As mentioned in [73] there are ten levels of autonomy that are used for different applications. These levels are used to define the control levels and autonomy as a metric in UAVs as shown in Fig. 21.

(p21.1) So there is a need for autonomy implementation in UAV or aerial robotics sector. Autonomy is used in different applications such as inspection, path planning, communication, delivery system, task scheduling, etc. [72]. As mentioned in [73] there are ten levels of autonomy that are used for different applications. These levels are used to define the control levels and autonomy as a metric in UAVs as shown in Fig. 21. 
