# An Overview on Saccharomyces cerevisiae Indigenous Strains Selection Methods

CorpusID: 240541434 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf9c8fe1d2ed2a63d506603702ae953f6a3b9ed6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf9c8fe1d2ed2a63d506603702ae953f6a3b9ed6)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology

## (s4) S. cerevisiae strains isolation
(p4.0) After the harvest of bunches, the spontaneous fermentation must be started, crushing the grapes. In order to avoid the contamination of the cultures, sterile conditions must be ensured by using sterilised or disposable equipment. In this step, di-ammonium phosphate (DAP) can be used as yeast nutrient and SO 2 in the form of potassium metabisulphite can be added to promote the dominance of S. cerevisiae strain respect to SO 2 -sensitive non-Saccharomyces. Alternatively, the process could proceed without any addition of other nutrients or additive, except grape juice. The contact of must with berries skins is essential since the highest yeast concentration is in this compartment. Because of its resistance to osmotic pressure, tolerance to high sucrose concentration and to its efficient fermentation of sugar, S. cerevisiae is well adapted to the grape must [12,42].

(p4.1) Due to the ethanol tolerance of S. cerevisiae and to the sensitivity of other yeast species, when the alcoholic fermentation is close to the end (ethanol more than 10% V/V), a sample of fermenting must-wine should be collected to isolate those yeasts that are driving the spontaneous process [12,42]. Yeast isolation is performed by plating the collected samples on selective laboratory media in controlled conditions. The dilution of fermenting must or wine at the end of AF is critical to evaluate a reasonable number of colonies in the solid artificial media. However, a compromise with the risk to lose biodiversity with the dilution procedure must be found, so that the sample should represent the yeast population in each vinification. Usually, the sample is diluted until 10 −5 or 10 −6 and aliquots of these suspensions are plated. Wallestein Laboratory (WL) agar solid media allowing to differentiate among yeast species on the basis of different colours of the colonies is usually used for yeast growth (Figure 3). The incubation temperature must be 24-26° C.
## (s5) Genotyping: Molecular biology applied to yeast species identification and S. cerevisiae strain characterisation
(p5.0) One of the main goals in microbiology is to obtain a valid identification of microorganisms. Traditionally, before the application of molecular biology techniques, yeasts have been identified by morphological and physiological criteria. These methods are basically labor-intensive, time-consuming, and usually provide doubtful identifications. This is due to similar colony morphology, to the influence of culture conditions on yeast physiology and to the presence of different teleomorphic and anamorphic forms in the same species [50,51].
