# Thiadiazoles: the appropriate pharmacological scaffolds with leishmanicidal and antimalarial activities: a review

CorpusID: 24194201 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/398f681027af2b954a7b62edccb5d457c089e374](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/398f681027af2b954a7b62edccb5d457c089e374)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s2) Antimalarial compounds with thiadiazole substituent
(p2.0) The current antimalarial drugs have different mode of actions (30). 4-aminoquinoline (CQ and AQ) and aryl-amino alcohol drugs (MQ and HAL) inhibit the heme polymerization. Artemisinin and its derivatives also interact with heme or iron by their endoperoxide bond. While, the antifolate drugs inhibit either dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) (sulfadoxine) or dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) (cycloguanil, pyrimethamine). Today, drugs resistant variants showed reduced affinity toward antimalarial drugs. Actually, drug resistance is considered as an important global health problem in malaria prophylaxis and treatment. In this situation, the development of new, cheap, efficient, and safe drugs for the treatment of this disease is imperative.

(p2.1) Recently, the research groups have focus on the synthesis of new antimalarial compounds especially with a different mechanism of action compared with current drugs (Figure 6, Table 2). For instance; enzymatic activity of carbonic anhydrase in P. falciparum and in the mouse parasite P. berghei has been demonstrated in various studies (31)(32)(33). Krungkral et al. evaluated acetazolamide as a standard carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) ( Figure  4). Acetazolamide showed weak antimalarial activity for monitoring growth of P. falciparum in in vitro (IC50 value of 20 µM) (30) and a strong PfCA inhibitory activity with KI of 0.32 µM (31). When the human red cells were pretreated with acetazolamide, the host enzyme activity wholly abrogated, present no pronounced effect on the parasite invasion. On the other hand, in vivo studies showed complete inhibition of P. berghei carbonic anhydrase (pbCA) by acetazolamide. Whereas, it was ineffective against mice infected with P. berghei.

(p2.2) Indeed, the P. falcipaum carbonic anhydrase (pfCA) is one of the enzymes that involve in the sequential steps in the path-way leading to DNA/RNA synthesis in Plasmodium. Furthermore, the inhibitors of pfCA can prevent this biosynthetic pathway with different mechanism compared with current antimalarial drugs.  has reported the in vitro pfCA inhibition studies with a library of sulfonamide compounds. In this study 1,3,4-thiadiazole-and 1,3,4-thiadiazoline-2-sulfonamide derivatives 16-20 exhibited the inhibition of pfCA with KIs in the range of 0.192-6.867 µM (33). The variation of the inhibitory activity of these compounds depends on different substitution on thiadiazole ring. For instance, in the thiadiazoline 19 (KI = 6.867 μM), substituted methyl group on thiadiazole ring has been led to a two-fold increase in the inhibitory activity of 19 compared to 17 (KI = 3.441 μM). Also,  Ref  3D7  K1  W2  NF54   21  75.3  144  --Inhibition of pfLDH  34  22  --> 10  -Inhibition of FP  35  23  -->10  -24  -->10  -25 297 --284 -36

(p2.3) *The compounds (16)(17)(18)(19)(20) showed the inhibitory activity against pfCA with KI values of 2.583, 3.441, 0.192, 6.867 and 6.730 μM, respectively (33). EC50 value was calculated for the compound (25) replacement of the perfluoro-phenyl sulfonyl moiety of compound 16 (KI = 2.583 μM) with the corresponding perfluoro-phenyl carbonyl moiety present in compound 19 resulted in increased inhibitory activity 19 (KI = 6.867 μM) compared to 16. In fact, compound 18 (KI = 0.192 μM) with perfluoro-octyl sulfonyl moiety was the most potent pfCA inhibitor with thiadiazole scaffold in compared with acetazolamide as a standard carbonic anhydrase inhibitor with a KI of 0.315 µM (33). Compound 20 (KI = 6.730 μM) possessing phenyl ureido-thiourea moiety showed a less effective inhibitor than compounds 16-18. In the following, all compounds indicated low ex vivo anti P. falciparum activity with IC50 > 50 µM when compared with reference drug acetazolamide, which inhibited the ex vivo growth of P. falciparum with an IC50 of 20.0 µM. As a result, maybe other analogues of these compounds can have potential in development of novel antimalarial drugs because of inhibiting malaria parasite carbonic anhydrase, which is the first step of pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. P. falciparum lactate dehydro-genase (pfLDH) can consider as another target for antimalarial drug discovery. The parasite P. falciparum lacks a functional Kreb's cycle (34). Therefore, for energy production, it is dependent on glycolysis. LDH is the latest enzyme in the glycolytic pathway in P. falciparum that converts pyruvate to lactate and simultaneously converts NADH to NAD + . Moreover, this enzyme can be considered as a potential molecular target for antimalarial drugs as selective inhibitors of pfLDH. The inhibition of LDH is expected to stop the production of adenosine triphosphate, and subsequently P. falciparum cell death. Cameron and co-workers (34) synthesized a new class of heterocyclic, azole-based compounds, as selective inhibitors of the pfLDH that exhibited antimalarial activity. Using high-throughput enzymatic assay of several compounds, they found that azoles family was active against pfLDH, among thiadiazole compound including 3-hydroxyl and 4-carboxyl moieties. X-ray crystallographic and steady-state kinetic analyses showed the interaction of these compounds with pfLDH. The crystallographic analysis of enzymethiadiazole inhibitory complex between pfLDH and 4-hydroxy-1,2,5-thiadiazole-3-carboxylicacid (TDA1, 21) showed an amino acid interaction network at the active site of pfLDH, such as a hydrogen bond between sulfur atom in the thiadiazole ring with the side chain at serin 245 of enzyme. It also demonstrated that the formation of hydrogen bonds between carboxyl and hydroxyl groups with argenins 109 and 171 from the enzyme is vital for inhibition activity.

(p2.4) The study of antimalarial activity of compound (21) against P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes in both K1 chloroquine-resistant (IC50 value of 144 µM) and 3D7 chloroquine-sensitive (IC50 value of 75.3 µM) strains was parallel with its activity against pfLDH with IC50 value of 0.14 μM (34). Activity of compound (21) against the human LDH (hsLDH) isoforms showed IC50 value of 10.27 μM. The selectivity of this compound against hsLDH is rather less than malaria LDH. However, the inhibitory activity of these azolebased compounds was measured in a dose-response experiment against P. berghei in BALB/c mice, and TDA1 (21) showed the efficacy in killing the parasite. Although, TDA1 (21) was less effective than the chloroquine as a control drug. In the pharmacokinetic studies (34), TDA1 (21) has been exhibited to have good plasma level at 30 min after oral administration with a peak level of 35.2 μg/ml and after IP administration with peak level of 41.0 μg/ml. However, its half-life was short in the circulation that justifies the lack of complete suppression of parasitemia at dose of 100 mg/kg/day with different route of administration. The complex of PfLDH with NADH and TDA1 has been also reported with PDB ID:1T26 (34).

(p2.5) For the development of antimalarial chemotherapy with different mode of action, researchers also focused on Falcipains (FPs) as validated targets. The hemoglobinases of P. falciparum, which are called FP, degrade hemoglobin during the blood stage of P. falciparum and lead the parasite growth. With composition of structure and ligand -based virtual screening, a set of 28 potent inhibitors of FP were recognized, then in each sets were carefully assessed their structure-activity relationship (35). Analogs with the quinazoline core and thiadiazole substitution exhibited inhibitory activity against FP II. The type of substitution at position R2 in the quinazoline ring is important for its activity.

(p2.6) With aliphatic substitutions at this position, the activity of compound 22 was maintained (FP II IC50= 5.93 μm). However, cyclohexyl substitution in compound 23 resulted in a reduced activity against FP II FP II IC50 > 50 μm) in comparison to its analog (22). These compounds were also evaluated against the P. falciparum CQ-resistant strain W2 and showed IC50 values of > 10 μM against cultured parasites. The compound 24 with chlorine insertion at position 6 and phenyl at position 2 in quinazoline ring didn't show any activity against FP II at a test concentration up to 50 µM and presented a weak affinity (>10 μM) against W2 strain of P. falciparum.

(p2.7) A large chemical library has been assessed against blood-stage P. falciparum with growth inhibition assay for oral drug discovery (36). Originally, in vitro assays (cytotoxicity, dose-response, and spot test) as well as in silico and in cerebro analyses are involved in the choice and the validation of novel antiplasmodial hits. The chemical properties and the diversity of a set of hits were recognized using the computational analysis. Eventually, new chemotypes with favorable properties were synthesized and evaluated by a P. falciparum growth inhibition assay. At first, the screening campaign caused to the selection of 178 compounds with EC50 < 1 µM and selectivity >10. Cluster 25 with a imidazo-[2,1-b]-[1,3,4]-thiadiazole core and its six analogs were selected from 178 compounds. This cluster showed EC50 values of 297 and 284 against 3D7 and NF54 strains of P. falciparum, respectively and also indicated good physicochemical properties.

(p2.8) As a result, these researches showed that the synthesized compounds had moderate activity against P. falciparum. Meanwhile, the compound (18) showed excellent inhibitory activity against pfCA compared to acetazolamide (33). This thiadiazole analog have excellent potential in development of novel antimalarial drugs because of inhibiting malaria parasite carbonic anhydrase as a key enzyme in the first step of pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis. Although, continuing research on the improving of activity is needed for this analoge. This is considerable that the analog has different mechanism of action compared with current antimalarial drugs which can be its advantage relative to compounds with similar mechanism.

(p2.9) Nevertheless, with all advantages of thiadiazole scaffold in medicinal chemistry, their toxicity still remains a major concern and further exploration on desired synthesis methods is necessary which contribute to development of new drugs.
