# Ecology of Urban Bees: A Review of Current Knowledge and Directions for Future Study

CorpusID: 24414925 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12ee4315f6610759755e8c39d6899ad28fbdd9dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/12ee4315f6610759755e8c39d6899ad28fbdd9dc)

Fields: Geography, Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Little is known about urban bee fauna as we are only beginning to document their community dynamics including patterns of species diversity and abundance. In agricultural and wildland settings, bees contribute to ecosystem function as pollinators of a majority of crop (Klein et al. 2007) and angiosperm species, with an estimated 85% of angiosperms relying on bee pollinators (Moldenke 1976;Simpson 1977;Moldenke 1979;Frankie and Thorp 2002). Their ubiquitous presence and importance in non-urban habitats has led to many publications on wild bee ecology and conservation but publications on urban bee ecology are much fewer.

(p0.1) Conversion of natural habitat can potentially affect bees by decreasing foraging resources, eliminating nesting site availability, fragmenting habitats and subjecting populations to anthropogenic pressures such as pollutants, pesticides, foot traffic, among other effects. Monitoring responses of bee populations to urbanization may identify underlying drivers shaping bee community dynamicsrelationships that are currently obscure at best. Elucidation of causal relationships between community composition and habitat characteristics may provide information useful for bee conservation, especially as it applies to urban habitat construction.
## (s3) Scope of Urban Bee Surveys
(p3.0) Urban bee surveys have been conducted in sites that varied according to, among other factors, density of development, remnant vegetation type, size or history of use. In this review we categorized the types of urban habitats surveyed based on broad descriptors to provide a context for evaluating trends in urban bee communities. In most of the surveys the authors classified habitats as "urban" without providing detailed descriptions. We note that although proximity to a built environment does constitute an urban setting, the term "urban" is general and does not allow for distinctions between habitats based on variation in ecologically significant characteristics. McIntyre et al. (2000) discussed the need for using quantitative descriptors when defining "urban" habitats. The use of an interdisciplinary concept of an urban habitat would promote comparison between urban ecological studies (McIntyre et al. 2000).
