# Differences between hairdressers and consumers in skin exposure to hair cosmetic products: A review

CorpusID: 246361906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb0dee76ac3710bd3b9117685ab9ae399199dc4d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fb0dee76ac3710bd3b9117685ab9ae399199dc4d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) | Consumers' exposure
(p2.0) Typical use frequencies of hair cosmetics by consumers (when normally applied by professionals in a hairdressing salon) and self-users (when applying hair cosmetics at home) have been considered together. Some products are usually applied only in a hair salon (e.g., waving agents or hair relaxers), others frequently at home (e.g., shampoos and oxidative or nonoxidative hair colors). Data on consumers' exposure was obtained primarily from the NoG, as far as available, which refers back to Hall et al. (2007) as well as Hall et al. (2011),, 8,9 who suggest a framework for conducting population exposure assessments regarding European consumer exposure to cosmetic products.
## (s12) | Exposure to hair cosmetic products in hairdressers compared to consumers
(p12.0) Within the seven reviewed studies, data on the 12 procedures alongside with concomitantly used product types were available. Most of the identified tasks are performed exclusively by hairdressers (Table 1). Data on hairdressers' exposure including frequency of procedures using corresponding products, mean duration of procedures, the share of hairdressers who usually conduct the respective procedure, and the share of hairdressers usually wearing gloves while conducting the respective procedure, as well as consumers' exposure including frequency of procedures using corresponding products, mean duration of procedures, and the share of people who usually conduct the respective procedure were extracted as summarized in Table S2.

(p12.1) While shampooing/washing the hair, consumers and/or self-users are exposed to shampoo one time per day, 7 whereas hairdressers are exposed to shampoo up to 12 times per day, with a mean duration of 7.5 minutes for each washing procedure. 10 regularly by only 23.9% of the hairdressers. 10 During deep conditioning the hair with hair conditioner, consumers and/or self-users are exposed to hair-conditioning products 0.28 times per day, 20 in contrast to hairdressers who are exposed to hair conditioners up to 5 times per day, with a mean duration of 10 minutes plus possibly additional 12.5 minutes each due to potentially following use of conditioning products with head massage. 10,17 Deep conditioning is done by 90.5% of hairdressers, and 11.5% of hairdressers reported wearing gloves while doing this task; head massages are conducted by 91.7%

(p12.2) of hairdressers and 8.4% of hairdressers wear gloves massaging the head. 10 Cutting wet hair is done either without previous coloring or previous coloring. The former strategy avoids exposure of hairdressers to residual dye monomers, as it is known that colored hair exposes hairdressers to substances released from the hair color. Consumers as well as self-users are not exposed to wet hair during the cutting of hair. Hairdresser are exposed to wet, uncolored hair for up to 9.9

(p12.3) times per day and to colored hair for $2 times per day, with a mean duration of a haircut being 25.0 minutes each. 10,15,[17][18][19]21 This task is conducted by 93.5% of the hairdressers, and 1.3% of them use gloves for it. 10 Regarding coloring of the full head of hair with permanent/ oxidative hair color using 6% to 12% hydrogen peroxide, consumers and/or self-users are exposed one time per month in contrast to hairdressers who are exposed to permanent/oxidative hair color for up to four times per day. 10,[15][16][17][18][19]21 In terms of coloring a full head of hair with semi-permanent oxidative hair color using 2% to 3% hydrogen peroxide or nonoxidative hair color, consumers or self-users are exposed one time per week regarding semi-permanent, nonoxidative hair color and one time per month regarding semi-permanent oxidative hair color, whereas hairdressers are exposed to such coloring agents about three times per week. 16,17 While coloring roots/regrowth only using oxidative/nonoxidative hair colors according to previous treatment, consumers and/or self-users are exposed a maximum of one time per week regarding semi-permanent, nonoxidative hair color and one time per month regarding semi-permanent oxidative hair color, in contrast to hairdressers who are exposed to the agents approximately three times per week. 17 The mean duration of each of the coloring services mentioned is 15.0 minutes, and the services are conducted by 99.3% of the hairdressers, of whom 95.2% wear gloves during this task. 10 There is no scientific data on consumers' exposure in highlighting the hair (mostly using bleach with 6% to 9% hydrogen peroxide) and
## (s13) | Exposure to wet work in hairdressers compared to consumers
(p13.0) In addition, information about wet work exposure in hairdressers was extracted ( Table 3). These data support the known fact that hairdressers are exposed to a considerable amount of wet work within their daily working life, which can add up to even more than 4 hours per working day for a considerable amount of hairdressers, 15,17,22 whereas wet work is likely less performed by the "common consumer." 23 
## (s15) Dermal, respiratory
(p15.0) No Styling products (e.g., hair gels) are applied by the hairdresser without gloves, and the hands are usually not washed until the service is finished. In order not to get setting products (e.g., hairspray) into the customers' face, the hairdresser protects it using their own hand while spraying with the other, getting the hairspray on the protecting hand. Dermal and respiratory effects of hairsprays have already been reported. 46,47 Metal tools/objects (e.g., tweezers, crochet hooks)

(p15.1) Nickel and/or cobalt Dermal No Tweezers are used to pluck eyebrows and to remove undesired facial hair. A nickel and cobalt release (and also a co-release of both) from tweezers has already been reported. 26,27 Crochet hooks are used for highlighting/ lowlighting the hair using a cap. A nickel release from tweezers in the hairdressing trade has already been reported. 27,48 many working tasks, but also that a considerable amount of identified procedures are usually performed only by hairdressers, such as perming the hair using diverse types of perming solutions (Table 1).
