# MAINTENANCE ANALYTICS FOR BUILDING DECISION- MAKING: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 248139104 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74dfcd754f9688fe2a43625a55268f3928f0e36](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f74dfcd754f9688fe2a43625a55268f3928f0e36)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) To achieve the purpose of this study, a comprehensive literature review was carried out to understand maintenance analytics, its application, data source, and the various analytical techniques. Articles for this study were sourced from Web of Science, Springer Link, Elsevier, Emerald, Scopus databases, and Science Direct.

(p1.1) Keywords used in the search were 'maintenance analytics' OR 'data analytics' OR 'machine learning' AND 'big data' OR 'maintenance data'; AND 'maintenance', OR 'facility management' OR 'building maintenance'. A total of 1647 papers were generated from the search, but after reviewing the abstracts and keywords, articles that did not fit the study were eliminated. Fifty-seven (57) articles were then selected for the review.

(p1.2) The content analysis was applied for the literature review. Each article was reviewed based on the research problem, aim, methodology, analytical technique, case study, and size of data. The results and findings from the analysis and the recommendation for future research are provided. Karim et al. (2016) described maintenance analytics as a structured approach for extracting valuable information from a methodological and technological perspective. Maintenance analytics can be applied to align maintenance needs with projected growth or reduction, using data obtained from field works and inspections (Razali et al., 2020). This decreases maintenance frequency to ensure corrective maintenance is as low as possible, thereby reducing the overall maintenance cost. Yang & Bayapu (2020) highlighted the following action plan for the implementation of maintenance analytics:
## (s5) Computerised Maintenance Management System (CMMS)
(p5.0) The CMMS was designed to assist in planning, management, and administrative functions needed for effective maintenance and repairs (Jamkhaneh et al., 2018). The software assesses a building to reduce maintenance problems (O'Donoghue & Prendergast, 2004). Lopes et al. (2016) listed the functions of CMMS to be facility management, work order management, inventory control, preventive maintenance, and report management. It covers a wide range of activities related to maintenance work order, work location, material, equipment needed, and intended date of completion (Hassanain, Froese & Vanier, 2003). Also, it supports the maintenance budget and financial management. The CMMS tool is not exclusively designed to control maintenance but to ensure high output by carrying out appropriate activities over time (Kumar et al., 2014).

(p5.1) Of the various maintenance systems, CMMS is the most practical for the facilitation of maintenance decision-making because it contains information on maintenance operations (Yousefli, Nasiri & Moselhi, 2020). Although it is impossible to be proactive in maintenance without computer-based support, the successful implementation of CMMS is still low (Wienker, Henderson & Volkerts, 2016). This is because organisations are reluctant to adopt the accompanying process for its implementation, their view of CMMS as a strategy rather than a maintenance tool, the lack of adequate IT infrastructure, failure to promote its importance to senior management, and insufficient resources for its implementation (Wienker et al., 2016).
