# Donor quality of life after living donor liver transplantation: a review of the literature HHS Public Access

CorpusID: 244268211 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/440127f317a9558394c03ffc98b529e417f163d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/440127f317a9558394c03ffc98b529e417f163d8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Materials and methods
(p1.0) We performed a systematic search of the MEDLINE database from 2008-2020 to identify original studies evaluating donor HRQOL after LDLT. This time interval was chosen to ensure that this systematic review included any articles that were published between 2008 and 2010, and not captured in our previous systematic review (16). In order to include all relevant articles, we searched the MEDLINE database using the following Medical Subject Headings: "Liver donors", "liver transplantation", and "quality of life". In addition to these Medical Subject Headings, we included the following keywords to ensure thorough coverage: "QOL", "HRQOL", "HRQL", "liver transplant", "liver grafting", "liver graft(s)", "hepatic transplantation(s)", "hepatic transplant(s)", "living donor hepatectomy", "living donor hepatectomies", "LDLT", "live donor(s)", "living donor hepatectomy" and "living donor hepatectomies". Inclusion criteria limited articles to human subjects and those available in English. We excluded review articles, case reports, case series, articles that only assessed HRQOL in donors prior to LDLT and articles that exclusively assessed pediatric LT. The remaining articles were evaluated for study design, cohort size, and follow up time. Studies were excluded if they included significant methodological flaws, including small sample size (n<20).

(p1.1) The specific HRQOL instrument utilized in the study was also critically examined in order to evaluate the clinical significance of results and compare findings across studies (Table  1). Each HRQOL survey and relevant supporting literature was assessed individually to determine if the survey had been validated prior to use in the study and if so, whether or not the survey was validated in an appropriate study population. Each instrument's psychometric properties were evaluated thoroughly to ensure that the instrument was valid and reliable. If a survey had not been validated or if it had been created by the authors specifically for the study, survey questions were assessed when available to determine if the questions were suitable and clinically relevant to live living donors' QOL. Studies were excluded if they included non-validated surveys without outlining specific survey questions or if the survey questions were not deemed to be clinically relevant to living donors' QOL. Studies using surveys validated in the general population were included as living donors were thought to most closely resemble this population.
## (s2) Results
(p2.0) Our original MEDLINE search, restricted to the English language and human subjects, identified 159 unique articles. After evaluating each article, 43 articles met inclusion criteria and were included in the review (Figure 1).

(p2.1) Twenty studies (47%) had a cross-sectional design and 23 (53%) studies had a longitudinal design (Table 1). Forty-two unique HRQOL metrics were implemented across the 43 studies, the majority of which were questionnaires. The most frequently used instrument was the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36), which was used in 31 (72%) studies.

(p2.2) In total, 19 generic instruments, which were not designed for a specific population or disease process, were used to assess HRQOL, with the WHOQOL-BREF questionnaire, the Functional Assessment of Chronic Illness Therapy (FACIT) Fatigue Scale, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the Profile of Mood States (POMS-65) and the Symptom Checklist 90-Revised (SCL-90-R) used most frequently. Fifteen of the 19 (79%) generic instruments were validated in general populations, demonstrating acceptable construct validity and internal consistency reliability, but none of them were validated in live liver donors specifically. Thirteen surveys specific to chronic liver disease were used in 12 different studies. Of these thirteen surveys, only two were extensively validated in those with chronic liver disease (the Chronic Liver Disease Questionnaire and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease Liver Transplant Database Quality of Life questionnaire). The Living Liver Donor-QOL Survey (LLD-QOL) and the Donor Specific Survey (DSS), which were used in two different studies, were designed specifically for liver donors and validated in this specific population. Nine of the 13 (69%) liver disease specific surveys were designed for the individual study and were not validated. Moreover, two studies included unique questionnaires specific to abdominal surgeries, with a focus on cosmetic appearance and body image after surgery, neither of which were validated. A minority of studies employed alternate means of assessing HRQOL, with five (12%) studies using qualitative interviews rather than quantitative questionnaires and one study (2%) relying on chart review to assess the development of psychiatric comorbidities following donation (20).

(p2.3) The mean number of donors enrolled in the 47 studies was 142 (range: 8-578). Studies provided follow-up times as either mean, medians or total length of follow-up (Table 1). For the 33 studies that provided mean follow up times, the average follow-up was 31.3 months. For all included articles, follow up ranged from 3 to 132 months. Two studies did not provide follow up times or the data necessary to calculate follow up time.
## (s3) Overall Physical and Mental HRQOL
(p3.0) In studies that implemented the SF-36, donor HRQOL including both physical (PCS) and mental composite scores (MCS) were typically higher than the general population prior to donation (21)(22)(23)(24)(25). Ladner et al. (23) evaluated the A2ALL cohort and found mean PCS and MCS scores to be close to one standard deviation higher than the normative means before donation. Prior to donation, potential candidate donors and eventual donors were found to have higher PCS scores (57.6 and 58.0 respectively) than the general population and the healthy reference sample (25). Eventual donors also had higher MCS scores than potential candidate donors (51.8 vs. 46.8), but these scores were not significantly different from the general population or the healthy reference sample.

(p3.1) Donors generally experience positive long-term outcomes in both physical and mental HRQOL after LDLT. Physical HRQOL tends to decrease and reach a nadir between 1 to 6 months directly after surgery, with PCS scores decreasing to 42.9-50.9 at 3 months (21,23,(25)(26)(27)(28). Numerous studies report rapid improvement of physical HRQOL within 3-6 months of LDLT (21,23,(25)(26)(27)29). For example, in one prospective study (29), the mean PCS score decreased significantly at 1 month after surgery but fully recovered by 6 months. In recent years, however, multiple studies that included lengthier follow up periods demonstrate that donors may take significantly longer to return to baseline physical function, ranging from 2 to 4 yearspost-donation. In Butt et al.'s (28) prospective study containing 271 patients, donors reported significant decrease in PCS scores and higher levels of fatigue, abdominal pain and back pain at 3 months post-donation. These physical HRQOL domains started improving 6 months after donation and continued to do so for 2 years, but failed to reach pre-donation levels at the end of the study, with significantly worse scores in the pain domain. Shen et al. (30) found a similarly prolonged recovery period, with physical domains of HRQOL taking 3 to 4 years to return to pre-operative baseline levels or levels comparable to the general population. Humphreville et al. (24) found that 11.2% patients reported their health as worse than prior to donation 7 years later, suggesting an even more prolonged recovery period than the majority of studies in this review. Among the studies included in this review, Raza et al.'s (31) study had the longest mean follow up period of 11.5 years and found PCS scores to be similar to the general U.S. population more than a decade later. Regardless of new data suggesting a longer time to recovery, our evaluation of the literature does support overall positive long-term physical quality of life amongst donors, as the majority of studies demonstrate that HRQOL returns to pre-operative levels or levels comparable to the general population after 4 years (22,32).
## (s4) Physical symptoms
(p4.0) After surgery, the most commonly reported donor symptoms were abdominal pain, irritation or numbness of the surgical scar, and gastrointestinal complaints including irregular bowel habits, nausea and heartburn (24,25,27,(33)(34)(35)(36)(37)(38). In one large cross-sectional study (38), the most common post-operative symptoms were numbness and itching around the surgical site and decreased stomach tone. Approximately 6 years after surgery, 15% of donors were still endorsing donation-related medical problems, with the most common problems being hernias, nausea, diarrhea and problems relating to scar tissue and adhesions from the surgery. Berglund et al. (37) had a mean follow up period of 4.8 years after donation and found the most common physical complaints to be incisional discomfort (25% of A large portion of patients reported that post-operative pain was more significant than they had expected and that time to recovery was longer than they had anticipated (28,39,40). For example, in one cross-sectional study (39) containing 68 donors, 41% noted post-operative pain that was "much greater than or somewhat greater than expected." In another study (34), 24% of patients were still having wound-related pain 10 months after surgery. Furthermore, multiple studies revealed long-lasting fatigue and limitations in physical activity following donation (28,31,35). Azoulay et al. (35) found that 22% of donors felt limited in their ability to perform vigorous activity such as running, lifting heavy weights or playing sports up to 6 years after donation. In another study (31), 48.5% of donors endorsed restricting the type of physical activity they performed when evaluated more than a decade after surgery.

(p4.1) LDLT was also found to impact donor's body image. In Dubay et al.'s cross-sectional study (41), donors reported significantly lower perception of their body image and lower satisfaction with their surgical scar compared to those who underwent open-donor nephrectomy. Younger age, greater pre-donation concern regarding their own health and greater post-donation perception that the recipient engaged in behaviors that risked the new liver were independently associated with negative body image.
## (s5) Mental HRQOL and psychiatric comorbidities
(p5.0) The existing literature demonstrates that mental HRQOL remains relatively stable after donation and comparable to the general population (27,42,43), with a few studies finding an increase in overall mental HRQOL (26,40,44). While overall MCS scores remain stable, certain domains of mental HRQOL can worsen. Hesimov et al. (21) found that MCS scores did not change post-donation, but the social functioning component of the SF-36 assessment did drop significantly 3 months after donation and gradually returned to pre-operative levels by 12 months post-donation.
## (s6) Sexual function after donation
(p6.0) Our review showed that LDLT and even evaluation for potential donation negatively impacts sexual function (33,35,41). In a cross-sectional study containing 91 donors (41), 9% of donors had a decrease in sexual activity following surgery. Donors with low body image scores were significantly more likely to report interference with both sexual activity and intimate relationships. While donors typically report high physical and emotional functioning at evaluation, DiMartini et al. (33) found that donors and potential candidate donors had worse sexual function at evaluation and at 3 months post-LDLT when compared to 1-year post-LDLT, suggesting that poorer sexual function at evaluation and directly after LDLT could be due to the stresses inherent to the evaluation process and the decision to donate.
## (s7) Financial impact of donation
(p7.0) Studies revealed that a significant portion of donors felt that donation-related expenditures were burdensome and that LDLT impacted their employment and health insurance. In one illustrative example (33), 40% of donors reported that donation-related costs were burdensome at 3 months post-donation and 19% reported feeling similarly at 2 years post-donation. Cumulatively, 24% of donors found donation-related costs to be more than expected in this study. Furthermore, 34% of donors changed jobs or modified their work because of donation at 3 months post-donation, though only 1% reported changes in employment 2 years later. In this study, those with lower household incomes were at higher risk of poorer financial outcomes. Dew et al. (38) assessed financial burden approximately 6 years after donation and found that 15% of donors reported that donation expenses were burdensome; a portion of these donors changed jobs and experienced permanent income reductions. In this study, 11% of donors also experienced health or life insurance problems due to donation.
## (s8) Overall donor perception of LDLT
(p8.0) Despite our review demonstrating that LDLT can impact short-term HRQOL and can be perceived as financially burdensome to some patients, all studies in this review found that almost all donors did not regret their decision to donate and 85-100% of participants would donate again if need be (28,(35)(36)(37)(38)(39)(40)46,47). The minority of patients who would not donate again were those who experienced significant post-operative complications (47) or the recipient died (28). worse social functioning and higher depression and anxiety scores. There were conflicting findings on whether post-operative complications impacted HRQOL. While some studies found that more post-operative complications led to worse HRQOL (28,32,43,51), others studies (21,46,52,53) showed that complications had no impact on HRQOL. Ladner et al. (23) found that the Hispanic ethnicity and an education less than a bachelor's degree to be predictors of poor PCS scores, yet ethnicity and education have not been studied extensively in the literature. Thus, these findings have not been replicated.
