# life Increased Depression and Anxiety Disorders during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Children and Adolescents: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 243808611 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4557899d605c1987d6b90ca15edc04b3e1f0dea2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4557899d605c1987d6b90ca15edc04b3e1f0dea2)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s9) Italy and Spain
(p9.0) Italy was the first European country to be affected by the coronavirus. Countermeasures taken by the Italian government to contain the spread of the virus consisted mainly of a nationwide quarantine and social distancing orders. School closures that followed destabilized the daily lives of millions of children and young people, representing around 16% of the Italian population. Accordingly, experts verbalized concerns about the psychological impact that the blockade and the pandemic could have on children and adolescents [20].
## (s10) China
(p10.0) According to studies carried out in China, it may be estimated that the COVID-19 outbreak took its toll on the physical, social, or mental health of 87% of pupils worldwide. There had been, however, no rigorous testing done at the time.

(p10.1) A cross-sectional online survey of primary and secondary school pupils from Shanghai, China, was conducted in March 2020. The study sought to estimate the prevalence of symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress, and the level of life satisfaction among children and adolescents experiencing home quarantine and confinement schools in Shanghai due to COVID-19. The internet survey was conducted among 4391 students from primary school (classes 1-5), middle school (classes 6-9), and high school (classes 10-12). The average age of the study group was 11.86 ± 2.32 years and ranged from 6 to 17 years. Girls represented 49% of the study group. Among the subjects, 24.9% showed symptoms of anxiety, 19.7% showed symptoms of depression, and 15.2% showed signs of stress. Five hundred (11.5%) of the subjects met criteria for depression, anxiety, and stress simultaneously. Symptoms were more severe and were most frequently reported in middle schools, and least frequently in primary schools. No differences were observed between boys and girls with regards to either frequency or severity of symptoms. It was observed, however, that symptoms of depression, anxiety, and stress were all greater among those who took a more negative approach to the home quarantine and who did not discuss COVID-19 with their parents [23].
