# Using wearable cameras to investigate health-related daily life experiences: A literature review of precautions and risks in empirical studies

CorpusID: 240317464 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1211f590db7e7fb7650bc6d0593d694fec2a19b)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Abstract Introduction
(p0.0) Automated, wearable cameras (henceforth, "wearable cameras") can be used to obtain more objective information about daily life experiences. Wearable cameras are programmed to take still photos automatically (i.e. without prompting by the wearer) at set intervals (e.g. every 2-20 seconds). These cameras are typically worn in the upper chest region (e.g. pinned to the shirt) (Wilson, 2017) and use a wide-angle lens designed to capture as much of the wearer's environment as possible. To maximize storage capacity, their photos are relatively low-resolution (Hodges et al., 2011). Examples of wearable cameras include the Microsoft SenseCam, one of the first to become popular among investigators , and the eButton, a more recent device designed specifically for research rather than commercial use (Sun et al., 2014). Studies across a range of fields (e.g. public health, psychology, human-computer interaction) have employed wearable cameras to supplement or replace traditional data collection methods (e.g. selfreport) (e.g. Chambers et al., 2018;Gemming et al., 2015b;Gouveia and Karapanos, 2013;Kerr et al., 2013;O'Loughlin et al., 2013).
## (s1) Wearable cameras in health-related research
(p1.0) Investigations of daily life experiences can provide important information relevant to health . For one, daily life experiences include healthrelated behaviors (e.g. eating, physical activity) and health-related exposures (e.g. alcohol advertising). Also, recording daily life experiences makes it possible to investigate memory of those experiences, which can be impaired in certain conditions or diseases.

(p1.1) Research into daily experiences typically relies on self-report methods; however, self-report of behavior can be inaccurate for various reasons. Inaccuracies may result from typical limitations of memory and attention (e.g. forgetfulness, greater attention to certain events) (Evers et al., 2009;Hodges et al., 2006;Kelly et al., 2011) or impairments of memory and attention (e.g. dementia) (Hodges et al., 2006). Participants may also misreport behaviors, particularly those that are commonly viewed as socially desirable or undesirable. For example, in research on dietary behavior, most individuals tend to underreport their actual food intake (Dhurandhar et al., 2015;Novotny et al., 2003;Poslusna et al., 2009), which could reflect memory limitations, subconscious biases in reporting, conscious misreporting, or a combination.

(p1.2) The use of wearable cameras offers benefits for assessing daily experiences when those experiences can be observed visually and when self-report has significant limitations. For example, in the area of dietary assessment, recent research suggests that using wearable cameras to supplement self-reported food intake reduces dietary under-reporting (Gemming et al., 2013;O'Loughlin et al., 2013). Wearable cameras have also been used to assess other health-related behaviors (e.g. sedentary behavior  or physical activity (Taylor et al., 2015)), as well as health-related exposures (Barr et al., 2015;Cowburn et al., 2016). Additionally, wearable cameras have emerged as a method for investigating autobiographical memory in healthy individuals and especially in individuals with memory impairments (Allé et al., 2017). In contrast to more standard methods of experience recording (e.g. participant-initiated photographs), use of wearable cameras presents fewer challenges for individuals with memory impairments (Dubourg et al., 2016) and may be less likely to alter the memory processes under investigation (Allé et al., 2017).
## (s2) Risks of wearable cameras
(p2.0) The same aspects of wearable cameras that make them valuable as a tool for health-related research can also potentially increase risks to participants. Wearable cameras pose risks standard to all wearable technology, including physical discomfort (Cowburn et al., 2016) and noticeability of the technology (Kwok et al., 2015;Nebeker et al., 2016), as well as concerns about confidentiality of data during collection, transfer, and storage (Mok et al., 2015;Nebeker et al., 2017). However, the nature of the information captured in images increases some of those risks (e.g. confidentiality). Additionally, because wearable cameras capture not only the experiences being investigated but all events appearing in the photo frame, the resulting images may contain identifying or sensitive information. This introduces two types of privacy-related risks .

(p2.1) Participant privacy. The possibility of capturing identifying or sensitive information, especially unintentionally, presents risks to the privacy of participants . Photos may capture bank account details appearing on a screen, nudity, or other sensitive, embarrassing, or illegal activities, such as child abuse or drug use, and participants may experience discomfort with private details of their life being shared. More rarely, participants could experience psychosocial and/or legal consequences based on information contained in the images (e.g. due to mandated reporting of child abuse).

(p2.2) Bystander privacy. Because of the potential for capturing information from third parties (e.g. bystanders in the participant's environment), participants in studies with wearable cameras also face risks related to bystander privacy Kwok et al., 2015). Participants may experience anxiety about bystanders' reactions to the camera, may feel distressed if bystanders have negative reactions, or, more rarely, may suffer legal consequences related to bystander privacy (Brown et al., 2017;Kelly et al., 2013). For instance, photographing third parties without consent in certain situations (e.g. locker rooms) could result in criminal charges (e.g. due to violating laws designed to protect individuals against being photographed without their consent when not fully clothed).
## (s4) Current review
(p4.0) Despite the existence of these guidelines and principles, information on the actual risks and benefits of studies employing wearable cameras remains limited, which poses a barrier for investigators and IRBs considering how to evaluate and mitigate potential harm. Without data on the precautions and risks common in research with wearable cameras, investigators face challenges in designing their studies to minimize camera-related risks. Similarly, IRBs struggle to conduct risk assessments of these protocols, which may lead to delays and additional burden on investigators to explain and anticipate potential risks (Nebeker et al., 2017). To better guide investigators' and IRBs' decisions, a comprehensive review of findings regarding camera-related risks (e.g. adverse events) and the precautions taken to reduce those risks is needed. Most existing reviews of wearable camera research have focused on specific areas of health research, such as memory (Allé et al., 2017;Chow and Rissman, 2017;Dubourg et al., 2016;Silva et al., 2018) or physical activity (Loveday et al., 2015). Only one review has examined ethical issues concerning the use of wearable cameras, aggregating literature across several fields, including market research (Mok et al., 2015). However, no existing reviews have comprehensively examined the precautions and risks relevant to using wearable cameras in studies investigating daily experiences.

(p4.1) Thus, we conducted a literature review of empirical studies that included wearable cameras, with the aim of surveying available empirical data on: (1) the types of precautions investigators report employing to mitigate the risks to participants of using wearable cameras; and (2) findings relevant to camera-related risks, including participants' acceptability of and experiences with using wearable cameras, as well as adverse events related to using the wearable cameras.
## (s5) Methods
(p5.0) We performed a literature review to identify studies that included the use of automated wearable cameras to investigate human daily experiences. The search protocol was modified from the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) (Moher et al., 2009). Development of our search, screening, and data extraction procedures occurred in two phases. In April 2018, we performed an initial search of two databases (PubMed and PsycINFO) using the following search terms and strategy: eButton wearable camera OR SenseCam OR Vicon Revue OR Autographer OR GoPro OR "wearable camera." At that time, we developed eligibility and data extraction procedures (described below). The initial search did not capture all relevant papers of which the authors were aware. Thus, in November 2019, we performed a second, more extensive search using expanded search terms and an additional database, in order to conduct the current review. Specifically, three databases were searched (PubMed, PsycINFO, and EMBASE) using the following search terms and strategy: eButton OR SenseCam OR Vicon Revue OR Autographer OR GoPro OR (camera AND phone) OR (camera AND wear*). Searches were limited to publications that were published before April 1, 2018 (the date we initiated the initial search), written in English, and included human participants. Of note, we did not filter for articles with a particular focus (e.g. health-related behaviors), since articles across broad areas of investigation would provide relevant information on camera-related precautions and risks, and our goal was to identify the most comprehensive set of relevant articles. However, our selection of databases-specifically, databases that are commonly searched when conducting health-related reviews-was informed by our backgrounds in health-related research. As a result, almost all relevant articles from our search pertained to health. All references identified in the second search were imported into Covidence, an online, systematic review management software. The second search resulted in a total of 1325 articles, which were screened for eligibility in two phases, described below. Please also refer to Figure 1 for a flowchart of the search and screening process.

(p5.1) First, two authors (LP and KNJ) screened the titles and abstracts to identify potentially eligible articles. Articles were deemed eligible if they met all of the following eligibility criteria: (1) text in English; (2) published online or in print before 04/01/2018; (3) presents findings of original, empirical research (i.e. not a theoretical manuscript or review of studies reported elsewhere); (4) includes human participants; (5) participants wore a camera that took photos automatically; (6) camera worn as part of the study protocol (i.e. not as part of life logging activities engaged in by the participant prior to and independent of the study); (7) camera worn to document daily experiences that are not specific to a profession (e.g. studies using wearable cameras to document surgical procedures, or studies of police body cams, were excluded); (8) camera worn in participants' own everyday environment (i.e. not only in the laboratory, or during prescribed activities such as an outing with the investigator); (9) camera worn in locations where participant could reasonably encounter bystanders who are non-cohabitants and not participating in or aware of the study; (10) wearable camera system did not capture video and/or audio. We established criteria 7-9 to eliminate studies in which wearable cameras were used but did not pose the full range of camera-related risks relevant to this review, such as participants receiving negative reactions from bystanders. Conversely, criterion 10 eliminated studies that posed risks beyond those associated with the use of wearable cameras to capture still photos, due to the capture of audio or video. Additionally, publications were excluded if they were (11a) case studies or (11b) conference proceedings that included only an abstract, since these were unlikely to include information sufficient for analyses. A total of 100 duplicate articles were removed; eighty-five duplicates were identified automatically by Covidence, and 15 duplicates were identified manually by LP and KNJ. These authors marked "no," "maybe," or "yes" to indicate each article's eligibility status Please see the text for the definitions of the eligibility criteria, referred to here by number. Eligibility criteria were ordered starting from general to specific, and reviewers selected the first reason in the list that a given article was not eligible. Thus, articles could have been excluded for more than one reason.

(p5.2) based on the article's title and abstract. All articles with conflicting decisions were flagged by Covidence, and LP and KNJ reviewed each abstract together to reach a consensus. Next, two authors (LP and CJ) scanned the full text of the 103 articles identified as potentially eligible (i.e. marked as "yes" or "maybe.") This resulted in the exclusion of 62 articles for the following reasons, numbered according to the corresponding eligibility criteria (see above): (3) not original, empirical research (12 articles); (5) camera not worn or picture taking not automatic (11 articles); (6) camera not worn as part of the study protocol (2 articles); (7) camera not worn to document common daily experiences (2 articles); (8) camera not worn in everyday environment (8 articles); (9) camera not worn around true bystanders (1 article); (10) camera took video and/or audio (9 articles); (11a) case study(ies) (3 articles); (11b) conference proceedings (14 articles). Eligibility criteria were ordered starting from general to specific, and reviewers selected the first reason in the list that a given article was not eligible; thus, articles could have been excluded for more than one reason. Forty-one papers from the full-text review met all eligibility criteria. Additionally, the authors identified four additional, potentially relevant articles from the results of the initial search. These articles were subjected to the same screening processes described above, resulting in a total of 45 eligible articles.

(p5.3) Review of these articles suggested that, in some instances, multiple articles referred to the same sample of participants (i.e. data came from the same study). In total, the 45 articles were based on 36 independent studies. As described below, data were extracted for each study, using all relevant articles, rather than for each article. This ensured that we did not incorrectly portray a precaution or risk as occurring multiple times (i.e. if it was reported in two or more articles referring to the same study).

(p5.4) The last stage of the literature review included analyzing the main manuscript and supplemental materials for all 45 eligible articles. We also analyzed any articles that an article cited as providing further information on its study procedures (e.g. Signal et al. (2017) provides additional details on the study presented in Chambers et al. (2018). To survey the precautions and findings relevant to camerarelated risks, we extracted the following information from all articles pertaining to each independent study: (a) description of the study aims, with a focus on aims relevant to use of wearable cameras; (b) description of the sample, including participant number, demographics, and brief description of eligibility criteria with a focus on criteria relevant to camera-related risks; (c) brief description of procedures, with a focus on camera-related procedures; (d) description of reported camera-related precautions; (e) description of any findings relevant to camera-related risks, including participants' acceptability of and experiences with using wearable cameras and any adverse events related to use of wearable cameras. Regarding acceptability, we focused primarily on the acceptability of wearing cameras to document daily experiences, rather than on the acceptability of viewing the resulting images (e.g. to reflect on past experiences), since the latter tends to be a common feature of only certain types of studies (e.g. those investigating autobiographical memory).
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) Wearable cameras have been used in health-related research for over a decade, including in investigations of health-related behaviors, health-related exposures, and autobiographical memory (Chambers et al., 2018;Doherty et al., 2013;Finley et al., 2011). In these areas of investigation, standard methods of assessment (e.g. self-report, or observer report) have substantial limitations (Dhurandhar et al., 2015), and wearable cameras have, by comparison, great potential to provide more objective information with less reactivity to assessment, especially once the participant has acclimatized to the camera. However, the features that make wearable cameras so useful (i.e. their automaticity, creation of photographic records of daily experiences) also means that these cameras capture extraneous information not relevant to the scientific question. This information can include identifying and sensitive information from participants or from third parties, such as bystanders. Thus, in keeping with best practices for ethical research with wearable cameras , investigators should employ precautions to protect the privacy and confidentiality of participants and third parties, and to protect participants from adverse reactions from bystanders. The current review is the first to summarize the risks of using wearable cameras, and the types of precautions taken to mitigate those risks, reported in empirical research.

(p9.1) To survey reported camera-related precautions and risks, we reviewed 45 empirical articles that were published by March 2018 and used wearable cameras to examine daily experiences. These articles, which predominantly focused on health-related topics, included 1398 participants in total from 36 independent studies of children, adolescents, and adults, including older adults. Although most participants were healthy, some studies included individuals with physical health concerns (Taylor et al., 2015) or neuropsychiatric illness or impairment (Silva et al., 2017).

(p9.2) The reviewed studies reported a range of camera-related precautions, ranging from no reported precautions (e.g. Cuberos-Urbano et al., 2018) to precautions fully consistent with best practices (Nebeker et al., 2016). The most common precaution was instruction to disable or remove the camera during private moments or in certain situations (e.g. bathrooms) (e.g. Finley et al., 2011). Other common precautions included allowing participants to review and delete images (e.g. Gemming et al., 2015a) and data security precautions (e.g. Robinson et al., 2017).

(p9.3) No studies reported serious adverse events related to the use of wearable cameras, including events related to participant or third-party privacy (e.g. serious participant distress, legal consequences, hostile bystander reactions). Participants generally found cameras to be acceptable with a low burden of inconvenience, excepting one study involving a cellphone worn around the neck (Arab et al., 2011). In studies that assessed participants' specific camera-related concerns, the most commonly reported concerns were related to physical inconvenience (e.g. Kelly et al., 2015) and discomfort with wearing the camera in certain situations (e.g. Kelly et al., 2012). Participants generally reported few privacy-related concerns, and some reported that concerns diminished with time (e.g. Cowburn et al., 2016). The minimal concern with privacy is not surprising given that participants volunteered for a study with wearable cameras, and that participants reported using the option of disabling or removing the camera to protect their own (or others') privacy (e.g. Brown et al., 2017), although reports on the frequency of this practice varied. When given the option to review and delete images, some to almost all participants elected to do so (e.g. Nebeker et al., 2016), but only a minority of participants tended to delete images, typically a very small number (e.g. Robinson et al., 2017).

(p9.4) Regarding bystander reactions, some participants cited discomfort or concern about attracting negative attention in public places when wearing the camera (e.g. Gemming et al., 2013). These concerns tended to be heightened for less subtle cameras (Arab et al., 2011) and in studies with small children (Beltran et al., 2016), in that they might be approached by strangers because of the camera. In studies where participants reported that the camera received attention from bystanders, the attention was generally found to be non-problematic (e.g. Signal et al., 2017), except by a minority of participants and their parents in a study of small children (Beltran et al., 2016;Raber et al., 2018). No studies reported complaints from bystanders, and in studies that provided participants with bystander cards, few participants reported handing out cards, although some did describe the cards as helpful (Barr et al., 2015). Several studies reported that bystanders with concerns were satisfied with verbal explanation or removal of the camera (e.g. Nebeker et al., 2016), and no studies reported hostile reactions from bystanders or requests to surrender the camera.
