# Pregnancy, Preeclampsia, and COVID-19: Susceptibility and Mechanisms: A Review Study This open-access article has been published under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial 3.0 (CC BY-NC 3.0)

CorpusID: 249237488 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92df17bba2472a309998ef619f1005647d01eb92](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92df17bba2472a309998ef619f1005647d01eb92)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Severe acute respiratory syndrome caused by coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The virus binding to angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2), a renin angiotensin aldosterone system (RAAS) counter-regulator, leads to its entrance to the cells and consequently, cells infection (1). Although, the ACE2 has 60% homology with the ACE1 enzyme, its different active site leads to its inhibition prevention by ACE inhibitors (2). ACE2 is the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein receptor (3). The cellular entry of SARS-CoV-2 through ACE2 that its expression increases during pregnancy might increase susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection in the pregnant women and the risk of pregnancy complications including preeclampsia (4).
## (s1) The RAAS pathway
(p1.0) The RAAS pathway consists of renin, angiotensinogen (AGT), ACE/ACE1, ACE2, angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) and angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2R) components. All these components exist in both systemic and local/tissue RAAS; however, the regulation of local RAAS is independent from the systemic RAAS that is found in many tissues such as kidneys, heart, lungs and blood vessels (10). This enzyme, renin, degrades AGT to inactive Ang I decapeptide. The ACE catalyzes the conversion of Ang I, a decapeptide, to Ang II, an active vasoconstrictor octapeptide. The Ang II elevates the aldosterone secretion and consequently increases blood pressure and inhibits the renin secretion. The ACE2 degrades Ang I into angiotensin (Ang)-(1-9) and also, Ang II to Ang-(1-7) peptides. The Ang-(1-7) exerts its vasodilatory, apoptotic and antiproliferative effects by binding to a G-protein coupled receptor, Mass receptor (11).
## (s2) Preeclampsia
(p2.0) Preeclampsia, a complication of pregnancy with unknown etiology, is defined as the presence of hypertension and proteinuria after 20 weeks of gestation in a woman that has previously been normotensive. The preeclampsia diagnosis is a challenge, since nonspecific signs detection basement. However, some biomolecules such as anti-angiogenic markers, renin angiotensin system related markers, immunological markers, metabolic markers, and endocrine markers have been suggested for early preeclampsia diagnosis (12). Dysfunction of the maternal vascular endothelium and abnormal placentation are risk factors for susceptibility to preeclampsia (13). Hypertension is the most serious clinical symptom of preeclampsia that affects mothers and fetus health. Thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and platelet aggregation are known to be associated with preeclampsia (14).

(p2.1) The criteria of preeclampsia diagnosis include high systolic and diastolic blood pressure (≥140 mmHg, and ≥90 mmHg, respectively), the protein excretion > 300 mg in 24 hours, the ratio of urine protein: creatinine of more than 0.3 and the presence of ≥30 mg/dl protein in a randomly provided urine sample (1+ reaction on a standard urine dipstick). Severe preeclampsia is defined as a blood pressure higher than 160/110 mmHg, more than 3+ urine protein, visual disturbances, headache, upper abdominal pain, increased serum creatinine and transaminases, thrombocytopenia and restriction of fetalgrowth. Preeclampsia <34 weeks, gestation is defined as early-onset preeclampsia (8).
## (s3) The RAAS dysregulation and preeclampsia
(p3.0) In a normal pregnancy the RAAS stimulation results in the increased plasma levels of renin and aldosterone. During pregnancy, pregnant women remain normotensive even in the presence of a two times increase in the Ang II level that could be due to the resistance to the Ang II presser effects and the AT1R down-regulation (15). The angiotensin peptides of Ang II and Ang IV act through the AT2R and angiotensin type 4 receptor (AT4R), respectively. The high expression of both AT2R and AT4R in the early stage of pregnancy contributes to normal placenta formation (16).

(p3.1) The renin angiotensin aldosterone system in the preeclamptic women is suppressed and vascular resistance increases, so, the hypervolemia, a physiologic condition in pregnancy, could not develop. In this pregnancy complication, the RAAS perturbation is correlated with an enhanced vascular responsiveness to Ang II (15). According to a hypothesis the presence of hypertension and proteinuria in the preeclampsia can be attributed to the imbalance in the RAAS and increased abdominal pressure, which may lead to functional or structural renal injuries (17).

(p3.2) The levels of Ang I, Ang II, and Ang-(1-7) peptides are increased during a normal pregnancy. In physiological pregnancy, increased activity of the RAAS is accompanied by reduced hypertensive Ang II function. So, in a normal pregnancy, the reduced hypertensive effect of Ang II along with increased aldosterone secretion allows the proper blood volume circulation in the vascular bed. The main mechanisms that maintain proper organ perfusion for the placenta during pregnancy are the enhanced circulating blood volume and cardiac output. However, in gestational hypertension, decreased the RAAS activity and enhanced sensitivity to Ang II effects have been detected. In preeclampsia, low activity of the RAAS results in the decrease of circulating blood volume and cardiac output reduction. Consequently, these alterations lead to the blood flow decrease in the kidney and placenta that will accompany with an abnormal placental development and followed by impaired intrauterine fetal growth (18).

(p3.3) In an advanced and severe form of preeclampsia, some clinical symptoms such as cerebral edema, hemolysis, renal failure, low platelets count, and elevated liver enzymes, are observed. The profile of RAAS components in the preeclamptic women is greatly different from healthy pregnant women; for example, the vasodilator Ang-(1-7) peptide is significantly decreased in the preeclampsia. The Ang-(1-7) vasodilator peptide plays a significant role in human pregnancy and along with effect on the renal vascular resistance and renal function, might contribute in the physiologic vasodilation occurring during the pregnancy. The imbalance between levels of Ang II and Ang-(1-7) might be involved in the preeclampsia etiology. Although, dysregulated RAAS contributes to the preeclampsia risk, the triggering factor of RAAS imbalance is still unknown (9,19).

(p3.4) Systemic inflammation activates the immune response in the brain. There is an interaction between the immune system and the RAAS in the central nervous system which is a contributing factor in the pathogenesis of hypertension. The RAAS and inflammatory factors act synergistically in blood pressure regulation in the brain (20).
## (s6) Pregnant patients infected with SARS-CoV, and Middle
(p6.0) East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)-CoV had more adverse outcomes of pregnancy, including intrauterine growth restriction, spontaneous miscarriage, and premature delivery. And also, the rate of mortality among infected pregnant patients was more than the general infected population (25 vs. 10%, respectively) (23). Among French pregnant women, mostly symptomatic it was revealed that COVID-19 can be serious and acute in pregnant women. Although, the most serious COVID-19 was observed in women with the highest rates of comorbidities such as obesity, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and advanced age (33). A retrospective study was conducted to compare clinical outcomes and the results of laboratory tests of COVID-19 infected pregnant women of ≥ 20 weeks gestational age with non-pregnant women from four large hospitals of France and Belgium. This study found a significant high risk of ICU admission among pregnant women in comparison with non-pregnant women. Also, they did not report mortality in the groups (38). This study along with a report from Iran with 7 out of 9 deaths due to severe COVID-19 in their pregnant women (39) and one study from Sweden with higher risk of ICU admission in the pregnant and postpartum women with COVID-19 in comparison with non-pregnant women (40) indicated more severe outcomes of COVID-19 in pregnant women than their non-pregnant women. However, Blitz et al. (41) evaluated the data from a large hospital system in the New York State, USA among hospitalized women with COVID-19 and reported that the risk of ICU admission in the pregnant women was not higher than the non-pregnant women. In a retrospective study of Wuhan, China patients (n=82), an increase in the COVID-19 susceptibility and its severity were not observed in the pregnant women (n=28) in comparison with the non-pregnant women (n=54) (42).
## (s7) Maternal COVID-19 and placental infection
(p7.0) The infection of the placenta and SARS-CoV-2 vertical transmission is rare. In a meta-analysis including 1316 pregnant women infected with SARS-CoV, MARS-CoV, and SARS-CoV-2, no transmission of CoVs from the mother to the fetus was detected (43). In the Di Mascio et al. study, analysis of a small number of cases (n=41) suggested that COVID-19 was associated with a higher preterm birth rate, preeclampsia, cesarean delivery, and prenatal death, with no clinical evidence of vertical transmission (27). Also, no evidence of vertical transmission through intrauterine infection in the COVID-19 pneumonia affected woman in the late pregnancy was found (30). However, significant abnormalities in the placenta morphology have been detected among COVID-19 infected patients (44). Examination of 16 placentas from mothers with COVID-19, including 15 live births and one intrauterine fetal death that demonstrated an increased prevalence of maternal vascular malperfusion in the COVID-19 patients, placentas compared with controls, a pattern indicative of injury of the placenta that is associated with adverse perinatal outcomes (45). Although, one COVID-19 infected pregnant woman in the second trimester was reported that placental infection and severe early-onset preeclampsia were detected. This study suggested that COVID-19 might contribute to placental inflammation and consequently result in early-onset preeclampsia. Both infections with SARS-CoV-2 and hypertensive disorders of pregnancy decrease the ACE2 activity which leads to enhanced tissue levels of Ang II. It seems that RAAS dysregulation in the COVID-19 patients might contribute to hypertensive complications of pregnancy such as preeclampsia; and COVID-19 may increase the severity of these complications by infecting the placenta (46). The ACE2 is involved in the placentation and also plays a role in the multiple pregnancy adverse outcomes, including miscarriage, ectopic pregnancy, and preeclampsia. Regarding its presence in the placenta, it is likely SARS-CoV-2 might bind to ACE2, which leads to infection and affecting placental function and fetal development; this entity should be elucidated (44).
## (s8) Diagnostic and therapeutic roles of exosomes in COVID-19 and preeclampsia
(p8.0) Exosomes are nano-sized extracellular vesicles that are secreted by all cell types and have structural similarities with viruses. Exosomes are secreted by cells infected with viruses and mediated in communication between infected and un-infected cells. Also, the contents of exosomes induce the inflammation through activation of the receptors of the cells. So, it seems exosomes be involved in the propagation of the SARS-CoV-2 and inflammation induction contributing to organ dysfunction in the severe COVID-19. Also, theses extracellular vesicles are involved in the pathogenesis of pregnancy complications such as preeclampsia. Due to modulation of the production and composition of exosomes by SARS-CoV-2, they can be used for COVID-19 diagnosis and also could have therapeutic benefits in the COVID-19. The engineered exosomes can be used as a therapeutic tool for different, diseases (47,48). The exosomal contents can be released into the circulation. This various content can be acted as potential diagnostic biomarkers. Exosomes can be used in the early detection of complications of pregnancy including preeclampsia. In preeclampsia, exosomes contain specific miRNA, DNA and proteins that secreted by trophoblasts and could help in the preeclampsia onset prediction much earlier than blood protein markers (48). Also, the engineered exosomes can be used as different antiviral therapeutics types including COVID-19 treatment.
