# OPEN ACCESS RECEIVED Increasing the reliability of energy system scenarios with integrated modelling: a review

CorpusID: 247423333 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ece5364f14b391c71bf89209eb7a57841268f0e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8ece5364f14b391c71bf89209eb7a57841268f0e)

Fields: Engineering, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Transitioning the primary energy supply to utilize non-emitting generation technologies requires a holistic assessment of impacts, mitigation and adaptation policies to ensure that actions in one area do not cause unintended consequences in another area [1,2]. For example, dedicating land to biofuel production could impact food availability, while planning for new hydroelectric facilities must consider plans for irrigation. Should these interactions be ignored, there is the risk that natural, human and financial resources are wasted. Systems modelling is one of the main tools used by policy makers to inform decisions on such multicriteria challenges. In general, there are two main model categories used for different types of decisionmaking [3]. The power engineering community has focussed on engineering solutions that replace the primary energy supply (largely fossil fuels) with a system fuelled predominantly by intermittent renewables and non-emitting power generation technologies. The energy-economy modeling communities have focussed on building models that capture the interaction of individual behaviour with climate policy (carbon pricing, flexible fuel standards, carbon trading) to be assessed within the framework of a national or jurisdictions economy. These disconnected responses create decision-making inertia which is problematic given the increasingly short timescale [4] in which meaningful climate mitigation strategies need to be invoked.
## (s32) Modelling evaluation framework
(p32.0) Based on the feedback from the experts in the focus groups, as well as the literature review, the focus of modelling efforts should be on transparent analysis covering different aspects of the nexus and increasing model complexity only where needed to address specific research questions. This brings us to a framework for evaluating modelling projects which goes beyond just combined modelling and is applicable to any nexus modelling activity. Table 3 shows the components of the modelling evaluation framework proposed in this paper.

(p32.1) The framework in table 3 provides a simple way of comparing models and their representation of the nexus and their usefulness to open and transparent analysis, with higher scores indicating higher levels of nexus representation, higher levels of openness and better standardization and documentation.

(p32.2) Similar to the work by Khan et al [53] who they identify 15 features of integrated modelling, we identify a set of nine features of nexus modelling that are important for effective analysis. The 15 items Khan et al identify are included in the nine below with, for example, their item 15 (synchronized future scenarios) being incorporated into our number 7. Koppelaar et al [71] and Zhang et al [72] similarly provide reviews of the purposes and capabilities of different nexus modelling approaches, but neither work provides an evaluation framework that can be applied to comparing modelling efforts on a numerical scale. The framework we present can be applied to any nexus modelling activity to get a sense of how well that activity represents the nexus and how well it addresses the additional aspects identified in our expert elicitation focus groups, namely open modelling and standardized data processing and documentation. Although we expect that the numerical grading of the framework will only be applied occasionally, the identified aspects and their descriptions should be used by modellers to evaluate their modelling approach and move towards better/best practices.
