# Article 798078 (2022) Zinc Intakes and Health Outcomes: An Umbrella Review

CorpusID: 246635842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d896ea270205bf633b590fee0b78edf83a53c388](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d896ea270205bf633b590fee0b78edf83a53c388)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Quality Assessment and Evidence Grading
(p4.0) AMSTAR2, containing a comprehensive rating than the original AMSTAR classification, was utilized to evaluate the methodological quality and risk of biases of included articles (22)(23)(24). AMSTAR2 consisted of 16 items including 7 critical and 9 non-critical domains and classified different articles into "Critically low, " "Low, " "Moderate" and "High." We assessed the strength of evidence of eligible articles through the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) (25). All articles were categorized into four levels: "Very low, " "Low, " "Moderate" and "High."
## (s5) Data Analysis
(p5.0) We retrieved the outcome data and the most adjusted estimated effect with 95% CI in each meta-analysis either through fixed or random effect. Dose-response calculations were extracted when available. When an article reported summary estimate effects of cohort and case-control studies separately without an overall outcome, the cohort studies were included in this review because they were generally less susceptible to selection and recall biases. We included heterogeneity, represented by I 2 metric value and Cochran's Q test P-value. And publication bias was calculated by Egger's regression test (26). The standard that P-value < 0.05 was set for both Egger's test and heterogeneity. Figure 2 shows the whole process of systematic search and selection of eligible studies. The search identified a total of 6136 articles and yielded 43 meta-analyses for the umbrella review. And among them, we retrieved 11 unique outcomes for dietary zinc consumption and 88 unique outcomes for supplementary zinc intakes (Figure 3). The characteristics of the included studies as to dietary and supplementary zinc consumption were displayed in Table 1 and Supplementary Tables 1, 2.
## (s8) Mortality
(p8.0) On one hand, the higher dose of dietary zinc intake (40 mg/day) might not relate to all-cause mortality in adults (RR: 0.90, 95% CI: 0.63, 1.16) (27). On the other hand, low doses of zinc supplementations (10 mg/day) were not connected with decreased all-cause mortality in children (28). Concerning the survival and mortality of COVID-19, no significant findings favored the effect of zinc supplementation for them, including the survival to hospital discharge (Risk difference (RD): 0.01, 95% CI: −0.07, 0.08) and in-hospital mortality (RD: −0.03, 95% CI: −0.09, 0.03) (29).
## (s9) Cancer Outcomes
(p9.0) In adults, the highest vs. lowest dose of dietary zinc intakes were related to a reduction in the risk of suffering overall digestive cancer (30), colorectal cancer (30), and pancreatic cancer (31). However, compared with the lowest zinc intakes, reduced risk of prostate cancer (32), gastric cancer (30), and esophageal cancer (33) 
## (s11) Growth Outcomes
(p11.0) Zinc supplementations in children might be connected with a significant increase in height gain (15). This meta-analysis containing over 10,000 children in poverty-stricken countries from 19 RCTs manifested a gain of 0.43 (95% CI: 0.16, 0.70) cm in supplementary zinc group compared with no zinc intakes. At the same time, daily consumption of a low dose of zinc supplementations for children was also related to height (17), weight (17), weight gain (15), head circumference (15), weightfor-age z-scores (WAZ) (17), and weight-for-length z-scores (38). However, supplementary zinc intakes in low doses were not a strong indicator for the risk of stunting (RR: 1.00, 95% CI: 0.95, 1.06), underweight (RR: 1.08, 95% CI: 0.96, 1.21) and wasting (RR: 0.94, 95% CI: 0.82, 1.06) in children (15).

(p11.1) Compared with no zinc intakes, the effect from lower supplementary zinc intakes could consistently be applied to other physical development parameters, including head circumference change (15), height-for-age z-scores (HAZ) change (15), MUAC (16), MUAC change (15), WAZ change (15), HAZ (15,16), weight for height z-scores (16) and psycho-motor development (39) as well as adulthood body fat percentage (40), body mass index (BMI) change (40), hip circumference (40), waist circumference change (40) and waist-to-hip ratio (40).

(p11.2) Apart from the above-mentioned, a daily dosage of <20 mg of supplementary zinc intakes would not benefit childhood mental development executive function (7), intelligence (7), and mental development index (16).
## (s12) Metabolic Outcomes
(p12.0) Supplementary zinc intakes would significantly level up serum zinc concentration in the general population (41) and decrease the incidence of childhood zinc deficiency by 63% (RR: 0.37, 95% CI: 0.22, 0.62) (16). For adults specifically, the zinc supplemented group though did help improve serum zinc concentration by 0.43 µmol/L, the negative value of the lower limit of the effect size manifested that there is a chance that zinc supplementation had no effect (37).

(p12.1) In terms of dietary intake in adults, the highest dose compared with the lowest dose might be associated with a 13% lower risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) (OR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.78, 0.98) (42). Furthermore, daily supplementary zinc intake of more than 20 mg would relate to increasing total antioxidant capacity and glutathione, reducing malondialdehyde and serum inflammation factors including tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), C-reactive protein (CRP) levels, but not interleukin-6 (IL-6) or nitric oxide (NO) (43,44). In lipid metabolism among the general population, a high dosage of zinc supplementations would relate to a decrease of 10.92 mg/dl (95% CI: −18.56, −3.28), 6.87 mg/dl (95% CI: −11.16, −2.58) and 10.29 mg/dl (95% CI: −15.33, −6.52) for triglyceride, low density lipoprotein cholesterol and total cholesterol (TC) respectively, while an unobvious rise of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (MD: 2.12, 95% CI: −0.74, 4.98) was also identified (45).

(p12.2) Besides, zinc supplementations were associated with a higher concentration of insulin-like growth factors-1 (IGF-1) (WMD: 8.62 ng/ml, 95% CI: 1.13, 16.11) in children and adults (46), while not for brain-derived neurotrophic factor levels (SMD: 0.30 µg/ml, 95% CI: −0.08, 0.67) (47) as well as leptin levels (WMD: 0.74 ng/ml, 95% CI: −1.39, 2.87) (48) in adults.
## (s13) Reproductive Outcomes
(p13.0) Supplementary zinc with a daily dosage of more than 20 mg was not connected to better sperm viability (SMD: −4.95, 95% CI: −9.87, −0.03) or increased sperm count (SMD: −4.95 * 10 6 /ml, 95% CI: −9.87, −0.03) (49). However, in comparison with no intakes, adequate zinc supplementations for adults improved sperm motility (MD: 7.03, 95% CI: 6.03, 8.03) (50), concentration (MD: 1.48 * 10 6 /ml, 95% CI: 0.69, 2.27) (50), morphology (SMD: −0.75%, 95% CI: −1.37, −0.14) (49) as well as volume (SMD: −0.99 ml, 95% CI: −1.60, −0.38) (49). Thus, the clinical pregnancy rate was found to drastically increase by 343% (OR: 4.43, 95% CI: 1.39, 14.14) (51).
## (s14) Respiratory Outcomes
(p14.0) With supplementary zinc intakes <20 mg per day, the incidence of childhood acute lower respiratory infections was lowered by 35% (RR: 0.65, 95% CI: 0.52, 0.82) (20). To be more specific, the incidence and prevalence of pneumonia were 13% (RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.81, 0.94) and 41% (RR: 0.59, 95% CI: 0.35, 0.99) lower in the zinc supplemented children, respectively (52). However, low dosages of zinc failed to neither significantly attenuate the risk of lower respiratory tract infections (RR: 0.78, 95% CI: 0.49,   
## (s15) Skeletal Outcomes
(p15.0) There were significant associations between the zinc supplementations and alkaline phosphatase levels, osteocalcin levels, not parathyroid hormone levels, and bone alkaline phosphatase levels (58). It was the mineral density of femoral neck bone rather than lumbar bone that could benefit from zinc supplementations consumption among the general population (58). In addition, adults receiving dietary zinc might not significantly improve the incidence of overall bone health complications (MD: −0.33, 95% CI: −0.77, 0.11) (58).
## (s16) Other Outcomes
(p16.0) Supplementary zinc consumption lower than 20 mg per day might not improve adult tinnitus (RR: 2.53, 95% CI: 0.50, 12.70) (59). The same effect of zinc supplements worked for the incidence of malaria (60), anemia (16) and, otitis media (61) in children.
## (s19) Publication Bias of Included Studies
(p19.0) Twenty-one studies (48.84%) reported that there was no publication bias and 9 of them presented the exact Egger test value. 3 studies reported that there was statistically significant publication bias, including CRP levels (p = 0.002) (43), BMI change (p = 0.002) (40), height (p = 0.01) (17), weight (p = 0.03) (17) and WAZ (p = 0.04) (17). However, 19 studies did not report or mention the publication bias owing to the limited magnitude.
## (s20) AMSTAR2 and GRADE Evaluation of Included Studies
(p20.0) The results of AMSTAR2 were displayed in Supplementary Table 3. The vast majority (60.47%) of included articles were rated as "Critically Low" when only 34.88% and 4.65% of articles were rated as "Low" and "Moderate, " respectively. This was largely caused by the fact that most articles did not display the information of excluded studies, which was one of the critical domains. A detailed version of AMSTAR2 classification was in Supplementary Table 4. In terms of GRADE categorizations in Supplementary Table 3, 65.12% of the studies were "Very low, " 16.28% were "Low, " 6.98% were "Moderate" and 11.63% were "High." The reason for the universally low evidence of strength was that on the one hand, the bias of studies was always unignorable and on the other hand, most studies failed to reach the width, breadth, and magnitude of the bonus items. The detailed information was displayed in Supplementary Table 5.
## (s23) Strengths and Limitations
(p23.0) This umbrella review had systematically integrated the current evidence about the associations between zinc intakes and different health outcomes for the first time. We pioneered utilizing the AMSTAR2 (22) and GRADE classification systems (25) to evaluate the strength and quality of the evidence of all meta-analyses. Some possible limitations should be noted nevertheless. To begin with, a relatively large number of the metaanalyses were "Critically Low" in AMSTAR2 classification as well as "Very low" in GRADE categorizations. This phenomenon was largely caused by that many studies did not display the list of excluded articles, report the publication bias in the critical domain AMSTAR2. Studies failed to explain the selection of study type and provide the funding sources of included studies also lent themselves to rank higher in the AMSTAR2. For GARDE categorization, serious imprecision derived from limited studies numbers and population numbers as well as considerate confidence intervals and I 2 . The fact that few studies met the upgrading items including a relatively large magnitude of effect and beneficial plausible confounding factors also contributed to low evidence. Due to the different rating domains, there is no statistical correlation between AMSTAR2 and GRADE. Second, according to our selection criteria, some of the studies might be missed because they were less recent and contained a smaller number of participants compared with included meta-analyses. Of note, some subgroup analyses of included studies may also be missed due to incomplete details required by the umbrella review. Third, a proportion of the eligible meta-analyses included a small number of studies and populations, which probably cause publication bias. Forth, the period of receiving zinc may confound the related conclusion due to lack of consensual definition. Finally, zinc intakes are as described as before would be influenced by a great number of factors, therefore, there might be a disparity between oral zinc and absorbed zinc. Even so, most of the studies include generally healthy participants, which would minimize the possible bias, to a large extent.
