# Volatile Compounds in Pulses: A Review

CorpusID: 245367127 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fde979831064c5748872c92c6a470a7134665b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fde979831064c5748872c92c6a470a7134665b3)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Oxidation of Free Fatty Acids
(p1.0) Free fatty acids, such as linoleic and linolenic acids, are the substrate of lipoxygenase (LOX), a nonheme iron dioxygenase that catalyses the addition of O 2 in polyunsaturated fatty acids with a cis, cis-1,4-pentadiene moiety [20].

(p1.1) The oxidation of free fatty acids follows three stages. First, unsaturated fatty acids (RH) lose hydrogen in the presence of a pro-oxidant initiator, such as LOX, that promotes the formation of an alkyl radical (R • ). The initiation step is also induced by nonenzymatic factors, such as high temperatures, light, and metal ions. Moreover, tissue disruption or frost activates enzymatic oxidation of legumes in the field or during storage [11]. During autoxidation, oleic, linoleic, and linolenic acids are also oxidized into hydroperoxides [14]. Then, during the propagation step, O 2 reacts with the alkyl radical (R • ) to form a peroxy radical (ROO • ) that is reduced to an unstable hydroperoxide (ROOH) by oxidizing another fatty acid (RH). A new alkyl radical (R • ) is formed. Thus, this radical could react with a new molecule of O 2 and lead to new hydroperoxides. Finally, peroxy radicals (ROO • ) react together to produce non-radical products during the termination step [21].
## (s2) Degradation of Hydroperoxides and Formation of Volatile Compounds (Secondary Products)
(p2.0) The degradation of hydroperoxides involves a complex set of reactions that produces many volatile and non-volatile compounds that contribute to the global flavour. Hydroperoxides are unstable molecules that are decomposed into small molecules under the effect of heat or metal ions (autoxidation) or in the presence of hydroperoxide lyase.

(p2.1) The diversity of hydroperoxides promotes a variety of different volatile compounds. Oxidation of oleic acid leads to the formation of 8-, 9-, 10-, and 11-hydroperoxides, whereas oxidation of linoleic acid leads to two stereoisomers of 9-and two stereoisomers of 13-hydroperoxides. The oxidation of linolenic acid produces 9-, 12-, 13-, and 16-hydroperoxides. Furthermore, 9-hydroperoxide mainly leads to 2,4-decadienal, while 13-hydroperoxides produce hexanal. Other aldehydes, acids, ketones, or lactones originate from hydroperoxide degradation [14]. Subsequently, aldehydes are converted into alcohol by alcohol dehydrogenase [25].
## (s4) Biodegradation
(p4.0) Amino acids are the source of a myriad of volatile compounds, such as branchedchain compounds, benzene aldehydes, alcohols, acids, esters, nitrogen compounds (amines, pyrazines and pyridines), and sulphur compounds. Their origins are the breakdown of proteins by proteases and the hydrolysis of peptides. Spinnler (2011) studying the amino acid degradation pathways in microorganisms, assumed that these pathways could also occur in plants [26]. In addition, certain enzymes involved in this degradation are present in tomatoes and bananas [25].

(p4.1) The Ehrlich−Neubauer pathway is the most commonly used pathway by microorganisms. The amino acids are converted into an α-ketoacid by a transaminase. This α-ketoacid is then decarboxylated into aldehyde, alcohol, and acid (the latter two have one less carbon than the original amino acid). Alanine, phenylalanine, valine, methionine, isoleucine, and leucine are precursors of volatile compounds (Table 1). Pulses are deficient in methionine compared to cereals [27]. This could explain the absence of alcohols and acids derived from these amino acids in the studied pulses.
## (s7) Degradation of Carotenoids
(p7.0) Terpenes can be derived from the degradation of carotenoids. Carotenoids are oxidized by LOX 2 at neutral pH and produce these volatile compounds [39]. This origin is highly disputed. Indeed, due to the low concentrations found in plants, these molecules would be absorbed by plant roots at the soil level during their cultivation and then accumulate in the seeds [25].
## (s17) Pyrazines
(p17.0) Pyrazines (Table 10) are only identified in the pea samples (except for the pea protein concentrate). Pyrazines are produced from amino acids and carbohydrates at room temperature (acyloin degradation) and high temperatures (the Strecker degradation) [42].
## (s21) Other Volatiles
(p21.0) Other volatiles (Table 14) are mainly present in common beans (black beans, pinto beans, and dark red kidney beans), whole peas, and chickpeas. They do not belong to a specific class of volatiles, and their origin has not been studied.

(p21.1) Pulses present different compositions of free fatty acids and amino acids that induce a high variety of volatile compounds. Different factors, such as environmental stress conditions in fields, uncontrolled storage, transformation of seeds (dehulling, production of proteins), and lipoxygenase activity, promote the production of volatiles. Moreover, cultivars have a different nutritional composition, which could explain the difference in the percentage of volatiles. For example, high-tannin faba beans contain more lipids that promote the production of volatiles from free fatty acids [37]. Most of these volatiles have an unpleasant odour or aroma that contributes to pulses' off-flavours. Moreover, some articles did not mention all the details about pulses, such as crop year, environmental field conditions, cultivar, or storage conditions, before analysis. These details are important and could explain the origin of the differences. Finally, it is important to highlight the odour-active compounds among all the volatiles present in pulses to determine adequate strategies to reduce their perceptions. Odour-active volatiles are identified by GC-Olfactometry (GC-O).
## (s23) Conclusions and Perspectives
(p23.0) This review constitutes a compilation of the different volatile compounds identified in pulses with a focus on those that are odour-active and a discussion on their potential origins to reduce the off-notes.

(p23.1) A qualitative comparison of volatile compounds between pulses is presented. Indeed, the main drawback to making quantitative comparisons of volatiles is that the data are often expressed as peak areas or relative percentages, without using a standard compound allowing real quantification of each volatile compound. However, it was possible to suggest some hypotheses on the origins of the off-notes present in pulses with the aim of increasing the acceptability of pulses in food for humans.

(p23.2) The diversity of unsaturated free fatty acid contents and the characteristics of endogenous lipoxygenases in pulses mainly explain the large variety of volatile compounds identified. All of the classes of volatiles are present in pulses, but ketones, pyrazines, furans, and lactones are minority classes. Aromatic hydrocarbons represent more than 38% of the volatiles detected in common beans (black beans, pinto beans, and dark red kidney beans), whereas aldehydes and alcohols are more specific to dehulled peas, pea proteins (concentrate and isolate), and faba beans (location and storage). Seed transformations or uncontrolled parameters of storage promote the generation of volatile compounds from the degradation of free fatty acids and amino acids. For whole peas, the 2006 harvest-year seeds present higher percentages of aromatic hydrocarbons, aldehydes, alkanes, ketones, and furans than those of the 2005 and 2007 seeds [11]. If the storage conditions are supposed to be equivalent for these three harvest years, bad culture conditions could be suggested during 2006, such as water stress and/or mechanical or insect attacks, compared to years 2005 and 2007 and could explain these differences in terms of volatiles. Finally, all of these parameters could account for such heterogeneity in volatile compounds, yet they are not always taken into consideration in explaining the variability in aromatic composition.

(p23.3) Although the number of volatile compounds identified in pulses is high, only a small part contributes to the aroma. These odour-active compounds present different descriptors and threshold detection. However, identifying odour-active compounds in pulses is rarely done, and only two studies report on their olfactory impact, namely in lupins and peas. Only aldehydes, alcohols, ketones, acids, lactones, and pyrazines are involved in the aroma.

(p23.4) The origin of these compounds is free fatty acid oxidation, except for acids and pyrazines, which originate primarily from amino acid degradation by unwanted microorganisms. Off-notes are described as vegetable, green, hay, potato, bean, metallic, mushroom, animal, dust, solvent, cardboard, etc., and refer to "beany" notes, but other volatiles present a pleasant smell, such as floral, fruity, grilled, sweet, and vanilla odours.
