# Dioptric power and refractive behaviour: a review of methods and applications

CorpusID: 247867326 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03ea6242c2fac54c2919b3e17e52064d34f48388)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) InTroduCTIon
(p1.0) Instantaneous dioptric power (a 2×2 matrix, F) where variation over time is momentarily ignored is fundamentally a four-variate quantity 1 and any suitable analysis must take into consideration that power is quantifiable using four unique quantities or numbers. (eg, the instantaneous power of the human eye, a thick optical system, is four-dimensional).
## (s7) Myopic astigmatism
(p7.0) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p7.1) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.

(p7.2) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p7.3) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.
## (s10) Open access
(p10.0) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.

(p10.1) It may be difficult for some people to fuse stereo-pairs and so the same sample is shown in figure 2 using meridional profiles of dioptric power. They are less satisfactory as each power is represented by three profiles (two are shown on one rectangular plot with displacement of 90°) rather than a single point in the stereo-pairs in the previous figure. Nonetheless, they are often helpful to identify outliers and departures from normality and study the nature and magnitude of sample variation and they are in many ways supplemental and complimentary to the stereo-pairs. Both methods are complete representations of the distribution concerned.

(p10.2) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.

(p10.3) It may be difficult for some people to fuse stereo-pairs and so the same sample is shown in figure 2 using meridional profiles of dioptric power. They are less satisfactory as each power is represented by three profiles (two are shown on one rectangular plot with displacement of 90°) rather than a single point in the stereo-pairs in the previous figure. Nonetheless, they are often helpful to identify outliers and departures from normality and study the nature and magnitude of sample variation and they are in many ways supplemental and complimentary to the stereo-pairs. Both methods are complete representations of the distribution concerned.
## (s19) InTroduCTIon
(p19.0) Instantaneous dioptric power (a 2×2 matrix, F) where variation over time is momentarily ignored is fundamentally a four-variate quantity 1 and any suitable analysis must take into consideration that power is quantifiable using four unique quantities or numbers. (eg, the instantaneous power of the human eye, a thick optical system, is four-dimensional).
## (s25) Myopic astigmatism
(p25.0) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p25.1) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.

(p25.2) We have isolated this topic from the previous sections due to the rapidly increasing global prevalence of myopia and the large impact, now and in the future, that myopia is likely to exert on the global public health system and individual quality of life also. 131 Moderate to severe myopia are important for effects in relation to foveal integrity and retinal nerve fibre layer thickness as well as factors such as retinal detachment. 131 Treatments for myopia (such as refractive surgery, low-dose atropine, gene therapy, lenses and others) 132-136 need further study with power vectors and matrices but studies are available and more emerge each year.

(p25.3) Although the emphasis in studies of myopic astigmatism is towards understanding distributions of refractive behaviour and especially that relating to myopia, power vectors and matrices are also of interest when considering reliability, validity and precision of measurement instruments in relation to refractive behaviour. For example, Cervino et al 137 used power vectors to study instrument myopia in adults (mean age: 20.8±2.5 years) with three different wavefront analysers and a binocular open-view autorefractor (SRW-5000). Their sample was relatively small at 80 eyes (21 women and 19 men) and measurements were obtained without cycloplegia. They considered outliers and concluded there was slightly more myopia on average (0.3 D) with the wavefront aberrometers than with binocular open view autorefraction but, overall, they found good agreement across the different instruments and there were no significant inter-instrumental differences for the antistigmatic coefficients (F J =J 0 and F K =J 45 ). Detailed exploration of myopia is outside the scope of this paper but research over the last two decades has emphasised myopia and its consequences and management and power vectors and matrices are important in that regard.
## (s28) Open access
(p28.0) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.

(p28.1) It may be difficult for some people to fuse stereo-pairs and so the same sample is shown in figure 2 using meridional profiles of dioptric power. They are less satisfactory as each power is represented by three profiles (two are shown on one rectangular plot with displacement of 90°) rather than a single point in the stereo-pairs in the previous figure. Nonetheless, they are often helpful to identify outliers and departures from normality and study the nature and magnitude of sample variation and they are in many ways supplemental and complimentary to the stereo-pairs. Both methods are complete representations of the distribution concerned.

(p28.2) If one instead uses power vectors (f or t) then one or more separate plots are required for coefficients, M, J 0 and J 45 , and this is commonly used in papers involving refractive state or coefficients are combined in a single plot, however such plots become quite cluttered as a result. Alternatively, we can use two pseudo-3D plots as in figure 1D to create a stereo-pair. Such plots can be rotated to view the antiscalar plane. So, stereo-pairs as in figure 1 provide a single stereoscopic plot once fusion occurs and this greatly simplifies analysis and interpretation of the data. The axes in such figures represent the scalar and antiscalar powers and readers can think of the three axes as MI, J 0 J and J 45 K or as we prefer F I I, F J J and F K K where M=F I , J 0 =F J and J 45 =F K . The crucial difference here is not what symbols are used to label the axes but rather that figure 1B, for example, is a representation of a small part of an infinite Euclidean 3-space where points each represent a unique 2×2 power matrix, F i (see equation 20). The axis labelled F I I (=MI) is the scalar axis and here we can see that the NETRA refractive states cluster near this axis, mostly ranging from I (the first tick on the positive part of the vertical axis) to approximately −10I D (the continuation of the axis in the negative power direction). That is, this sample contains refractive states that are mostly myopic with small amounts of astigmatism. The greater the cylinder (in clinical terms), the further away from the scalar axis is the point for that power matrix.

(p28.3) It may be difficult for some people to fuse stereo-pairs and so the same sample is shown in figure 2 using meridional profiles of dioptric power. They are less satisfactory as each power is represented by three profiles (two are shown on one rectangular plot with displacement of 90°) rather than a single point in the stereo-pairs in the previous figure. Nonetheless, they are often helpful to identify outliers and departures from normality and study the nature and magnitude of sample variation and they are in many ways supplemental and complimentary to the stereo-pairs. Both methods are complete representations of the distribution concerned.
