# STORAGE MEDIUM FOR AVULSED TEETH: A LITERATURE REVIEW

CorpusID: 240574717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2032691a7b50529c73af64adea9738cd96afa6fd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2032691a7b50529c73af64adea9738cd96afa6fd)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) …………………………………………………………………………………………………….... Introduction:-
(p0.0) Dental trauma refers to injury to the teeth and periodontium (gums, periodontal ligament,alveolar bone), and nearby soft tissues such as the lips, tongue, etc .Dental trauma is accounting for a major part of dental problems in children and adolescents.Falling, fight, sports, accidents, and hittingobjects or people are among common etiologic factors. Traumatic dental injuries are neglected oral condition despite its relatively high prevalence. Among various types of dental injuries-Dental avulsion is an emergency in which prompt management (within 20-40 minutes of injury) results in favourable prognosis of the tooth. 1 Tooth avulsion (exarticulation) implies total displacement of the tooth out of its socket. This kind of dental trauma causes the periodontal ligaments to be severed with or without fracture of the alveolus. Reported incidence of dental avulsion is 0.5-3%of all dental injuries. The age group of 7-14 years appears to be most affected. 2 At this age, the loosely structured periodontal ligament and low mineralized bone surrounding erupting teeth provide only minimal resistance to an extrusive force. When a tooth is avulsed, attachment damage and pulp necrosis occurs. 2 Since most avulsions occur before the patient's facial growth is complete it is critical to maintain the integrity of the surrounding bone.The ideal treatment of avulsion injury is immediate replantation, but this can rarely be achieved. 3 In such conditions the avulsed tooth should be stored in appropriate storage media. Storage medium keeps the attached periodontal ligament cells in hydrated state and maintain their viability, allows healing with regenerated periodontal ligament cells when replanted. However, if excessive drying occurs before replantation , the damaged periodontal ligament cells will elicit an inflammatory response over a diffuse area on the root surface which will result in replacement resorption (ankylosis). 2 This literature review attempts to discuss various storage media in depth, including their advantages and disadvantages for maintaining viability of attached PDL cells and allows favourable prognosis following Replantation.
## (s3) A) Naturally available i)Tap water
(p3.0) Most of the time the available adult or parents at the accident site place avulsed teeth in tap water because it is most readily available .But it is not an ideal storage media because several studies have shown that cells stored in water did not maintain their morphology, with visible destruction and rapid cell death. 5 Thus tap water should only be used to avoid tooth dehydration only if there is no other appropriate media available ,as water is inadequate for preservation of PDL cells attached to the avulsed teeth.(figure:1)
## (s10) Milk
(p10.0) The American association of endodontics indicates milk as a storage medium for avulsed teeth for maintaining the viability of PDL cells. Milk is an excellent storage medium for upto 6 hours after which it loses its effectiveness. 8 877 Not all types of milk are equally effective as storage medium. Avulsed teeth stored in chilled milk upto 6 hour can maintain sufficient number of viable PDL cells to support replantation of tooth and possibility of PDL healing. 9 Milk with lower fat content is considered to be more appropriate at maintaining cell viability than milk with higher fat content. 10 (figure:3) Advantages 1. Isotonic liquidwith physiologic osmolality(275 mOsm /kg) 2. Neutral ph (6.5-6.8) 11 3. Low or no bacterial content because of pasteurization 4. Contains growth factors and essential nutrients for cells 5. Milk contains epithelial growth factor which stimulates the proliferation and regeneration of epithelial cell rests of Malassez
## (s11) Disadvantage
(p11.0) As regular pasteurized milk has a short shelf life and requires refrigeration which makes it less readily available at the trauma site.  Sousa et al. (2008) evaluating human PDL adhered to extracted tooth roots and maintained in this storage medium observed that the egg white provided cell viability and histologicalcharacteristics similar to those of milk. 12 Khademi et al (2008) compared milk and egg white as solutions for storing avulsed teeth, and found that teeth stored in egg white for 6 to 10 h had a better incidence of repair and lower surface resorption than those stored in milk for the same amount of time. 
## (s17) Propolis
(p17.0) Propolis is a sticky resin obtained chiefly from the buds of some conifer trees. It consists of flavonoids (45-55%), waxes and fatty acids (23-35%), essential oils (10%), pollen-proteins (>1%), vitamins and sugars (5%), other organics (ketones, lactones, quinones, steroids) and trace minerals (iron and zinc). Martin and Pileggi (2004) considered propolis as the most efficient medium whereas  found that propolis had 50% efficacy in maintaining cell viability. 15 
## (s18) Morusrubra(red mulberry)
(p18.0) It is a natural product usually availablein Southern Europe, Middle East,Northern Africa and Indian subcontinent which contains flavonoids, alkaloidsand polysaccharides. Ozan et al. (2008) reported that when teeth were stored in red mulberry for up to 12 h, its capacity to maintain the viability of PDL cells was better than that of HBSS; however, if a longer storage time is required, it is advisable to employ higher concentrations of the fruit juice. 17 There are very few studies evaluating the use of red mulberry juice as a transport medium for avulsed teeth and its biological properties have not been established yet. Further research is necessary before its use can be recommended.(figure:8)
## (s21) Ricetral:
(p21.0) Dehydration, as in diarrhea cases, is treated with oral rehydration solutions like Ricetral. These solutions are available in drugstores at low cost and their components are able to maintain the body hydrated by replenishment of liquids lost in the intestine. Rajendran etal. (2011) evaluated the PDL cell viability of extracted human teeth by the Tripan blue exclusion method and the results of the study showed that the effectiveness of Ricetral was similar to the HBSS control and both were superior to milk as storage medium. In an another study by Subramanian P et al(2014)the viability of PDL cells in Ricetral was maintained for 45 minutes, when it was used as storage media whereas in HBSS the viability of cells was maintained for 24 hours. 18 Thus HBSS was found to be more effectiveas compared to Ricetral in terms of storage time when both were used as storage medium for avulsed teeth.(figure:10) Advantages 1. It contains essential nutrients like glucose and vital salts in concentrations considered adequate for the cell metabolism. 2. Low cost 3. Readily available at drug stores.
## (s24) Gatorade
(p24.0) It is a sports drinks used for rehydration and is available at sport's equipment stores. Sigalas et al. (2004) evaluated Gatorade efficacy in maintaining the viability of PDL cell culture by the Tripan blue exclusion method and the results showed that at 37 0 C it was toxic to the cells; but this may be an alternate medium to HBSS and milk when used as ice cold and for a short time.(figure:12).
## (s28) Hank's Balanced Salt Solution (HBSS)
(p28.0) Hank's balanced salt solution has been commercially prepared storage medium for avulsed teeth.It contains active ingredients like 8 g/L sodium chloride, 0.4 g/L D-glucose, 0.4 g/L potassium chloride, 0.14 g/L calcium chloride, 0.35 g/L sodium bicarbonate, 0.09 g/L monobasic sodium phosphate, 0.1 g/L anhydrous magnesium sulphate and water as a vehicle and has the ideal osmolality of 270-290 mOsm/kgand pH of 7.2. 7 HBSS is available at Sigma Aldrich Pharmaceuticals, Bangalore, India .

(p28.1) Hwang et al. reported 94% cell viability after storage of cultured human PDL cells for 24 h in this medium, which is considered as an excellent result, and Souza et al. had also reported similar results with HBSS. Moreover it has also beenshown to replenish metabolites which have been depleted from PDL cells. Hence, it has been recommended to place avulsed teeth in HBSS for 30 minutes before replantation in order to replenish the PDL cells, even if the avulsed teeth had been stored in an appropriate storage medium(figure:13). 11 In some countries ,HBSS is available in emergency kits [Save-A-Tooth, PA, USA]. This kit comprises a small basket to hold the avulsed tooth while it is submerged in HBSS. Each tooth that goes into Save-A-Tooth gets into its own protective slot that prevents any serious damage while transporting the avulsed tooth and the design of the slots allows the dentist to remove the tooth without accidentally damaging the root.( figure:14) Advantages 1. It has physiologic ph of 7.2 and osmolality of 270-290 mOsm/kg. 7 2. The presence of magnesium, glucose,calcium and other essential nutrients can maintain the PDL cell viability. 3. Replenishes the metabolites that had been depleted from the PDL cells 4. It has a long shelf life of 2 years and does not require refrigeration.
