# Risk and Financial Management Review Order Routing Decisions for a Fragmented Market: A Review

CorpusID: 244372299 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2de198a7c707df3bc30111a7155dec9aede62a42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2de198a7c707df3bc30111a7155dec9aede62a42)

Fields: Business, Economics, Medicine

## (s3) The Conequences of the Market Fragmentation
(p3.0) The equilibrium in the early theoretical market microstructure studies does not incorporate the multiple venue consideration. Early theoretical studies, such as the multimarkets strategic trading model by Chowdhry and Nanda (1991) and the limit order auction markets model by Glosten (1994), assume that the liquidity supply is competitive. Therefore, combined with the order matching system and large tick size, these models imply that a fragmented market should not affect the quotes. However, many empirical studies in the same period disagreed with the theoretical suggestions. For instance, Easley et al. (1996) and Hasbrouck (1995) observe that different markets obtain significant differences in information contents of order flow, hence arguing that the market fragmentation impacts market quality. Still, the theoretical predictions and empirical findings on market fragmentation are mixed. The conclusions about fragmentation on market quality are diverse and differ according to the factors considered.

(p3.1) The directive consequence of market fragmentation is the intensified competition across trading venues. Several studies suggest that the competition that raised from the fragmentation can improve the market quality by reducing fees, promoting innovation, and hence improving quality (Chao et al. 2017). For example, Macey and O'Hara (1997) suggest that the multi-venues environment allows traders to have a chance to compare the execution quality under each venue, and ultimately the trader could achieve the best execution. Biais et al. (2000) theoretically examine competition among liquidity suppliers and limit order trading in a decentralized market. Their model assumes that market makers are risk-neutral, and the model predicts that the trading volume increases under a high decentralized market. Furthermore, Buti et al. (2017) analyze competition between a limit The market share is calculated as the volume executed on a particular market venue divided by the total volume on all venues. The volume data by the exchange is obtained from the CBOE's U.S. Equities Market Volume Summary (https://www.cboe.com/us/equities/market_share, accessed date: 20 August 2021).
## (s4) The Conequences of the Market Fragmentation
(p4.0) The equilibrium in the early theoretical market microstructure studies does not incorporate the multiple venue consideration. Early theoretical studies, such as the multimarkets strategic trading model by Chowdhry and Nanda (1991) and the limit order auction markets model by Glosten (1994), assume that the liquidity supply is competitive. Therefore, combined with the order matching system and large tick size, these models imply that a fragmented market should not affect the quotes. However, many empirical studies in the same period disagreed with the theoretical suggestions. For instance, Easley et al. (1996) and Hasbrouck (1995) observe that different markets obtain significant differences in information contents of order flow, hence arguing that the market fragmentation impacts market quality. Still, the theoretical predictions and empirical findings on market fragmentation are mixed. The conclusions about fragmentation on market quality are diverse and differ according to the factors considered.

(p4.1) The directive consequence of market fragmentation is the intensified competition across trading venues. Several studies suggest that the competition that raised from the fragmentation can improve the market quality by reducing fees, promoting innovation, and hence improving quality (Chao et al. 2017). For example, Macey and O'Hara (1997) suggest that the multi-venues environment allows traders to have a chance to compare the execution quality under each venue, and ultimately the trader could achieve the best execution. Biais et al. (2000) theoretically examine competition among liquidity suppliers and limit order trading in a decentralized market. Their model assumes that market makers are risk-neutral, and the model predicts that the trading volume increases under a high decentralized market. Furthermore, Buti et al. (2017) analyze competition between a limit order book and a dark pool. Their model implies that the introduction of a dark pool increases trading volume. Overall, both Biais et al. (2000) and Buti et al. (2017) predict that the fragmentation could increase overall market volume.
## (s9) Market Condition
(p9.0) Two-period sequential trade model Zhu ( Figure 3 shows the current U.S. equity structure. Based on pre-trade opacity, the trading venues can be separated into lit-and off-exchanges. A lit-exchange refers to an exchange where quote information (bid and ask) are posted publicly. Currently, all U.S. national securities exchanges are lit-exchanges. In contrast, an off-exchange refers to a venue that does not provide price quotation information. Based on pricing structure, lit-exchanges can be further separated into maker-taker, taker-maker and other pricing structure. Maker-taker exchanges can also be referred to as "traditional exchanges", where the exchange charges fees for traders who take away liquidity (market order) and provides a rebate for traders who provide liquidity (limited order). A taker-maker exchange is also called an "inverted exchange" or "inverted fee exchange", where exchanges charge fees for traders who provide liquidity and provide a rebate for traders who take away liquidity. Besides maker-taker and taker-maker exchanges, some exchanges, such as the Investors Exchange (IEX), adopt a flat-fee model that charges a fixed fee regardless the type of order. Alternative Trading System (ATS) is an off-exchange that matches the buyer and seller without going through an intermediary. It includes several types, and the most prevalent one is the Electronic Communication Network (ECN), which pairs the buyer and seller directly by a computer algorithm. A dark pool is a type of ATS that provides anonymity for trading large orders with automated execution. It is generally used by institutional investors. Crossing networks (CNs) are similar to dark pools for large trading. Unlike other venues, where buyer and seller determine price, call markets execute buyer and seller orders at a predetermined price at predetermined time intervals. Alongside Alternative Trading System (ATS) is an off-exchange that matches the buyer and seller without going through an intermediary. It includes several types, and the most prevalent one is the Electronic Communication Network (ECN), which pairs the buyer and seller directly by a computer algorithm. A dark pool is a type of ATS that provides anonymity for trading large orders with automated execution. It is generally used by institutional investors. Crossing networks (CNs) are similar to dark pools for large trading. Unlike other venues, where buyer and seller determine price, call markets execute buyer and seller orders at a predetermined price at predetermined time intervals. Alongside ATSs, wholesalers (market makers) can also be broadly included in the off-exchange definition, and they provide liquidity by buying and selling stocks as a counterparty. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) classifies wholesalers as over-the-counter (OTC) non-ATS dealers.

(p9.1) Overall, different trading system structures provide different degrees of transparency and execution quality. This is associated with different levels of the execution costs 5 and investors always seek for maximizing profit with minimized execution costs (Bertsimas and Lo 1998).
## (s11) Transaction Fee
(p11.0) Perhaps the most important determinant for trading venue choice is the direct transaction fee. Intuitively, order routing decisions should be negatively affected by the fee that exchanges charge. Table 2 demonstrates the fees structure across competing exchanges. Due to competition, exchanges usually modify their pricing on a monthly basis 6 . The national exchanges in the U.S. are operated under three types of pricing model: (1) the maker-taker (MT) model or traditional model, where the traders pay a certain fee for taking liquidity and getting a rebate for generating liquidity; (2) the taker-maker (TM) model or inverted model, in which offering rebates to the liquidity taker and charging a fee to liquidity maker; and (3) the flat fee model, where traders pay for transactions despite taking or providing liquidity. Angel et al. (2015) point out that in order to maximize profit, brokers strategically send their marketable orders to inverted fee exchanges to gain taker rebates or sell to wholesale dealers to capture the spread and send their limit orders to traditional exchanges to gain maker rebates. Unlike the lit-exchanges, the Alternative Trading System (ATS) 7 operator and market makers in off-exchanges operate either by negotiating fees individually with the participants or under the payment for order flow (PFOF) model.

(p11.1) In theoretical development, Colliard and Foucault (2012) propose limit order trading models with a fixed or endogenized fees, and their model predicts that the change in total execution fees should affect trading volume. Foucault et al. (2013) extend the model by differentiating fees between makers and takers. Hendershott and Mendelson (2000) show that dark pools 8 obtain a relative cost advantage. Cimon (2021) develop a theoretical model to support the empirical study of broker's routing incentives by Battalio et al. (2016b) and confirm that brokers' route order decision is primarily based on the fee, rather than execution quality.
## (s14) Summary and Further Discussions
(p14.0) The evidence discussed in the above sections suggest that the trader's routing order decision is directly influenced by the execution cost, and the execution cost can be viewed from three dimensions: the transaction cost, the execution quality, and the information asymmetry cost. Traders may strategically choose the venue for profit maximization. McAleer et al. (2017) review the theoretical, econometric and statistical models that connect the decision sciences and financial economics.

(p14.1) In fact, several studies suggest that the final venue choice decision may depend on multiple trade-offs between the cost, execution probability, and information asymmetry risk. For instance, Boehmer (2005) compares the SEC rule 1Ac1-5 execution quality report for NYSE and Nasdaq and finds that Nasdaq has a greater execution cost but faster execution speed than NYSE. The findings in Boehmer (2005) infer that the final venue choice decision may depend on multiple trade-offs between cost, execution probability, and information asymmetry risk. Friederich and Payne (2007) examine the trade-off on routing decisions and suggest that the investor's routing decision is driven by execution and information risks. The order routing decreases when the venue has a high execution risk, high asymmetry information risk, and/or low liquidity. An influential paper by Menkveld et al. (2017) proposes a pecking order hypothesis in explaining the routing decision. Menkveld et al. (2017) suggest that the investor prefers to trade at low-cost-low-immediacy venues (ex. dark pools) on days without information shocks and will switch to highcost but high-immediacy venues (ex. lit-exchanges) if there is an information shock with increased liquidation urgency. Yet, Brolley (2020) argues that the trade-off between cost vs. immediacy has already existed through marketable vs. limit orders in lit-exchanges, and the limit orders are a natural substitute to dark orders. Thereby, the trade-off consideration for the investor is between immediacy vs. price improvement. Instead of choosing venues, investors strategically choose order types to limit the execution risk. For further discussion about the microstructure models about the information asymmetry and liquidity, we refer the reader to Madhavan (2000) and Biais et al. (2005) for a comprehensive microstructure literature survey.
## (s17) Fast vs. Slow Trader
(p17.0) Based on trading speed, microstructure theories separate the traders as fast and slow traders 14 . Traders compete with each other by the reaction speed to new information. Fragmentation induces high-frequency trading in order to take the information advantage. In particular, with technology innovation, some traders utilize algorithmic trading to respond to a market event at the millisecond level (referred as the high-frequency trader).

(p17.1) Many theoretical studies focus on discussing the impact of high-frequency trading on market quality and overall welfare. For instance, Üslü (2019) applies the search-andbargaining model to discuss the impact of exogenous heterogeneity in investors' search speed. The model by Biais et al. (2015) allows the interaction between fast and slow traders and shows that the information advantages from faster traders could result in adverse selection for the slower traders. Budish et al. (2015) provide a model to examine the high-frequency trading on the market design and social welfare. Baldauf and Mollner (2020) extend Budish et al. (2015) to include high-frequency trading into the information acquisition procedure by endogenizing the informed trading and HFT reaction. Furthermore, the theoretical model proposed by Roşu (2019) allows one to examine informed trading at different speeds.

(p17.2) Many empirical studies show the positive relationship between high-frequency trading (HFT) and market quality in lit-and off-exchanges. The HFT could potentially lower the adverse selection cost, improve market quality under liquidity, price discovery, and the short-term volatility dimensions (Brogaard et al. 2015;Hasbrouck and Saar 2013;.  argues that increased number of faster traders could result in more order cancellations in a relatively high-latency venue, creating frictions and harming slow traders. Shkilko and Sokolov (2020) show that the differential in a traders' trading speed harms market quality.

(p17.3) With technology enabling faster speeds, fast traders can actively seek latent liquidity across venues to make an arbitrage profit. Hasbrouck and Saar (2009) document a trading "fleeting orders" phenomenon, namely submitting a limit order and quickly canceling within a second. Hasbrouck and Saar (2009) explain that increased numbers of "fleeting orders" results from new dynamic trading strategies. Additionally, some studies point out that venues with a maker-taker pricing structure may be more favored by faster traders as they could place the limited order to earn the rebates faster than anyone else, and venues with a taker-maker pricing structure may be less attractive to fast traders since the taker-maker venues allow slow trader to pay the maker fee and jump to the head of the queue (O'Hara 2015; Ye and Yao 2014).
## (s18) Trader's Behavior and Strategy
(p18.0) Trading strategies could also affect the order routing decision since the trade timing and the selected trade venue can materially affect the trader strategy's success and estimated return. Theoretical models generally use the CAAR model to formalize an investor's optimal trading strategy to maximize the expected utility, and the reader may refer to McAleer et al. (2016b) who summarize the investors' utility models and related implications. An experimental work by Frydman et al. (2014) confirms the disposition effect and find that the investor's decision-making procedure is consistent with the predictions of realization utility. Therefore, the effect of changes in trading behavior on routing preference could be a promising direction for future research. Parlour and Seppi (2003) propose a limit order trading model to incorporate the strategic behavior of traders. Their model assumes trader's strategies depend on the market current state, and they predict that widened spread leads traders to place more limit orders and fewer market orders. Kyle et al. (2018) propose a symmetric continuoustime model to incorporate the heterogeneity belief among investors and trade speed to trade strategies. Glode and Opp (2020) endogenizes the trader's expertise in the model and show that the trader's expertise matters in choosing between the limit-order markets and over-the-counter (OTC) markets 15 . Garvey et al. (2016) empirically examine the trader's expertise on the routing venue choice and suggest that traders with better skill are more likely to participate in off-exchange trading.
## (s19) Summary and Further Discussion
(p19.0) Alongside the execution cost, studies suggest that the order route decision is also influenced by the types of traders and their trading behavior. On the dimension of the trading information. The studies suggest informed traders prefer to trade in dark pools to hide information, and they are more likely to split orders to smaller sizes and send them over to multiple venues to maximize profits. On the other hand, most orders placed by uninformed traders (retail investors) are internalized or executed in off-exchanges by market makers. On the dimension of the trading speed, the studies show that the fast trader uses a technological advantage to fleet across venues to seek latent liquidity and get arbitrary profit.

(p19.1) Traders' expertise and their trading behavior may influence the order routing decision as well. However, connecting trader's behavior with the routing venue choice is an important question and yet has not been well explored. Investors' sentiment is widely studied through the lens of behavioral finance, as much as the anomalies germane to the asset pricing literature 16 . Thus, it will be worthwhile for future research to link sentiment with the trader's behavior on the routing venue choice. Especially, as discussed in McAleer et al. (2016a), there are not many theoretical models developed to link behavioral and financial economics to health and medical science. McAleer (2020) discusses risk management measures, such as Global Health Security Index, which could potentially link the market uncertainty with the country's health security. Still, given the ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic, the health condition and environment's impact on risk aversion and trading behavior remains largely undefined and is an important direction for future research.
## (s24) Trading Technologies
(p24.0) The technology innovation on trading speed significantly reduces the latency of information transmission and execution. In this section, we will start with the literature on the fragmentation with trading technology innovation and briefly discuss the theoretical prediction and empirical studies about the impact of the technology on the exchanges 18 , namely speed competition and colocation, on the market quality. For a broad discussion on the impact of technology on the financial market, readers may refer to comprehensive reviews by McAleer et al. (2015) about econometrics with informatics and data mining and by Menkveld (2016) and Zaharudin et al. (2021) about HFT trading. Menkveld (2014) argues that both high-frequency trading (HFT) and market fragmentation resulted from technology innovation. With improved technology, search costs decrease, making the trading floor's operation more profitable, facilitating more venues to enter the market, thus increasing fragmentation. Technology innovation also lowers the information latency, along with the fragmented markets, makes HFT possible.
## (s25) Speed Race (Low Latency)
(p25.0) To increase the market share, exchanges also compete on the speed to respond to submitted orders. A decrease in communication response speed decreases latency arbitrage, attracting more volumes (Chakrabarty et al. 2021). The limit order book model by Baldauf and Mollner (2020) incorporates the random communication latency within the exchange system. Brolley and Cimon (2020) extend a model from Baldauf and Mollner (2020) by assuming that the market makers were endogenously affected by latency delay. Biais et al. (2015) predict that speed arms race pushes venues to extensively invest in speed technology innovation,
## (s26) Co-Location
(p26.0) With the development of technology and algorithm trading, introducing the colocation services by securities exchanges becomes necessary due to competition. Hau (2001) explains that traders located close to the financial center will have more information advantages than those who do not. The introduction of co-location allows an exchange to reduce latency further, attracts more algorithm trading volumes, and enhances liquidity (Aitken et al. 2017;Brogaard et al. 2015;Frino et al. 2014).
## (s27) Summary and Further Discussion
(p27.0) So far, many studies on the relation between technology innovation and orders routing have focused on the interaction with high-frequency trading and market quality. The effect of big data on trader behavior is still unexplored. A review of the theoretical models, econo-metrics, as well as statistical models about the connection on the big data, computation science, psychology, decision-making, and finance is well beyond the scope of our paper, and we refer the reader to the excellent survey by McAleer et al. (2018b), who provide a comprehensive review of the literature that connects big data, finance, and psychology in both theoretical and empirical way.
## (s29) Order Handling Rules in 1997
(p29.0) In order to promote the quote competition, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) implemented new order handling rules (OHRs) on NASDAQ's dealer market in 1997, requiring market makers to display customer limit orders in their quotes 19 . Barclay et al. (1999) and Weston (2000) show that implementing OHRs reduced spreads and dealers' rent, suggesting improved market quality. However, Rhee and Tang (2013) argue that, in the long-term, forcing quote competition by policy results in dealers altering their competition strategy from quote competition to payment for order flow competition. They observe a weaker correlation between the trading volume and quote competitiveness after the implementation of the OHRs.
## (s30) Decimalization in 2000
(p30.0) In order to promote the price competition, the SEC mandated all exchanges to adopt the decimalization system in 2000, with a reduction in minimum tick size from the previous $1/16 ($0.0625) to $0.01 20 .

(p30.1) The implementation of the decimalization results reduced the trade execution costs, increased quote competition among the exchanges, and narrowed the spreads, thus improving market quality. Under the revenue maximization model developed by Chordia and Subrahmanyam (1995), the reduction in tick size will negatively impact the volume internalization. Kandel and Marx (1999) extend Chordia and Subrahmanyam (1995) by treating spreads, preference trades, and vertical integration as equilibrium outcomes. Their models suggest the decrease in tick size results in asymmetric effects on endogenous variables, such as numbers of market makers, due to the change in the equilibrium.
