# Recycling phosphogypsum in road construction materials and associated environmental considerations: A review

CorpusID: 253484110 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d93536967f1d81aeb14bc69dc32083aa32379446](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d93536967f1d81aeb14bc69dc32083aa32379446)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Chemical composition
(p3.0) The chemical composition of PG produced in different countries is shown in Table 1. It indicates that the chemical composition of PG varies from one area to another. In general, PG mainly consists of CaO and SO 3 , with both accounting for approximately 70% of the total mass. In addition, PG also contains Fe 2 O 3 , Mg, Al, sulphides and organic matters (Masmoudi-Soussi et al., 2019). During the reuse of PG, impurities in the PG affect the product properties. Singh et al. (Singh, 2005) found that more than 1.0% soluble phosphate adversely affected the setting time and strength development of selenite gypsum. Moreover, the fluoride and organic matters in PG can decrease the compressive strength of gypsum. Min et al. (2007) found that soluble phosphorus and organic matters in PG could prolong the gelling time of gel materials. Furthermore, these impurities in PG have adverse effects on the serviceability of gypsum dihydrate and gypsum hemihydrate. In other words, PG should be pretreated before reuse to remove impurities and prevent the adverse effects on PG-based materials.
## (s5) Nuclides
(p5.0) Naturally occurring radionuclides are mainly derived from phosphate rock used in processing (Rutherford et al., 1996). The mined phosphate rock is further processed into the required product by the WPA process, with PG as a by-product. The radionuclides that can occur naturally in the phosphate rock are transferred to PG, leading to the PG containing trace amounts of radioactive elements (Arhouni et al., 2022). The radioactivity is mainly from 238U, 232Th and 226Ra (Saadaoui et al., 2017). During phosphoric acid production, radionuclides are partitioned between the H 3 PO 4 and PG phases (Szajerski, 2020). Elemental uranium is transferred   from the non-mobile fraction in phosphate rock to the bioavailable fraction in PG at a rate of 23% (Perez-Lopez et al., 2007). 226Ra, 210Pb and thorium isotopes preferentially favour PG at 90% for 226Ra (with ore), 100% for 210Pb, and 80% for 232Th and 230Th (Mazzilli et al., 2000). The types and contents of nuclides in PG determined by various countries, regions and organisations are shown in Table3. The radiation hazard indicators for PG determined by various countries, regions and organisations are shown in Table 4. There are some variations in the types and contents of nuclides in PG produced in various countries, regions and organisations and in the radiation hazard indicators for PG measured by researchers.
## (s10) Thermal treatment method
(p10.0) The calcination pretreatment method has shown good results in removing phosphorus, fluorine, and organic impurities. The method can also convert soluble and eutectic phosphorus into inert impurities with no adverse effects on the properties of PG (Cao et al., 2021). Furthermore, calcination allows large-scale treatment of virgin PG with high efficiency and effectiveness, which is friendly to large-scale industrial production.

(p10.1) The pretreatment of PG by calcination reduces the adverse effects of impurities in PG and changes the gypsum phase. The XRD analysis of Liu et al. showed that PG calcined at 150 C was mainly composed of dihydrate and part of β-hemihydrate. After calcination at 350 C, with increasing calcination time, dihydrate was largely converted to β-hemihydrate, and type III hard gypsum appeared. The PG was almost completely dehydrated to hard gypsum, and II-U hard gypsum and II-E hard gypsum appeared at 600 C-800 C. In addition, soluble phosphorus was removed by converting soluble phosphorus to insoluble calcium pyrophosphate (CaP 2 O 7 ) (Liu et al., 2020b). Researchers also prepared supersulphate cement using PG purified at different calcination temperatures. The supersulphate cement prepared from PG calcined at 350 C has the fastest setting times and the best processing properties, while calcination at 600 C gives the best early and late strength properties. The temperature selection depends on different requirements for different engineering applications.

(p10.2) PG contains heavy metals, such as arsenic, lead, chromium, vanadium, zinc, and cadmium, which have irregular shapes and various particle sizes (20-50 μm) and are difficult to be removed completely by conventional debinding methods. Imed Ghiloufi et al. separated heavy metal elements from PG using plasma technology to treat PG by pyrolysis. Both the thermal plasma treatment time and the plasma current magnitude can affect the evaporation degree of heavy metal elements. The results showed that heavy metal elements such as lead, cadmium, vanadium, chromium, arsenic and zinc evaporated completely, and the PG became inert after 40 min of treatment at a plasma current of 160 a. This method offers new ideas for PG decontamination (Ghiloufi et al., 2021). Using electricity as an energy source in the plasma system reduces heat emissions and increases the controllability and flexibility of the working process, making the method safe, efficient and environmentally friendly.  (Singh et al., 1996). Solar energy has been a popular renewable energy source in recent years. Researchers have endeavoured to use the sun's high-quality photothermal resources for the PG industry. Palla et al. performed solar thermal treatment of PG with a Scheffler reflector and used the treated PG as a cement retarder (Palla et al., 2022). It was demonstrated that soluble phosphates such as P 2 O 5 were converted to an inert form (e.g. pyrophosphate) in the photothermally treated PG and that the minimum temperature required for PG to be used as a retarder was 350 C. Compared with the calcination process, the use of solar energy protects the environment, reduces fuel consumption, and saves expenditure, resulting in a double benefit for the environment.
## (s11) Application of PG in agriculture
(p11.0) The application of waste PG is currently a hot topic in agriculture, where it can provide a certain amount of calcium and phosphorus according to the composition of the PG. Therefore, waste PG can positively impact plant growth (Hentati et al., 2015). The main current applications of PG in agriculture are to improve soil physicochemical properties, provide trace elements to plants, promote plant growth, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
## (s12) REEs recovery from PG
(p12.0) The REE is a global strategic resource composed of seventeen chemical elements such as lanthanide, scandium, and yttrium. Due to its unique electronic structure and special properties, it has become an essential element group for developing high-tech and cutting-edge technologies (Dushyantha et al., 2020). It plays a vital role in magnets, catalysts, biology, new materials, new energy, and atomic energy (Peiravi et al., 2021). China controls more than 90% of the world's REEs production (Blissett et al., 2014). In addition to the surge in China's domestic REEs consumption in recent years, the quota for REEs exports has been reduced. Therefore, finding new REEs sources has been a focus of scientists from all over the world. With the deepening of research, PG has attracted the attention of researchers worldwide. The PG has a low content of REEs, with the total amount in the mass range of 0.343-0.637% (Grabas et al., 2019). However, PG is a potential source of REEs due to its high annual production . With the development of science and technology, the leaching rate of REEs continues to increase. At present, there are two main methods, i.e., chemical and biological methods, for extracting REEs from PG.

(p12.1) Currently, researchers mostly use inorganic acids as leaching agents to leach REEs in PG. Strong acids, such as nitric acid and sulfuric acid, have attracted the attention of researchers because of their high leaching and recovery rates of REEs. C anovas et al. used HNO 3 (above 80%) or H 2 SO 4 as a leaching agent. The leaching rates of REEs with the addition of 3 mol/L HNO 3 and 0.5 mol/L H 2 SO 4 were 63% and 46%-58%, respectively. It can be seen that nitric acid is the best leaching agent. When the reaction time was increased from 2 h to 8 h, the leaching efficiency and the impurity release rate of the two leaching solutions increased by 8% and 6%, respectively. Adding the chelating agent DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid) can increase the leaching rate of REEs from 13% to 22% (Canovas et al., 2019). In addition, Hammas-Nasri et al. leached REEs in PG with dilute sulfuric acid and leached PG samples twice with 10% H 2 SO 4 at 60 C with a liquid-solid ratio of 1.3:1. The mixture was stirred continuously for 1 h-2 h. Then, the solid and liquid were separated for evaporative crystallization. Finally, a sample with about 86% REEs was obtained (Hammas-Nasri et al., 2016).
## (s14) Soil stabilisation and amendment
(p14.0) The engineering properties of soils, the main material for road base construction, are crucial. In road foundations, sand and gravel soils make good fillers due to their excellent properties when compacted. Although certain soils (e.g., chalk and special soils) are not suitable for direct use as road base fillers, they can be stabilised in advance for improved strength and water sensitivity. Lime or cement stabilisations are common soil stabilisation methods (Kumar et al., 2015), which also have disadvantages such as high water-to-ash ratio and high cost. Therefore, when strengthening soft soil roadbeds, their chemical composition must be analysed first. Adding PG can reduce the amount of cement used while satisfying the same strength requirements, thus reducing construction costs. Degirmenci et al. (2007) found that the unconfined compressive strength of unstabilised soils was lower than that of stabilised soils. Cement with PG was significantly more effective than fly ash with PG for mixing modified soils. Shen et al. prepared a new lime-fly ash-PG binder for semi-rigid road subgrades, the optimum formulation of which was 8-12% modified lime, 18-23% PG, and 65-74% fly ash. Soils stabilised with the new lime-fly ash-PG binder had higher early strength than soils stabilised with lime-fly ash, lime, or cement, and granular soils stabilised with the new binder have higher long-term strength than typical road subgrade materials (Shen et al., 2007). Mineralogical analysis revealed that the chemical reaction between PG and the cementitious material (calcium aluminate hydrate) forms calcium alumina. In the meantime, the increased contents of calcium and PG positively affect the strength development of cement stabilised soils at full cementation after 28 days. The produced calcium alumina tends to swell, increasing the density and strength of the structure. However, excessive PG may increase the volume and cause structural damage and strength loss.

(p14.1) Treating waste with waste is an ideal way of recycling that increases waste reuse, protects the environment and conserves resources. Treated waste can be used to improve the soil for road construction. Dredging is conducted annually throughout China to maintain good drainage conditions of water systems and improve water quality. However, dredged silt is a soft soil with low compressive strength. The effects of PG on the unconfined compressive strength and early strength of cement stabilised dredged soils were investigated experimentally by Zeng et al. The experimental results showed that the unconfined compressive strength of cement-stabilised soils with PG contents of 1.4%-8.6% was about 31.7 to 9.4 times higher than that of cement-stabilised soils without PG. In particular, the early strengths of PG-doped stabilised soils were 1.3 and 2.1 times higher after curing for 3 and 7 days, respectively, compared to those without PG (Zeng et al., 2021). Microscopic analysis revealed that PG accelerated the volcanic ash reaction between lime and fly ash, forming AFt that fills the small pores in the binder. Therefore, road base materials with lime-fly ash-PG binder had excellent performance. Gu et al. (2021) found that PG, slag, and cement with a weight ratio of 6:3:1 mixed with 5% micro silica fume (MSF) and 3‰ hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) showed the best overall performance with a compressive strength of 28.8 MPa at 60 days and a softening coefficient of 0.9. At the optimum mix ratio, the weight of PG and slag was approximately 90% of the total, indicating that this waste recycling method can significantly increase the reuse and consumption of solid waste.

(p14.2) Expansive soils swell and soften with water and shrink with water loss. With poor scour resistance, expansive soils are unsuitable for direct use in highway engineering. Therefore, Oumnih et al. Oumnih et al. (2019) stabilised expansive soils with a mixture of lime and gypsum, concluding that the plasticity and swelling of the stabilised soils were significantly reduced. After cost analysis, the most economical combination was 8% lime and 8% gypsum. The reduced plasticity index indicated improved water stability of the soils and subsequently improved water resistance of the roadbed soils. Kumar et al. (2015) found that the dry bulk weight and optimum moisture content increased in the bentonite containing 8% PG and 8% lime. The increase in dry bulk weight indicated a lower water content and increased water stability of the stabilised soils.

(p14.3) As mentioned above, PG is mainly mixed with diatomaceous ash or cement to improve the strength and water stability of subgrade soils. Although cement-PG mixes provide better stability to the ground, there are disadvantages. Mousa et al. (Mousa and Hanna, 2013) found that impurities in PG can enhance its retarding effect on cement and reduce the early cement strength development rate mainly because they lowered the pH of the mixture and slowed down the reaction of the volcanic ash. Gu et al. (2021) revealed that adding 5% micro silica powder reduced the retarding effect of PG effectively and increased the 3-day compressive strength by 170%. In addition to the 3‰ hydroxypropyl, adding methyl cellulose also retarded the hydration reaction. Therefore, adding accelerators to the mix can improve the performance of stabilised soils and overcome their shortcomings, making their engineering properties more suitable for subgrade construction.
## (s15) Applications in modified asphalt and asphalt mixes
(p15.0) Asphalt is a common pavement material to protect highway structures such as road foundations. PG is often used in asphalt modification or applied to asphalt mixtures. In asphalt modification, sulphuric acid mixed with PG was used to modify asphalt, and the results indicated that adding 10 wt.% PG activated with 0.5 wt.% sulphuric acid significantly improved the rheological response of the resulting asphalt at high temperatures (Cuadri et al., 2014). In addition, the modification was less effective when common gypsum of the same concentration was used instead of PG. FTIR tests show no C-O-P band in specimens without sulphuric acid, as shown in Figure 6, confirming that sulphuric acid is the "bonding" promoter.

(p15.1) Cuadri et al. also used PG in foam asphalt as a foaming agent. With a long storage time, no heating requirement, and good rolling shaping performance, foam asphalt makes an excellent road material. After mixing the molten base asphalt with 10 wt% of the foaming agent, a 0.5 wt% sulphuric acid was added into the mixture to start the foaming. The foaming process starting upon adding the sulphuric acid confirmed that sulphuric acid could be a 'facilitator' for releasing phosphorus and structural water from PG (Cuadri et al., 2021).
## (s16) Application to road base pavement materials
(p16.0) Acquiring conventional road base fillers such as soil and stone could damage the environment. Stabilised and cured PG can be used to replace traditional road materials, thus reducing rock and soil mining and protecting the environment while increasing PG utilisation for sustainable development. A mixture of 46.5% sand, 46.5% PG, and 7% cement was prepared, and its mechanical strength was discussed (Zmemla et al., 2022). The prepared mixture was subjected to conventional compressive and tensile strength tests as well as Young's modulus test, the results of Figure 6. FTIR spectra of pure bitumen with a modified binder from 2000 cm À1 to 900 cm À1 (Cuadri et al., 2014).

(p16.1) which indicated that the early and final compressive strengths of the stabilised material were higher than those of conventional road subgrade materials, reaching 2200 and 3500 kPa at 28 and 360 days, respectively.

(p16.2) Fly ash and lime are traditional road materials, and mixing fly ash and lime with PG produces a road material that may have more desirable properties. The suitability of fly ash-lime-PG composites in road pavements was verified using composites of fly ash þ8% lime þ2% PG, where the unconfined compressive strength, splitting tensile strength, maturation durability, and load-bearing ratio were determined after 28 d of maintenance, concluding that the composites met the criteria for unconfined compressive strength, splitting tensile strength, maturation durability and had a high load-bearing ratio (Rakesh Kumar and Vaibhav, 2016).

(p16.3) Aggregates used as semi-rigid road base materials require good gradation. Therefore, large amounts of sand and gravel were added to meet the gradation requirements. The leaching mass loss of a mixture consisting of 6% PG þ 6% lime þ12% fly ash þ76% crushed stone was 1.8% lower than that of a typical lime-fly ash-crushed stone mixture, in which the compressive strength after wet and dry cycling increased by 57.8%, and the dry shrinkage was significantly lower . Moreover, the PG-lime-fly ash-crushed stone mixture had good volume stability and environmental stability.

(p16.4) Composites containing 50% PG were found to have an unconfined compressive strength of 1.08 MPa, and replacing 30% of the lime and fly ash with slag further increased the strength to 3.2 MPa, which met the subgrade foundation strength durability criteria (Mashifana et al., 2018). Researchers have used citric acid to chemically treat the waste PG prior to the experiments, which effectively reduced the radionuclides in PG.

(p16.5) Reflection cracks in asphalt pavements, mainly caused by shrinkage cracks in the subgrade, have become one of the most common pavement diseases. In order to compensate for the shrinkage of the stabilised subgrade, a new slow setting slight-expansive cement was prepared as the road base course binder (RBCB) with an experimentally derived optimum composition of 45% fly ash, 45% silicate cement clinker, and 10% gypsum (Li et al., 2019). The RBCB had a 28-day expansion rate of 4‰, which could compensate for the cement shrinkage and improve the volume stability in wet and dry conditions. The strength of RBCB stabilised aggregates was 15% higher than that of P.S 32.5 stabilised aggregates with the same cement content, thus saving 10-15% of cement. Moreover, RBCB effectively improved the splitting strength of the base material. Compared with ordinary cement stabilised aggregates, RBCB stabilised aggregates had a lower dry shrinkage ratio, thus reducing 82% of reflective cracks in semi-rigid subgrade pavements and extending the service life of the road.

(p16.6) Sludge from wastewater treatment is an extremely complex nonhomogeneous body consisting of organic matter, inorganic particles and colloids. It has high water and organic matter contents and decays easily, producing an awful smell. The rational use of sludge has attracted the interest of many researchers. A composite binder has been prepared by mixing PG, fly ash, and acetylene sludge and applied to rural road construction, where the optimum PG content was experimentally determined as 15%, and the negative effects of soluble phosphate and phosphoric acid disappeared in PG composed of fly ash and acetylene sludge (Qiao et al., 2010). Oil-bearing sludge is a type of mixed oil-earth-water waste. Xiao et al. (2019) used cement, fly ash, and silica fume as binders and PG as the stabiliser to assess the feasibility of oil-bearing sludge as a road base material based on the performance index unconfined compressive strength. Their test results showed that adding 20% binder (cement: fly ash: silica fume ¼ 1:0.7:0.8) and PG to the oil-bearing sludge improved the 28-day compressive strength of the cured specimens. The binder and PG mixture also significantly reduced the leaching rate of heavy metals. Moreover, the PG-stabilised oil-bearing sludge mixture had sufficient strength and good water stability, freeze-thaw resistance, and volumetric stability. PG can also serve as a stabiliser for road base construction and an aggregate for road base fillers. Analysis of the mix indicates that hydration is the main source of filler strength, with the consumption of C3S, C2S, C3A, and C4AF producing hydration products, such as AFt, which are used to solidify particles and fill the pores to improve the overall strength of the filler. The use of organic mixtures improves the overall performance of the road base filler, and the power and water stability are significantly enhanced. Copper tailing sands and steel slag are solid wastes, while oil-bearing sludge contains emulsified petroleum hydrocarbons, heavy metals, and solid particles. The integrated use of multiple wastes is in line with the aim of treating waste with waste and is a practice that protects the environment.
