# Adsorptive Removal of Atrazine From Contaminated Water Using Low-Cost Carbonaceous Materials: A Review

CorpusID: 250103787 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395a73c013bcfaeaa341f6952cd37c06f5999dac](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395a73c013bcfaeaa341f6952cd37c06f5999dac)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s1) CARBONACEOUS ADSORBENTS: A POSSIBLE REMEDIATION TECHNOLOGY
(p1.0) Several techniques have been employed for the removal of atrazine from wastewater streams, including incineration, coagulation, biodegradation, catalytic degradation, ozonation, solvent extraction, steam stripping, advanced oxidation processes, chlorination, filtration, and adsorption (Chang et al., 2005;Clausen and Fabricius, 2001;Ghosh and Philip, 2005;Elwakeel et al., 2017). The majority of the conventional wastewater treatment techniques can remove a range of environmental contaminants effectively; however, they are inefficient at removing atrazine entirely, owing to its high stability, lower biodegradation, and hydrophilicity (Chingombe et al., 2006). Even the most advanced wastewater treatment technologies such as ozonation and chlorination have been found ineffective in atrazine removal due to high energy requirements, being expensive, and yielding unwanted byproducts (Ahmad et al., 2019). The inefficient and poor removal efficiency of various conventional wastewater treatment techniques results in the generation of degradation by-products/metabolites of atrazine even with higher toxicity than atrazine itself, consequently enhancing the levels of secondary pollutants (Gkementzoglou et al., 2016). A selective, reliable, cost-effective, and eco-friendly method is needed for the efficient removal of atrazine along with its metabolites from various water sources for a sustainable environment. Among the aforementioned wastewater treatment techniques, adsorption is widely accepted and efficient for the removal of recalcitrant organic pollutants such as atrazine. Adsorption is characterized by its low capital and operational cost, simplicity, ecofriendliness, higher efficiency, and insensitivity to toxic substances. However, the selection of an appropriate adsorbent is of critical importance for efficient and complete atrazine removal from wastewater.

(p1.1) Various adsorbents, including clays, nanoparticles, nanometals-based adsorbents, MgO particles, nanoparticles, and carbon-based adsorbents, have been employed as good adsorbents for atrazine removal. However, majority of these adsorbents, such as zeolite and bentonite have lower adsorption capacity for atrazine (He et al., 2019). Therefore, various researchers have synthesized engineered adsorbents such as polymer-nanoparticles, magnetic nanoparticles, mesoporous silica-coated Fe 3 O 4 nanoparticles, and magnetic biochars. The application of such engineered adsorbents has demonstrated higher atrazine removal efficiency with good regeneration efficiency (Gkementzoglou et al., 2016;Li et al., 2018). The application of nano-based adsorbents for atrazine removal has gained a huge deal of attention from researchers in recent years (Shirmardi et al., 2016). However, despite their higher atrazine adsorption capacity, nanomaterial-based adsorbents are expensive and their fabrication is complicated (He et al., 2019). Likewise, porous polymeric adsorbents contain both hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions and thus possess lower selectivity (He et al., 2019).
## (s6) CARBON NANOTUBES AS ADSORBENTS FOR ATRAZINE REMOVAL
(p6.0) Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are made up of graphitic as well as several concentric tubules and are considered a new class of nanomaterial. The CNTs could either be single-walled (SWCNTs) or multi-walled (MWCNTs). Both of these types are sole macromolecules with one-dimensional structure, and thermally stable with certain chemical properties (Ren et al., 2011;Taghizade Firozjaee et al., 2018;Ahmad et al., 2019). CNTs are characterized with large surface area, tunable physical, chemical, and electrical characteristics, as well as small, hollow, and layered structures (Ahmad et al., 2019). The adsorption capacity of the CNTs towards pesticides is influenced by pore structure and functional groups that can be acquired by thermal and chemical modifications to gain the optimum performance for a targeted purpose (Yunus et al., 2012). Functional groups have the ability to alter the moisture contents on the surface of CNTs, which may help in the sorption of low molecular weight and polar compounds (Cho et al., 2008). Due to their unique characteristics, CNTs have come up recently as potential adsorbents for the removal of organic, inorganic, and biological contaminants from wastewater streams (Upadhyayula et al., 2009). However, the wastewater treatment efficiencies of CNTs mainly rely on the characteristics of the CNTs such as purity, surface area, and functional groups, as well as the adsorption conditions such as pH, temperature, ionic strength, contact time, competitive adsorption, dissolved organic matter, and initial contaminant concentration.

(p6.1) There is extensive information available on the application of CNTs for removal of various environmental pollutants from wastewater streams; however, the studies regarding atrazine adsorption onto CNTs are limited ). Due to the presence of sp 2 hybridized carbon atoms, CNTs can potentially attach to aromatic compounds such as atrazine via π-π EDA interactions . Furthermore, dispersion, hydrophobic effect, weak dipolar forces, and diffusion could also help in the adsorption of atrazine onto CNTs (Yang et al., 2006). The adsorption of atrazine onto various CNTs has been enlisted in Table 3. It is obvious from Table 3, that r-MWNTs exhibited the highest atrazine adsorption capacity as predicted by Langmuir isotherm (110.8, 100.42, and 97.05 mg g −1 at 18, 25, and 35°C, respectively). The highest adsorption capacities of the r-MWNTs could be attributed to the highest surface area of the said adsorbent (299.63 cm 2 g −1 ) as compared to the other CNTs adsorbents mentioned (Yan et al., 2008). Yan et al. (2008) further stated that due to the higher isoelectric point, the r-MWNTs contained a higher number of O-containing functional groups, which subsequently aided the atrazine adsorption onto it. Further, it was also stated that the adsorption process of atrazine onto r-MWNTs was spontaneous and exothermic (Yan et al., 2008). A study conducted by Rambabu et al. (2012) demonstrated a relatively higher adsorption capacity (66.5, 63.7, 60.8 mg g −1 at 18, 23, and 31°C, respectively) of CNTs as predicted by the Langmuir isotherm, which could also be attributed to the higher surface area (189 cm 2 g −1 ) of the said CNTs. They also explained that the adsorption of atrazine onto CNTs was an exothermic and spontaneous process. All the other types of CNTs reported in Table 3 represented relatively lower atrazine adsorption capacities, which could be designated to their comparatively lower surface areas and other physio-chemical and structural characteristics.

(p6.2) The performance of CNTs is not always uniform due to their agglomeration in the aqueous solution and deficiency of polar functional groups (Ahmad et al., 2019). Therefore, a lot of researchers are focusing on modifying the CNTs for improved adsorption capacity for a range of contaminants removal from wastewater streams. However, again, the modified CNTs do not always show an improvement in their adsorption capacity compared with the pristine ones. For instance, Shi et al. (2010) modified the CNTs with various surfactants i.e., cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate, and humic acid, and reported that the presence of the surfactants inhibited the adsorption of atrazine onto both SWCNTs and MWCNTs ( Table 3). The hydrophilic fraction of the aforementioned surfactant micelles faced in water converts the modified CNTs into more hydrophilic adsorbents, consequently reducing the adsorption of atrazine onto the modified CNTs. The inhibitory effects of anionic (sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate) surfactants were higher than that of cationic (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide) surfactants. Due to lower purity and more oxygen contents, the presence of O-containing functional groups on pristine and modified SWCNTs enhances the adsorption of atrazine, thereby reducing the inhibitory effects, as compared to pristine and modified MWCNTs adsorption (Shi et al., 2010).
## (s7) Mechanisms for Atrazine Removal by CNTs
(p7.0) It has been established that CNTs possess higher adsorption potentials for both organic and inorganic contaminants. The major mechanisms controlling atrazine adsorption onto CNTs could be either micropore diffusion or surface adsorption (Chen et al., 2008). Therefore, the adsorption of atrazine onto CNTs may follow either a single or more than one mechanisms such as hydrophobic effect, π-π EDA interactions, covalent bonding, electrostatic interactions, and H-bonding (Yang et al., 2008;Pyrzynska, 2011). Generally, the organic molecules with C=C bonds and aromatic rings are adsorbed onto the CNTs through ππ EDA interactions, H-bonding with the surface functional groups, and electrostatic interactions (Chen et al., 2007b;Yang et al., 2008;Ji et al., 2009;Ghaedi and Kokhdan, 2012;Smith and Rodrigues 2015). However, numerous studies have demonstrated that higher π-π EDA interactions are one of the most significant mechanisms for the adsorption of an organic compound with aromatic rings onto CNTs (Hyung and Kim, 2008;Lin and Xing, 2008). Besides, Shi et al. (2010) reported that surface area and pore volume (both micropore and mesopores) distribution significantly affect the atrazine adsorption onto CNTs. On the other hand, Yan et al. (2008) reported that surface area and O-containing functional groups are the major factors controlling the adsorption of atrazine onto r-MWNTs. Likewise, Ellerie et al. (2013) demonstrated that the surface area of the CNTs was the major factor controlling its adsorption efficiency towards atrazine. Contrarily, Chingombe et al. (2006) demonstrated that higher O-containing functional groups may adsorb more H 2 O molecules and resulting in the generation of clusters, subsequently reducing the adoption of atrazine. The reduction in atrazine adsorption with increased O-containing function groups (carboxylic groups) could also be attributed to the deprotonation property of the aforementioned functional groups . Additionally, the pore filling is also considered an important mechanism for the adsorption of atrazine onto CNTs ). In the aqueous media, the CNTs combine to create bundles, and the tiny empty spaces between the tubes in these bundles behaving like pores are filled with atrazine molecules. Therefore, the adsorption of atrazine onto CNTs is a complex process and depends on multiple factors including the characteristics of adsorbent as well as the adsorption conditions. Hence, detailed information about the characteristics of CNTs must be known before its implications for the removal of atrazine from wastewater streams.
## (s9) Mechanisms Involved in the Removal of Atrazine From Water Using Graphene
(p9.0) The removal of atrazine from wastewater through graphene may follow an individual or a combination of various processes, e.g., H-bonding, electrostatic interactions, pore diffusion, and π-π EDA interactions depending upon the type of adsorptive material and adsorption conditions (Tripathi and Ranjan, 2015;Singh and Gupta, 2016). Among all the aforementioned processes, π-π EDA interactions are the most dominant mechanism for adsorption of atrazine onto graphene. The adsorption of atrazine onto graphene is largely dependent on the type and characteristics of graphene used, as well as on the adsorbent conditions. For instance, a higher number of O-containing functional groups in GOs enhances its binding capability for positively charged atrazine molecules through electrostatic interaction, consequently removing a higher amount of atrazine (Chen et al., 2013). Further, the O-containing functional groups present on graphene and N-H groups of atrazine could attach via H-bonding, resulting in atrazine adsorption. Besides, the higher surface area and pore volumes of the graphene play a major role in the adsorption of atrazine via pore-filling mechanism . Contrarily, the abundance of O-containing functional groups may reduce the adsorption of atrazine onto graphene via generating hydrophilic surfaces. However, the O-containing functional groups of graphene may remove after its annealing reduction, consequently increasing the π-π EDA interactions . In a study conducted by Li et al. (2013), it was reported that the atrazine adsorption capacity of graphene was attributed to surface area and π-π EDA interactions. Moreover, besides adsorption, the atrazine can also be degraded with the help of graphene. For instance, Wu et al. (2018) studied the degradation potential of graphene composites with nanoscale zero-valent iron and persulfate for atrazine removal. The results suggested that atrazine degradation followed multiple mechanisms including dealkylation, dechlorinationhydroxylation, allylic oxidation, and allylic hydroxylation. Therefore, it can be stated that the removal of atrazine from contaminated wastewater through graphene follows multiple mechanisms including adsorption and degradation.
## (s10) FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
(p10.0) Atrazine and its metabolites have been detected in the atmosphere, water bodies, soil, and sediments all around the world. In the majority of cases, the concentrations of atrazine in wastewater exceed the maximum permissible levels for drinking water i.e., 3 μg L −1 in the United States, 0.1 μg L −1 in Europe, and 3.0 μg L −1 by WHO. The particulate, as well as vapor phases of atrazine, have been found even 100-300 km from the application site (Dorsey 2003). Likewise, it is mobile in soil and aquatic environment and can potentially migrate from one place to another. There is a limited degradation of atrazine in soil via chemical and biological means, however, no biodegradation of atrazine in groundwater has been reported. Moreover, the degradation of atrazine in the surface water is very low and has not been demonstrated well (Dorsey, 2003). Hence, all the available data indicated that atrazine is high recalcitrance in nature and may persist in water bodies for decades without degradation. However, if degraded, its metabolites could be even more toxic than the pristine atrazine. Therefore, the focus should be drawn to removing the recalcitrant atrazine and its metabolites from world water resources on urgent bases. The following directions could be followed to cope with this situation:

(p10.1) • Atrazine application should be prohibited in all the countries where atrazine utilization is still in practice. • Monitoring/surveillance of atrazine and its metabolites in surface and ground water resources surrounding 100-300 km should be performed. Moreover, levels of atrazine and its by-products in soils and sediments should be studied, as these could serve as a sink for atrazine introduction into nearby water bodies. • Behavior/fate of atrazine, as well as its metabolites in various environments, should be investigated. • A comprehensive study to explore the potential impacts of atrazine on humans, amphibians, and other animals should be conducted. • Efficient technologies should be identified for the complete removal of atrazine and its metabolites from water resources. The existing carbonaceous adsorbent should be modified via chemical, mechanical, thermal, ozone, plasma, and/or electro activities to improve their performance and efficiency.

(p10.2) • Carbonaceous nano-adsorbents should be fabricated and modified with metal oxide nanoparticles and applied for atrazine removal from wastewater. • Novel carbonaceous adsorbents with higher regeneration/ reusability should be developed for more sustainable management of atrazine-contaminated media.
