# Role of various pharmacologic agents in alveolar bone regeneration: A review

CorpusID: 259865127 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea5472c065b6870b7a72a62df474f471125a4fd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ea5472c065b6870b7a72a62df474f471125a4fd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) AGENTS PROMOTING ALVEOLAR BONE REGENERATION -BISPHOSPHONATES
(p1.0) Being similar in structure to pyrophosphate, the bisphosphonates have an affinity to the bone tissue. [6]To date, the bisphosphonates are classified into three generations [Figure 1] depending on side chains. [7]They act by inhibiting bone resorption by selectively adsorbing to the mineral surfaces and causing internalization of osteoclasts at the molecular level, which impacts the osteoclasts at the cellular level, thus inhibiting their osteoclastic activity. [8]hey also act on osteoblasts and osteocytes by preventing their apoptosis by binding and inhibiting protein tyrosine phosphatase. [9]ineni et al. conducted a study that compared the effect of 400 µg alendronate with β-Tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) against β-TCP alone. [10]The study included 60 subjects who were randomly divided into two groups and the clinical parameters were assessed at baseline, 3 and 6 months with bone levels being assessed at baseline and 6 months.The authors concluded that the combination proved better clinical outcomes and bone formation when compared to β-TCP alone.

(p1.1) Akram et al. conducted a meta-analysis assessing the efficacy of bisphosphonate as an adjunct to scaling and root planning (SRP). [11]They inferred that although systemic and local bisphosphonate therapy as an adjunct to SRP yielded favorable outcomes in periodontitis patients in short-term, precaution should be taken that the patient may be at risk of developing osteoradionecrosis of the jaw. [12]meta-analysis on the synergistic effect of 1% alendronate with platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) was conducted in 2019. [13]his meta-analysis included studies that had compared the use of 1% alendronate with PRF alone in periodontal bone regeneration.The combination of PRF and 1% alendronate focuses on the advantages of both agents.PRF is a rich reservoir of growth factors that promote wound healing, angiogenesis, differentiation, and proliferation of cells to form soft tissues and bone, respectively.On the other hand, alendronate, belonging to the bisphosphonate family, targets osteoclasts impairing bone resorption.The authors concluded that PRF plus 1%ALN had better clinical outcomes when compared to PRF alone during periodontal regeneration. [14]NSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY DRUGS Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a group of antipyretic drugs, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory in nature. [15]PGE2 are one of the key components responsible for alveolar bone loss in periodontal inflammation.It is a pro-inflammatory mediator generated by the cyclooxygenase (COX) enzyme in the metabolism of arachnoid acid. [16]Selective COX-2 inhibitor drugs such as flurbiprofen and naproxen inhibit the action of the COX enzyme, thus inhibiting the production of PGE2. [17]Jeffcoat et al. compared the topical effect of ketorolac to the systemic effect of flurbiprofen for inhibition of alveolar bone loss in chronic periodontitis.They concluded that ketorolac rinse preserved more alveolar bone compared to systemic flurbiprofen. [18] a meta-analysis, Wang et al. assessed the efficacy of topical application of host modulating agents. [19]Their meta-analysis highlighted that topical application of NSAIDs had a favorable effect in decreasing alveolar bone resorption which was similar to the effect on systemic administration of NSAIDs.
## (s3) EFFECT OF STATINS ON THE METABOLISM OF BONE
(p3.0) Statins affect bone metabolism by three mechanisms [38] (1) decrease osteoclastogenesis, (2) increase osteogenesis, and (3) decrease bone resorption.[41][42] Yazawa et al. demonstrated in an in-vitro study the positive effect of simvastatin on proliferation and osteoblastic differentiation of human periodontal cells due to inhibition of the mevalonate pathway. [43]adeep and Thorat investigated the efficacy of 1.2% simvastatin gel in patients with chronic periodontitis. [44]The clinical parameters were recorded at 1, 2, 4, and 6 months.The radiographic bone level was assessed at baseline and 6 months.It was observed that there was an improvement in clinical parameters and significant bone fill on local application of simvastatin after SRP.The authors attributed this increase in bone fill to the expression of the bone morphogenetic protein, the anti-inflammatory property of statin, and angiogenesis during wound healing.Pradeep et al. evaluated the efficacy of local application of 1.2% simvastatin gel as an adjunct to scaling and root planing in chronic periodontitis patients with Type 2 diabetes mellitus to improve clinical parameters and bone formation. [45]This study reported a decrease in sulcus bleeding index and pocket depth with an increase in clinical attachment level and bone fill in Type 2 diabetes mellitus patients with chronic periodontitis.Gupta et al. conducted a meta-analysis to assess the osteopromotive ability of simvastatin along with its healing potential on soft tissue and temporomandibular cartilage. [46]The authors concluded that simvastatin has shown a positive treatment outcome in alveolar bone regeneration due to its bone stimulation characteristics.

(p3.1) In a meta-analysis conducted by Sinjab et al., the authors studied the efficacy of statins in localized intrabony defects. [47]hey concluded that locally delivered statins as an adjunct to SRP were beneficial in increasing the bone fill percentage along with improvement in other periodontal parameters.In a study conducted by Muniz et al. to study the efficacy of statins on periodontal regeneration, the authors observed that simvastatin and rosuvastatin significantly improved the resolution of intrabony defects when they were compared to controls. [48]The authors concluded that stains improved periodontal parameters when used as an adjunct to SRP rather than with SRP alone or with a placebo.
## (s6) FUTURE THERAPEUTIC TARGETS
(p6.0) [84] Though some drugs inhibit the activity of these molecules in systemic diseases, still these drugs have not been used for treatment for periodontitis.86] These molecules can act as therapeutic targets for the future development of pharmacologic agents, which can inhibit alveolar bone resorption and promote alveolar bone regeneration.
