# A review of the bio-tribology of medical devices

CorpusID: 256398614 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a974128936499d2331e166af9c0c0d371834475](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4a974128936499d2331e166af9c0c0d371834475)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Literature search
(p1.0) An initial literature search was conducted in Web of Science on 20 th October 2020, with the following keywords: Topic = (medical device) and (tribology or friction or wear or lubrication). A total record of 9,896 was found. We excluded non-English records, abstract-type documents, and records with publication year before 2005. A total number of 6,747 records remained. However, the keyword "wear" may also mean "have something on one's body". About 3,000 records were identified to be related to wearable devices by additional keywords "wearable, wearing, wore, bodywear, footwear, stockings, mask, head-mounted, patient-worn". Among those wearable records, only 55 records were kept by searching with keywords "friction or lubrication or tribology". Finally, 2,409 records remained and were analyzed in this review. A classification of the records was conducted by medical device types. A total of six types were identified, including artificial joints, dental restoration devices, surgical instruments, skin-related devices, and fracture fixation devices, as shown in Fig. 1. A further classification of the records was conducted by materials, where four main biomaterials were identified including metal, polymer, ceramic, and hydrogel, as shown in Fig. 2. The bio-tribology of the medical devices was reviewed with respect to the six individual medical devices listed in Fig. 1. 3 Bio-tribology of artificial joints 3
## (s4) Articulating interface
(p4.0) The articulating interface is designed to provide relative motion. The friction coefficient and wear resistance are important considerations from the perspective of long-term survivorship. However, common complications (such as excessive wear, and aseptic loosening caused by wear particles) due to improper tribological design are the most important factors affecting the performance and long-term effectiveness of artificial joints. Thus, investigation and improvement of the tribological performance of the articulating surface have been one of the main areas in the bio-tribology of artificial joints. Despite various material combinations are used, the articulating interface can be generally divided into two types, the soft-on-hard, and the hard-on-hard combinations. Due to the excellent tensile strength and impact resistance, ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) and its modifications are widely used as the "soft" component. While the "hard"   component of an articulating pair often includes  cobalt-chromium alloys, titanium alloys, stainless steel,  alumina, zirconia, and zirconia toughened alumina  composite ceramics (ZTA). Since UHMWPE is much softer, it is the major source of wear and wear particles. Figure 4 shows several typical wear features observed from a retrieved acetabular cup [11]. Various approaches have been proposed to improve the wear resistance of UHMWPE. Recent developments include highly cross-linked UHMWPE, which provide substantially improved wear resistance [12,13]. The wear rate of irradiated UHMWPE significantly decreased with an increase in the cross-linking gamma irradiation. Also, Vitamin E stabilization is found to protect against the oxidation of cross-linked materials [14].

(p4.1) It's worth noticing that the surface properties of the hard counter-face are also important since its asperities may scratch the soft surface. Various surface coatings of the metallic counter-face are introduced to maintain the low wear of the soft surface. However, the potential long-term durability of the coatings needs further examination [15]. Besides, the design parameters of the articulating surface also play important roles in determining its friction behavior. For example, a large femoral head diameter leads to a larger contact area and a longer sliding distance, which is a disadvantage in terms of wear [16]. However, a larger femoral head may also benefit from hydrodynamic lubrication. Thus, the actual wear performance is a negotiation of design parameters, lubrication, and surgical factors.

(p4.2) There are mainly two types of hard-on-hard combinations for artificial joints, the metal-on-metal, and ceramic-on-ceramic. In vitro experiments indicate that wear in a metal-on-metal articulation is very low due to the improved hydrodynamic lubrication. However, the wear of metal-on-metal is drastically increased under adverse operating conditions due to the breakdown of lubrication film. This is probably the main reason leading to the clinical failure of the device and the drastic reduction in clinical use. Ceramic-on-ceramic has been widely used for artificial knee joints. Compared with metal-on-metal joints, ceramic-on-ceramic joints have higher hardness and scratch resistance, thus it maintains a very low wear rate [17]. However, squeaking, as one of the potential complications, has been reported to happen range from 0.5% [18] to 10% [19]. Although various factors have been identified to contribute to squeaking, yet the squeaking mechanism is still unclear. Thus, the complete elimination of the squeaking in ceramic-onceramic joints remains a difficulty. Also, the risk of fracture was reported to be an important concern of  ceramic-on-ceramic joints. However, with the improved design and manufacturing, the fracture risk of the contemporary ceramic-on-ceramic joints is much lower (0.001% to 0.021%) [17].
## (s5) Fixation interface
(p5.0) For a long time, fixation failure has been an important cause of revision [27]. Artificial joints are mainly fixed with bone cement or biological fixation. Cemented fixation is realized by using fast-drying bone cement to "glue" the prosthesis and the bone together. The biological fixation is achieved by press-fit, and the prosthesis is specially textured or fabricated in a porous structure to allow bone ingrowth. The optimal fixation, whether cemented fixation or cementless fixation, has been an area of debate for decades.

(p5.1) Bone cement is widely used for its immediate fixation and excellent survivorship. And this is especially true for the knee joints. However, bone cement is prone to interface fretting and fatigue wear, and bone cement debris may cause osteolysis and aseptic loosening. Thus, the long-term stability of the prosthesis-bone interface remains difficult [28]. Due to the biological activity or porous structure of the prosthesis, the biological fixation theoretically provides the possibility to form a safe and reliable long-term fixation, i.e. the host bone grows into the surface or inside of the prosthesis [29]. Because of the better press-fit conditions, biological fixation has been widely used in hip replacements. Uncemented hip joints reduce the prosthesis loosening rate to 1/4, which greatly reduces the revision rate. Despite the excellent survivorship, component long-term fixation remains a concern. Aseptic loosening remains the most common indication for revision [30]. Clinical problems such as sinking [31], fibrous tissue wrapping, and even breakage of the prosthesis were also observed [32,33], as shown in Fig. 6. Several bio-fixation prostheses of the world's leading companies have been recalled by the United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA).

(p5.2) Several important factors were reported to affect the fixation stability of the interface. Due to the   difference in the mechanical properties of metal and natural bone tissue, the strain difference on the interface leads to stress concentration and micro-motion. Small micro-motion allows bone tissue forming, while excessive micro-motion causes the forming of fiber [34]. An increase in the interface gap decreases periimplant tissue forming, bone-implant bind rate, and fixation strength. In addition to the porous material, various factors also play important roles in determining the fixation of a cementless component, such as stiffness, porous structure and topography, and keel or peg design. Early cementless implants had poor survivorship due to design flaws such as using sintered beads or mesh coating, non-continuous fixation [35]. Various investigations have induced promising results in modern cementless designs. The mechanical properties of the porous implant can be tailored to match the stiffness of the local host bone to reduce bone resorption.
## (s6) Modular interface
(p6.0) During daily activities, the articulating interfaces bear three-dimensional dynamic motion and loading. The frictional forces and moments of the articulating interface are transmitted to the modular interfaces, which leads to the fretting of the modular surfaces. In combination with the presence of body fluids, the modular interfaces undergo fretting wear and fretting corrosion. Figure 7 shows typical fretting corrosion damages of retrieved hip components. Similar phenomena also exist in knee joints [36,37], shoulder joints [38], and spinal fixation using assemblies. It is generally believed that fretting corrosion is widespread in various artificial joints.

(p6.1) Modular-neck hips are reported to have a higher revision rate compared to fixed stems [40,41]. Corrosion and fretting at the taper interface have been widely reported with metal-on-metal and metalon-polyethylene implants [42,43]. Although the taper corrosion mechanism is not fully understood, a combination of electrochemical and mechanical interactions is identified as important factors [44]. The micromotion between the contact surfaces disrupts the passivation layer, and the exposure of the bulk metal leads to corrosion [45]. Also, crevice corrosion may happen due to the spaces between modular components [46].
## (s9) Bio-tribological issues of fracture fixation devices
(p9.0) Bone fracture is a very common body injury. There are millions of fractures worldwide per year, with a global market of $5.5 billion [60]. When a bone is broken, a "reduction" orthopedic surgeon is performed to re-set the bone, where various constructs are used for fracture fixation, as shown in Fig. 8. A detailed summary of fracture fixation devices was conducted based on different fracture sites, as shown in Table 1 [61]. Stainless steel, titanium alloys, cobalt-chromium alloys, and NiTi shape-memory alloys are widely used in fracture fixation devices [61]. The interface between the screw and the screw hole of the bone plate produces micro-action, which promotes fretting wear [62]. Also, the screw hole is the weakest link of www.Springer.com/journal/40544 | Friction the bone plate. Fatigue fracture often occurs under cycling loading. The micro-motion accelerates the generation of fatigue cracks and causes fatigue damage to the bone plates. Due to the in vivo condition, the synthetic effect of corrosion and fretting may result in unstable and fracture of the constructs. Also, since bone plates are in direct contact with cortical bones, the tribological performance of the bone-fixation plates is of importance for the minimization of wear debris and ion release, which causes inflammation and potentially carcinogenic effects [63].
## (s15) Challenges and future developments
(p15.0) Although effective measures have been proposed to reduce pressure-induced skin damage and ulcer, the contributions of different measures and their mechanism need further investigation. To prevent pressure ulcers, a thorough understanding of the skin-device interaction mechanism is required. An obvious measure is to reduce friction to a safe level. However, the friction coefficient cannot be minimized to zero in some cases. Instead, minimal friction is required to stay stable, such as keeping a patient to be sited in an elevated back position. The microenvironment such as humidity and temperature plays important role in the development of the pressure ulcer for the prosthetic socket-stump interface. Future work is expected to further investigate interpersonal differences in the threshold of the combined results of normal and shear pressure under various microenvironment conditions. 6 Bio-tribology of dental restoration devices 6
## (s18) Tooth restoration devices
(p18.0) The teeth are exposed to a significant amount of wear during chewing. Thus, the wear resistance of a dental restoration material is of importance. Various types of materials have been used for tooth restoration, including metals and their alloys, polymers, ceramics, and composite-based materials [81].

(p18.1) Since aesthetics is an important consideration of dental restoration, metal and its alloys became depreciated over the years due to their unpleasant color. Only a limited amount of amalgam filling is used as dental restoration materials. The majority of the metals and alloy dental materials are used as orthodontic appliances and dental implants. Polymeric materials are also used for dental restoration, but often demonstrate a high wear rate and poor gloss retention [82]. Dental ceramics are composed of crystalline and glassy phases [83], and their mechanical  [80]. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [80], © The Authors 2020.

(p18.2) www.Springer.com/journal/40544 | Friction and tribological properties are closely related to the composition of these two phases. Dental ceramics not only have an appearance close to the natural teeth but also have excellent wear resistance. Thus, they are widely used as restoration materials. One of the disadvantages of dental ceramics is their brittle property, which may cause the failure of the restoration. Compared with natural teeth, the wear resistance of dental ceramics is often higher, which may result in the extensive wear of the opposing occlusal surface of the natural tooth.

(p18.3) Resin-based dental composites consist of organic filler particles (such as Zirconia, borosilicate glass, quartz, and alumina, etc.) in organic monomers such as Bis-GMA (Bisphenol A-glycidyl methacrylate), TEGDMA (Triethylene glycol dimethacrylate), UDMA (Urethane dimethacrylate), HEMA (2-Hydroxyethyl methacrylate), and Bis-EMA (Ethoxylated bisphenol-A-dimethacrylate) [84][85][86][87]. Materials as such are very close to the characteristics of natural teeth and are frequently employed to restore cavities and replace decayed tooth tissues [88]. Unlike dental ceramics, composite-based materials can be placed through a direct technique, which greatly improves clinical efficiency [89]. Early resin composites demonstrate a high wear rate, since they contain large filler particles. Currently, the wear resistance has been significantly improved by introducing micro/nano-hybrid composites [90]. Kumar et al. [91] studied the wear behavior of Bis-GMA/TEGDMA based composite with different weight fractions of silane-treated nano zirconia particles. Compared with other dental composites, their dental composite filled with 3 wt% of nano zirconia filler exhibited maximum hardness, minimum wear rate, and outstanding wear resistance. Chadda et al. [92] investigated the fracture toughness and wear behavior of hydroxyapatite and silica/ hydroxyapatite-filled Bis-GMA/TEGDMA composite. The composites with the lowest filler content (20 wt%) demonstrate enhanced fracture toughness and moderate wear resistance, and the composites with 30 wt%-40 wt% of filler content exhibit maximum wear resistance.

(p18.4) Ceramic-polymer composites (hybrid ceramics) have both excellent properties of polymers and ceramics, such as high elasticity and ductility, strength, improved translucency, color retention, and wear resistance. The wear resistance of these materials is equivalent to that of feldspar porcelain and glassceramics [93]. Polymer infiltrated ceramic network (PICN) materials provide enhanced mechanical properties and excellent wear resistance. Xu et al. [94] investigated the wear behavior and mechanism of a PICN material (commercial ENAMIC). They found the ENAMIC has a similar Vickers hardness but lower Young's modulus than tooth enamel. Also, the ENAMIC exhibits a similar wear damage mode to tooth enamel but has lower wear resistance. Yu et al. [95] studied the effect of acidic agents on the wear behavior of a PICN material (Vita Enamic, Vita Zahnfabrik, Bad Sackingen, Germany). Specimens were immersed into different solutions for 4 weeks, including deionized water, 2 wt% citric acidic solution, 2 wt% astringent solutions, and 2 wt% lactic acidic solutions. Reciprocating wear tests were performed under artificial saliva. Their results demonstrate that the acidic environment has limited degradation of the PICN. Although acid erosion demonstrated a significant effect on the initial wear behavior of the PICN, no obvious effect on the long-term wear property was observed.
## (s19) Dental implants
(p19.0) Implants provide a strong foundation for fixed or removable replacement teeth that are made to match natural teeth. There are many advantages to dental implants, including improved appearance, durability, and convenience. However, there are still many failed clinical cases. The possible causes are interface fretting and corrosion [96,97]. Although they are difficult to detect, they directly affect the bone ingrowth at the initial stage of implantation and the long-term lifetime of the dental implant [98].
## (s23) Research advances on the bio-tribology of cardiovascular devices
(p23.0) Mechanical friction and wear have always been important research interests for various mechanical heart valves [118]. Wear and friction often occur in the hinge region of a bileaflet, between the occluder and the ring or struts in a titling-disc, between the ball and cage in a cage-ball valve [119]. Excessive wear may cause the leaflet to escape or strut fracture, and finally result in the failure of mechanical heart valves. A tribology-related leaflet escape was reported by Zhang et al. [120] in a low profile bileaflet mechanical prosthesis, where excessive wear of the leaflet outflow edge was identified.
## (s25) Bio-tribological issues of minimally invasive surgical devices
(p25.0) In recent years, MISs, such as various endoscopic surgeries, are commonly found in medical operations. Tribological problems are accompanied such as needle insertion into a soft tissue, device-tissue interactions, and endoscope-tissue interactions. Due to the existence of the friction and tribological problems between tissue and surgical instruments, it brings difficulties to be able to control the position and force with high precision [134]. There are several factors for the accurate conduction of an MIS, such as needle insertion, grasp, haptic feedback, and transmission hysteresis (by tendon-sheath, cam pulley, etc.). However, the hysteresis is considered a transmission error, which is beyond the scope of bio-tribology and is not discussed here. Only the device-tissue interactions are reviewed.
