# A Survey on Federated Learning for the Healthcare Metaverse: Concepts, Applications, Challenges, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 257913812 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/39d3ac2b003398e4c2876cb311fd98a9ce56f21f)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) B. FL in Conventional Healthcare
(p3.0) As computer software and hardware technologies advance quickly, more and more healthcare data are becoming available from patients, healthcare organizations, the pharmaceutical industry, and insurance companies, among other sources. Data science technologies now have an improbable chance to get insights from data and raise the standard of healthcare services because of this access [29]. However, the acquisition of enormous, diversified, centrally stored healthcare datasets is almost impossible due to strict privacy laws and data ownership considerations. On the other hand, the AI model demands an increasing amount of healthcare data in order to provide better decisions. FL offers promising solutions to this issue, and the advantages of adapting FL over conventional methods are discussed below.

(p3.1) • Privacy: FL offers training without compromising privacy of healthcare data. FL has enormous potential for connecting disparate healthcare data sources while protecting privacy. FL uses a central server to train a common global model while preserving all the sensitive data at the local institutions where it belongs [30]. Thus, FL enables healthcare organisations to create reliable and trustworthy models by participating in collaborative training without disclosing data to third parties. As a result, it provides new opportunities for industry and research and enhances health care all around the world. FL can have positive impact on almost all stakeholders and the entire treatment cycle, better diagnostic tools for clinicians, including improved medical image analysis, collaborative and accelerated drug discovery, true precision medicine by assisting in the identification of similar patients, and which reduces cost and time-to-market for pharmaceutical companies [31].
## (s4) • Reduced Computational Cost and Power Consumption:
(p4.0) The accuracy of AI models will increase as more data is gathered. However, if all the healthcare data is kept in one location, training a model will take more time and resources [32]. With FL, there is no need to store data in a certain place. Instead, a global model can be trained based on the parameters shared by the local models. When compared to conventional models, FL does not require any personal data from the local models, which lowers the cost of computational resources and lowers power usage [33]. • Personalization: FL also allows local model to train at local network, and the cloud for global model aggregation. The distributed datasets, which may vary across various local nodes, are the major source of data used for training at the cloud server. The shared model may not work well for a specific user since it purely accounts for the traits that all health users have in common [34]. As a consequence, each user incorporates the learned global model with his own unique health data to provide personalized health monitoring. The local devices get the global model from the cloud and train their unique model in order to capture the tailored services. Additionally, a balanced dataset is created for every device using the global model from the cloud, reducing the disparity between individualised models and the global model [35].
## (s5) C. The Healthcare Metaverse Platform
(p5.0) Metaverse has been built to intently provide permanent, decentralized, collaborative, and interoperable opportunities and business models that will allow companies to extend their digital operations [10]. A general Metaverse platform for healthcare and medical can have seven layers, including infrastructure, human interface, decentralization, spatial computing, economy, discovery, and experience as from the bottom to the top layers as shown in Fig. 2, as from the bottom to the top, but not being strict and may be changed upon many metrics, such as applications, services provided, scalability, and requirement.

(p5.1) Infrastructure: At the bottom, the infrastructure layer pertains to all technological infrastructure things that are required to create a fully immersive, functional, and interoperable Metaverse [36]. Networking and wireless communication with 5G, 6G, and WiFi, cloud storage architecture, VR systems, microelectromechanical systems, and graphics processing units are some major technology clusters to build a healthcare Metaverse, which allows to seamlessly connect decentralized healthcare and medical centers. So far the Metaverse stands on the foundation of powerful computers, integrated medical circuits, communication components, healthcare and medical equipments, and mixed reality devices.

(p5.2) Human interface: The human interface layer mentions about the hardware or the devices that enable users (doctors, clinicians, and patients) to experience the true immersive experience in the virtual world [37]. This layer involves wearable devices such as VR mobiles, VR headsets, gloves with haptic, smart glasses, gesture, voice, miniaturized biosensors, smart contact lenses and human brain-computer interface systems. With the haptic technology, users can operate electronics gadgets in mid-air (e.g., picking up a 3D lung object to zoom in and rotate for diagnosis) without touching screen or buttonaided control.

(p5.3) Decentralization: In the domain of healthcare, the Metaverse should be decentralized, open, and diffused, that means, it is governed by a single entity and belongs to no one but serving everyone at the same time. Decentralization encompasses the blockchain, self-sovereign digital identity mechanisms, smart contracts, open-source platforms to enable and facilitate the increasing growth of distributed computing and healthcare microservices in a scalable environment, serving many crowded patient and medical expert communities [38], [39]. A host of decentralized healthcare Metaverse projects can use the blockchain technology to provide patient-owned private data (e.g., sensory data, medical image, and electronics health records) and shareable clinic experiences (e.g., diagnosis and treatment approaches) in a transparent and traceable manner to perform transactions and interactions.

(p5.4) Spatial computing: as standing for a real/virtual combination, spatial computing dims the borderline between the actual and ideal worlds. In the healthcare domain, spatial computing is all material, libraries, and AI tools to create 3D immersive experience for real-world healthcare and wellness applications as well as medical services [9]. For instance, medical students have opportunity to practice and test their ability in realistic environments without risk over a virtual surgical training applications built in the Metaverse. Some 3D design engines like Unity and Unreal support for 3D modeling and rendering with GPUs for displaying geometry and animation. Spatial computing also helps to integrate diversified healthcare and medical data from different devices and sources for between visualization and analysis using VR devices.

(p5.5) Economy: This layer is responsiable for economic establishment and development in the Metaverse, in which patients, doctors, healthcare institutions, and medical clusters can manage their business in many unique kinds. Patients can allow the service providers to use their private data for research activities and other non-commercial purposes, meanwhile, the providers will reward their contribution by virtual goods, assets, and incentives. There are some economic actitivies provided by healthcare and medical institutions, such as managing a virtual market of digital contents (e.g., medical training, remotely collaborative diagnosis, and treatment plan) and trading health things and medical equipment (e.g., first aid kit, thermometer, and wheelchair), wherein retail shops should be placed in the virtual world [40]. Indeed, it has enormous potential for economic expansion by generating a virtual space for not only patients and doctors but also content creators and designer to connect and communicate in the Metaverse.

(p5.6) Discovery: Discovery can be understood as an advertising ecosystem which includes store placements, rating systems, and recommendation systems from users and service providers. This layer conveys the experiential learning that can be achieved as the results of pull and push information constantly. Particularly in the Metaverse for healthcare and medical domains, pull represents an inbound system where patients proactively look for useful information and experiences (e.g., disease symptoms and treatment plans shared by other patients), whereas push in more outbound and incorporates notice procedures about what experiences awaiting patients in the Metaverse [41]. Some major modules are usually deployed in the Metaverse to make profit, including inbound with search engine, community-driven content, application stores, and real-time presence, and outbound with display advertising, notifications, emails and other social media.

(p5.7) Experience: This layer contains what the most individuals and business are focusing on. Users, including patients and clinicians, has various interactive activities, with virtual objects and each other, in digitally-driven setting via digital content such as disease symptom declaration, health and medical checking, remotely collaborative diagnosis, medial training and education. As known that the Metaverse is more than a simple 3D representation of reality, it was introduced as the ultimate virtualization of physical space and product to engender a seamlessly virtual-realistic ecosystem with built-in services and applications. For example, an interactive virtual reality surgery platform can help doctors to find an anatomy of interest and utilize meaningful information, from learned AI model, to enhance the quality of medical images in the real time.
## (s7) A. Improved Privacy
(p7.0) The Metaverse provides doctors and patients with an immersive and interactive healthcare experience with the aid of technologies such as AI, AR/VR/MR, blockchain and digital twins. The Metaverse environment can collect the patients' details such as the brainwaves, health related data, and biometric data to create a complete healthcare system that simulates the healthcare system of the physical world and could use the same for understanding the patients' body, their physiological responses, and the way their body would react in case of specific treatment procedures. However, such data, if fallen into the hands of the malicious users could manipulate it, thus leading to serious complications such as improper diagnosis, treatment, and drug administration. Therefore, preserving data privacy is of great importance in the case of healthcare Metaverse [8]. FL is the privacy-preserving machine learning mechanism that enables different participating entities to jointly collaborate a machine learning model without actually sharing the data, but only the model parameters. As most of the data of a particular patient is maintained by a single edge device/ hospital, FL mechanisms help in training the data on the edge devices itself. This enables the centralized medical agencies to improve their models without actually collecting the private data of users.
## (s8) B. Better Interoperability between Different Stakeholders
(p8.0) The healthcare Metaverse can collect data from multiple healthcare centres/ hospitals for ensuring greater patient diversity from different demographics [42]. However, data interoperability between different stakeholders is a significant challenge in the Metaverse environment, since the data collected from multiple devices/ Metaverses need to be made accessible to the trusted parties. Such data can be used for finding patient similarity [43], remote patient monitoring [44], and for predicting mortality rates. In order to address these issues, FL can be used for pooling data from every edge node/ hospital, train them on the edge devices itself and send the updates to the server, so that the model can be globally trained in the Metaverse, thereby mitigating localized biases and offering customized and effective solutions for rare diseases or during a pandemic. The problem of data interoperability can thus be addressed using FL mechanisms, thereby providing quality healthcare to the patients.
## (s9) C. Better Data management and Cross-model usage
(p9.0) The data sources of the healthcare Metaverse include sensors, AR/VR devices, wearable devices, scanning machines and other healthcare components. Such data that is widely distributed needs to be aggregated for making intelligent decisions in a healthcare scenario. This is particularly useful in conducting collaborative research in applications such as building a unified and global model for disease diagnosis, identifying disease pattern trends and so on. However, due to the heterogeneity of data, it becomes quite challenging to train the data at the central server [45]. FL mechanisms can be employed here to deal with the issues of data heterogeneity by training the data at the devices itself. Vertical FL, also known as heterogeneous FL helps in training the datasets that share the same sample ID space but differing in feature space. Thus FL mechanisms can guarantee proper data management and cross-model usage witin and between different healthcare Metaverses.
## (s10) D. Extra Security
(p10.0) The major security challenges in the Metaverse environment include user identity spoofing and account hacking, thus resulting in the avatar itself to be taken over by the intruders. It is critical in the case of a healthcare Metaverse, as the intruders can use such data collected from hospitals, patients and other healthcare providers to manipulate the data itself or the decisions regarding disease diagnosis and medications to be provided [46]. FL can help in such scenarios by making use of its secure aggregation mechanisms to keep the updates of the edge devices private. The actual value or the source of model updates is thus secured, by reducing the likelihood of data attribution and inference attacks. FL mechanisms can thus ensure extra security in a healthcare Metaverse.
## (s11) E. Automation and Intelligence
(p11.0) The healthcare Metaverse enables medical professionals to provide quality services to the patients, which was difficult earlier especially due to geographical limitations. With the advancements in the key enabling technologies such as AR/VR, AI, DT, and blockchain, automation in the healthcare Metaverse is possible in all the application areas such as diagnostics, billing, scheduling of appointments, data sharing, asset tracking and post-treatment care. However, the automation process needs to be energy-efficient and faster [47]. As the FL model doesn't require collecting and aggregating data from different edge devices, the entire learning process can be accelerated, thus enabling enhanced energy-efficiency and intelligent responsiveness in terms of automation and relevant decision making. Thus, the comprehensive, intelligent and automated healthcare scenario in the Metaverse can be significantly improved with FL by learning from every client, yet by keeping the data private.
## (s12) F. Improved Scalability
(p12.0) The healthcare Metaverse signifies an immersive and shared environment that spans a myriad of 3D virtual worlds of patients and healthcare providers. However, building a scalable Metaverse is quite challenging as it is almost impossible to use traditional servers [48]. The scalability issues in a healthcare Metaverse correspond to the multitude of users interacting in the virtual and real worlds, complexity of the scene with respect to its appearance and detailing, and the range of interactions between the users. The healthcare Metaverse architecture should be built in such a way that the system efficiency is not compromised and best personalized experience could be provided to the patients and the healthcare providers. FL techniques can help in solving the scalability issues in the healthcare Metaverse by providing a de-centralized system for various medical applications such as diagnosis and treatment. This de-centralized system allows an efficient and concurrent system usage for a wide variety of users in the Metaverse healthcare scenario.
## (s13) G. Low Latency Support
(p13.0) Network latency refers to the delay in communication over a network. In a healthcare Metaverse, network latency plays a major role especially in critical applications such as surgeries that require quick response to deliver a safe, reliable, and good experience. Any delay in communication could have serious effects leading to life-threatening situations. In order to support immersive Metaverse experiences, approximately 0-20 millisecond latency is required. Healthcare Metaverses require even lower latency for supporting services such as personalized medical recommendations, collaborative surgeries and quickreaction services between patients an doctors present at various locations [49]. FL support collaborative model training without having the data to be shared to the centralized server, thus minimizing the amount of data transfers required between the edge devices and the healthcare Metaverse environments. FL thus help in personalized healthcare recommendations, disease diagnoses and other prediction and recommendation systems in a healthcare Metaverse environment. Fig. 3 summarizes the benefits of FL in the healthcare Metaverse.
## (s15) A. Medical Diagnosis
(p15.0) Medical diagnosis deals with identifying patients' diseases based on their symptoms [50]. The conventional method of disease diagnosis is carried out physically at health centres or hospitals, where the patient needs to be examined by a doctor. However, during emergencies, the conventional diagnosis approaches may result in delayed treatment that may cause loss of lives. Therefore, telemedicine was introduced as a solution for monitoring patients remotely [51]. Furthermore, the rapid developments in AI have contributed to all domains, including healthcare. By mimicking human cognitive capabilities, ML models can make better decisions regarding disease diagnosis by getting trained on the data collected from various health centres [52]. However, one of the notable limitations of telemedicine is that the patients cannot clearly express their symptoms or the level of injury as they don't meet the health professionals in person.

(p15.1) The Metaverse is an ideal solution in such scenarios where enabling technologies like AR, VR, digital twins, and blockchain helps create a real-world digital simulation. Medi-cal professionals can even provide personalized diagnoses with the help of the Metaverse, where doctors and patients can interact in shared, persistent and immersive virtual worlds [11]. ML models can use the data collected using wearable devices and other systems in the Metaverse environment for training the model. However, this requires the entire data to be present in the system where the training is done. In addition, as the data collected may contain patients' private information, any leakage of such information may have serious consequences. For instance, the Metaverse environment requires data from the real world to create digital simulations of the patients through digital twins [53]. Digital twins can be created for the patient population, individuals, or the organs. These digital twins can be manipulated to obtain clear insights in the decision making process. The data may be collected through different sources such as AR/VR devices and wearables. If the malicious users get hold of this collected data, they could manipulate it to create false diagnoses and improper treatments. Therefore, the model training should happen without exposing the patients' private information.

(p15.2) Consider an example where a unified global disease diagnosis model need to be built for the healthcare Metaverse. The centralized healthcare Metaverse requires the data to be collected from various edge devices or other Metaverses. However, as the patient's data is sensitive, sharing the data in its raw form to the central server for training the global model may violate the HIPAA rules [54]. However, a machine learning model cannot be trained without having the actual data made available to the original model. FL helps in such scenarios by creating a global disease diagnosis model without sharing the original data as such. In the case of horizontal FL, all the datasets across devices use the same set of features [55]. Initially, a global model would be created and broadcasted to the edge devices or the participating Metaverses. The model would then be trained locally at their side with their own datasets. Only the parameter updates pertaining to the model will be sent back to the central server. After averaging the updates from different clients, the server updates it's original model and the updated model will be sent again to all the participating clients.This process continues until a predefined set of rounds or until optimal results are obtained. As multiple devices or Metaverses can jointly train a model under the coordination of the central Metaverse server while retaining the training data at the client side itself, FL mechanisms play a major role in ensuring data privacy in the Metaverse environment [56].
## (s17) C. Collaborative Research and Medical Education
(p17.0) Digital transformation has been adopted enthusiastically in various domains especially in collaborative research due to the emergence of virtual reality and related technologies. Further, VR has visualized rapid proliferation with the progressive growth in Metaverse technology. The increased adoption of these technologies have reduced the associated cost of implementation and made it more accessible for common users [62]. Experimentation and research are intrinsic aspects of higher education programs wherein researchers often find it difficult to learn and retain information without handson experimentation. Also justification of the experimental results lag authenticity due to the same reason. The VR based simulated labs provide the necessary experimental and hands-on learning experience. In case of biomedical research, students can perform various critical experimentation using chemicals in a VR based safe zone with no risks of harming property or human life [63]. The challenges pertaining to availability of chemical or related resources also gets eliminated wherein experiments can be repeated multiple times to ensure justification of results. Also, the removal of risks ensues innovation and creativity among student minds to design and develop experiments which could lead to path-breaking results and discoveries contributing immensely towards the growth of science [64]. The impact of Metaverse can be a game changing experience in collaborative research wherein improved data driven decision making would be possible across chemical value chain existing in various laboratories across the globe. A holistic approach to digital twin can enable improvement of process and control-system engineering from the very early stages of any collaborative project design. The use of advanced simulation and modeling technologies can enable multiple teams located globally to work on common projects, develop steady state design models and then integrate them into dynamic models. These models can be tested through realtime dynamic simulations for supporting process engineering execution [65]. Although Metaverse enables such collaborative research but there are associated concerns pertaining to distributional discrepancies across multiple stake holders which could lead to counterproductive consequences. FL enables achieving collaborative equilibrium by ensuring security is not compromised wherein smaller collaboration coalitions can be created. In such cases each client can collaborate with other team members who maximally improve the model and isolate the ones whose contribution is minimum. FL enables multi-institutional collaborations ensuring data privacy is maintained. The model-learning manages all the available data without sharing it across the participating Institutions, The model-training is distributed across all the data-owners and the results are aggregated [66].
## (s18) D. Infectious diseases/ Pandemic
(p18.0) The COVID-19 pandemic has set up a perfect stage for the Metaverse technology to take off. The pandemic has affected the economic and social stability of the nations to a great extent. Longer periods of isolation has even created a society with social anxiety [70]. However, the pandemic has made huge technological advancements in education, healthcare, and entertainment. The wide adoption of online classes, virtual meetings, telemedicine and OTT movie release are all a result of the pandemic [71]. Pandemic surveillance is an important aspect that helps to understand the pattern of the spread of the disease so that appropriate measures can be adopted to alleviate the spread [72]. The transparency and efficiency of the surveillance can be enhanced by building a platform that can integrate data from multiple domains such as transportation, retail and telecommunications. However, such an integration would be difficult to be accomplished in a real world even with the advanced technologies due to the risk of the spread of disease.
## (s19) E. Drug Discovery
(p19.0) Drug discovery is the technique through which potential novel therapeutic entities are identified, using an amalgamation of experimental, computational, clinical and translational models. Machine learning models play a major role here in improving the decision making for applications such as hit discoveries, target identification, hit to lead and lead optimization [75]. Computational growth algorithms are also used in De novo drug design (DNDD) to understand and design new chemical entities that fits in the defined constraint sets [76]. Enhanced experimental results can be obtained if researchers can collaborate in building the required models. However, conducting experiments for discovering new drugs is critical and requires a lot of human effort and expenses.
