# Clinical Medicine Subthreshold Micropulse Laser for Diabetic Macular Edema: A Review

CorpusID: 255338210 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54cd863d07f0c4f99440aacd34808926d72971dc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54cd863d07f0c4f99440aacd34808926d72971dc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Diabetes mellitus (DM) has become a civilization disease associated with a sedentary lifestyle and the aging of the population in the contemporary world. It is estimated that DM affects around 10% of the global population [1]. The prevalence of diabetes is increasing rapidly, and the World Health Organization (WHO) has recognized diabetes as a noncommunicable disease which is causing an epidemic in the 21st century. An insufficiently controlled and long-term disease is associated with a high risk of multiorgan complications, including those involving eyes. One of the main retinal complications is diabetic macular edema (DME), which leads to gradual visual impairment, especially at working ages. DME occurs in 4% of patients diagnosed with DM, even at the early stage of diabetic retinopathy. The estimated number of adults worldwide in 2020 with clinically significant DME was 18.8 million, and this is projected to increase by half in 2045 [2].

(p0.1) According to the current international guidelines for the management of DME by the European Society of Retina Specialists (EURETINA), intravitreal anti-vascular endothelial growth factor (anti-VEGF) was established as first-line therapy in DME with visual impairment [3]. After publishing the results of the DRCR.net Protocol I and Protocol S studies, laser therapy was regarded as being inferior to anti-VEGF treatments [4].

(p0.2) The availability of anti-VEGF injections has changed the standard of care for DME patients [5]. The agents improve both the functional and anatomical parameters of the retina. Currently, different anti-VEGF agents such as ranibizumab, aflibercept, brolucizumab, faricimab, and off-label bevacizumab have become the therapy of choice in DME treatments [6]. Intravitreal injections have a high efficacy and safety profile, however, on the phyll in the neurosensory retina. Commercially available devices can deliver conventional and micropulse shots at 577 nm that simultaneously enable the combination therapy of the grid micropulse laser and the direct photocoagulation of microaneurysms [18]. The 670 nm laser is less scattered and not absorbed by hemoglobin and xanthophyll, thus, it seems to be safe for the neurosensory retina [19]. There is no consensus on which wavelength is the most favorable for the treatment for DMEs, thus, all the above-described devices have a high safety profile and are recommended for micropulse use.

(p0.3) Currently, the specific indications for the application of MPLT have not been established. It is considered as an alternative treatment in macular disorders such as DME (Figure 1), central serous chorioretinopathy, and macular edemas that are secondary to retinal vein occlusion [20][21][22][23]. MPLT was proven to be efficient and free from adverse events in minor and moderate macular edemas with a central retinal thickness (CRT) below 400 µm and relatively good visual acuity [24]. As an adjuvant to anti-VEGF agents, it helps to stabilize the anatomic and functional retinal parameters with a lower required number of injections. of the micropulse was performed with a 810 nm laser modality, where the wavelength deeply penetrated the retina and, thus, it was not absorbed by the macular carotenoids. The 577 nm wavelength targets oxyhemoglobin and melanin, and it is not absorbed by xanthophyll in the neurosensory retina. Commercially available devices can deliver conventional and micropulse shots at 577 nm that simultaneously enable the combination therapy of the grid micropulse laser and the direct photocoagulation of microaneurysms [18]. The 670 nm laser is less scattered and not absorbed by hemoglobin and xanthophyll, thus, it seems to be safe for the neurosensory retina [19]. There is no consensus on which wavelength is the most favorable for the treatment for DMEs, thus, all the above-described devices have a high safety profile and are recommended for micropulse use.

(p0.4) Currently, the specific indications for the application of MPLT have not been established. It is considered as an alternative treatment in macular disorders such as DME (Figure 1), central serous chorioretinopathy, and macular edemas that are secondary to retinal vein occlusion [20][21][22][23]. MPLT was proven to be efficient and free from adverse events in minor and moderate macular edemas with a central retinal thickness (CRT) below 400 μm and relatively good visual acuity [24]. As an adjuvant to anti-VEGF agents, it helps to stabilize the anatomic and functional retinal parameters with a lower required number of injections. 
## (s3) Safety of MPLT
(p3.0) A high safety profile of MPLT was reported in the in vivo and in vitro studies (Table 2). Potential damages were assessed using mathematical models, investigated using animal and stem cell cultures, and measured in imaging tests such as infrared (IR) and redfree fundus photos, optical coherent tomography (OCT), fundus autofluorescence (FAF), microperimetry, fluoresceine angiography (FA), and indocyanine angiography (IGCA).  Ohkoshi et al. [25] detected sites of the application of the micropulse laser in scanning laser ophthalmoscopy in the retro mode. Dark spots were visible immediately after photostimulation, and they were not identified in FAF nor in the fundus photos. However, after 1 week, the alterations were no longer observed. This study implied that MPLT affects the RPE cells and can cause the localized swelling of the treated region.

(p3.1) Luttrull et al. [26] assessed the risk of laser-induced retinal thermal injury by comparing computer modeling of the tissue temperature after MPLT using clinical findings in imaging tests such as IR and red-free fundus photography, FAF, FFA, and OCT. According to the study, an increased risk of retinal damage was related to higher retinal irradiance, and it was found in none of the patients treated with MPLT at a 5% duty cycle.
## (s6) Subthreshold Micropulse Laser Treatment and Intravitreal Therapy
(p6.0) Numerous studies compared MPLT with intravitreal treatment or investigated combination therapy (Table 5).    Most articles compared MLPT with bevacizumab, ranibizumab, and aflibercept. The treatment protocol for anti-VEGF monotherapy was three loading injections at a monthly interval followed by a pro re nata (PRN) scheme. The patients qualified for micropulse therapy after receiving three initial loading anti-VEGF doses and with a CRT below 400 µm. It was suggested that additional laser treatment could decrease the burden of agent injection frequency with similar functional and anatomical outcomes [75,[78][79][80]82,83,[85][86][87]. However, the study by Akhlaghi et al. [77] led to a different conclusion: adjuvant MPLT improved BCVA and CRT in eyes resistant to the bevacizumab therapy.

(p6.1) Inagaki et al. [75] suggested that the initial loading dose of intravitreal anti-VEGF agent, followed by a single MPLT for residual edema reduces the number of required injections and effectively improves BVCA and CRT.

(p6.2) Akkaya et al. [76] proved that MPLT was superior to anti-VEGF injections in patients with mild macular oedema (CRT max. 350 µm) and good visual acuity (BCVA ≤ 0.15 logMAR) due to there being less frequent visits, lower costs, and a higher safety profile. In this regard, MPLT could be considered as the early intervention and, if it is necessary, it can be continued with anti-VEGF injections.

(p6.3) The study by Abdelrahman et al. [81] compared patients treated with MPL or ranibizumab with a control group for multifocal electroretinography (mfERG). The functional outcome was additionally measured not only by the subjective BCVA, but also by objective mfERG readings from the macular region. Only in the ranibizumab group was there a significant improvement in electrophysiological parameters after the treatment. They proved that both MPLT and ranibizumab improved the anatomical and functional retinal parameters, with superiority over the intravitreal agent.

(p6.4) A recent retrospective study by Lai et al. [88] presented that aflibercept monotherapy resulted in short-term higher functional and anatomical improvement compared to that resulting from the MPLT with rescue aflibercept therapy, however, the long-term results did not show any significant differences. In contrast to other studies, MPLT was not preceded by initial anti-VEGF injections, and it was performed with focal conventional laser treatment of microaneurysms.

(p6.5) In general, the authors agree that adjuvant micropulse therapy reduced the number of required intravitreal injections, apart from Koushan et al. [89], who did not find an additional benefit in using a combined therapy.

(p6.6) Elhamid et al. [9] treated center-involved DMEs, which previously did not respond to an anti-VEGF therapy, with a combination of an Ozurdex implant and MLPT. As in other studies, they suggested that poor response after three initial monthly injections of anti-VEGF predicts reduced the persistent response for subsequent doses. An early switch to a steroid implant diminished the number of intravitreal surgeries. In this study, the frequency of recurrence was relatively lower than it was in other trials with the dexam-ethasone implant, which can be explained by the synergic effect of MPLT. In terms of the limitation, the obtained results require confirmation in larger studies with a control group. Toto et al. [90] also demonstrated the effect of MPLT in addition to a dexamethasone implant. The combined therapy reduced the frequency and the number of required injections, thus extending the treatment-free interval.

(p6.7) Micropulse lasers appear to be an efficient modality to decrease persistent DMEs after pars plana vitrectomy. A comparative study by Bonfiglio et al. [91] showed that MPLT performed 6 months after surgery improved the anatomical and functional parameters in vitrectomized eyes.
## (s7) Conclusions
(p7.0) An analysis of the available results is limited due to the scarce number of large, randomized clinical trials. The reviewed studies varied in terms of the inclusion criteria, protocols, and treatment procedures. The detailed eligibility criteria for MPLT have not been defined, however, according to the presented literature, there are some therapeutic principles.

(p7.1) Three meta-analyses which evaluated the efficacy of MPLT versus conventional photocoagulation or intravitreal injections have been published. Chen et al. [92] compared the mean change in BCVA and CRT, according to six randomized controlled trials (RCTs), including a total of 398 eyes. MLPT resulted in better visual acuity with similar anatomical outcome. Similarly, Qiao et al. [93] compared MPLT with an mETDRS treatment in seven RCTs on 425 eyes. They found no statistical differences in BCVA and CRT after the treatments, with less retinal damage after MPLT. Wu et al. [94] performed a Bayesian analysis of 18 studies, comprising a total of 1758 patients, which assessed the effect of lasers in monotherapy or adjuvant therapies to anti-VEGF. The findings showed that ranibizumab plus conventional photocoagulation is more effective than micropulse laser monotherapy is, however, there was no significant difference in efficacy between the MPLT and bevacizumab plus conventional laser treatments, as well as between the MPLT and conventional laser monotherapies.

(p7.2) There are no standardized protocols for MPLT, however, according to the reviewed articles, micropulse panmacular treatment including the fovea, with a fixed regimen, seems to be a cost-effective, noninvasive, and safe therapy. Data in the analyzed articles confirmed that 577 nm laser applications using a 200 µm retinal spot, 200 ms pulse duration, 400 mW power, and 5% DC induced significant morphologic and functional improvement in the central retina and were not associated with any adverse events. Titration can prolong and complicate the procedure. The continuous-wave test burn is performed outside the posterior pole, over non-edematous retina, until a barely visible white spot is created. There is no consensus, after reaching the threshold, on how much to modify the laser power. Some authors switched the continuous wave to the micropulse mode, multiplying the threshold value by 0.5-4. Some researchers titrated the power in micropulse mode and then divided the value by 2. The proper subthreshold value is hard to determine, and medical errors can lead to overtreatment and involuntary damage of the retina. A confluent treatment using fixed 400 mW power for yellow laser with low 5% DC and high intensity was confirmed to effectively stimulate RPE cells.

(p7.3) None of the presented studies detected any visible signs of chorioretinal damage in the ancillary imaging tests and animal retinal sections. In contrast to harmful conventional laser treatment, MPLT additionally increased the central retinal sensitivity.

(p7.4) The efficacy of the micropulse laser was proven in mild DMEs with a CRT that is smaller than 400 µm due to the diffused distribution in the target tissue. In general, the treatment helps to stabilize or improve the visual acuity and decrease the macular edema. Better results are observed in a high-density protocol covering the macular region, with no spacing between the spots. Automatic pattern systems are helpful in the application of invisible laser spots. The minimal interval from the treatment to obtain a significant response and a reduction in retinal thickness is about 3 months. Therefore, it can be recommended to start the therapy with three loading doses of anti-VEGF, followed by MPLT combined with PRN injections to achieve a quick response to anti-VEGF, which is supported by the long-lasting remodeling effect of MPLT. The increased number of micropulse sessions is associated with a greater retinal response. A combined treatment requires a lower number of anti-VEGF injections, and it is not inferior to monotherapy [95,96]. MPLT is also an emerging option as a standalone treatment for noncompliant patients and for those having contraindications for other therapies. 
