# A Review Article on Monkeypox, infection Transmission, Prevention, Vaccination and Role of Health Care

CorpusID: 255215666 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6de33fb5a1087f145b0a103646e83b3e5324b2aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6de33fb5a1087f145b0a103646e83b3e5324b2aa)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s7) Prevention
(p7.0) Primary prevention for monkeypox is to increase public awareness of risk factors and symptoms and educate people regarding actions to reduce their exposure to the virus.Currently, research has been conducted for the prevention and control of monkeypox to determine the feasibility and appropriateness of vaccination. 7ome countries are developing policies to provide vaccines to frontline workers such as laboratory personnel, rapid response teams, and health workers. 9
## (s11) Role of community health nurse
(p11.0) The integrated part of community health care activities is community health nursing.Community health nursing deals with the group of community people to improve their quality of life and helps solve the various problems that cause susceptibility to health problems and risks. 14here is a great need in today's community for complexity and adapting advanced technology.To face the existing challenges, the community health nurse must apply a holistic and integrated approach. 15everal types of research revealed that in a pandemic like a monkeypox crisis, nurses have experience and understanding regarding several aspects of the disease, like isolation wards, casualty, and ICU.These are reviews outside the Community health care, but due to this crisis, the community faces many challenges, and to overcome these challenges, the people require community health nurses. 16During a situational crisis like a pandemic, community health nurses need competencies that could improve the skills nurses to overcome the situation.The C.H.N. has made community people more attentive to the fight against chronic disease and disease threats. 17
## (s12) nursing Approach
(p12.0) Nurses played an important role in community health crises and were seriously influenced during the monkeypox epidemic.Nurses are vital during the pandemic as it is very difficult to use diverse healthcare systems to respond to emergencies in different content of care. 18urses are in great need of personal protective equipment, but in the pandemic situation, the availability of P.P.E. is very low and staff couldn't get through, which staff faces many challenges like less work satisfaction and increased risk of infection among the staff. 19uring a pandemic, the nurses reported many problems like the inability to communicate with families and relatives due to the P.P.E and isolation and the need for human resource allocation and CNE to develop new skills and become competent.The crucial aspect of nursing during the monkeypox involves personal care. 19ersonal care in the aspects of nursing includes environmental care.Also, it can be affected during emergencies which deteriorates the prognosis and satisfaction with care. 20
## (s15) environmental infection Control
(p15.0) Standard practices to be performed while handling the soiled laundry, like bedding, towels, personal clothing, and contusion material, must be avoided during contact at the time of laundry.Soiled laundry needs to be smoothly and instantly contained in a suitable laundry bag and not handled, due to which the infectious substance may scatter. 21Activities like dry dust, seeping, and vacuum cleaning should be avoided.A wet cleaning method has been chosen.Regular procedures need to be carried out for managing food service items. 9
