# The economic burden of treating uncomplicated hypertension in Sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 251372418 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36c31285c3ac5a226104a73e9efd27f0f4c51a2b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36c31285c3ac5a226104a73e9efd27f0f4c51a2b)

Fields: Economics, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) This systematic review follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) 2020 guidelines [20]. In the following, we describe how we operationalized the recommended methodological steps outlined in these guidelines.
## (s20) Discussion
(p20.0) To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review focusing on economic burden of hypertension in SSA. Our review found that treatment of hypertension poses a great economic burden for many people and providers in SSA, with high expenditures compared to monthly household income and wages. We were able to identify research gaps and major cost drivers as important target points for future interventions. Our analysis showed that costs differed substantially depending on costing perspectives, healthcare facility setting and type of visit for in-and outpatient admissions. Therefore, it was difficult to examine overall trends across whole SSA with each country posing different premises in terms of health system infrastructure, financing, and even cultural differences. However, major cost drivers identified across multiple countries were comorbidities, being treated in hospitals or private health institutions and higher socioeconomic status.

(p20.1) In 2015, Gheorghe et al. [17] argued that the mean direct costs for hypertension was Int$ 22 per month in low-and middle-income countries which is in the same range as our results. While this cost may be considered as an average across LMIC settings, our research shows that costs across health care systems differ substantially; The lowest cost estimate in our systematic review represents merely a tenth of the cost reported in Gheorghe et al., whereas our highest estimate is more than ten times higher than the average costs in this previous study.
