# From tolerance allocation to tolerance-cost optimization: a comprehensive literature review

CorpusID: 253678599 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7eae70f4e07c45f99c522a2d56b507c4909f2f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f7eae70f4e07c45f99c522a2d56b507c4909f2f6)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s3) Robust design
(p3.0) All these early and late phases of the design engineering process are accompanied by the paradigm of robust Fig. 2 Off-line quality control in design engineering according to TAGUCHI: system design, parameter design, tolerance design design [26,27], i.e. improving the robustness of a system in terms of quality, reliability and costs [28]. Focusing on this global aim, a huge number of robust design techniques for system, parameter and tolerance design are used to reduce the sensitivity of design parameters of a system under uncertainties [9,24,29]. In tolerance design, this aspect is mainly incorporated by a concurrent optimization of dimensions and tolerances to achieve a so-called robust tolerance design at minimum cost [30,31]. In doing so, numerous authors adopt the basic idea of TAGUCHI's quality loss and integrate this aspect in tolerance design (see Section 3.2.2) [9]. These approaches take into account that any deviation from the target value results in an additional loss for the customer [32][33][34].

(p3.1) All these early and late phases of the design engineering process are accompanied by the paradigm of robust Fig. 2 Off-line quality control in design engineering according to TAGUCHI: system design, parameter design, tolerance design design [26,27], i.e. improving the robustness of a system in terms of quality, reliability and costs [28]. Focusing on this global aim, a huge number of robust design techniques for system, parameter and tolerance design are used to reduce the sensitivity of design parameters of a system under uncertainties [9,24,29]. In tolerance design, this aspect is mainly incorporated by a concurrent optimization of dimensions and tolerances to achieve a so-called robust tolerance design at minimum cost [30,31]. In doing so, numerous authors adopt the basic idea of TAGUCHI's quality loss and integrate this aspect in tolerance design (see Section 3.2.2) [9]. These approaches take into account that any deviation from the target value results in an additional loss for the customer [32][33][34].
## (s7) Tolerance allocation
(p7.0) As highlighted, tolerance allocation corresponds to assigning and distributing the tolerance values among the parts of an assembly [59,62]. In general, tolerances are primarily assigned for functionality mostly based on expertise or empirical data. In doing so, the cost aspect is neglected or only indirectly taken into account [63]. As a consequence, tolerances are typically chosen tighter as necessary to ensure product quality [64]. This leads to high-quality products but also to higher manufacturing costs [63,65]. The identification of a valid set of tolerance values creating a balance between quality and cost is a challenging task. In order to solve this conflict (see Fig. 5), three main questions must be answered [66]:

(p7.1) 1. "How good does the product have to be?" 2. "What can be done to improve the quality of the product?" 3. "What is the most profitable action to take?"
## (s12) Basic idea
(p12.0) Since the type of tolerance-cost optimization and its implementation strongly depends on its objective [18], it can be interpreted in different ways. In most cases, however, it aims to minimize the manufacturing costs C sum (objective) while ensuring the fulfillment of the quality requirements by keeping the lower and/or upper specification limits for the KCs to Q min (constraint) [39,98]. Therefore, the optimizer has to identify an optimal combination of tolerances t = [t i , . . . , t I ] T . The design variables t i define the design space which is constrained by the lower t i,min and upper boundaries t i,max in compliance with the manufacturing process limits. Mathematically spoken, least-cost tolerance-cost optimization corresponds in its most simple way to a single-objective optimization [9,99]:
## (s16) Design variables
(p16.0) The main design variables in tolerance-cost optimization are the tolerances t. The tolerances are in general considered uncorrelated, i.e. independent from each other (see Fig. 7). However, there are also approaches to consider the correlations of the tolerances within the optimization, which is especially relevant in the context of selective assembly [7,120].

(p16.1) The boundaries for the tolerances are defined by the precision limits of the respective manufacturing machines (see Section 3.2.1). Although the limits do mostly not necessarily have to be set, it makes sense to limit the design space to only technically feasible solutions to minimize the computing time [121]. In addition, the nominal dimensions in combined parameter and tolerance design are considered as design variables [109,122,123].
## (s17) Constraints
(p17.0) In general, the tolerance-cost optimization problem is constrained by at least one inequality condition. It primarily depends on the objective of the optimization if the fulfillment of a quality or a cost limit is expressed by a set of constraints (see Eq. 1). The optimization problem is further extended by additional constraints to consider specific aspects, such as machining and process capacities [125,126] or stock removal allowance [17].
## (s18) Optimization algorithms
(p18.0) A number of optimization algorithms has evolved over the years and can be classified into deterministic and stochastic algorithms (see Fig. 7) [128]. Traditional optimization algorithms are generally deterministic since they deliver the same results in different optimization runs [128,129]. Thus, most of these mathematical programming methods are based on the gradients of both objective function and constraints [128].
## (s23) Key characteristics
(p23.0) Although technical systems primarily serve to fulfill a function in use, they must meet a number of different quality requirements. Therefore, the requirements are converted into geometrical requirements and expressed by a set of (functional) key characteristics (F)KC as measures of quality (see Section 2.2) [57].
## (s24) Dimensionality
(p24.0) In order to model the technical system, the dimensionality of the system is decisive for a realistic tolerance analysis (see Fig. 8) [39]. If the KC can be described by a linear tolerance chain to consider only dimensional tolerances, it is sufficient to reduce the problem to a 1D-problem. The tolerance analysis of nonlinear KCs and geometrical tolerances often require a geometrical 2D-or even 3D-model [39,239]. As a consequence, the dimensionality influences the tolerance analysis approach with its mathematical model (see Section 3.4.3) and the optimization process. However, it always depends on the effects to be considered and the dimensionality that has to be chosen as a compromise of model accuracy and computational effort.

(p24.1) In order to model the technical system, the dimensionality of the system is decisive for a realistic tolerance analysis (see Fig. 8) [39]. If the KC can be described by a linear tolerance chain to consider only dimensional tolerances, it is sufficient to reduce the problem to a 1D-problem. The tolerance analysis of nonlinear KCs and geometrical tolerances often require a geometrical 2D-or even 3D-model [39,239]. As a consequence, the dimensionality influences the tolerance analysis approach with its mathematical model (see Section 3.4.3) and the optimization process. However, it always depends on the effects to be considered and the dimensionality that has to be chosen as a compromise of model accuracy and computational effort.
## (s26) Structural behaviour
(p26.0) In general, technical systems are often assumed to be rigid in tolerancing. Even if the compliance influences the KCs, which is especially relevant for Type-2-assemblies consisting of multiple, compliant sheet parts (see Section 3.3.3), this fact is often neglected in tolerance-cost optimization. Although several authors strive to integrate compliance in tolerance-cost optimization, especially in context of process-oriented tolerance-optimization [241,[244][245][246][247], mostly just simple cases are considered whose structural behaviour is approximated by simple analytical equation.
## (s31) Tolerance analysis model
(p31.0) Tolerance analysis plays an important role in tolerance-cost optimization since it is used to analyze the technical system under variation (see Section 3.3) and to check the fulfillment of the requirements defined by the KCs (see Section 3.3.1). Thus, the efficiency and the results of the optimization strongly depend on the tolerance analysis model with its subsequently discussed aspects (see Fig. 8) [273].

(p31.1) Tolerance analysis plays an important role in tolerance-cost optimization since it is used to analyze the technical system under variation (see Section 3.3) and to check the fulfillment of the requirements defined by the KCs (see Section 3.3.1). Thus, the efficiency and the results of the optimization strongly depend on the tolerance analysis model with its subsequently discussed aspects (see Fig. 8) [273].
## (s32) Tolerance specification
(p32.0) As shown in Fig. 4, tolerance-cost optimization is based on a predefined tolerance specification [58]. Therefore, structured procedures as well as software tools assist the designer in the correct specification of dimensional and geometrical tolerances according to the current standards of ISO and ASME [58,[274][275][276]. Even if tolerance specification and analysis frequently address both geometrical and dimensional tolerances (GD&Ts), tolerance-cost optimization is mostly limited to dimensional tolerances (see Section 4.1).

(p32.1) As shown in Fig. 4, tolerance-cost optimization is based on a predefined tolerance specification [58]. Therefore, structured procedures as well as software tools assist the designer in the correct specification of dimensional and geometrical tolerances according to the current standards of ISO and ASME [58,[274][275][276]. Even if tolerance specification and analysis frequently address both geometrical and dimensional tolerances (GD&Ts), tolerance-cost optimization is mostly limited to dimensional tolerances (see Section 4.1).
## (s41) Quality Loss
(p41.0) Focusing on the tolerance-cost model, it can be seen that TAGUCHI's idea of quality was already recognized in the early 90s and integrated into tolerancecost optimization (see Fig. 7). The loss of quality significantly shaped the subsequent research activities and is considered additionally to the manufacturing costs in context of robust tolerance design (see Fig. 17c).

(p41.1) Technical system and tolerance analysis model Although most problems in engineering are 3D problems, they are mostly reduced to 1D or 2D. Thus, the geometrical KCs are mostly described by linear and simple nonlinear KCs to reduce the complexity of tolerance analysis and thus the computational effort (see Fig. 17d). In comparison with tolerance analysis, optimal tolerance allocation is mainly based on dimensional tolerances [39]. Geometrical tolerances are just rarely allocated and current standards are often neglected (see Fig. 17e). The strengths of statistical tolerancing have already been recognized at the beginnings and have mostly been applied over the years (see Fig. 17f). Worst-case approaches are usually only used if other aspects are mainly in focus and the aspects of tolerance analysis are moved to the background. However, simplified statistical approaches, especially the root sum square approach, are preferred to sampling techniques due to shorter computing times (see Fig. 8).

(p41.2) Focusing on the tolerance-cost model, it can be seen that TAGUCHI's idea of quality was already recognized in the early 90s and integrated into tolerancecost optimization (see Fig. 7). The loss of quality significantly shaped the subsequent research activities and is considered additionally to the manufacturing costs in context of robust tolerance design (see Fig. 17c).

(p41.3) Technical system and tolerance analysis model Although most problems in engineering are 3D problems, they are mostly reduced to 1D or 2D. Thus, the geometrical KCs are mostly described by linear and simple nonlinear KCs to reduce the complexity of tolerance analysis and thus the computational effort (see Fig. 17d). In comparison with tolerance analysis, optimal tolerance allocation is mainly based on dimensional tolerances [39]. Geometrical tolerances are just rarely allocated and current standards are often neglected (see Fig. 17e). The strengths of statistical tolerancing have already been recognized at the beginnings and have mostly been applied over the years (see Fig. 17f). Worst-case approaches are usually only used if other aspects are mainly in focus and the aspects of tolerance analysis are moved to the background. However, simplified statistical approaches, especially the root sum square approach, are preferred to sampling techniques due to shorter computing times (see Fig. 8).
## (s82) Robust design
(p82.0) All these early and late phases of the design engineering process are accompanied by the paradigm of robust Fig. 2 Off-line quality control in design engineering according to TAGUCHI: system design, parameter design, tolerance design design [26,27], i.e. improving the robustness of a system in terms of quality, reliability and costs [28]. Focusing on this global aim, a huge number of robust design techniques for system, parameter and tolerance design are used to reduce the sensitivity of design parameters of a system under uncertainties [9,24,29]. In tolerance design, this aspect is mainly incorporated by a concurrent optimization of dimensions and tolerances to achieve a so-called robust tolerance design at minimum cost [30,31]. In doing so, numerous authors adopt the basic idea of TAGUCHI's quality loss and integrate this aspect in tolerance design (see Section 3.2.2) [9]. These approaches take into account that any deviation from the target value results in an additional loss for the customer [32][33][34].

(p82.1) All these early and late phases of the design engineering process are accompanied by the paradigm of robust Fig. 2 Off-line quality control in design engineering according to TAGUCHI: system design, parameter design, tolerance design design [26,27], i.e. improving the robustness of a system in terms of quality, reliability and costs [28]. Focusing on this global aim, a huge number of robust design techniques for system, parameter and tolerance design are used to reduce the sensitivity of design parameters of a system under uncertainties [9,24,29]. In tolerance design, this aspect is mainly incorporated by a concurrent optimization of dimensions and tolerances to achieve a so-called robust tolerance design at minimum cost [30,31]. In doing so, numerous authors adopt the basic idea of TAGUCHI's quality loss and integrate this aspect in tolerance design (see Section 3.2.2) [9]. These approaches take into account that any deviation from the target value results in an additional loss for the customer [32][33][34].
## (s86) Tolerance allocation
(p86.0) As highlighted, tolerance allocation corresponds to assigning and distributing the tolerance values among the parts of an assembly [59,62]. In general, tolerances are primarily assigned for functionality mostly based on expertise or empirical data. In doing so, the cost aspect is neglected or only indirectly taken into account [63]. As a consequence, tolerances are typically chosen tighter as necessary to ensure product quality [64]. This leads to high-quality products but also to higher manufacturing costs [63,65]. The identification of a valid set of tolerance values creating a balance between quality and cost is a challenging task. In order to solve this conflict (see Fig. 5), three main questions must be answered [66]:

(p86.1) 1. "How good does the product have to be?" 2. "What can be done to improve the quality of the product?" 3. "What is the most profitable action to take?"
## (s91) Basic idea
(p91.0) Since the type of tolerance-cost optimization and its implementation strongly depends on its objective [18], it can be interpreted in different ways. In most cases, however, it aims to minimize the manufacturing costs C sum (objective) while ensuring the fulfillment of the quality requirements by keeping the lower and/or upper specification limits for the KCs to Q min (constraint) [39,98]. Therefore, the optimizer has to identify an optimal combination of tolerances t = [t i , . . . , t I ] T . The design variables t i define the design space which is constrained by the lower t i,min and upper boundaries t i,max in compliance with the manufacturing process limits. Mathematically spoken, least-cost tolerance-cost optimization corresponds in its most simple way to a single-objective optimization [9,99]:
## (s95) Design variables
(p95.0) The main design variables in tolerance-cost optimization are the tolerances t. The tolerances are in general considered uncorrelated, i.e. independent from each other (see Fig. 7). However, there are also approaches to consider the correlations of the tolerances within the optimization, which is especially relevant in the context of selective assembly [7,120].

(p95.1) The boundaries for the tolerances are defined by the precision limits of the respective manufacturing machines (see Section 3.2.1). Although the limits do mostly not necessarily have to be set, it makes sense to limit the design space to only technically feasible solutions to minimize the computing time [121]. In addition, the nominal dimensions in combined parameter and tolerance design are considered as design variables [109,122,123].
## (s96) Constraints
(p96.0) In general, the tolerance-cost optimization problem is constrained by at least one inequality condition. It primarily depends on the objective of the optimization if the fulfillment of a quality or a cost limit is expressed by a set of constraints (see Eq. 1). The optimization problem is further extended by additional constraints to consider specific aspects, such as machining and process capacities [125,126] or stock removal allowance [17].
## (s97) Optimization algorithms
(p97.0) A number of optimization algorithms has evolved over the years and can be classified into deterministic and stochastic algorithms (see Fig. 7) [128]. Traditional optimization algorithms are generally deterministic since they deliver the same results in different optimization runs [128,129]. Thus, most of these mathematical programming methods are based on the gradients of both objective function and constraints [128].
## (s102) Key characteristics
(p102.0) Although technical systems primarily serve to fulfill a function in use, they must meet a number of different quality requirements. Therefore, the requirements are converted into geometrical requirements and expressed by a set of (functional) key characteristics (F)KC as measures of quality (see Section 2.2) [57].
## (s103) Dimensionality
(p103.0) In order to model the technical system, the dimensionality of the system is decisive for a realistic tolerance analysis (see Fig. 8) [39]. If the KC can be described by a linear tolerance chain to consider only dimensional tolerances, it is sufficient to reduce the problem to a 1D-problem. The tolerance analysis of nonlinear KCs and geometrical tolerances often require a geometrical 2D-or even 3D-model [39,239]. As a consequence, the dimensionality influences the tolerance analysis approach with its mathematical model (see Section 3.4.3) and the optimization process. However, it always depends on the effects to be considered and the dimensionality that has to be chosen as a compromise of model accuracy and computational effort.

(p103.1) In order to model the technical system, the dimensionality of the system is decisive for a realistic tolerance analysis (see Fig. 8) [39]. If the KC can be described by a linear tolerance chain to consider only dimensional tolerances, it is sufficient to reduce the problem to a 1D-problem. The tolerance analysis of nonlinear KCs and geometrical tolerances often require a geometrical 2D-or even 3D-model [39,239]. As a consequence, the dimensionality influences the tolerance analysis approach with its mathematical model (see Section 3.4.3) and the optimization process. However, it always depends on the effects to be considered and the dimensionality that has to be chosen as a compromise of model accuracy and computational effort.
## (s105) Structural behaviour
(p105.0) In general, technical systems are often assumed to be rigid in tolerancing. Even if the compliance influences the KCs, which is especially relevant for Type-2-assemblies consisting of multiple, compliant sheet parts (see Section 3.3.3), this fact is often neglected in tolerance-cost optimization. Although several authors strive to integrate compliance in tolerance-cost optimization, especially in context of process-oriented tolerance-optimization [241,[244][245][246][247], mostly just simple cases are considered whose structural behaviour is approximated by simple analytical equation.
## (s110) Tolerance analysis model
(p110.0) Tolerance analysis plays an important role in tolerance-cost optimization since it is used to analyze the technical system under variation (see Section 3.3) and to check the fulfillment of the requirements defined by the KCs (see Section 3.3.1). Thus, the efficiency and the results of the optimization strongly depend on the tolerance analysis model with its subsequently discussed aspects (see Fig. 8) [273].

(p110.1) Tolerance analysis plays an important role in tolerance-cost optimization since it is used to analyze the technical system under variation (see Section 3.3) and to check the fulfillment of the requirements defined by the KCs (see Section 3.3.1). Thus, the efficiency and the results of the optimization strongly depend on the tolerance analysis model with its subsequently discussed aspects (see Fig. 8) [273].
## (s111) Tolerance specification
(p111.0) As shown in Fig. 4, tolerance-cost optimization is based on a predefined tolerance specification [58]. Therefore, structured procedures as well as software tools assist the designer in the correct specification of dimensional and geometrical tolerances according to the current standards of ISO and ASME [58,[274][275][276]. Even if tolerance specification and analysis frequently address both geometrical and dimensional tolerances (GD&Ts), tolerance-cost optimization is mostly limited to dimensional tolerances (see Section 4.1).

(p111.1) As shown in Fig. 4, tolerance-cost optimization is based on a predefined tolerance specification [58]. Therefore, structured procedures as well as software tools assist the designer in the correct specification of dimensional and geometrical tolerances according to the current standards of ISO and ASME [58,[274][275][276]. Even if tolerance specification and analysis frequently address both geometrical and dimensional tolerances (GD&Ts), tolerance-cost optimization is mostly limited to dimensional tolerances (see Section 4.1).
## (s120) Quality Loss
(p120.0) Focusing on the tolerance-cost model, it can be seen that TAGUCHI's idea of quality was already recognized in the early 90s and integrated into tolerancecost optimization (see Fig. 7). The loss of quality significantly shaped the subsequent research activities and is considered additionally to the manufacturing costs in context of robust tolerance design (see Fig. 17c).

(p120.1) Technical system and tolerance analysis model Although most problems in engineering are 3D problems, they are mostly reduced to 1D or 2D. Thus, the geometrical KCs are mostly described by linear and simple nonlinear KCs to reduce the complexity of tolerance analysis and thus the computational effort (see Fig. 17d). In comparison with tolerance analysis, optimal tolerance allocation is mainly based on dimensional tolerances [39]. Geometrical tolerances are just rarely allocated and current standards are often neglected (see Fig. 17e). The strengths of statistical tolerancing have already been recognized at the beginnings and have mostly been applied over the years (see Fig. 17f). Worst-case approaches are usually only used if other aspects are mainly in focus and the aspects of tolerance analysis are moved to the background. However, simplified statistical approaches, especially the root sum square approach, are preferred to sampling techniques due to shorter computing times (see Fig. 8).

(p120.2) Focusing on the tolerance-cost model, it can be seen that TAGUCHI's idea of quality was already recognized in the early 90s and integrated into tolerancecost optimization (see Fig. 7). The loss of quality significantly shaped the subsequent research activities and is considered additionally to the manufacturing costs in context of robust tolerance design (see Fig. 17c).

(p120.3) Technical system and tolerance analysis model Although most problems in engineering are 3D problems, they are mostly reduced to 1D or 2D. Thus, the geometrical KCs are mostly described by linear and simple nonlinear KCs to reduce the complexity of tolerance analysis and thus the computational effort (see Fig. 17d). In comparison with tolerance analysis, optimal tolerance allocation is mainly based on dimensional tolerances [39]. Geometrical tolerances are just rarely allocated and current standards are often neglected (see Fig. 17e). The strengths of statistical tolerancing have already been recognized at the beginnings and have mostly been applied over the years (see Fig. 17f). Worst-case approaches are usually only used if other aspects are mainly in focus and the aspects of tolerance analysis are moved to the background. However, simplified statistical approaches, especially the root sum square approach, are preferred to sampling techniques due to shorter computing times (see Fig. 8).
