# Cross-contamination rate of reusable flexible bronchoscopes: A systematic literature review and meta-analysis

CorpusID: 257212170 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f4a8d3237e18fd1f3f2461768d1edbf38f3cb0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72f4a8d3237e18fd1f3f2461768d1edbf38f3cb0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Data extraction, analysis, and statistical methods
(p3.0) Positive samples were defined in accordance with the European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy and European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Nurse and Associates (ESGE-ESGENA) guidelines for quality assurance in reprocessing: Microbiology surveillance testing in endoscopy is stated below (Beilenhoff et al., 2007).

(p3.1) · Minimum total count<20 CFU/channel (liquid samples from endoscope channels) · Growth of indicator organisms in swab cultures (Enterobacteriaceae, enterococci, P. aeruginosa, and other gram-negative nonfermenters, Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis, atypical mycobacteria, and Legionella spp.)

(p3.2) The primary data extracted from the studies that were assessed for eligibility were authors; country; setting; total number of samples (N); total number of positive samples (n); and whether they fulfilled CFU thresholds or stated indicator organisms, microorganisms, reprocessing method, and sampling method. The data extraction was performed manually and extrapolated into a commercially available spreadsheet (Microsoft® Excel® for Office 365 MSO) Table 1. The statistical analyses were conducted via the metafor package in R V.3.6.2. To overcome the challenges of anticipated heterogeneity, a random effects model was applied (Higgins et al., 2003;Von Hippel, 2015).

(p3.3) The results of the random effect models were presented as average cross-contamination rate ± standard deviation (SD) and 95% confidence interval (CI). Heterogeneity was presented as an inconsistency index (I 2 ), analysed via a Qtest, and illustrated in a forest plot. Publication bias was analysed via the Egger's regression test and illustrated in a funnel plot.  
## (s7) Discussion
(p7.0) Recently, numerous outbreaks have been linked to crosscontaminated, reusable, patient-ready RFBs, entailing significant cost and potentially health-related quality of life decrement (Mangen et al., 2017;Mouritsen et al., 2020). Therefore, it is important to elucidate the actual cross-contamination rate of RFBs. This study estimated the RFB cross-contamination rate based on the best available evidence via a systematic literature review. In all, eight studies were identified utilising PRISMA, and the estimated total cross-contamination rate was 8.69% via a random effect model. To our best knowledge, this is the first metaanalysis to estimate the total cross-contamination rate of RFBs, including a standardised contamination threshold based on a well-established endoscopy surveillance-testing guideline (Beilenhoff et al., 2007). This result clearly shows that despite continuous improvement in reprocessing and reprocessing guidelines, the RFB cross-contamination rate is still high. By proving this, it is evident that an infection control paradigm shift is needed to ensure patient safety.
