# A Review on Direct Digital Conversion Techniques for Biomedical Signal Acquisition

CorpusID: 259181030 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e369d2725748d17c4f9b208a371c41a480a00a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4e369d2725748d17c4f9b208a371c41a480a00a5)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Home-based health monitoring through wearable devices is becoming prevalent. Low power consumption is very important to allow long-time monitoring. Besides power consumption, for multiple-channel applications such as neural recording, there are also requirements of a small size and minimum off-chip components.

(p0.1) There are mainly two categories of biomedical signals: biopotential signals such as Electrocardiogram (ECG) and Electroencephalogram (EEG), and bio-optical signals such as photoplethysmography (PPG) and near infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). Interestingly, they share a similar signal pattern, which is a small useful component superposed on a large quasi-DC component [1]. Traditional biopotential signal readouts consist of an AC-coupled preamplifier followed by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC) [2]. To reliably achieve a sub-Hz high pass frequency, large off-chip components are needed. Meanwhile, DCcoupled structures have a limited gain, reducing the effective resolution on the useful AC signal at the ADC output. Traditional bio-optical signal readout circuits use an integrator or a transimpedance amplifier (TIA) to convert the photocurrent to a voltage that is then digitized by an ADC [3]. However, the architecture of using TIA is prone to noise folding. In addition, due to the low perfusion index (PI) of the chest PPG signal, a larger dynamic range (DR) is required for the readout circuit, which undoubtedly increases the complexity of the design and power consumption.

(p0.2) In recent years, a direct digital conversion (DDC) structure has been proposed to directly digitize biomedical signals, which overcomes the above problems by combining preamplifier and ADC into one stage while making compromises among area, noise, power, and input impedance, etc.

(p0.3) In Section 2, we describe the techniques for neural signal recording. In Section 3, the techniques for voltage-controlled oscillator-based signal recording are presented. In Section 4, we discuss the techniques for PPG/NIRS signal recording. In Section 5, we conclude with the focus of neural signal recording and PPG/NIRS signal recording.
## (s1) Techniques for Biopotential Signal Recording
(p1.0) Multi-electrode neural recordings are becoming standard practice in neuroscience research to gain knowledge on the way the brain works and enable neuro-prosthetic applications. There is a clear need for a higher number of recording sites per given area, which provides real-time signals at the level of neurons from an ever-increasing brain volume. In parallel with the requirements of signal integrity and low power consumption, a miniature IC chip area with the minimum number of off-chip component is of paramount importance to enable hundred-channel neural probes [4].
## (s2) Techniques for Voltage-Controlled Oscillator (VCO)-Based Signal Recording
(p2.0) Although the CT-∆∑modulator achieves a high dynamic range, low noise and high input impedance at the same time, the supply voltage cannot be easily reduced to a sub-1V range because the output signal amplitude and thus the overall SNR/SNDR are always limited by the supply. This makes the front ends difficult to implement in a more advanced technology node together with the ever-complicated digital processing circuits, which benefit significantly from Moore's law. Frequency-domain separation is a workable approach to reduce supply and cancel artifacts [17].

(p2.1) Therefore, W. Jiang proposed a VCO-based neural signal recording system [18] in 2017 which is able to work at a 1.2 V supply while providing similar performance as that of the CT-∆∑ architecture. Instead of processing input signal in the voltage domain, it directly converts voltage into the frequency domain by using VCO. Due to the high voltage-to-frequency gain of VCO, the input signal can be applied directly to the VCO without preamplifier, as shown in Figure 9, achieving a high input range together with low noise. To maintain high SDNR of system, the VCO nonlinearity can be corrected by foreground correction. In this work, it is implemented by a fifth-order polynomial VCO tuning curve stored in the digital circuits. The VCO-based neural signal recording system achieves a ±50 mV input range and a 76 dB SNDR. Meanwhile, it occupies 0.135 mm 2 with an analog power of 3 µW and a digital switching power of 4 µW. The disadvantage of this loop architecture is that it may still limit the linearity of system because of PVT variations, even with a nonlinearity calibration effort.

(p2.2) To avoid this limitation of open-loop VCO-based system, a closed-loop CC-VCO-based sensor readout system featuring hybrid PLL-∆∑modulator is proposed in [19]. As shown in Figure 10, the dual VCOs integrate the input voltage to create phase variation, which is subsequently detected by phase frequency detector (PFD). The PFD acts as an integrator that generates the sum of input phase difference. Compared to classic PLL, this work uses an array of 15 PFDs instead of only one PFD as an efficient quantizer. The dual VCO structure allows the PFD to perform self-comparison without an extra phase. The PFD array can detect every delay stage of VCOs which naturally create a set of evenly phase-shifted PWM waveforms without a classic barrel-shifter. Thus, by sampling the PFD array, the quantized phase difference can directly be regarded as output and CDAC control signal. The use of all VCO phases allows low VCO frequency without information loss, which avoids high-speed VCO to save power and area. The prototype readout system achieves a 78 dB SNDR in 10 kHz BW, consuming 4.5 µW and a 0.025 mm 2 active area with a 172 dB FoM. Although this work has an excellent tradeoff between power, area, input range and noise, the input impedance is reduced since a chopper is applied. To avoid this limitation of open-loop VCO-based system, a closed-loop CC-VCObased sensor readout system featuring hybrid PLL-∆∑modulator is proposed in [19]. As shown in Figure 10, the dual VCOs integrate the input voltage to create phase variation, which is subsequently detected by phase frequency detector (PFD). The PFD acts as an integrator that generates the sum of input phase difference. Compared to classic PLL, this work uses an array of 15 PFDs instead of only one PFD as an efficient quantizer. The dual VCO structure allows the PFD to perform self-comparison without an extra phase. The PFD array can detect every delay stage of VCOs which naturally create a set of evenly phase-shifted PWM waveforms without a classic barrel-shifter. Thus, by sampling the PFD array, the quantized phase difference can directly be regarded as output and CDAC control signal. The use of all VCO phases allows low VCO frequency without information loss, which avoids high-speed VCO to save power and area. The prototype readout system achieves a 78 dB SNDR in 10 kHz BW, consuming 4.5 µW and a 0.025 mm 2 active area with a 172 dB FoM. Although this work has an excellent tradeoff between power, area, input range and noise, the input impedance is reduced since a chopper is applied. Jiannan Huang proposed a ΔΣ-modulator structure using a VCO-based quantizer [20] while avoiding the drawback of nonlinearity by applying differential pulse code modulation (DPCM). As shown in Figure 11, the predictor is designed to exploit the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal so that the quantizer only needs to deal with the remaining prediction error. It allows reducing the nonlinearity of the VCO quantizer by lowering the signal swing at the input of the VCO quantizer. In addition, oversampling increases the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal, so a high oversampling rate (OSR) leads to a good linearity of the VCO system. This sensor To avoid this limitation of open-loop VCO-based system, a closed-loop CC-VCObased sensor readout system featuring hybrid PLL-∆∑modulator is proposed in [19]. As shown in Figure 10, the dual VCOs integrate the input voltage to create phase variation, which is subsequently detected by phase frequency detector (PFD). The PFD acts as an integrator that generates the sum of input phase difference. Compared to classic PLL, this work uses an array of 15 PFDs instead of only one PFD as an efficient quantizer. The dual VCO structure allows the PFD to perform self-comparison without an extra phase. The PFD array can detect every delay stage of VCOs which naturally create a set of evenly phase-shifted PWM waveforms without a classic barrel-shifter. Thus, by sampling the PFD array, the quantized phase difference can directly be regarded as output and CDAC control signal. The use of all VCO phases allows low VCO frequency without information loss, which avoids high-speed VCO to save power and area. The prototype readout system achieves a 78 dB SNDR in 10 kHz BW, consuming 4.5 µW and a 0.025 mm 2 active area with a 172 dB FoM. Although this work has an excellent tradeoff between power, area, input range and noise, the input impedance is reduced since a chopper is applied. Jiannan Huang proposed a ΔΣ-modulator structure using a VCO-based quantizer [20] while avoiding the drawback of nonlinearity by applying differential pulse code modulation (DPCM). As shown in Figure 11, the predictor is designed to exploit the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal so that the quantizer only needs to deal with the remaining prediction error. It allows reducing the nonlinearity of the VCO quantizer by lowering the signal swing at the input of the VCO quantizer. In addition, oversampling increases the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal, so a high oversampling rate (OSR) leads to a good linearity of the VCO system. This sensor Jiannan Huang proposed a ∆Σ-modulator structure using a VCO-based quantizer [20] while avoiding the drawback of nonlinearity by applying differential pulse code modulation (DPCM). As shown in Figure 11, the predictor is designed to exploit the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal so that the quantizer only needs to deal with the remaining prediction error. It allows reducing the nonlinearity of the VCO quantizer by lowering the signal swing at the input of the VCO quantizer. In addition, oversampling increases the correlation between the adjacent sample of the input signal, so a high oversampling rate (OSR) leads to a good linearity of the VCO system. This sensor front end consumes 3.2 µW of power and achieves an SNDR of 89 dB and a DR of 94 dB in 500 Hz of bandwidth. Together with a 1.18 µVrms integrated input-referred noise, it achieves a noise efficiency factor (NEF) of 4 and a Schreier FoM of 171 dB. Despite the fact that other indicators are excellent, a nine-bit CDAC is needed to feedback prediction signal, leading to extra area; in addition, input impedance is limited by chopping frequency and input capacitance.

(p2.3) Corentin Pochet proposed a third-order VCO-based ∆ΣADC [21] using a pseudovirtual ground feedforward technique. As shown in Figure 12, each integrator is comprised of a Gm stage and VCO followed by PFD. The pseudo-virtual ground of the ADC feeds forward to the second and third integrators using Gm cells. The signal summation between the feedforward path and the integration path is performed in the current domain, and the resulting current drives the CCO of the next integrator. With third-order shaping, the system achieves a 1.8 V input range, a 92.1 dB SNDR over a 2.5 kHz bandwidth and consumes 4.4 µW with a 0.1 mm 2 area. However, the input impedance is still poor since a chopper is used. front end consumes 3.2 µW of power and achieves an SNDR of 89 dB and a DR of 94 dB in 500 Hz of bandwidth. Together with a 1.18 µVrms integrated input-referred noise, it achieves a noise efficiency factor (NEF) of 4 and a Schreier FoM of 171 dB. Despite the fact that other indicators are excellent, a nine-bit CDAC is needed to feedback prediction signal, leading to extra area; in addition, input impedance is limited by chopping frequency and input capacitance. Corentin Pochet proposed a third-order VCO-based ΔΣADC [21] using a pseudovirtual ground feedforward technique. As shown in Figure 12, each integrator is comprised of a Gm stage and VCO followed by PFD. The pseudo-virtual ground of the ADC feeds forward to the second and third integrators using Gm cells. The signal summation between the feedforward path and the integration path is performed in the current domain, and the resulting current drives the CCO of the next integrator. With third-order shaping, the system achieves a 1.8 V input range, a 92.1 dB SNDR over a 2.5 kHz bandwidth and consumes 4.4 µW with a 0.1 mm 2 area. However, the input impedance is still poor since a chopper is used. To avoid impairing input impedance, work [22] presents a highly linear Gm-C-based CT-DSM (delta-sigma modulator) without chopping. As shown in Figure 13, a resistive feedback DAC (RDAC) is implemented in parallel with resistor RS of first Gm-C integrator instead of CDAC. The signal current IS through RS and the feedback current IDAC generated by RDAC are subtracted at the VS. Due to the feedback-assisted Gm linearization, the magnitude of the IIN maintains within the LSB of the feedback DAC current even with a large input voltage, which can significantly improve the linearity of the CTDSM system. This design achieves a high input impedance, a 300 mVpp linear input range, a 80.4 dB Corentin Pochet proposed a third-order VCO-based ΔΣADC [21] using a pseudovirtual ground feedforward technique. As shown in Figure 12, each integrator is comprised of a Gm stage and VCO followed by PFD. The pseudo-virtual ground of the ADC feeds forward to the second and third integrators using Gm cells. The signal summation between the feedforward path and the integration path is performed in the current domain, and the resulting current drives the CCO of the next integrator. With third-order shaping, the system achieves a 1.8 V input range, a 92.1 dB SNDR over a 2.5 kHz bandwidth and consumes 4.4 µW with a 0.1 mm 2 area. However, the input impedance is still poor since a chopper is used. To avoid impairing input impedance, work [22] presents a highly linear Gm-C-based CT-DSM (delta-sigma modulator) without chopping. As shown in Figure 13, a resistive feedback DAC (RDAC) is implemented in parallel with resistor RS of first Gm-C integrator instead of CDAC. The signal current IS through RS and the feedback current IDAC generated by RDAC are subtracted at the VS. Due to the feedback-assisted Gm linearization, the magnitude of the IIN maintains within the LSB of the feedback DAC current even with a large input voltage, which can significantly improve the linearity of the CTDSM system. This design achieves a high input impedance, a 300 mVpp linear input range, a 80.4 dB To avoid impairing input impedance, work [22] presents a highly linear Gm-C-based CT-DSM (delta-sigma modulator) without chopping. As shown in Figure 13, a resistive feedback DAC (RDAC) is implemented in parallel with resistor R S of first Gm-C integrator instead of CDAC. The signal current I S through R S and the feedback current I DAC generated by RDAC are subtracted at the V S . Due to the feedback-assisted Gm linearization, the magnitude of the I IN maintains within the LSB of the feedback DAC current even with a large input voltage, which can significantly improve the linearity of the CTDSM system. This design achieves a high input impedance, a 300 mVpp linear input range, a 80.4 dB SNDR, a 81 dB DR and consumes only 6.5 µW with a signal bandwidth of 10 kHz. However, without chopping, this system has poor CMRR and the schematic of first Gm-C integrator is complex.

(p2.4) Electronics 2022, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17 SNDR, a 81 dB DR and consumes only 6.5 µW with a signal bandwidth of 10 kHz. However, without chopping, this system has poor CMRR and the schematic of first Gm-C integrator is complex. In [23,24], several methods to save power and reduce noise for VCO-based modulators are provided. In [23], a modulation method is described for spread-spectrum clock generators (SSCGs) which reduce clock power. In [24], a noise reduction method for ∆∑ bang-bang PLL is presented. Table 2 summarizes the performance of state-of-the-art VCObased DDC-structured biopotential readout circuits. In [18], a VCO-based neural recording system which works at 1.2 V supply is proposed. This work achieves good performance on SNDR (76 dB) compared with a conventional delta-sigma modulator. However, the linearity of the system depends on PVT variations of the calibration module. In [19], a In [23,24], several methods to save power and reduce noise for VCO-based modulators are provided. In [23], a modulation method is described for spread-spectrum clock generators (SSCGs) which reduce clock power. In [24], a noise reduction method for ∆∑ bang-bang PLL is presented. Table 2 summarizes the performance of state-of-the-art VCObased DDC-structured biopotential readout circuits. In [18], a VCO-based neural recording system which works at 1.2 V supply is proposed. This work achieves good performance on SNDR (76 dB) compared with a conventional delta-sigma modulator. However, the linearity of the system depends on PVT variations of the calibration module. In [19], a closed-loop VCO-based system is presented using a PFD array as quantizer. With a PFD array, the system avoids high-speed VCO to save power (4.5 µW) and area (0.025 mm 2 ). Therefore, the FoM of the system is higher than that in [18]; however, the input impedance is not considered. In [22], a Gm-C-based CT-DSM is proposed without chopping. This work has good performance on SNDR (80.4), area (0.078 mm 2 ) and input impedance (13.3 MΩ@10 kHz). However, without chopping, the CMRR (76 dB) and noise (95 nV/ √ hz) are poor. In [20], a VCO-based quantizer is proposed using DPCM to avoid nonlinearity. With low OSR (OSR = 32), the system achieves an SNDR of 89 dB, consuming 3.2 µW. Although other performance values are excellent, the input impedance (4 MΩ) is limited by the chopper and input capacitor. In [21], a third-order VCO-based DSM was proposed using a pseudo-virtual ground to eliminate the large swing at the integrator output. This work also achieves good tradeoff between SNDR (92 dB) and power (4.4 µW), but input impedance is poor. Compared to the traditional DDC structure, the VCO-based DDC structure can achieve higher SNDR and FOM more easily because it has larger input range and displays lesser quantizer power consumption. The linearity of closed-loop structures is better [19][20][21][22] compared to the open-loop VCO-based structures in [18]. An obvious advantage of higherorder VCO-based DDC [21] is their ability to achieve large input range and high SNDR. When input impedance is the primary requirement, chopper-less designs [18,22] exhibit excellent performance at the cost of low-frequency noise. When considering the area of the acquisition chip, the hybrid PLL DSM structure proposed in [19] is suitable due to its low VCO center frequency.
