# Epicutaneous immunotherapy in rhino-conjunctivitis and food allergies: a review of the literature

CorpusID: 255951720 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53dbc69083eb3a9825c1db73a440132db1aa4eb1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53dbc69083eb3a9825c1db73a440132db1aa4eb1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) Critical analysis of the results
(p3.0) In their three studies [13,18,19], Senti et al. used different methods at the aim to improve the safety and efficacy of treatment, taking into account the data obtained from the first trial. In fact, in their first study, the authors showed, by a VAS scale, that EPIT may induce a very significant improvement of symptoms (> 70%) in treated patients, but it was paralleled by a significant increase in local adverse effects compared to placebo.

(p3.1) With the purpose of reducing local adverse reactions, in the second trial by Senti et al. [18] the patients were treated with three different doses of allergens. They reduced the number of patch applications from 12 to 6 and reduced the duration of patch application from 48 to 8 h. In this doseescalation study, they obtained a significant improvement of symptoms (70%) with the higher dose of Phl p 5 (30 µg), which was similar to the results obtained with 21 µg of the same allergen in the previous study [13]. They also showed a relevant reduction of local adverse reactions, but unfortunately 10 systemic adverse events that were not previously evidenced were observed.
## (s6) Critical analysis of the results
(p6.0) In the cow milk pilot study by Dupon et al. [21], a suggestive increase in tolerance in ten treated children was reported, but this increase was not significant compared to the placebo. The low number of patients and low cumulative dose (36 mg) given for only 3 months may be responsible for this nonsignificant result. Local adverse events were more frequent in patients treated with cow milk, but the difference compared to those of the placebo was not significant. Systemic adverse events were not reported.

(p6.1) The first EPIT peanut study [22] confirmed the safety data of the previous study on cow milk allergies. This study was performed in a non-homogeneous population of children and adults using three different doses in a short period of 2 weeks. It showed that adverse events were more frequent with the high doses, but the differences were not significant.
## (s7) Conclusions
(p7.0) The four clinical trials on EPIT for grass pollen allergic rhino-conjunctivitis have shown efficacy, safety and high adherence of this new route of AIT administration, and they were performed with different methods and evaluated by a VAS. However, for these reasons, validation by further studies performed according to EAACI and other international AIT guidelines are needed. The time of patch application ranging from 48 to 8 h in the last two studies of Senti et al. is very different from what is suggested by the kinetic study in an animal model [16]. A protocol taking into account the knowledge obtained from this model could be very useful to definitively identify a safe and effective allergen dose and the best time of patch application on the skin. Moreover, the cumulative dose might be reached through an increased number of patch applications in a longer period of 6 or 12 months or even 3 years, likely for SCIT and SLIT, with a possible definitive efficacy, long-lasting effect and same safety shown by EPIT in patients affected by allergic respiratory diseases. Studies performed in animal models [25,26] show that EPIT, differently from SCIT and SLIT, may induce the production of naïve regulatory T-cells bearing a homing receptor for low respiratory airways as well. This activation of lung homing receptors, if it is confirmed in humans, might suggest the specific role of EPIT in the treatment of allergic asthma.
## (s14) Critical analysis of the results
(p14.0) In their three studies [13,18,19], Senti et al. used different methods at the aim to improve the safety and efficacy of treatment, taking into account the data obtained from the first trial. In fact, in their first study, the authors showed, by a VAS scale, that EPIT may induce a very significant improvement of symptoms (> 70%) in treated patients, but it was paralleled by a significant increase in local adverse effects compared to placebo.

(p14.1) With the purpose of reducing local adverse reactions, in the second trial by Senti et al. [18] the patients were treated with three different doses of allergens. They reduced the number of patch applications from 12 to 6 and reduced the duration of patch application from 48 to 8 h. In this doseescalation study, they obtained a significant improvement of symptoms (70%) with the higher dose of Phl p 5 (30 µg), which was similar to the results obtained with 21 µg of the same allergen in the previous study [13]. They also showed a relevant reduction of local adverse reactions, but unfortunately 10 systemic adverse events that were not previously evidenced were observed.
## (s17) Critical analysis of the results
(p17.0) In the cow milk pilot study by Dupon et al. [21], a suggestive increase in tolerance in ten treated children was reported, but this increase was not significant compared to the placebo. The low number of patients and low cumulative dose (36 mg) given for only 3 months may be responsible for this nonsignificant result. Local adverse events were more frequent in patients treated with cow milk, but the difference compared to those of the placebo was not significant. Systemic adverse events were not reported.

(p17.1) The first EPIT peanut study [22] confirmed the safety data of the previous study on cow milk allergies. This study was performed in a non-homogeneous population of children and adults using three different doses in a short period of 2 weeks. It showed that adverse events were more frequent with the high doses, but the differences were not significant.
## (s18) Conclusions
(p18.0) The four clinical trials on EPIT for grass pollen allergic rhino-conjunctivitis have shown efficacy, safety and high adherence of this new route of AIT administration, and they were performed with different methods and evaluated by a VAS. However, for these reasons, validation by further studies performed according to EAACI and other international AIT guidelines are needed. The time of patch application ranging from 48 to 8 h in the last two studies of Senti et al. is very different from what is suggested by the kinetic study in an animal model [16]. A protocol taking into account the knowledge obtained from this model could be very useful to definitively identify a safe and effective allergen dose and the best time of patch application on the skin. Moreover, the cumulative dose might be reached through an increased number of patch applications in a longer period of 6 or 12 months or even 3 years, likely for SCIT and SLIT, with a possible definitive efficacy, long-lasting effect and same safety shown by EPIT in patients affected by allergic respiratory diseases. Studies performed in animal models [25,26] show that EPIT, differently from SCIT and SLIT, may induce the production of naïve regulatory T-cells bearing a homing receptor for low respiratory airways as well. This activation of lung homing receptors, if it is confirmed in humans, might suggest the specific role of EPIT in the treatment of allergic asthma.
