# A Review on HEVC Video Forensic Investigation under Compressed Domain

CorpusID: 253038400 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95396daee6827d1b1d2ff68c44c1449af6e3d688)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Overview of HEVC Coding Structure
(p1.0) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

(p1.1) The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 

(p1.2) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

(p1.3) The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 
## (s2) A. Coding units (CUs)
(p2.0) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 

(p2.1) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 
## (s5) HEVC Video Forgeries
(p5.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p5.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
## (s6) A. Video Quality Forgery
(p6.0) HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

(p6.1) Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

(p6.2) Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.

(p6.3) HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

(p6.4) Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

(p6.5) Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.
## (s7) B. Video Content Forgery
(p7.0) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p7.1) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.

(p7.2) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p7.3) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.
## (s8) Inter-frame Forgery
(p8.0) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.

(p8.1) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.
## (s10) A. Transcoding detection techniques
(p10.0) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p10.1) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p10.2) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 

(p10.3) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p10.4) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p10.5) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 
## (s11) B. Fake Bitrate detection techniques
(p11.0) Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

(p11.1) To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

(p11.2) In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

(p11.3) Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

(p11.4) For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 

(p11.5) Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

(p11.6) To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

(p11.7) In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

(p11.8) Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

(p11.9) For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 
## (s36) Overview of HEVC Coding Structure
(p36.0) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

(p36.1) The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 

(p36.2) The HEVC standard is designed to accomplish the objective of providing high-quality compression at reduced bitrate, to meet the increasing demand for storing and transferring high-definition video contents. This need is substantially larger on mobile devices and other consumer applications such as digital TV broadcasting [16].

(p36.3) The general architecture of encoding and decoding a sequence of video frames is depicted in Fig. 3. A typical encoder divides each frame into multiple block-shaped units. These units are predicted using intra prediction (by referring to neighbouring regions in the same image) or inter prediction (by referring to neighbouring frames). The first frame of each GOP (Group of pictures) is always intra-predicted, while the rest of the frames are both intra or interpredicted. The residual information generated by the prediction unit is transformed, quantized and entropy encoded to generate a valid bitstream. This bitstream can be stored and transmitted. The decoder reverses this process by decompressing the bitstream to produce the sequence of frames. In comparison to previous coding standards, efficient partitioning and prediction algorithms have been adopted in the HEVC standard to provide increased compression efficiency. The following subsections briefly discuss the key design elements of the basic encoding unit. In literature, researchers have performed forensic investigations based on the artefacts found in these coding elements. 
## (s37) A. Coding units (CUs)
(p37.0) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 

(p37.1) Block partitioning divides each frame into equal-sized units called Coding Tree Units (CTUs). Replacing the conventional macroblock structure where the size was fixed to 16x16, CTUs in HEVC are subdivided into flexible CUs to form a quadtree structure. To find the optimal portioning, an efficient Rate-Distortion Cost (RDCost) algorithm is employed [5]. Smoother regions of high-resolution pictures are encoded using larger-sized CUs to provide improved compression efficiency. Whereas smaller-sized CUs are more efficient in dealing with finer details of dense areas resulting in improved picture quality. Fig. 4 shows the partitioning structure of a CTU into CUs and the resulting quadtree formation for that portion of the video frame. 
## (s40) HEVC Video Forgeries
(p40.0) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 

(p40.1) There are various kinds of tampering attacks being applied to HEVC videos, commonly classified as Video Quality Forgery and Video Content Forgery [19]. Former, fake about the quality of videos and later, alter the contents of the video. Fig. 6 shows the classification chart of HEVC video forgeries. 
## (s41) A. Video Quality Forgery
(p41.0) HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

(p41.1) Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

(p41.2) Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.

(p41.3) HEVC videos are essentially high-quality videos. In this type of forgery, encoding characteristics of low-quality videos are altered in order to publish them as high-quality HEVC videos. Video quality forgeries are subdivided into Transcoding and Fake Bitrate.

(p41.4) Transcoding Video transcoding is the conversion of digital content from one encoding scheme to another. With the popularity of HEVC, as a symbol of high-quality videos, fraudsters re-encode their originally low-quality MPEG/AVC videos as HEVC videos. In order to gain more financial benefits from advertising and click-through rate, contents are transcoded using newer codecs, without any improvement in the quality. In the entertainment sector, where hundreds of hours of videos are uploaded to YouTube every minute, quality control measures must be extremely efficient. In [10,20,21], the authors presented forensic approaches for determining if it is an authentic HEVC video or it is generated by transcoding an existing MPEG/AVC video sequence.

(p41.5) Fake Bitrate Bitrate is another measure to judge the quality of a digital video. Fraudulent persons tend to increase the bitrate of videos without adding any more information, especially for videos that are shared over the Internet. In this scenario, the ostensibly high bitrate video would have been of inferior visual quality. Many internet bitrate conversion applications that can accomplish this operation are now available for free. These fake upscaled bitrate videos deceive media consumers and potentially waste a lot of storage space and network bandwidth. This paper provides a comparative analysis of the work presented by authors in [19,22,23] for fake bitrate attacks tested for varied bitrates and resolutions.
## (s42) B. Video Content Forgery
(p42.0) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p42.1) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.

(p42.2) This type of forgery tampers the video either by manipulating the contents inside individual frames or by altering the original sequence of frames [13]. It is divided into two sub-categories: Intra-frame forgery and Inter-frame Forgery.

(p42.3) Intra-frame Forgery A digital video is essentially a collection of still images called frames [24]. A counterfeiter manipulates the contents of a frame in intra-frame forgery. Intra-frame forgeries can be carried out at the pixel level, where specific pixels are altered, or at the object level, where a region containing a specific object is tampered. Typically, the goal of this manipulation is to clone, splice, or inpaint an area or object at a specific location in a frame. Fig. 7 shows an example of intra-frame object forgery, wherein part (a) depicts the cloning operation. A white truck from the authentic sequence of frames is copied and pasted at some other location in the same sequence of frames. In part (b), a person from some other video is spliced into an authentic video to produce a spliced video. An example of an inpainted video is shown in part (c), where a cycle object is removed from the original video by replacing the object region with neighbouring pixel values. Fig. 7. Example of intra-frame forgery. (a) Cloning forgery; a white truck is copied and pasted, in the same sequence, at some other location (b) Splicing forgery; a lady is spliced in an authentic sequence, from another video (c) In-painting forgery; a cycle object is removed from the authentic sequence.
## (s43) Inter-frame Forgery
(p43.0) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.

(p43.1) Inter-frame forgery is the act of altering a series of frames in a video. A fraudster may purposefully remove, insert, or duplicate a sequence of frames from a genuine video [25]. The objective could be to destroy evidence of a criminal act or to stage an event at an incorrect moment, in order to slander someone. Surveillance videos are frequently used in criminal case investigations as vital evidence. If such manipulation takes place in surveillance footage, it may go unnoticed by human eyes, jeopardizing justice. Fig. 8 shows an example of video interframe forgery. Row (a) depicts an authentic video sequence obtained from a surveillance camera. In row (b), frame deletion forgery is performed by removing a sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person in an office premise. Frame insertion forgery is performed in row (c), wherein, a forged sequence of frames representing the arrival of a person is inserted in the original sequence. The inserted sequence is obtained from the same surveillance camera, recorded on some other day. In row (d), a sequence of frames is copied and pasted in same surveillance footage to depict frame duplicated forged video.    9 illustrates the process of generating forged videos including, transcoded, fake bitrate, intra-frame forged and inter-frame forged. Typical forgery operations involve decoding the authentic video, performing manipulations and recompressing. Thus, a forgery operation always includes double compression. To detect forgery several double compression detection techniques are proposed in the literature. These techniques extract abnormal features either from decoded frames known as, decompressed domain or extract irregular coding features directly from encoded bitstream known as compression domain. The approaches proposed in the compression domain require less computation time and demand less cache for processing operations [13]. Thus, for data of high dimension or beyond, analysing compression domain features is more desirable. This paper aims at reviewing HEVC forensic techniques utilizing artefacts that occurred in HEVC coding elements.
## (s45) A. Transcoding detection techniques
(p45.0) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p45.1) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p45.2) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 

(p45.3) Genuine HEVC videos are directly formed from a sequence of raw uncompressed images, whereas transcoded HEVC videos are generated by re-encoding the decoded AVC/MPEG content. Costanzo et al. [10] analysed the frequency of uni-predicted CUs and bi-predicted CU's in all B-frames of genuine HEVC videos and transcoded HEVC videos. The authors observed that in genuine HEVC videos the number of bi-predicted CUs is substantially larger than the number of uni-predicted CUs. The number of uni-predicted CUs, on the other hand, makes up the vast bulk of all units when the HEVC sequence is generated by re-encoding a lower-quality AVC sequence. This approach, however, can only be used if the quantization mode is set to a constant value and QP in re-encoding is less than that first encoding.

(p45.4) Bian et al. [20] explored the differences in prediction unit statistics of I-frame and P-frames for single and double encoded videos. Differences in quantization parameters between the first and second encoding cause the distortion of the optimal encoding scheme thus, to achieve the least cost the partitioning scheme of transcoded video tries different patterns. Authors utilized this observation and came to a conclusion that there exists more fine-grained PUs, i.e., smaller-sized blocks, in transcoded HEVC videos, whereas, the amount of coarse-grained PUs is much less accordingly in transcoded HEVC videos. A 30-D feature vector comprising the statistics of PUs in I and P-frames is utilised for training and testing using an SVM classifier to support this claim. The proposed technique is robust against video enhancement.

(p45.5) Zhang et al. [21] concatenated the characteristics of CU partition types to the PU partition types. A 38-D feature vector is designed by extracting mean frequencies of CU and PU partition types from I-frames and first P-frames of each GOP. The features are then classified as transcoded or not using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel. The technique obtained an average accuracy of 98.98% for high-resolution movies, which is slightly better (0.81%) than the scheme described by [20]. The approach claimed to be resilient to both a shifted GOP structure attack and a frame deletion attack. A comparative study of transcoding detection techniques is given in Table 2. 
## (s46) B. Fake Bitrate detection techniques
(p46.0) Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

(p46.1) To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

(p46.2) In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

(p46.3) Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

(p46.4) For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 

(p46.5) Rate control modes decide the number of bits to spend on a given frame. HEVC standard supports two rate control modes: CBR and VBR. Constant bitrate mode (CBR), forces the video encoder to always use a certain bitrate for all frames. Variable bitrate mode (VBR) enables the encoder to use more bits for complex and fast-moving content while saving bits from smooth textures. Rate control is a critical step in determining the size-quality trade-off. The higher the number of bits, the better the video quality. Using tools like FFmpeg a forger can re-encode an originally low-quality video with higher bitrates, to give the illusion of being a high-quality video.

(p46.6) To expose fake bitrate forgery Liang et al. [22] obtained PU statistics from the first P frame of each GOP. A 25-D feature vector is retrieved from the histogram of the PU partitions, known as HPP. An average of the HPP features of all GOPs in a video sequence is calculated to obtain the final detection feature. The features are then classified using an SVM classifier with a polynomial kernel to obtain an average accuracy of 87%.

(p46.7) In another study, the authors improved average accuracy by extracting multiple prediction features from both I and P frames [23]. Features extracted from I-frames include a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoICU), 5-D PU partitioning mode (PMoIPU) and 6-D intra partitioning modes (PMoIIPM). From P-frames, a 4-D CU partitioning mode (PMoPCU) and 25-D PU (PMoPPU) partitioning mode information is extracted. A systematic analysis of individual and combination of features is performed to detect videos with fake bitrate.

(p46.8) Recently, Yu et al. [19] proposed a 10-D feature vector named, PMF formed from the features extracted from intra and inter-prediction modes. HEVC introduced 35 intra-prediction modes. Out of these, Planar, DC, H0 and V0 are suitable for representing homogenous textures. Fake HD videos with low-quality origin have reduced texture complexity, thus during re-encoding more Planar, DC, H0 and V0 modes would be used for intra-prediction in comparison to videos with high-quality origin. A 4-D feature vector of intra-prediction modes is derived from each I-Frame. Further, a 6-D feature vector is extracted from P-frames and B frames, comprising information of Skip, Merge and AMVP inter prediction modes. An ensemble classifier was employed to achieve state of art results with average accuracy near to 99%.

(p46.9) For detecting fake bitrates authors have conducted experiments on videos with both low-resolution (QCIF and CIF) and high-resolution (720p and 1080p). A comparison chart of average detection accuracies achieved by the above works are presented in Table 3. It has been observed that the higher the difference between the bitrate of first encoding and second encoding, the higher the variation in the prediction mode features thus, the higher the detection accuracy. Table  4 presents a summary of Fake bitrate detection techniques in HEVC videos. 
