# Contactless Palmprint Recognition System: A Survey

CorpusID: 251076876 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aad71ad8c94218ca82b3d6132f730027b58bb109](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aad71ad8c94218ca82b3d6132f730027b58bb109)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) A biometric authentication effectively recognizes a person's identification with high confidence [1]- [3]. Recent study interest has been required by palmprint recognition, an emerging technique in biometrics systems. Researchers have been looking at constructing such systems in a contactless approach to make the palmprint. Thus, there are two categories of palmprint capture techniques: contactbased and contactless-based. However, human users have expressed much justifiable opposition to contact-based acquisition strategies. However, this has had a detrimental effect on the advancement of palmprint recognition. As a result of these failures, contactless palmprint recognition has The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Jonathan Rodriguez . been developed to increase user-friendly and hygienic and safeguard user privacy [4]- [7]. Thus, this paper provides an overview and evaluation of the contactless palmprint recognition system, the state-of-the-art performance of existing works, different types of ''Region of Interest'' (ROI) extraction algorithms, feature extraction, and matching algorithms.

(p0.1) This work discusses the theoretical background of biometric recognition, contactless palmprint as a biometric, and the concept of on-device intelligence. Several related works are also discussed to highlight the state-of-the-art techniques related to these research areas. The following are some of the significant challenges in respect of palmprint biometrics in the literature: its pose and Illumination affect the layouts and visibility of palm lines; detecting the contactless palmprint region of interest (ROI) due to the different orientations of the presented palm is challenging; current palmprint processing is off the device; and due to costs, most of the devices are equipped with limited memory [8]- [11].
## (s1) II. LITERATURE REVIEW
(p1.0) In image processing, biometrics technology has become an important application and is getting more popular daily. Today researchers dwell more on improving this area because, in security, biometrics is very important. It then became helpful in analyzing many security cases, which gave many researchers the strong will to do more in developing the field. Also, biometric technology plays a very important role in security and commercial, civil, and industrial project designs by incorporating recognition and identification of human beings in their designs. This work discusses the theoretical background of biometric recognition, contactless palmprint as a biometric, and the concept of on-device intelligence. Several related works are also discussed to highlight the state-of-the-art techniques related to these research areas.

(p1.1) The human palm is the flat region of the hand below the fingers visibly marked by principal lines similar to fingerprints. As presented in Figure 5, its unique features include ridges and valleys patterns, minutiae, and pores visible in high resolution [32]. Palm print information is another widely used method of identifying individuals. According to studies, the hand groove pattern and arteries can be used to identify individuals accurately. Different features of a person's palmprint, including geometric features, principal lines, and wrinkles, produce distinct and unique patterns. These techniques are employed in biometrics and the identification of individuals. In terms of vascular location, palmprints have numerous features and a set of distinguishing features that can be used for identification [33]. The palmprint features are considered reliable for personal recognition systems desiring high usability, execution speed, user acceptance, and reduced acquisition cost. Palmprint recognition systems have been deployed for access control, law enforcement and forensic analysis systems, to mention a few [34].
## (s5) B. CONTACTLESS PALMPRINT RECOGNITION SYSTEMS
(p5.0) This method acquires images in a less-constrained manner. Image acquisition can be achieved with four different types of sensors: Colour Charge Couple based (CCD-based), digital camera, digital scanner, and video camera. The CCD-based palmprint scanner usually captures high-quality palmprint images, enhancing the development of a robust recognition algorithm. Furthermore, image acquisition based on digital scanners and video cameras does not use pegs for hand placement. Also, the images are collected in an uncontrolled environment with a variant on rotations, scales, illuminations, and translations due to the hand movement [47]. A summary of the various capturing devices for contact-based and contactless palmprint images is provided in Figure 12.   
## (s6) IV. CONTACTLESS PALMPRINT IMAGE ACQUISITION DEVICES AND DATABASES
(p6.0) Numerous publicly available database has been released to facilitate the development and deployment of contactless palmprint recognition technology, as detailed in Table 2. The data acquisition method determines the algorithm/techniques that will be applied in the subsequent stages of the palmprint recognition system and, consequently, the system's performance [28]. Table 3 presents some contactless palmprint acquisition devices, highlighting device types, sensor properties, and image quality.
## (s13) D. PALMPRINT TEMPLATE MATCHING METHODS
(p13.0) Matching shows the resemblance between data sets created by comparing the unfamiliar person's feature codes and those held in the system. Moreover, for a specific person's features, the score will be high and low for those who are different [90]. As earlier mentioned, feature extraction and matching are the most critical problems in palm print technology, which is equally grouped into holistic-based, feature-based and hybrid methods. Table 6 shows the various palmprint comparison methods, while Figure 16 shows the palm print matching/classification method.
