# Imaging evaluation of patellofemoral joint instability: a review

CorpusID: 257485963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a5f122daa1ba05b5487b4f62c9181c5399da8c2f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a5f122daa1ba05b5487b4f62c9181c5399da8c2f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Patellar height
(p3.0) Patella alta, also known as high-riding patella, is considered another main factor of PFI, which is present in 25-30% of patients with acute patellar dislocations [12,35]. Patella alta is characterized by an abnormal position of the patella in relation to the trochlear groove. An excessive length of the patellar tendon can be the origin of this anatomic morphology [36]. Compared with a patient with normal patellar height, in patients with patella alta, a higher degree of knee flexion is necessary for the patella to engage in the trochlear sulcus [12]. In the first degrees of knee flexion, the patellar contact area is reduced, leading to a decrease in stability. MRI is more sensitive to assess the patellar height due to the reliability of the measurement of the patellar tendon [12].

(p3.1) Five PFI indices have been described in the literature to evaluate the patellar height: Insall-Salvati Index (ISI); Modified Insall-Salvati Index (MISI); Caton-Deschamps Index (CDI); Blackburne-Peel Index (BPI); and Patellotrochlear Index (PTI). In cross-sectional studies, all measurements are performed in the sagittal slice showing the longest axis of the patella and the insertion of the patellar tendon in the anterior tibial tuberosity.
## (s6) Tibial tubercle lateralization
(p6.0) Bony misalignment of lower limbs has significant relevance in the setting of PFI. Coronal alignment of the lower limbs has begun to be assessed by measuring the Q angle, aiming to evaluate the operating angle of the extensor mechanism. Valgus alignment is often associated with PFI-related problems. Due to the difficulty of quantifying the Q angle, cross-sectional imaging techniques have rapidly become the gold standard method for assessing the behavior of the extensor mechanism. Quantification of the anterior tibial tuberosity lateralization contributes to useful indicators of misalignment. This quantification is relevant to plan surgical distal realignment procedures [64,65]. Two PFI indices were found for this purpose: tibial tubercle-trochlear groove (TT-TG), and tibial tubercle-posterior cruciate ligament (TT-PCL) distances.

(p6.1) Two axial images are necessary to measure the TT-TG distance: the axial slice 3 cm above the femorotibial joint line that includes the intercondylar groove with an appearance of a Roman arch, and the axial slice with the insertion of the patellar tendon in the anterior tibial tuberosity. A tangential line to posterior femoral condyles is used as reference. TT-TG distance is obtained by the distance between the perpendicular lines that pass through the deepest point of the trochlear groove and the midpoint of the insertion of the patellar tendon in the anterior tibial tuberosity (Fig. 6a). It was originally described for CT images, but recent studies have supported the use of MRI for assessing this parameter [66,67]. Knee in full extension is suggested for more reliable measurements [64,[68][69][70]. Some discussion is raised regarding the factors that influence the outcome of the TT-TG distance measurements. Besides the degree of knee flexion, Pennock et al. showed the influence of age, gender, and size of the patient in the TT-TG distance outcomes [68]. Their research has shown an increase of 0.12 in TT-TG distance for each centimeter in patient height [68]. These factors have led to some inconsistencies in the literature regarding the reference values of this PFI index. A cut-off of 15 mm is used by Thakkar et al. [71]. A systematic review conducted by Tan et al. compares the TT-TG distance performed in CT and MRI. The outcome of this study indicates that both medical imaging modalities are reliable for assessing the TT-TG distance, although the cut-off values are different,  [64]. On the axial slice below the articular surface of the tibia plateau and above the fibular head, a line is drawn tangential to the posterior aspect of the condylar line of proximal tibia, as reference. A perpendicular line is drawn in the medial border of PCL in the most distal axial slice where the ligament could be clearly identified, corresponding to the insertion of the ligament on the tibia. TT-PCL distance is given by the distance between the line passing through PCL and the line passing through the midpoint of the insertion of the patellar tendon in the anterior tibial tuberosity (Fig. 6.b) [64]. A cut-off value of 24 mm was established. Values higher than 24 mm indicate excessive tibial tubercle lateralization [64]. Recent studies have suggested adjustments in the cut-off value for this PFI index, suggesting a value between 20 and 21 mm [65]. Some authors have emphasized that the TT-PCL distance describes the pure lateralization of the tibial tubercle once it is measured, resorting only to anatomical landmarks of the tibia, excluding the influence of the extensor mechanism of the knee joint in the measurements [64,65].
