# Innovative pedagogical principles and technological tools capabilities for immersive blended learning: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 251178286 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e55c38a6651fefd5530d104ea73d44f0ae912e59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e55c38a6651fefd5530d104ea73d44f0ae912e59)

Fields: Education, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Blended learning is widely recognised as an integration of classroom face-toface learning experiences with online learning experiences. An increased use of blended learning environments in higher education has been an emerging trend in the twenty-first century (Mozelius & Rydell, 2017) due to the ever-changing world of technology and the need to guide twenty-first century learners to approach learning. Many studies have shown that blended learning can improve academic achievement (Kassab et al., 2015;Kazu & Demirkol, 2014). Through blended learning, technology is used to cater to multiple learning styles or needs, engage students, and support learning goals and values.
## (s15) Included
(p15.0) Keywords: heutagogy*; heutagogy* AND higher education; heutagogy; heutagogy AND higher education; heutagogical; heutagogic; heutagogy AND technological learning tools; heutagogy* AND principles AND higher education  Table 4 for the sub-aspects themes and its description).

(p15.1) (2) Careful review of all 39 studies via a constant comparative method: inductive approach (Maykut & Morehouse, 1994) by comparing and breaking down the raw data from the 39 studies through a process of inductive reasoning, in order to develop appropriate themes of capabilities of FB, LMS, and blog technologi- Reports assessed for eligibility (n = 10) Reports excluded: Methodological quality (n = 1) Methodological relevance (n = 1) Topic relevance (n = 1) Studies included in review (n = 7)
## (s23) Mapping of the principles of heutagogy, peeragogy, and cybergogy
(p23.0) with the capabilities of technological learning tools for immersive blended learning implementation Figure 8 shows the basis for mapping elements to indicate the suitable implementation of an immersive blended learning approach. The capabilities of the technological learning tools are mapped with the selected ten innovative pedagogical principles to find the relevance of the two elements in creating an immersive blended learning environment. Initially, there are 12 innovative pedagogical principles discussed in this study; however, the second and fifth principles of peeragogy are not included in the mapping because of their unimportance to being adopted in a blended learning environment. This is because (1) the two principles require no technological learning assistance when learners need to halt/take a step back in order to observe their learning process. Note that technological usage is necessary for the scope of this study, and (2) the independent learning concept that can be found in both second and fifth principles has been covered in the first and fourth principles; therefore, it is appropriate to omit the second and fifth peeragogy principles to avoid duplicated results in the mapping.

(p23.1) Based on Figs. 9, 10, and 11, the obvious pattern that can be seen from the mapping is that each capability of all types of technological tools, i.e., FB, blogs, and LMS, is associated with at least one aspect of the principles of Education 4.0 innovative pedagogies. This could mean that establishing an immersive blended learning environment is possible, as the learning process could be optimised by integrating comprehensive pedagogical elements and technological tools that are directly linked to each other. This is also congruent with Kaufman's (2019) suggestion that in redesigning a transformative instructional model of blended learning, it  has to involve both technology and pedagogy and thus can promote active learning experiences and student-centred pedagogies.

(p23.2) Analysing the technological learning tools individually, FB has the most connections (n = 30 links) between the capabilities and pedagogical principles compared to blogs (n = 24), and LMS (n = 23). This proves that although FB starts off as a social media tool, it is relevant to be categorised as one of the most influential   (Gregory & Bannister-Tyrrell, 2017). This also implies that FB is able to support different kinds of aspects in a learning process, as it holds all six capabilities of technological learning tools and supports all the sub-categories except two sub-capabilities, namely, synchronous (communication time) and critical thinking (self-related) although the latter is still debatable, as Blaschke and Hase (2019) mentioned briefly how social media could help learners to think critically.
## (s24) Conclusions
(p24.0) The Education 4.0 era requires both instructors and students to change the learning and teaching paradigm by implementing and experiencing innovative pedagogies, such as heutagogy, peeragogy, and cybergogy. The techno-pedagogy mapping developed through this systematic review could offer helpful guidance for providing an immersive blended learning environment to fit the mission of twenty-first century learning. As emphasised by Bidarra and Rusman (2017), the focus on both technology and pedagogy, as done in this present systematic review, is crucial in building suitable immersive blended learning environment. This is because, it is observed that when learning technologies are introduced, the attention of blended learning is usually concentrated on the technology implementation per se (Chen & Yao, 2016) rather than stressing the innovative pedagogies and learning objectives (Shand et al., 2016). As there has been little, if any, research into linking blended learning with the underlying principles of twenty-first century pedagogy and the capabilities of technology in learning and instruction, despites it values (see Ayob et al., 2020;Mahalli et al., 2019;Mujacic et al., 2013), this techno-pedagogy mapping could be useful in reducing the pressure in adopting right merging of technology and pedagogy for immersive blended learning. According to Ata (2016) and Rasheed et al. (2020), the challenges for instructors to adopt immersive blended learning is due to digitally illiterate, and limited time for exploring, tweaking, and creating immersive Table 6 The weight of evidence of the included and excluded studies according to themes   (2012) Table 9 Description on the practical aspect of the mapping No Practical Scenarios 1 First, the course instructor needs to create an appropriate learning problem and context, for instance, How to develop a company website? The direction of the website development needs to be aligned with the requirements set by the company, that is (1) supports thousands of items of data, (2) has shorter time to load website pages, and (3) needs only a small budget allocation for website development Let us assume that the course instructor would like to apply heutagogical learning as the main pedagogy, where, in the end, his/her students are able to achieve goals such as (1) able to learn with only the limited provision of learning materials and guidance from the course instructor, and (2) achieve a good cognitive level based on the problems that often concern the real work-based context. One thing to emphasise when developing the heutagogical learning activities is that the course instructor has to re-balance the activities towards self-determination and autonomy instead of favouring only knowledge acquisition (which reflects the cognitive aspect) because those two are core characteristics of the heutagogical method. Furthermore, the three principles of immersive learning, that is, (1) real-life like environment, (2) a learning process that focuses more on learning experiences, presence, and co-presence, and (3) support by the appropriate technological learning tools, must also be considered. Its application can be seen in the next stages 2 Second, students are given full authority on how they would want to proceed with the learning activity that has been designed at the second stage above, because self-determined learning is crucial in the heutagogical learning approach. Nonetheless, despite being given full authority to execute the learning activity, the course instructor may at least make it compulsory for students to focus specifically on the reflection activity when they solve the problem. This is to avoid the students from getting lost and having no sense of direction regarding what to focus on when solving the problems. This also can be used as proof of students' cognitive development. What is more important is that, based on the mapping, it shows that reflection is associated with heutagogical learning practice 3 Third, let us consider that there might be two situations that emerged due to the students being given full authority to create their own learning journey, that is, (1) students who prefer to solve problems alone, and (2) students who prefer to co-learn with peers when solving problems. Note that, from the mapping framework, students who prefer to co-learn with peers when solving problems and doing reflection are actually applying peeragogical learning. This is where we can see how more than two innovative pedagogies can be applied in one learning activity. Mapping for FB, blogs, and LMS shows that reflection favours not only heutagogy but peeragogy as well 4 Fourth, for students who prefer to do the activity alone, perhaps blog is an appropriate tool for them to choose because when working alone, they are more inclined to share ideas instead of welcoming others' ideas to build upon further. As shown in the mapping, blogging supports sharing ideas instead of creating ideas 5 Fifth, for students who want to co-construct knowledge with peers, FB is a suitable tool to use because, as shown from the mapping, it allows for both creating ideas and sharing ideas actions. In addition, communication and interaction processes from peers are easier to perform through FB due to the notifications and tagging function, which allows for a quick response. Besides the user-friendly interface, the threaded messages are also organised; hence, the searching for related messages will be easier when there is a large number of messages in the comments section. LMS also allows for creating ideas, nevertheless, for communication and interaction purposes, it might not be sufficiently convenient since students are required to log in to the system every time they want to have a discussion. Plus, the system tends to log the user out if it remains idle for a period of time even though the students might in fact be reading at that moment 6 Sixth, if the course instructor feels that students who learn on their own do not reach a certain standard of knowledge and comprehension when assessing their reflection, he/she can redirect the students to peers or professional experts. This can be done because blogging also supports the communication and interaction capabilities. In innovative pedagogical learning, the course instructor could act only as a coach rather than spoon-feeding the students with facts and controlling the learning blended learning application. Furthermore, the techno-pedagogy mapping which have been identified and aligned in detail including some suggestions in order to make it more practical could provide an input to other significant parties in education, such as curriculum designers and faculty administrators and complement the transformation of learning and teaching course design, curriculum and delivery as the framework of a future-ready curriculum for Malaysian public universities is yet to provide any guidelines on how to use this pedagogy and technology effectively. The techno-pedagogy mapping presented in this study is limited in its scope and involves only three types of innovative pedagogical approaches and three forms of technological learning tools. Hence, the mapping can be further expanded using other important online technological learning tools, such as WhatsApp, Webex, Zoom, Google Meet, Padlet, Google Drive, and YouTube, among others, in order to help make immersive blended learning and teaching effective in the real sense and to vary the ways of learning and teaching transactions. Moreover, the mapping output is still in the conceptual form; hence, it needs to be validated empirically so that a proper framework of innovative pedagogies and technological learning tools can serve as a feasible source of reference for instructors to design an immersive blended learning environment and visualise its practical aspect.
