# A review of common mental health problems in the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic in South Asia

CorpusID: 254876361 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d85ed2fb1b9a8bd214eb0bea35872426ff066b47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d85ed2fb1b9a8bd214eb0bea35872426ff066b47)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s13) Suicidal tendencies
(p13.0) With estimates varying according to age, gender (females at seemingly greater risk), smoking status, or fear of COVID-19, 5-8% of the population appeared at elevated risk for suicidal ideation in relation to severe depression Mamun et al., 2021). In one study, the mean score on the item 'Stress influences my mind to commit suicide was 2.09 out of 6 (1 = not applicable, 6 = strongly agree), indicating that some people were dissatisfied with their current situation and wished to die (Islam et al., 2020b). Suicidal thoughts or ideation were often accompanied by depression . The pooled prevalence estimate of suicidal ideation was 6.5%.
## (s22) Marital status
(p22.0) In one study, unmarried participants showed greater levels of depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms than married participants (Ahmed et al., 2022). On the other hand, Bhatta et al. reported more prevalent anxiety among individuals who were married compared to unmarried people (9.9% versus 7.8%) (Bhatta et al., 2021).
## (s25) Sleep problems
(p25.0) COVID-19-related anxiety was more common among people who had trouble sleeping as compared to those without sleep difficulties (Bhatta et al., 2021). During the COVID-19 pandemic, sleeplessness was related to the intensity of depression (Bajaj et al., 2020). Loneliness was also linked to insomnia (Lahiri et al., 2021).
## (s30) COVID-19-related symptoms
(p30.0) COVID-19 symptoms (fever, exhaustion, and dry cough) were associated with higher levels of depression, anxiety, and stress. Individuals reporting having experienced COVID-19 infection were more prone to be anxious than those without infection (Rahman et al., 2021).
