# Measuring and characterizing night time human behaviour as it relates to residual malaria transmission in sub-Saharan Africa: a review of the published literature

CorpusID: 255867025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bcf1d398e6121e80fa0438682801c8ed5fe80ef](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0bcf1d398e6121e80fa0438682801c8ed5fe80ef)

Fields: Medicine, Environmental Science

## (s4) Association between night time location and malaria risk
(p4.0) Seven studies were identified that linked night time location with malaria risk. Four of the six studies specifically looked at whether time spent outdoors at night was associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. A case control study in South-West Kenya by Githinji et al. assessed micro-ecological and human behavioural factors associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. Human behaviour was assessed through a standardized survey [31]. No detail on the content of the human behavioural survey questions was included in the methods section. Results showed participants who spent time outside at night were more likely to be infected with malaria. Spending time outside at night was binary and did not specify length of time or time of the night. The discussion section described 'experiences gathered during data collection period' that showed community ceremonies such as funerals were commonly carried out at night, leading to an increased exposure to the risk of mosquito bites. However, no description was provided in the study methods about how night time activities were recorded nor was this information included in the results section.

(p4.1) In two studies, Bradley et al. investigated the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea. In a 2012 publication, Bradley analysed data from an annual malaria indicator survey, which includes a question asking whether a child spent time outside between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. [32]. Children aged two to fourteen were tested for Plasmodium falciparum using rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). Only 4% of children were reported to spend time outside during this time and no significant difference in prevalence was observed for children who spent time outside verses those who did not. In a 2015 publication, Bradley et al. conducted a survey to measure the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection as measured by RDT, in addition to measuring exposure to malaria vectors [28]. Malaria infection was not significantly higher in individuals who reported spending time outside between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the previous night compared to those who did not, in both adults and children. Malaria infection in neither adults nor in children was associated with exposure to outdoor bites, even after adjusting for confounders.

(p4.2) Mwesigwa et al. assessed incidence of P. falciparum infection using a cohort study in The Gambia [33]. The study included a household survey that asked about outdoor sleeping among household members. Outdoor sleeping varied by season and was associated with a significantly higher risk of malaria infection.

(p4.3) Hetzel et al. carried out a longitudinal study looking at time spent at shamba (farm houses) and incidence of fever in rural Tanzania [34]. The study included a survey to record where household members spent time during the day and night and use of ITNs as well as a treatmentseeking questionnaire recording fever episodes and treatment-seeking behaviour. During weeding and harvesting seasons a large proportion of household members spent days and nights at the farm houses. Fever incidence rates were lower in the shamba compared to the village, and 97% of participants reported using a mosquito net the night before. The discussion noted that since shamba houses are spread out there is little opportunity for socializing in the evening and, therefore, household members were likely to go to bed early; however, information on night time social activities and average bed times were not reflected in the study methods or results. Using global positioning system (GPS) data loggers, Searle et al. assessed seasonal movement patterns in rural Southern Zambia [35]. As part of the study, the team assessed time spent away from the household compound during peak biting hours, defined as 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. for the primary local vector, An. arabiensis. On average, participants spent 5.6% of time away from the household compound during peak vector biting hours. Time spent in high or low risk areas, identified by a malaria risk map, depended on the level of risk for the area in which a participant's compound was located. Participants largely spent time in and close to their household compound, with less frequent longer distance movements. While the study assessed time away from the household compound during peak biting hours, the spatial resolution of the loggers was not sufficient to distinguish time spent indoors and outdoors specifically.

(p4.4) Ototo et al. included the percentage of the population outdoors during times of the night when the highest densities of blood fed vectors were collected in a study in Kenya [36]. Approximately half of the study population was outdoors in the evening between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. and in the morning between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In the highland sites, participants reporting going outdoors earlier in the morning compared to the lowland sites, between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., largely due to agricultural activities. The results show that no one slept outdoors, even in the hot months. While presented together, the data were not integrated to provide an estimate of exposure to malaria vectors.

(p4.5) Seven studies were identified that linked night time location with malaria risk. Four of the six studies specifically looked at whether time spent outdoors at night was associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. A case control study in South-West Kenya by Githinji et al. assessed micro-ecological and human behavioural factors associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. Human behaviour was assessed through a standardized survey [31]. No detail on the content of the human behavioural survey questions was included in the methods section. Results showed participants who spent time outside at night were more likely to be infected with malaria. Spending time outside at night was binary and did not specify length of time or time of the night. The discussion section described 'experiences gathered during data collection period' that showed community ceremonies such as funerals were commonly carried out at night, leading to an increased exposure to the risk of mosquito bites. However, no description was provided in the study methods about how night time activities were recorded nor was this information included in the results section.

(p4.6) In two studies, Bradley et al. investigated the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea. In a 2012 publication, Bradley analysed data from an annual malaria indicator survey, which includes a question asking whether a child spent time outside between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. [32]. Children aged two to fourteen were tested for Plasmodium falciparum using rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). Only 4% of children were reported to spend time outside during this time and no significant difference in prevalence was observed for children who spent time outside verses those who did not. In a 2015 publication, Bradley et al. conducted a survey to measure the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection as measured by RDT, in addition to measuring exposure to malaria vectors [28]. Malaria infection was not significantly higher in individuals who reported spending time outside between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the previous night compared to those who did not, in both adults and children. Malaria infection in neither adults nor in children was associated with exposure to outdoor bites, even after adjusting for confounders.

(p4.7) Mwesigwa et al. assessed incidence of P. falciparum infection using a cohort study in The Gambia [33]. The study included a household survey that asked about outdoor sleeping among household members. Outdoor sleeping varied by season and was associated with a significantly higher risk of malaria infection.

(p4.8) Hetzel et al. carried out a longitudinal study looking at time spent at shamba (farm houses) and incidence of fever in rural Tanzania [34]. The study included a survey to record where household members spent time during the day and night and use of ITNs as well as a treatmentseeking questionnaire recording fever episodes and treatment-seeking behaviour. During weeding and harvesting seasons a large proportion of household members spent days and nights at the farm houses. Fever incidence rates were lower in the shamba compared to the village, and 97% of participants reported using a mosquito net the night before. The discussion noted that since shamba houses are spread out there is little opportunity for socializing in the evening and, therefore, household members were likely to go to bed early; however, information on night time social activities and average bed times were not reflected in the study methods or results. Using global positioning system (GPS) data loggers, Searle et al. assessed seasonal movement patterns in rural Southern Zambia [35]. As part of the study, the team assessed time spent away from the household compound during peak biting hours, defined as 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. for the primary local vector, An. arabiensis. On average, participants spent 5.6% of time away from the household compound during peak vector biting hours. Time spent in high or low risk areas, identified by a malaria risk map, depended on the level of risk for the area in which a participant's compound was located. Participants largely spent time in and close to their household compound, with less frequent longer distance movements. While the study assessed time away from the household compound during peak biting hours, the spatial resolution of the loggers was not sufficient to distinguish time spent indoors and outdoors specifically.

(p4.9) Ototo et al. included the percentage of the population outdoors during times of the night when the highest densities of blood fed vectors were collected in a study in Kenya [36]. Approximately half of the study population was outdoors in the evening between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. and in the morning between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In the highland sites, participants reporting going outdoors earlier in the morning compared to the lowland sites, between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., largely due to agricultural activities. The results show that no one slept outdoors, even in the hot months. While presented together, the data were not integrated to provide an estimate of exposure to malaria vectors.
## (s5) Characterization of night time activities
(p5.0) A total of 10 studies included some description of night time activities occurring during times when local malaria vectors are active (Table 3). These studies identified activities taking place in the peri-domestic setting (inside and directly outside of the home), as well as away from home, throughout the night. This included routine household chores and entertainment occurring in the evening hours before bed, routine livelihood activities that lasted throughout the night such as security and fishing, and large-scale socio-cultural events, such as weddings and funerals which lasted throughout the night. Circumstances that could temporarily disrupt usual sleeping patterns were also described including travel, illness, and house guests, as well as seasonal changes to sleeping patterns associated with farming practices and outdoor sleeping.

(p5.1) Methods used to document and characterize human behaviour included in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, participatory methods (e.g. mapping, diagramming, and photovoice recordings), direct observation of night time events, and questionnaires. These studies often looked at specific night time activities, as well as the impact of these activities on use of malaria prevention tools.

(p5.2) The level of detail provided on night time activities and sleeping patterns varied widely across publications. In some studies, night time human behaviour was the primary area of focus. For example, Dunn et al. explored shifting household sleeping patterns in response to livelihood practices and socio-cultural events, and how these could impact malaria exposure and prevention practices in rural Tanzania [38]. The study documented changes in daily and seasonal sleeping patterns associated with farming practices that could impact human-vector interaction either through differences in time spent indoors/ outdoors or differences in use of ITNs. The study also identified risk behaviours during socio-cultural events, such as funeral ceremonies, that could impact time spent outdoors and use of ITNs.
## (s6) Discussion
(p6.0) This review identified two categories of importance related to night time human behaviour. The first relates to when (time of night) and where (indoors versus outdoors) people are exposed to malaria vectors. The second is what people are doing at night that may increase their contact with malaria vectors. This understanding of human behaviour is crucial for targeting context-appropriate vector control interventions across settings.

(p6.1) While it was not possible to compare study results directly due to differences in study design and methods, the results of the studies in this review suggest a majority of exposure to malaria vectors continues to occur indoors during sleeping hours for unprotected individuals. This is true even in contexts where unweighted biting rates are higher outdoors than indoors. However, when looking at ITN users, roughly half of exposure occurred outdoors in some settings, signalling a gap in protection. One of the most relevant indicators for understanding residual malaria transmission is the protective efficacy of ITNs, defined as the proportion of human exposure to malaria vectors prevented by ITN use out of total exposure i.e. compared to a non-user. Protective efficacy, the overall reduction in nightly biting rate for an ITN user compared to a non-user, was as low as 50% in some settings, with even lower estimates of protection for primarily exophagic malaria vectors. The fraction of exposure occurring indoors during non-sleeping hours and outdoors can pose a threat to malaria control and elimination efforts [10].
## (s18) Association between night time location and malaria risk
(p18.0) Seven studies were identified that linked night time location with malaria risk. Four of the six studies specifically looked at whether time spent outdoors at night was associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. A case control study in South-West Kenya by Githinji et al. assessed micro-ecological and human behavioural factors associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. Human behaviour was assessed through a standardized survey [31]. No detail on the content of the human behavioural survey questions was included in the methods section. Results showed participants who spent time outside at night were more likely to be infected with malaria. Spending time outside at night was binary and did not specify length of time or time of the night. The discussion section described 'experiences gathered during data collection period' that showed community ceremonies such as funerals were commonly carried out at night, leading to an increased exposure to the risk of mosquito bites. However, no description was provided in the study methods about how night time activities were recorded nor was this information included in the results section.

(p18.1) In two studies, Bradley et al. investigated the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea. In a 2012 publication, Bradley analysed data from an annual malaria indicator survey, which includes a question asking whether a child spent time outside between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. [32]. Children aged two to fourteen were tested for Plasmodium falciparum using rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). Only 4% of children were reported to spend time outside during this time and no significant difference in prevalence was observed for children who spent time outside verses those who did not. In a 2015 publication, Bradley et al. conducted a survey to measure the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection as measured by RDT, in addition to measuring exposure to malaria vectors [28]. Malaria infection was not significantly higher in individuals who reported spending time outside between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the previous night compared to those who did not, in both adults and children. Malaria infection in neither adults nor in children was associated with exposure to outdoor bites, even after adjusting for confounders.

(p18.2) Mwesigwa et al. assessed incidence of P. falciparum infection using a cohort study in The Gambia [33]. The study included a household survey that asked about outdoor sleeping among household members. Outdoor sleeping varied by season and was associated with a significantly higher risk of malaria infection.

(p18.3) Hetzel et al. carried out a longitudinal study looking at time spent at shamba (farm houses) and incidence of fever in rural Tanzania [34]. The study included a survey to record where household members spent time during the day and night and use of ITNs as well as a treatmentseeking questionnaire recording fever episodes and treatment-seeking behaviour. During weeding and harvesting seasons a large proportion of household members spent days and nights at the farm houses. Fever incidence rates were lower in the shamba compared to the village, and 97% of participants reported using a mosquito net the night before. The discussion noted that since shamba houses are spread out there is little opportunity for socializing in the evening and, therefore, household members were likely to go to bed early; however, information on night time social activities and average bed times were not reflected in the study methods or results. Using global positioning system (GPS) data loggers, Searle et al. assessed seasonal movement patterns in rural Southern Zambia [35]. As part of the study, the team assessed time spent away from the household compound during peak biting hours, defined as 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. for the primary local vector, An. arabiensis. On average, participants spent 5.6% of time away from the household compound during peak vector biting hours. Time spent in high or low risk areas, identified by a malaria risk map, depended on the level of risk for the area in which a participant's compound was located. Participants largely spent time in and close to their household compound, with less frequent longer distance movements. While the study assessed time away from the household compound during peak biting hours, the spatial resolution of the loggers was not sufficient to distinguish time spent indoors and outdoors specifically.

(p18.4) Ototo et al. included the percentage of the population outdoors during times of the night when the highest densities of blood fed vectors were collected in a study in Kenya [36]. Approximately half of the study population was outdoors in the evening between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. and in the morning between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In the highland sites, participants reporting going outdoors earlier in the morning compared to the lowland sites, between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., largely due to agricultural activities. The results show that no one slept outdoors, even in the hot months. While presented together, the data were not integrated to provide an estimate of exposure to malaria vectors.

(p18.5) Seven studies were identified that linked night time location with malaria risk. Four of the six studies specifically looked at whether time spent outdoors at night was associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. A case control study in South-West Kenya by Githinji et al. assessed micro-ecological and human behavioural factors associated with an increased risk of malaria infection. Human behaviour was assessed through a standardized survey [31]. No detail on the content of the human behavioural survey questions was included in the methods section. Results showed participants who spent time outside at night were more likely to be infected with malaria. Spending time outside at night was binary and did not specify length of time or time of the night. The discussion section described 'experiences gathered during data collection period' that showed community ceremonies such as funerals were commonly carried out at night, leading to an increased exposure to the risk of mosquito bites. However, no description was provided in the study methods about how night time activities were recorded nor was this information included in the results section.

(p18.6) In two studies, Bradley et al. investigated the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection on Bioko Island, Equatorial Guinea. In a 2012 publication, Bradley analysed data from an annual malaria indicator survey, which includes a question asking whether a child spent time outside between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. [32]. Children aged two to fourteen were tested for Plasmodium falciparum using rapid diagnostic tests (RDT). Only 4% of children were reported to spend time outside during this time and no significant difference in prevalence was observed for children who spent time outside verses those who did not. In a 2015 publication, Bradley et al. conducted a survey to measure the association between time spent outdoors and malaria infection as measured by RDT, in addition to measuring exposure to malaria vectors [28]. Malaria infection was not significantly higher in individuals who reported spending time outside between 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the previous night compared to those who did not, in both adults and children. Malaria infection in neither adults nor in children was associated with exposure to outdoor bites, even after adjusting for confounders.

(p18.7) Mwesigwa et al. assessed incidence of P. falciparum infection using a cohort study in The Gambia [33]. The study included a household survey that asked about outdoor sleeping among household members. Outdoor sleeping varied by season and was associated with a significantly higher risk of malaria infection.

(p18.8) Hetzel et al. carried out a longitudinal study looking at time spent at shamba (farm houses) and incidence of fever in rural Tanzania [34]. The study included a survey to record where household members spent time during the day and night and use of ITNs as well as a treatmentseeking questionnaire recording fever episodes and treatment-seeking behaviour. During weeding and harvesting seasons a large proportion of household members spent days and nights at the farm houses. Fever incidence rates were lower in the shamba compared to the village, and 97% of participants reported using a mosquito net the night before. The discussion noted that since shamba houses are spread out there is little opportunity for socializing in the evening and, therefore, household members were likely to go to bed early; however, information on night time social activities and average bed times were not reflected in the study methods or results. Using global positioning system (GPS) data loggers, Searle et al. assessed seasonal movement patterns in rural Southern Zambia [35]. As part of the study, the team assessed time spent away from the household compound during peak biting hours, defined as 7:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. for the primary local vector, An. arabiensis. On average, participants spent 5.6% of time away from the household compound during peak vector biting hours. Time spent in high or low risk areas, identified by a malaria risk map, depended on the level of risk for the area in which a participant's compound was located. Participants largely spent time in and close to their household compound, with less frequent longer distance movements. While the study assessed time away from the household compound during peak biting hours, the spatial resolution of the loggers was not sufficient to distinguish time spent indoors and outdoors specifically.

(p18.9) Ototo et al. included the percentage of the population outdoors during times of the night when the highest densities of blood fed vectors were collected in a study in Kenya [36]. Approximately half of the study population was outdoors in the evening between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m. and in the morning between 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In the highland sites, participants reporting going outdoors earlier in the morning compared to the lowland sites, between 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., largely due to agricultural activities. The results show that no one slept outdoors, even in the hot months. While presented together, the data were not integrated to provide an estimate of exposure to malaria vectors.
## (s19) Characterization of night time activities
(p19.0) A total of 10 studies included some description of night time activities occurring during times when local malaria vectors are active (Table 3). These studies identified activities taking place in the peri-domestic setting (inside and directly outside of the home), as well as away from home, throughout the night. This included routine household chores and entertainment occurring in the evening hours before bed, routine livelihood activities that lasted throughout the night such as security and fishing, and large-scale socio-cultural events, such as weddings and funerals which lasted throughout the night. Circumstances that could temporarily disrupt usual sleeping patterns were also described including travel, illness, and house guests, as well as seasonal changes to sleeping patterns associated with farming practices and outdoor sleeping.

(p19.1) Methods used to document and characterize human behaviour included in-depth interviews, focus group discussions, participatory methods (e.g. mapping, diagramming, and photovoice recordings), direct observation of night time events, and questionnaires. These studies often looked at specific night time activities, as well as the impact of these activities on use of malaria prevention tools.

(p19.2) The level of detail provided on night time activities and sleeping patterns varied widely across publications. In some studies, night time human behaviour was the primary area of focus. For example, Dunn et al. explored shifting household sleeping patterns in response to livelihood practices and socio-cultural events, and how these could impact malaria exposure and prevention practices in rural Tanzania [38]. The study documented changes in daily and seasonal sleeping patterns associated with farming practices that could impact human-vector interaction either through differences in time spent indoors/ outdoors or differences in use of ITNs. The study also identified risk behaviours during socio-cultural events, such as funeral ceremonies, that could impact time spent outdoors and use of ITNs.
## (s20) Discussion
(p20.0) This review identified two categories of importance related to night time human behaviour. The first relates to when (time of night) and where (indoors versus outdoors) people are exposed to malaria vectors. The second is what people are doing at night that may increase their contact with malaria vectors. This understanding of human behaviour is crucial for targeting context-appropriate vector control interventions across settings.

(p20.1) While it was not possible to compare study results directly due to differences in study design and methods, the results of the studies in this review suggest a majority of exposure to malaria vectors continues to occur indoors during sleeping hours for unprotected individuals. This is true even in contexts where unweighted biting rates are higher outdoors than indoors. However, when looking at ITN users, roughly half of exposure occurred outdoors in some settings, signalling a gap in protection. One of the most relevant indicators for understanding residual malaria transmission is the protective efficacy of ITNs, defined as the proportion of human exposure to malaria vectors prevented by ITN use out of total exposure i.e. compared to a non-user. Protective efficacy, the overall reduction in nightly biting rate for an ITN user compared to a non-user, was as low as 50% in some settings, with even lower estimates of protection for primarily exophagic malaria vectors. The fraction of exposure occurring indoors during non-sleeping hours and outdoors can pose a threat to malaria control and elimination efforts [10].
