# Shin Splint: A Review

CorpusID: 256175348 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7edf6efd437203e9381e06b0ed5374e7e344e7a4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7edf6efd437203e9381e06b0ed5374e7e344e7a4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction And Background
(p0.0) Pain along the shinbone (tibia) is termed "shin splints," which occurs due to the inflammation of the tissue in the area. It is also known as medial tibial stress syndrome (MTSS). Military recruits, runners, and dancers are all at risk of shin splint. Athletes who have recently increased or modified their training programs are prone to this, as well as athletes who have not properly warmed up, increased their training mileage suddenly, or have hyperpronated their feet. Muscles, tendons, and bone tissues are overworked as a result of increased exercise. For an athlete, this kind of injury can disturb their performance and all their activities [1]. A stress fracture of the tibia, which is represented by focused discomfort in the front tibia, is the most frequent complication of medial tibial stress syndrome [2]. The discomfort gradually lasts longer into the run as a patient's injury gets worse; eventually, it lasts through the cooldown and into daily activities and can localize to become point soreness [3]. People with a higher body mass index (BMI) and those who had previously used orthotic devices for a long time were shown to be more likely to develop diabetes. This condition affects the lower leg [4].
## (s4) Surgical Treatment
(p4.0) Surgery is only occasionally necessary for shin splints. In cases that are extremely severe and if nonsurgical treatment is ineffective, surgery has been performed. However, the effectiveness of surgery is unclear [20].
## (s5) Review of literature
(p5.0) In 2015, Cheatham et al. assessed and critically evaluated current data to answer the following questions: Can self-myofascial release (SMR) using a foam roll or roller massager improve the range of motion (ROM) without affecting muscle function? Is self-myofascial release using a foam roller or roller massager effective for improving postexercise muscle repair and reducing delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS)? Does selfmyofascial release using a foam roller or roller massager before an activity improve muscle performance? A search strategy was implemented prior to April 2015 that incorporated electronic databases, as well as wellknown journals. This study included studies that met the following criteria: 1) peer-reviewed articles published in the English language; 2) several studies that have examined the effects of self-myofascial release (SMR) using a foam roll or roller massager on joint range of motion, acute muscle soreness, and delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS); 3) studies comparing a foam roll or roller massager intervention program to a control group; and 4) the comparison of two foam roll or roller massager intervention approaches. The PEDro scale was used to evaluate the papers' quality. Fourteen articles met the requirements for inclusion. With the use of a foam roller or roller massager, self-myofascial release tends to increase joint range of motion without sacrificing muscle performance in the near term and may impact muscle performance and delayed-onset muscle soreness after intense exercise. Short bouts of selfmyofascial release before exercise do not appear to affect muscle performance. The body of research on the effects of SMR is still in its infancy. This study suggests that foam rolling and roller massage may be effective therapies for improving joint range of motion and muscle performance both before and after exercise. Despite this, because different studies use different approaches, there is currently no consensus on the best SMR program [1].
## (s6) Incidence
(p6.0) Males (44.7% of the population) were less likely to have a shin splint than females (55.3%) (Figure 4). Depending on the degree of pain and the shoe surface, shin splints are more frequent in marathon runners [21]. 
