# OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY Sustainable and Intelligent Phytoprotection, a section of the journal Frontiers in Plant Science Characteristics of unmanned aerial spraying systems and related spray drift: A review. Characteristics of unmanned aerial spraying systems and related spray drift: A review

CorpusID: 251372948 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f22826b217bfbf92a5befcfd907afe024d01cc1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f22826b217bfbf92a5befcfd907afe024d01cc1)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s5) Factors influencing unmanned aerial spraying systems drift Atomization and sprays Nozzles
(p5.0) The nozzle is at the core of the spraying system as it plays a key role in spray atomization. Spray atomization refers to the process of spraying a liquid into a gas medium at high speed through a nozzle, dispersing and fragmenting it, and finally forming fine particle droplets . Both the size of the droplets generated by atomization and the proportion of fine droplets have an impact on the drift (Al Heidary et al., 2014). In the spraying process of ground spray equipment, air induction fan nozzles are used in specific anti-drift scenarios. Table 4 summarizes drift test results from UASS equipped with different nozzles in the field. Regardless of the different UASS models and test areas, IDK 120-015 presents a better anti-drift effect than TR 80-0067. Hollow cone nozzles produce finer droplets and are often used for pest control in orchards; IDK nozzles produce larger droplet sizes than flat fan nozzles. The average VMD (DV50) values of IDK 120-015 and TR 80-0067 in this test were 114.9 and 312.6 µm, respectively, and the proportions of droplets with a particle size smaller than 75 µm were 16.1 and 1.8%, respectively. The air induction nozzle can produce coarser droplets, thus reducing the risk of droplet drifting .
## (s14) Flight direction
(p14.0) Two concepts of flight direction are investigated here. The first concerns the forward and backward movement of the aircraft during route planning.  studied the influence of forward and backward motion on droplet deposition in a tunnel frame of 5 m × 5 m × 2 m with 2 mm diameter drift collection lines on four sides (left-rightground-top). When the UASS flew forward, the deposition rate ratio of downwind varied between 57.3 and 64.8%, while the bottom part varied between 30.3 and 38.8%. However, the deposition rate ratio of downwind decreased to 24.4-28.7% when flying backward, and the bottom part increased to 51.5-60.4%. As a result, the deposition rate of the bottom part of backward flight can reach 60% in comparison with forward flight. Therefore, the backward direction had a better result and allowed for a reduction in drift, optimizing the deposition rate on the target plant and the utilization of pesticides . However, this result was caused by the asymmetric structure of the single rotor UASS, and may not be applicable to the symmetrical multi-rotor UASS.

(p14.1) The second concept is the movement (perpendicular or parallel) of the flight route relative to the row of crops. When an application operation proceeds in a perpendicular direction to the row orientation, a higher proportion of drift can be observed in comparison with an application operation that runs parallel to the row orientation. This is attributed to the high proportion (> 50%) of gaps in the canopy parallel to the wind direction (Brown and Giles, 2018). Consequently, a UASS flying backward or parallel to the direction of a row of vines should significantly reduce the risk of drift. However, these research data remain very specific, and such a conclusion may vary according to the different UASS models and crop types.

(p14.2) Two concepts of flight direction are investigated here. The first concerns the forward and backward movement of the aircraft during route planning.  studied the influence of forward and backward motion on droplet deposition in a tunnel frame of 5 m × 5 m × 2 m with 2 mm diameter drift collection lines on four sides (left-rightground-top). When the UASS flew forward, the deposition rate ratio of downwind varied between 57.3 and 64.8%, while the bottom part varied between 30.3 and 38.8%. However, the deposition rate ratio of downwind decreased to 24.4-28.7% when flying backward, and the bottom part increased to 51.5-60.4%. As a result, the deposition rate of the bottom part of backward flight can reach 60% in comparison with forward flight. Therefore, the backward direction had a better result and allowed for a reduction in drift, optimizing the deposition rate on the target plant and the utilization of pesticides . However, this result was caused by the asymmetric structure of the single rotor UASS, and may not be applicable to the symmetrical multi-rotor UASS.

(p14.3) The second concept is the movement (perpendicular or parallel) of the flight route relative to the row of crops. When an application operation proceeds in a perpendicular direction to the row orientation, a higher proportion of drift can be observed in comparison with an application operation that runs parallel to the row orientation. This is attributed to the high proportion (> 50%) of gaps in the canopy parallel to the wind direction (Brown and Giles, 2018). Consequently, a UASS flying backward or parallel to the direction of a row of vines should significantly reduce the risk of drift. However, these research data remain very specific, and such a conclusion may vary according to the different UASS models and crop types.
## (s16) Discussion and further recommendations Optimization of spraying system and structure layout
(p16.0) At present, the Chinese market alone is concerned by more than 178 types of agricultural drones, and the spraying systems carried by the drones are also very diverse (He, 2018). The spraying systems proposed by manufacturers can differ significantly, and models from a single manufacturer but produced at different periods can also be different. However, these drones dating from different periods are widespread in the market. Due to this fact, a universal operating rule or antidrift suggestion is difficult to establish. Therefore, the UASS system structure design still needs to be further improved corresponding technical standards need to be set. Drone manufacturers have focused on improving the drone platform during the previous development processes, such as positioning accuracy, autonomous control, and environmental sensing devices. However, the spraying system, as a core component of the drone, has been ignored . Spraying studies are scarcely conducted before drone manufacturers release drones, while they are more frequently based on existing drones for testing. In subsequent developments, an upgrade of the drone spraying system could become a primary solution.
## (s35) Factors influencing unmanned aerial spraying systems drift Atomization and sprays Nozzles
(p35.0) The nozzle is at the core of the spraying system as it plays a key role in spray atomization. Spray atomization refers to the process of spraying a liquid into a gas medium at high speed through a nozzle, dispersing and fragmenting it, and finally forming fine particle droplets . Both the size of the droplets generated by atomization and the proportion of fine droplets have an impact on the drift (Al Heidary et al., 2014). In the spraying process of ground spray equipment, air induction fan nozzles are used in specific anti-drift scenarios. Table 4 summarizes drift test results from UASS equipped with different nozzles in the field. Regardless of the different UASS models and test areas, IDK 120-015 presents a better anti-drift effect than TR 80-0067. Hollow cone nozzles produce finer droplets and are often used for pest control in orchards; IDK nozzles produce larger droplet sizes than flat fan nozzles. The average VMD (DV50) values of IDK 120-015 and TR 80-0067 in this test were 114.9 and 312.6 µm, respectively, and the proportions of droplets with a particle size smaller than 75 µm were 16.1 and 1.8%, respectively. The air induction nozzle can produce coarser droplets, thus reducing the risk of droplet drifting .
## (s44) Flight direction
(p44.0) Two concepts of flight direction are investigated here. The first concerns the forward and backward movement of the aircraft during route planning.  studied the influence of forward and backward motion on droplet deposition in a tunnel frame of 5 m × 5 m × 2 m with 2 mm diameter drift collection lines on four sides (left-rightground-top). When the UASS flew forward, the deposition rate ratio of downwind varied between 57.3 and 64.8%, while the bottom part varied between 30.3 and 38.8%. However, the deposition rate ratio of downwind decreased to 24.4-28.7% when flying backward, and the bottom part increased to 51.5-60.4%. As a result, the deposition rate of the bottom part of backward flight can reach 60% in comparison with forward flight. Therefore, the backward direction had a better result and allowed for a reduction in drift, optimizing the deposition rate on the target plant and the utilization of pesticides . However, this result was caused by the asymmetric structure of the single rotor UASS, and may not be applicable to the symmetrical multi-rotor UASS.

(p44.1) The second concept is the movement (perpendicular or parallel) of the flight route relative to the row of crops. When an application operation proceeds in a perpendicular direction to the row orientation, a higher proportion of drift can be observed in comparison with an application operation that runs parallel to the row orientation. This is attributed to the high proportion (> 50%) of gaps in the canopy parallel to the wind direction (Brown and Giles, 2018). Consequently, a UASS flying backward or parallel to the direction of a row of vines should significantly reduce the risk of drift. However, these research data remain very specific, and such a conclusion may vary according to the different UASS models and crop types.

(p44.2) Two concepts of flight direction are investigated here. The first concerns the forward and backward movement of the aircraft during route planning.  studied the influence of forward and backward motion on droplet deposition in a tunnel frame of 5 m × 5 m × 2 m with 2 mm diameter drift collection lines on four sides (left-rightground-top). When the UASS flew forward, the deposition rate ratio of downwind varied between 57.3 and 64.8%, while the bottom part varied between 30.3 and 38.8%. However, the deposition rate ratio of downwind decreased to 24.4-28.7% when flying backward, and the bottom part increased to 51.5-60.4%. As a result, the deposition rate of the bottom part of backward flight can reach 60% in comparison with forward flight. Therefore, the backward direction had a better result and allowed for a reduction in drift, optimizing the deposition rate on the target plant and the utilization of pesticides . However, this result was caused by the asymmetric structure of the single rotor UASS, and may not be applicable to the symmetrical multi-rotor UASS.

(p44.3) The second concept is the movement (perpendicular or parallel) of the flight route relative to the row of crops. When an application operation proceeds in a perpendicular direction to the row orientation, a higher proportion of drift can be observed in comparison with an application operation that runs parallel to the row orientation. This is attributed to the high proportion (> 50%) of gaps in the canopy parallel to the wind direction (Brown and Giles, 2018). Consequently, a UASS flying backward or parallel to the direction of a row of vines should significantly reduce the risk of drift. However, these research data remain very specific, and such a conclusion may vary according to the different UASS models and crop types.
## (s46) Discussion and further recommendations Optimization of spraying system and structure layout
(p46.0) At present, the Chinese market alone is concerned by more than 178 types of agricultural drones, and the spraying systems carried by the drones are also very diverse (He, 2018). The spraying systems proposed by manufacturers can differ significantly, and models from a single manufacturer but produced at different periods can also be different. However, these drones dating from different periods are widespread in the market. Due to this fact, a universal operating rule or antidrift suggestion is difficult to establish. Therefore, the UASS system structure design still needs to be further improved corresponding technical standards need to be set. Drone manufacturers have focused on improving the drone platform during the previous development processes, such as positioning accuracy, autonomous control, and environmental sensing devices. However, the spraying system, as a core component of the drone, has been ignored . Spraying studies are scarcely conducted before drone manufacturers release drones, while they are more frequently based on existing drones for testing. In subsequent developments, an upgrade of the drone spraying system could become a primary solution.
