# Author affiliations Health care costs and resource use of managing hemophilia A: A targeted literature review

CorpusID: 259089906 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/afb3da7f5b1f9f17362fe0cf1b2fe0a0ba622cb1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/afb3da7f5b1f9f17362fe0cf1b2fe0a0ba622cb1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Implications for managed care pharmacy
(p1.0) The cost of managing HA is substantial and varies by disease severity, treatment type and intensity, age, weight, and inhibitor status. This study provides an in-depth analysis of current health care costs and resource utilization, providing a useful benchmark to understand the comparative cost-effectiveness of future therapies that may alter the costs of managing HA (eg, in-development gene therapies). This will have implications for clinical and coverage policies that guide managed care pharmacy benefits.

(p1.1) Health care costs and resource use of managing hemophilia A: A targeted literature review cost outcomes for patients with mild HA, which excluded patients with moderate and severe HA. 16 Patients with more severe disease often require more intense therapy and medical attention. Because of the wide array of available treatment strategies and data sources, these costs can vary. The objective of this targeted literature review was to identify, review, and summarize the published literature on the costs of managing congenital HA and to show the variation in resource use and costs.
## (s11) INDIRECT COSTS
(p11.0) Only 2 publications assessed indirect HCRU and its associated costs. Zhou et al reported information on absenteeism and imputed indirect costs using the human capital approach, which used wages as a proxy measure of work time output. 15,26 The average annual total indirect costs per patient were estimated at $13,220 and $27,978 among patients without and with inhibitors, respectively. Subgroup analysis results by disease severity and age groups are summarized in Supplementary 
## (s17) DISCLOSURES
(p17.0) Drs Solari and Thornhill are employees of Spark Therapeutics and Roche Group Shareholders. Ms Chen and Drs Cheng and Sullivan are employees of Curta, Inc. Spark Therapeutics paid Curta, Inc., to conduct the literature search. This study was funded by Spark Therapeutics. Spark Therapeutics was involved in the study design, collection, analysis and interpretation of data, article review, and the decision to submit the report for publication. Medical writing support was provided by Ashfield MedComms, an Inizio company. cost, which excludes the confidential discount rates and rebates agreed between drug manufacturers and payers. However, pharmacy claims are often able to tease apart the average wholesale price, actual payment to the pharmacy (ie, the discounted price paid by the insurer but not accounting for rebates), and the patient's out-of-pocket cost for the medication. 32 Furthermore, a few studies did not report currency year and/or adjust for medical inflation. In cases where a currency year was not reported, we adjusted for inflation using the last year of the study's follow-up period. Together, these factors complicate the understanding of the economic burden of managing HA with emerging treatment options.
## (s18) Conclusions
(p18.0) The economic burden of HA is substantial to the US payers and caregivers. Cost estimates vary widely, depending on the study population definitions, the intensity of prophylaxis, and the presence or absence of inhibitors. In all studies, total health care costs are dominantly driven by the cost of prophylaxis (ie, FVIII replacement concentrates, bypassing agents, and emicizumab) especially for patients with inhibitors and noninhibitor patients with severe disease on continuous prophylaxis. Various subgroups add to the complexity of understanding the cost burden. More robust studies in various settings and subpopulations are crucial to fully elucidate the economic burden, particularly regarding indirect costs and productivity loss for patients with HA. Cost and resource studies should also incorporate the patient/caregiver/ societal perspectives. As new treatments for HA emerge, future research examining resource use and costs is required to inform subsequent economic studies. obtained from HTCs or electronic medical records have the advantage of containing richer clinical information.

(p18.1) Importantly, the definitions of prophylaxis vary across studies. For instance, one study defined 3 prophylaxis cohorts over a 12-month period (1) based on quantity of claims, requiring patients with 6 or more non-inpatient, non-ED FVIII claims with 15 or more days supply; (2) based on frequency of claims, requiring no supply gaps more than 60 days between dispensings; (3) based on days of coverage, requiring patients having at least 273 days supply. This study found that the highest costs come from the subgroup with the third definition of prophylaxis use, highlighting how different methods of identifying patients managed with FVIII prophylaxis influence the cost estimates observed. 10 Using validated algorithms can improve patient identification. 31 Cost categories associated with managing HA were defined differently in some studies, thus requiring attention when interpreting and comparing study findings. For instance, some studies included medical and pharmacy costs in the calculation of FVIII prophylaxis treatment costs, whereas others only examined aggregate drug spending. Use of FVIII concentrate can be reflected on either medical claims or pharmacy claims, depending on each patient's specific benefit design. Therefore, careful understanding of the data is needed to avoid double-counting or omitting certain treatment costs. Differences in cost estimates highlighted the importance of knowing the data granularity and cost benchmarks used. For example, the ATHN dataset lacks specific cost data (although it does have good information on disease severity). Therefore, such studies estimated annual costs of FVIII prophylaxis based on use and median wholesale acquisition
