# Plant Disease Diagnosing Based on Deep Learning Techniques: A Survey and Research Challenges

CorpusID: 256602521 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11)

Fields: Computer Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) I. Introduction
(p0.0) Plants are a crucial part of life on Earth as they provide humans with breathable oxygen, food, etc. Furthermore, they provide food for insects and other animals, facilitate weather change, provide clean air, balance the ecosystem, and regulate flooding. In most countries, agriculture crops have become the chief source of economic development. Agriculture plant or crop cultivation has quickly developed in terms of quantity and quality of food production. However, a wide range of factors affect agriculture production such as occurrence of pests and diseases on crops, which, in turn, requires increasing food security. Unfortunately, such diseases are not always detected at an early stage (Fina, et al., 2013).

(p0.1) Plants have been reported to have the following organs: leaf, stem, root, fruit, and flower. In agricultural plants, leaves are an important organ of plants for providing information about the amount and nature of gardening crop (Saleem, et al., 2020). Numerous studies have been conducted on plant leaves as a comparative tool for different purposes such as classification and identification. This is because leaves are often the basis for identification and can be easily perceived, as they are usually green and flattened. Plant diseases can be understood as an unusual state that can interrupt usual plant growth (Shruthi, Nagaveni and Raghavendra, 2019). Plant disease prevention and control have been broadly discussed, because plants are susceptible to diseases and are affected by their outer environment. Normally, plant disease diagnoses have a significant role in monitoring farming systems accurately (Sun, Jia and Geng, 2018).
## (s1) II. Literature Review
(p1.0) Many approaches have been used in agriculture domain for automatic plant disease recognition in various plant parts such as fruit, root, stem, and leaf. A general plant disease detection and classification system using image processing includes five different stages, namely, data acquisition, preprocessing, segmentation, feature extraction, and classification. Fig. 1 depicts this five-step procedure (Panigrahi, et al., 2020).
## (s3) B. Data Preprocessing
(p3.0) The preprocessing step in machine learning or deep learning is important for building an efficient dataset to develop generalizability of the model. In deep learning, a huge amount of data must be collected from different sources such as physical devices, tools, software programs such as  (Panigrahi, et al., 2020).
## (s4) C. Data Segmentation
(p4.0) Computer vision and pattern recognition tasks require intelligent segmentation to recognize the content of an image and to facilitate image analysis. Image segmentation process divides the visual input into slices, which are denoted as entities or parts of entities and involve a set of pixels. Segmentation analyzes image data to identify boundaries in images, simplify the illustration of image, and extract meaningful information for further processing. It has a significant role in recognition and categorization of various plant diseases. Deep learning models can be usually applied directly on images to eliminate the process of segmentation.

(p4.1) Several studies have been conducted on automatic segmentation using various techniques. For example, Barbedo realized that image segmentation might be beneficial to separate the region, where the symptoms are located. The accuracy obtained by a convolutional neural network (CNN) trained with localized symptom lesion regions (87%) was found to be higher than original image (76%) (Barbedo, 2018). Moreover, a threshold metric of segmentation can be employed for RGB wavebands of the charcoal rot stem hyperspectral image (Nagasubramanian, et al., 2019). The authors of (Arnal Barbedo, 2019) segmented images into separate spots and lesions, which increased image number and data diversity as well as made it feasible to recognize numerous diseases in the same leaf, where single symptoms were being considered. About 12% accuracy was achieved, which is greater than the case when raw images were used. The authors of (Mohanty, Hughes and Salathé, 2016) segmented leaves to remove unnecessary background information. They opted a method based on a set of masks made by studying the color, saturation constituents, and lightness of a series of image parts. They showed that segmented images perform better than grayscale images but worse than colored images. Table II summarizes various segmentation processes.
## (s5) D. Feature Extraction
(p5.0) In pattern recognition, image features play a significant role and are part of an object in image to identify it. Features, most generally, describe image properties such as corners, edges, regions of interest points, and ridges. In plant disease recognition, color, shape, and texture have been used as characteristic descriptors to discriminate between plant object (foreground), and other unrelated objects (background). Image texture feature defines how the patterns of color are dispersed in an image. Image color feature is used to discriminate one disease from another. Moreover, due to diseases that have different shape features which are area, axis, and angle, they used to discriminate diseases (Panigrahi, et al., 2020).

(p5.1) Usually, machine learning datasets include a very huge or high dimensional data, which might contain correlated features, which can be misleading or redundant, which increases space size and makes data processing complex. Dimensionality reduction is a technique that can reduce the dimension of a set of features. Applying dimensionality reduction can represent data using a decreased group of features (Dara and Tumma, 2018;Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020).

(p5.2) Whereas traditional pattern recognition approaches adopt handcrafted features, deep learning automatically adapts features in a better and modernized way from a huge dataset (Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020). Fig. 2 illustrates a simple way to compare traditional and deep learning methods. The latter is categorized as a group of machine learning algorithms, wherein input layers are basically mapped onto output layers (Mohanty, Hughes and Salathé, 2016). Such methods involve various layers of non-linear processing units for extracting and adapting features. All sequential layers use the previous layer's output as an input (Benuwa, et al., 2016).

(p5.3) In a CNN, dimensionality reduction and the classification process are combined in the same model. CNNs use multiple feature extraction stages and avoid the complicated feature extraction procedure, and to learn the task specific features more efficiently.

(p5.4) Dimensionality reduction techniques can be broadly categorized into two types, namely, feature extraction and feature election (Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020), such as shown in Fig. 3 (Uddin, Mamun and Hossain, 2020). In machine learning, feature extraction is an important technique for converting an input image into a set of features (Dara and Tumma, 2018) and for reducing the dimensionality of feature space (Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020). Feature extraction can decrease the number of features needed to define a huge input dataset (Dara and Tumma, 2018) and to delete the data that are less significant (Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020). It affects the learning algorithm accuracy for processing the data in a least amount of time (Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020).

(p5.5) The second type of technique for dimensionality reduction is feature selection, which aims to find the best features among the whole obtained features. It selects the most important and preferable features among all features from the original dataset. These features can provide relevant information about the data and enable accurate prediction at output stage (Dara and Tumma, 2018;Karthikayani and Arunachalam, 2020).
## (s12) D. Challenges Associated with Constructing Large Datasets
(p12.0) In deep learning, a huge dataset with a wide variety is required. However, constructing such a dataset involves challenges. Barbedo realized that plant species, disease variety, variety of conditions in capturing image, and sample numbers in each class of the dataset affect and prevent deep learning models more widely to be used in practice (Barbedo, 2018). Data annotation is one of the important tasks that require expert assistance to label an input image accurately (Kamilaris and Prenafeta-Boldú, 2018).
## (s13) E. Challenges of Plant Diseases
(p13.0) Plant disease management and pathology are faced with ever-growing challenges. On the one hand, agricultural productivity has reduced due to depleting natural resources and diminishing arable lands. On the other hand, due to increasing global population, requests for high quality and varied food have increased. In addition, the evolution and epidemics of plant diseases have globally increased due to intensification, resources such as water, fertilizer, and pesticides (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016). Plant diseases and pests are the major reason that lead to substantial economic losses and reduced plant yields. In technological advancements, the theories of plant diseases and pest diagnoses such as detection and classification have been developed from symptoms and signs of the diseases (Balodi, et al., 2017).

(p13.1) In the future, plant disease management plans, such as an accurate plant disease recognition, are important and must be emphasized more for societal development, food security globalization, climate change, and disease prevention. In the field of plant pathology advancements, some new avenues for specific and sensitive plant diagnosis procedures have been developed that are coupled with molecular biology, bioinformatics, and biotechnology (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016;Balodi, et al., 2017).
