# World Journal of Gastroenterology Alcohol-related hepatitis: A review article Provenance and peer review: Peer-review model: Single blind Peer-review report's scientific quality classification Grade A (Excellent): 0 Grade B ( P-Reviewer

CorpusID: 258532551 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e62afe58061d3568fabc7f869b68cd458ec3ae9d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e62afe58061d3568fabc7f869b68cd458ec3ae9d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Seasonality:
(p4.0) Studies have shown that there might be a seasonal trend to admissions with alcohol use. We have previously reported that in the United States, ARH was highest in the summer months, as compared to the common opinion that ARH hospitalizations are higher in the winter season [27].
## (s8) Physical Examination
(p8.0) Physical examination can range from benign to profoundly abnormal [45]. Patients may have signs of malnutrition/sarcopenia manifested as temporal or thenar muscle wasting. Jaundice and scleral icterus may be apparent in patients with more severe disease while subtle signs of jaundice can be noted sublingually or in the tympanic membranes in patients with less severe disease. The presence of spider angiomas, gynecomastia in men and caput medusa is uncommon in patients with ARH in the absence of cirrhosis. Right upper quadrant tenderness to palpation along the enlarged hepatic border is common, with the liver edge extending into the pelvis and crossing the midline in severe cases. Some studies have reported a bruit over the liver as a feature of severe ARH in > 50% of patients [46]. Splenomegaly can often be appreciated as well even in the absence of cirrhosis. Fluid wave, shifting dullness and frank abdominal distention signifying large-volume ascites can be seen in severe cases. Lower extremity swelling progressing to anasarca can also be seen in severe cases. Finally, asterixis can be seen in patients with significant hepatic dysfunction.
## (s9) Laboratory findings
(p9.0) Patients with suspected ARH should undergo a broad laboratory workup including comprehensive metabolic panel, complete blood count, international normalized ratio (INR), and gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT). Serologies for HAV, HBV and HCV should also be obtained to rule out alternative/ concomitant infectious causes. Typical laboratory findings in ARH consist of elevated white blood cell count, thrombocytopenia, low sodium, potassium and magnesium. Other findings include total bilirubin > 3 mg/dL, elevated alanine transaminase (ALT) and aspartate transaminase (AST) with levels usually < 400 U/L, AST:ALT ratio > 2, GGT > 100 U/mL, INR > 1.5, and albumin < 3.0 g/L [47]. Other sequelae of chronic alcohol use such as macrocytic anemia can also be seen ( Figure 3).

(p9.1) It is pertinent to rule out alternative/concomitant causes of liver disease such as Wilson's disease, autoimmune liver diseases and iron overload syndromes. This is especially important in patients with severe disease who may be considered for liver transplantation, as these diagnoses will have significant implications on patient's ability to qualify for an urgent transplant as well as pre-and post-transplant management. Making these diagnoses can be challenging as patients with ARH may have multiple metabolic derangements. For example, patients with ARH may have decreased ceruloplasmin levels in the setting of hepatic dysfunction leading to suspicion of Wlison's disease. If there is a significant clinical concern for Wilson's disease, patients should undergo a slit lamp examination for Kayser-Fleischer rings as well as a 24-h urine copper collection. Ferritin levels as well as iron saturations in patients with ARH can be markedly elevated in ARH therefore genetic testing for HFE gene mutation should be considered [48]. A clinical suspicion of autoimmune liver disease, especially in the setting of elevated autoimmune markers [antinuclear antibody (ANA), anti-smooth muscle antibody (SMA), antimitochondrial antibody, anti-liver kidney microsomal antibody], should prompt consideration of liver biopsy. Alpha-1-antitrypsin levels can be artificially elevated in the setting of acute illness; genetic testing should be considered if clinical suspicion is sufficiently high.
## (s18) PREDICTION MODELS
(p18.0) MDF is a commonly used prognostic indicator in the management of ARH as it is specific for ARH and has shown to be relatively accurate in predicting short-term outcomes [87]. The MDF score incorporates two of the major indices of liver function, prothrombin time (PT) and total bilirubin with the formula 4.6 × (prolongation of PT in seconds) + bilirubin (µmol/L)/17. MDF score of < 32 signifies mild to moderate ARH with 30-d survival estimated at 80%-100%. MDF score ≥ 32 is considered to be severe ARH with a 30-d survival of only 50%, and these patients warrant corticosteroid administration for treatment of their disease [87] (Table 2). Lille Model is used to evaluate treatment response to corticosteroids and includes age, initial serum albumin, change in total serum bilirubin at day 7 of treatment, renal insufficiency, and initial MDF score [88]. Patients with a Lille score of < 0.45 had an average 6-mo survival rate of 85%, compared to just 25% in patients who scored ≥ 0.45 after 7 d of treatment (P < 0.0001). The Lille model is primarily used in conjunction with the MDF to guide treatment of ARH. Patients who score ≥ 0.45 after receiving corticosteroid therapy for 7 d are considered for discontinuation of steroids and initiation of alternative treatment modalities, as continuation of steroids is of little benefit in these patients.
