# Perspectives in the Application of High, Medium, and Low Molecular Weight Oat β-D-Glucans in Dietary Nutrition and Food Technology-A Short Overview

CorpusID: 257450006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b3e475eb1c5c2a105a2696a8a49f20c32961e47a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b3e475eb1c5c2a105a2696a8a49f20c32961e47a)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Oats: Health Benefits and the Source of Mixed-Linkage β-D-Glucan
(p1.0) The oat (Avena sativa) is a well-known cereal and one of the first cultivated plants on Earth. Humans used this crop extensively in the last century, but in the present time, the area under oats in some countries has drastically decreased. Currently, world oat production is about 22 million tons per year (compared to 46.9 million tons in 1961 [34]), less than barley at 170 million tons per year and much less than the 772 million tons of wheat in 2021. The most widely grown species are common oat Avena sativa L., naked oat Avena nuda L., and red oat Avena byzantine [35,36].

(p1.1) Oat groats are rich in protein (usually 13-20%) and a source of unsaturated fatty acids. These properties make it one of the most popular and healthy cereals as plain oat porridge or in a mixture for quick-prepared mueslis. In the EU, Canada, and the U.S., oats are also found among gluten-free commodities, supplying the production line for gluten-free oatcontaining foods, and studies show the general safety of this cereal for celiac disease [37]. The human consumption of oats supports the growth of beneficial gut microbiota such as bacteria of the genera Bacteroides and Prevotella. In addition, a diet containing oats may increase levels of butyric acid and propionic acid, which can positively impact the gut microbiota as well as diabetes mellitus, the latter by altering glucose absorption [38]. In this context, oat fibers can improve brain function by stimulating the microbiota to produce more short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), which can cross the blood-brain barrier with neuroprotective effects [39]. Gao et al. [40] found that feeding oat fiber to male mice with LDL receptor knockout (LDLR−/−) for 14 weeks significantly improved the cognitive behavior of animals. Using an atherosclerosis model, they found that a high fat, high cholesterol diet promoted neuroinflammation in LDLR−/− mice, whereas 0.8% dietary oat fiber had an anti-inflammatory effect. This phenomenon correlated with the inhibition of GFAP and IBα1 expression in the cortex and GFAP decrease in the hippocampus. Both proteins are involved in Aβ plaques associated with Alzheimer's disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. In this study, Aβ plaques developed in the LDLR−/− mice regardless of oat fiber consumption; however, oat fiber administration decreased the Aβ plaque formation.
## (s4) Preparation of Oat β-D-Glucans with Various M w
(p4.0) Cereal (1 → 3) (1 → 4)-β-D-glucans with different M w are common in bread, flakes, and beverages [4], and the range of M w is highly dependent on processing technologies [77,78], including the temperature conditions [79][80][81], enzymatic treatment, fermentation, storage [82], and also on the oat breed [83]. In addition, the influence of environmental factors is also hard to estimate [36,84].

(p4.1) Amylolytic and proteolytic enzymes can improve the final viscosity of β-D-glucan extracts from oat-containing products [72]. For HMW β-D-glucan, viscosity increases by facilitating the release of this polysaccharide from the food matrix. On the contrary, for partially degraded LMW β-D-glucan, the final viscosity decreased without the contribution of starch and proteins. Microbial α-amylase, i.e., endo-α-1,4-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.1), produced by Bacillus licheniformis and pancreatin (EC 3.4.21.70) from pork pancreas, was the most effective for the release of oat β-D-glucan from food matrices (Table 2). Thus, these enzymes can be used in in vitro models to estimate the viscosity of oat-containing products in the lumen of the upper intestine.
## (s6) Influence on Gastrointestinal Diseases and Inflammation
(p6.0) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p6.1) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p6.2) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.

(p6.3) Wilczak et al. [113] modeled enteritis in rats by LPS supplementation in a small-scale animal study. They observed changes in IL-2, IL-10, and TNF-α levels in the rat colon. While LPS can reduce colon level of IL-10, HMW oat β-D-glucans fed to LPS-induced enteritis mice were able to normalize IL-10 and thus reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and TNF-α. Błaszczyk et al. [114] studied the transcriptomic profile in the peripheral blood of mice with LPS-induced enteritis and fed them with a diet containing either LMW or HMW oat β-Dglucans. The intravenous injection of LPS triggered an innate immune response to bacteria threat by activating TLR4 in the cell membrane of many immune cells. Mice obtaining a diet with HMW oat β-D-glucan showed a 2.35-fold decrease in the expression of Granzyme Clike protein compared to the LPS-only mice. The authors connected this with the potential anti-inflammatory activity of HMW oat β-D-glucans. About a 12.6-fold expression fall was shown for the Serp2 gene, while it was about 3.4 times upregulated in LPS-only mice. The Serp2 gene is responsible for encoding stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein family member 2, responsible for numerous pathways involved in the initiation step of inflammation, angiogenesis, and other processes. The authors connect the upregulation of Serp2 with the inhibition of immune response by binding to the IL-1β-converting enzyme with a reduction of the level of the active cytokine. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans can prevent the inhibition of the immune response in LPS-challenged mice. Another gene that underwent elevated expression was Nlrp1. Its product usually initiates the formation of an inflammasome complex in cells and appears to inhibit gastrointestinal inflammation and tumorigenesis. The authors noted that Nlrp1 expression was influenced only by HMW but not LMW oat β-D-glucans. Low Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans regulate the synthesis of specific proteins, most notable with the increase in IL34 and decreased prostaglandin E receptor 3, both involved in the inflammatory process.

(p6.4) Suchecka et al. [115] studied the effect of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans on LPSinduced chronic enteritis in rats. In rats, unlike in mice, healthy control animals fed with HMW β-D-glucan had a lower percentage of NK lymphocytes than their untreated counterparts, which suggests a possible species-specific response to the supplementation. The percentage values of total lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, Tc, and granulocytes decreased in animals with enteritis regardless of β-D-glucan M w supplementation. In enteritis rats, monocytes decreased under HMW oat β-D-glucan feeding. In rats with sodium deoxycholate-induced gastritis [116], treated with a diet supplemented with LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of oat β-D-glucan, a significant decrease in the levels of lipid oxidation occurred. The total antioxidant status increased in stomach tissue, especially for the HMW fraction. According to the authors, the purified fractions of oat β-D-glucans could be more beneficial for gastritis treatment than oat bran because the bran cellulose can cause issues in patients with gastric problems.

(p6.5) Gudej et al. [117] studied the effect of the 30-day supplementation of oat β-D-glucan on 129 patients with confirmed chronic gastritis using a diet containing LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of pure oat β-D-glucan. The daily consumption of 3 g of β-Dglucans resulted in molar mass-dependent changes, mainly in immunological parameters and fecal SCFA concentration. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the mucosal damage, and the normalized concentration of SCFA in feces positively influenced peripheral blood glutathione metabolism and antioxidant parameters.

(p6.6) Oat β-D-glucan can thus affect sophisticated molecular signaling involved in gut inflammation. Different M w fractions can have a similarly positive effect during colitis or induce autophagy during Crohn's disease, but this effect may be less consistent when investigated with a more detailed study of blood cell count and blood protein data. Species differences may also influence the response to the used supplementation. Nevertheless, according to the various shreds of evidence, fundamental differences in the anti-inflammatory action mechanism of HMW and LMW β-D-glucans can exist.

(p6.7) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p6.8) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p6.9) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.

(p6.10) Wilczak et al. [113] modeled enteritis in rats by LPS supplementation in a small-scale animal study. They observed changes in IL-2, IL-10, and TNF-α levels in the rat colon. While LPS can reduce colon level of IL-10, HMW oat β-D-glucans fed to LPS-induced enteritis mice were able to normalize IL-10 and thus reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and TNF-α. Błaszczyk et al. [114] studied the transcriptomic profile in the peripheral blood of mice with LPS-induced enteritis and fed them with a diet containing either LMW or HMW oat β-Dglucans. The intravenous injection of LPS triggered an innate immune response to bacteria threat by activating TLR4 in the cell membrane of many immune cells. Mice obtaining a diet with HMW oat β-D-glucan showed a 2.35-fold decrease in the expression of Granzyme Clike protein compared to the LPS-only mice. The authors connected this with the potential anti-inflammatory activity of HMW oat β-D-glucans. About a 12.6-fold expression fall was shown for the Serp2 gene, while it was about 3.4 times upregulated in LPS-only mice. The Serp2 gene is responsible for encoding stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein family member 2, responsible for numerous pathways involved in the initiation step of inflammation, angiogenesis, and other processes. The authors connect the upregulation of Serp2 with the inhibition of immune response by binding to the IL-1β-converting enzyme with a reduction of the level of the active cytokine. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans can prevent the inhibition of the immune response in LPS-challenged mice. Another gene that underwent elevated expression was Nlrp1. Its product usually initiates the formation of an inflammasome complex in cells and appears to inhibit gastrointestinal inflammation and tumorigenesis. The authors noted that Nlrp1 expression was influenced only by HMW but not LMW oat β-D-glucans. Low Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans regulate the synthesis of specific proteins, most notable with the increase in IL34 and decreased prostaglandin E receptor 3, both involved in the inflammatory process.

(p6.11) Suchecka et al. [115] studied the effect of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans on LPSinduced chronic enteritis in rats. In rats, unlike in mice, healthy control animals fed with HMW β-D-glucan had a lower percentage of NK lymphocytes than their untreated counterparts, which suggests a possible species-specific response to the supplementation. The percentage values of total lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, Tc, and granulocytes decreased in animals with enteritis regardless of β-D-glucan M w supplementation. In enteritis rats, monocytes decreased under HMW oat β-D-glucan feeding. In rats with sodium deoxycholate-induced gastritis [116], treated with a diet supplemented with LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of oat β-D-glucan, a significant decrease in the levels of lipid oxidation occurred. The total antioxidant status increased in stomach tissue, especially for the HMW fraction. According to the authors, the purified fractions of oat β-D-glucans could be more beneficial for gastritis treatment than oat bran because the bran cellulose can cause issues in patients with gastric problems.

(p6.12) Gudej et al. [117] studied the effect of the 30-day supplementation of oat β-D-glucan on 129 patients with confirmed chronic gastritis using a diet containing LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of pure oat β-D-glucan. The daily consumption of 3 g of β-Dglucans resulted in molar mass-dependent changes, mainly in immunological parameters and fecal SCFA concentration. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the mucosal damage, and the normalized concentration of SCFA in feces positively influenced peripheral blood glutathione metabolism and antioxidant parameters.

(p6.13) Oat β-D-glucan can thus affect sophisticated molecular signaling involved in gut inflammation. Different M w fractions can have a similarly positive effect during colitis or induce autophagy during Crohn's disease, but this effect may be less consistent when investigated with a more detailed study of blood cell count and blood protein data. Species differences may also influence the response to the used supplementation. Nevertheless, according to the various shreds of evidence, fundamental differences in the anti-inflammatory action mechanism of HMW and LMW β-D-glucans can exist.
## (s7) Cholesterol Regulation and Bile Acid Binding
(p7.0) A substantial amount of data regarding the influence of oat β-D-glucan on blood cholesterol levels and bile acid binding is available. Forty-nine intervention trials between 1997 and 2019 reported total and LDL cholesterol lowering by oats [46]. These effects of oat β-D-glucan depend on their availability, M w , and viscosity. Gamel et al. [72] showed that the reduction of blood LDL cholesterol was more pronounced after consuming a beverage containing oat β-D-glucan than after consuming bread and cookies prepared with the same oat fiber. Compared to food with phytosterols only, oat HMW β-D-glucan included in a diet with phytosterols produced an additive effect on blood cholesterol reduction activity [118].
## (s8) Anti-Diabetic Activities
(p8.0) Among proven positive effects, β-D-glucans are potent in glycemic level reduction in the blood, thus in tandem with cholesterol regulation consistently reducing the possibility of developing cardiovascular diseases [126][127][128]. Regand et al. [129] studied food preparations containing different ratios of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and starch to see how much this addition influences starch digestibility and postprandial glycemic response (PPGR). According to their results, the M w of oat β-D-glucan correlates with starch digestibility in foods containing both these polysaccharides. The more viscous the β-D-glucan gel, the less resistant the starch is to digestion.

(p8.1) Based on the literature analysis, Noronha et al. [130] concluded that the M w of oat β-D-glucans plays a decisive role in the effectiveness of reducing glycemic response. The minimal amounts of oat β-D-glucan needed for this purpose are 0.2 g, 2.2 g, and 3.2 g per 30 g of available carbohydrates (avCHO) for HMW (M w > 1000 kDa), MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and LMW (M w 300 kDa) polysaccharides, respectively. Perez-Quirce et al. [55] reported that free glucose decreased in rice bread enriched with oat LMW β-D-glucans, and the starch digestibility index decreased in bread fortified with MMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans.

(p8.2) There is evidence that the 6 g/day dosage is much more effective in reducing glycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin than the 4 g/day recommended by the European Food Safety Authority [131]. It can be explained by the prolongation of gastric emptying, although there are still few articles with data about the long-term effects on other cardiovascular disease markers such as insulin sensitivity [132]. Zaremba et al. [133] found that even 4 g of HMW oat β-D-glucan added to food is effective in lowering appetite, compared to control food with the same amount of available carbohydrates per meal, i.e., 39.7 g in the control portion and 39 in that with β-D-glucan, with no effect on ad libitum eating. Therefore, foods containing HMW oat β-D-glucans can improve digestion and satiety, but in this study the impact of LMW oat β-D-glucan did not compare to that of HMW oat β-D-glucan.

(p8.3) Wolever et al. [134] confirmed the influence of oat β-D-glucans of various M w on PPGR; they found that a decrease in M w correlates with the time reduction for blood glucose to reach its peak, while HMW β-D-glucan demonstrated the opposite effect. Zurbau et al. [135], analyzing data from 103 trials (N = 538), found that oat β-D-glucans of different M w can affect important diabetes biomarkers such as postprandial blood glucose and insulin response dramatically. The glucose incremental area under the curve (iAUC), insulin iAUC, and glucose and insulin incremental peak-rise (iPeak) values were significantly reduced (glucose iAUC and iPeak by 23% and 28%, and insulin by 22% and 24%, respectively). The authors noted that the β-D-glucan-containing diet viscosity does not always have an impact on glycemic peaks because the concentration of this polysaccharide is changed by its interaction with gastric fluid secretions. Nevertheless, the LMW oat β-D-glucan did not have an impact on iAUC and iPeak, while MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and HMW (M w > 1000 kDa) oat β-D-glucans were capable of regulating glucose and insulin levels in the blood.

(p8.4) Zhang et al. [136] modeled glucose diffusion and absorption in the rat small intestine by different concentrations of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and found that glucose absorption reduced with the decreasing M w of added polysaccharides. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the concentration of available glucose in the small intestine more effectively than LMW oat β-D-glucans. Oat β-D-glucans inhibit starch digestion with a more pronounced effect of the HMW oat β-D-glucan. In the presence of oat β-D-glucans, the activity of Na + /K + -exchanging ATPase (EC 7.2.2.13) reduced in the small intestine mucosa of rats, and the inhibition of this activity was more pronounced when its M w and concentration increased. However, when the concentration of the β-D-glucan of defined M w increased, the Na + /K + ATPase activity increased because of higher gastrointestinal motility. The addition of oat β-D-glucans also reduced the activities of sucrose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.48) and maltose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.20), while the effect of HMW β-D-glucans was more pronounced than that of LMW β-D-glucans.

(p8.5) Overall, many studies are proving the M w -dependent lowering effect of oat β-Dglucans on the glycemic level, and more are expected in the future [137]. Based on the data available, HMW β-D-glucan appears to be the most active fraction. We can conclude that the diet should favor fewer processed oats in food due to the better retention of HMW β-D-glucan, which is much more effective in reducing glycemic response than LMW β-D-glucan [130].

(p8.6) Among proven positive effects, β-D-glucans are potent in glycemic level reduction in the blood, thus in tandem with cholesterol regulation consistently reducing the possibility of developing cardiovascular diseases [126][127][128]. Regand et al. [129] studied food preparations containing different ratios of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and starch to see how much this addition influences starch digestibility and postprandial glycemic response (PPGR). According to their results, the M w of oat β-D-glucan correlates with starch digestibility in foods containing both these polysaccharides. The more viscous the β-D-glucan gel, the less resistant the starch is to digestion.

(p8.7) Based on the literature analysis, Noronha et al. [130] concluded that the M w of oat β-D-glucans plays a decisive role in the effectiveness of reducing glycemic response. The minimal amounts of oat β-D-glucan needed for this purpose are 0.2 g, 2.2 g, and 3.2 g per 30 g of available carbohydrates (avCHO) for HMW (M w > 1000 kDa), MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and LMW (M w 300 kDa) polysaccharides, respectively. Perez-Quirce et al. [55] reported that free glucose decreased in rice bread enriched with oat LMW β-D-glucans, and the starch digestibility index decreased in bread fortified with MMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans.

(p8.8) There is evidence that the 6 g/day dosage is much more effective in reducing glycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin than the 4 g/day recommended by the European Food Safety Authority [131]. It can be explained by the prolongation of gastric emptying, although there are still few articles with data about the long-term effects on other cardiovascular disease markers such as insulin sensitivity [132]. Zaremba et al. [133] found that even 4 g of HMW oat β-D-glucan added to food is effective in lowering appetite, compared to control food with the same amount of available carbohydrates per meal, i.e., 39.7 g in the control portion and 39 in that with β-D-glucan, with no effect on ad libitum eating. Therefore, foods containing HMW oat β-D-glucans can improve digestion and satiety, but in this study the impact of LMW oat β-D-glucan did not compare to that of HMW oat β-D-glucan.

(p8.9) Wolever et al. [134] confirmed the influence of oat β-D-glucans of various M w on PPGR; they found that a decrease in M w correlates with the time reduction for blood glucose to reach its peak, while HMW β-D-glucan demonstrated the opposite effect. Zurbau et al. [135], analyzing data from 103 trials (N = 538), found that oat β-D-glucans of different M w can affect important diabetes biomarkers such as postprandial blood glucose and insulin response dramatically. The glucose incremental area under the curve (iAUC), insulin iAUC, and glucose and insulin incremental peak-rise (iPeak) values were significantly reduced (glucose iAUC and iPeak by 23% and 28%, and insulin by 22% and 24%, respectively). The authors noted that the β-D-glucan-containing diet viscosity does not always have an impact on glycemic peaks because the concentration of this polysaccharide is changed by its interaction with gastric fluid secretions. Nevertheless, the LMW oat β-D-glucan did not have an impact on iAUC and iPeak, while MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and HMW (M w > 1000 kDa) oat β-D-glucans were capable of regulating glucose and insulin levels in the blood.

(p8.10) Zhang et al. [136] modeled glucose diffusion and absorption in the rat small intestine by different concentrations of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and found that glucose absorption reduced with the decreasing M w of added polysaccharides. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the concentration of available glucose in the small intestine more effectively than LMW oat β-D-glucans. Oat β-D-glucans inhibit starch digestion with a more pronounced effect of the HMW oat β-D-glucan. In the presence of oat β-D-glucans, the activity of Na + /K + -exchanging ATPase (EC 7.2.2.13) reduced in the small intestine mucosa of rats, and the inhibition of this activity was more pronounced when its M w and concentration increased. However, when the concentration of the β-D-glucan of defined M w increased, the Na + /K + ATPase activity increased because of higher gastrointestinal motility. The addition of oat β-D-glucans also reduced the activities of sucrose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.48) and maltose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.20), while the effect of HMW β-D-glucans was more pronounced than that of LMW β-D-glucans.

(p8.11) Overall, many studies are proving the M w -dependent lowering effect of oat β-Dglucans on the glycemic level, and more are expected in the future [137]. Based on the data available, HMW β-D-glucan appears to be the most active fraction. We can conclude that the diet should favor fewer processed oats in food due to the better retention of HMW β-D-glucan, which is much more effective in reducing glycemic response than LMW β-D-glucan [130].
## (s9) Antioxidant Activity
(p9.0) The antioxidant activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w was tested by in vitro and in vivo experiments. Oat milling fractions, bran concentrate, and oat β-D-glucan extract contain a significant amount of polyphenols that may significantly impact the antioxidant activity of these preparations [104,105]. The antioxidant activity of oat β-D-glucans can be improved by complexation or mixing with tea polyphenols [102]; in vitro, the complex showed higher O 2

(p9.1) •− scavenging activity, while the mixture was better in the scavenging of OH • in vitro. In the in vivo experiments, the complex more effectively activates SOD (EC 1.15.1.1) and GPx (EC 1.11.1.9) in the liver than the mixture. However, the effects of both preparations on GPx activity, MDA level, and TAC in serum were comparable.

(p9.2) Du et al. [138] found that the results of the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assays of fungal and oat β-D-glucans of various M w strongly depend on the source of these polysaccharides, but the effect of M w was less pronounced. However, oat HMW β-D-glucan (M w 1800 kDa) exhibited the highest value of ORAC, while for MMW β-D-glucan (M w 500 kDa) this value grew in a dose-dependent manner.
## (s10) Prebiotic Activity
(p10.0) The increasing interest in the microbiome and its composition has raised the issue of sustaining a healthy intestinal microflora supported by appropriate prebiotics, e.g., fibers or inulin. Generally, oat β-D-glucan can stimulate the growth of "good" human gut microbiota, e.g., Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. Many studies have focused on oat bran and isolated β-D-glucan prebiotic activity, but only a few touch on the role of the M w in this phenomenon [141][142][143].

(p10.1) Oat β-D-glucan can influence the cardiovascular system via microbiota in a way that suggests it is a cardio-protector [144]. It can be fermented by intestinal bacteria in the colon, increasing the concentration of SCFA, i.e., acetate, butyrate, and propionate. These molecules are involved in the regulation of glucose and cholesterol metabolism via free fatty acid receptors FFA2 and FFA3 [145]. Activation of FFA2 can enhance insulin secretion and inhibit ghrelin secretion. Ligand-activated FFA2 downregulates NFkB by recruiting β-arrestin 2, leading to a reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. FFA3 in pancreas islets, when activated by propionate, inhibits insulin secretion. Dong et al. [146] revealed that oat β-D-glucan hydrolysates are better substrates (even as a single carbon source) for probiotic bacteria strains than the native oat β-D-glucan. Immerstrand et al. [90] studied the effect of a series of oat bran preparations characterized by β-D-glucans of M w 2348, 1311, 241, 56, 21, and <10 kDa on plasma lipids and the fecal formation of SCFA in C57BL/6NCrl mice. They concluded that diets with oat β-D-glucan with M w from 1311 kDa down to 10-20 kDa were equally effective in reducing plasma cholesterol in mice that developed high blood cholesterol due to an atherogenic diet. Despite that, the ratio of propionic acid and butyric acid contents to the acetic acid content increased with increasing M w of β-D-glucans, leading to the conclusion that as a component of a usual Western diet, the higher M w of oat β-D-glucan is more beneficial for microbiota. Wilczak et al. [113] have shown that both LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans increased the numbers of LAB in feces in healthy rats and rats with enteritis. The administration of β-D-glucans improved the profile of SCFA in rat feces, characterized by decreasing hydroxybutyric acid levels and increasing lactic and propionic acid content. Increasing propionic acid can be explained by improved fermentation.
## (s11) Anticancer Activity
(p11.0) β-D-Glucans demonstrated suppressive effects on tumor growth and even the reduction of primary tumor mass, though this activity can differ depending on the source of β-D-glucans [151]. For example, Shah et al. [152] proved oat β-D-glucan to be a more potent anti-proliferative agent on the cell line Colo-205 than barley β-D-glucan.

(p11.1) Despite reports about β-D-glucan being effective in combination with anticancer treatments, only a few clinical trials to consistently study the anticancer activity of β-Dglucan were established [153]. Unfortunately, despite the authors often underlining the importance of the M w of the used β-D-glucan fraction, few works show the comparison in the activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w in the range of the same study.

(p11.2) Parzonko et al. [154] studied oat LMW β-D-glucan (M w 134 kDa) as an anticancer agent on human HTB140 melanoma cells using an MTT assay. At the β-D-glucan concentration of 200 µg/mL, the viability of cells was 50%, and the cytotoxic effect of this polysaccharide was concentration-dependent, as well as lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27) release into the culture media. There were also changes in the mitochondrial functions of HTB-140 cells. Intracellular ATP levels negatively correlated with the rise of the concentration of β-Dglucan, with the lowest value 50.8 ± 7.8% at 200 µg/mL. The authors stated that the same experiment conducted in parallel on the cell line of normal fibroblasts had shown no cytotoxicity. Choromanska et al. [67] studied the anticancer activity of the LMW oat β-D-glucan, analyzing its possible toxicity for four cell lines: human pigmented malignant melanoma Me45, human epidermoid carcinoma A431, normal human keratinocyte HaCaT, and normal mouse macrophage P388/D1. The results suggested that oat β-D-glucans decreased the viability of both cancer cell lines and did not show a toxic effect on normal cells. In another study, Choromanska et al. [155] evaluated how LMW and HMW oat β-Dglucans affect normal keratinocytes, two lung cancer cell lines, and red blood cell hemolysis. The authors also confirmed tolerance to oat β-D-glucan by normal cells. Red blood cell hemolysis tended to be slowed to 51.64% by β-D-glucan treatment, with HMW being more effective in high concentrations than LMW β-D-glucan. In addition, MDA, the final product of lipid peroxidation, increased in a dose-dependent mode administrating HMW β-D-glucans to H69AR cells. Low and high concentrations of LMW β-D-glucans caused nucleus perturbations and abnormal chromatin condensation in A549 and HaCaT cells. All concentrations of HMW fractions caused actin fiber abnormalities in H69AR and HaCaT cells. A study on Me45 cells has shown that LMW oat β-D-glucans at a high concentration of 200 µg/mL in cell-growth media decreased the viability of melanoma cells to 19%, while in combination with electroporation to 12.5%, and caspase 3 expression increased significantly. At the concentration of 100 µg/mL, half of all cells were stained positively for cytochrome c. For caspase 12, a positive reaction was evident at 100 µg/mL and 200 µg/mL of oat β-D-glucans in media. This work evidences that LMW oat β-D-glucans have the potential to initiate the apoptotic process in melanoma cells involving cytochrome c, which participates in caspase activation, followed by the activation of dormant killer proteases [156].

(p11.3) Zhang et al. [157] evaluated the anticarcinogenic effect of three oat β-D-glucans with M w of 10 kDa, 200 kDa, and 500 kDa on mice inoculated in the flanks with B16F10 tumor cells. The polysaccharide solutions were injected intra-peritoneally in the tumor-bearing animals at 25 mg/kg. The control group of mice received PBS or dextran solution. A part of the mice were intravenously injected in the tail with B16F10 cells to generate lung metastasis. Similarly, in an osteosarcoma metastasis model, 5 K7 M2-luc2 mouse osteosarcoma cells were intravenously injected into Balb/c mice; the animals received 25 mg/kg of oat β-D-glucan (M w 200 kDa) intranasally. This preparation inhibited tumor growth the most effectively. Mice injected with B16F10 melanoma intravenously after treatment with the 200 kDa β-D-glucan demonstrated the lowest incidence of lung metastases. Tumors treated with oat β-D-glucans also showed microenvironmental differences, particularly regarding pro-inflammatory factors IFN-γ, TNF-α, and Th-1 chemokines (CXCL9 and CXCL10). The IRF1 and PDL-1 levels increased, and T cells, which produced Granzyme B and IFN-γ, infiltrated tumors. CD11 b+ and CD11 c+ cells, DC, T cells, and presumably NK cells supported the immune control of B16F10 treated with oat β-D-glucans. The authors hypothesized about an unidentified signaling pathway involved in the activation of DC by β-D-glucan-activated macrophages since conditioned media from later were more potent in DC activation than DC directly treated with β-D-glucan.

(p11.4) It is hard to speculate about the effectiveness of oat β-D-glucan of specific ranges of M w for cancer treatment. The mechanism of cytotoxicity on cancer cells can be related not only to the activation of immune cells by β-D-glucan molecules but also directly to GLUT1-related transport inside the cell. Since oat β-D-glucan shows no cytotoxicity on normal cells, further study on anticarcinogenic activity needs to investigate the specific effects of the various M w of β-D-glucan to address their use. For example, clarifying the cytotoxic effect through GLUT1 transporter involving different M w of oat β-D-glucan could be a beneficial contribution.

(p11.5) β-D-Glucans demonstrated suppressive effects on tumor growth and even the reduction of primary tumor mass, though this activity can differ depending on the source of β-D-glucans [151]. For example, Shah et al. [152] proved oat β-D-glucan to be a more potent anti-proliferative agent on the cell line Colo-205 than barley β-D-glucan.

(p11.6) Despite reports about β-D-glucan being effective in combination with anticancer treatments, only a few clinical trials to consistently study the anticancer activity of β-Dglucan were established [153]. Unfortunately, despite the authors often underlining the importance of the M w of the used β-D-glucan fraction, few works show the comparison in the activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w in the range of the same study.

(p11.7) Parzonko et al. [154] studied oat LMW β-D-glucan (M w 134 kDa) as an anticancer agent on human HTB140 melanoma cells using an MTT assay. At the β-D-glucan concentration of 200 µg/mL, the viability of cells was 50%, and the cytotoxic effect of this polysaccharide was concentration-dependent, as well as lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27) release into the culture media. There were also changes in the mitochondrial functions of HTB-140 cells. Intracellular ATP levels negatively correlated with the rise of the concentration of β-Dglucan, with the lowest value 50.8 ± 7.8% at 200 µg/mL. The authors stated that the same experiment conducted in parallel on the cell line of normal fibroblasts had shown no cytotoxicity. Choromanska et al. [67] studied the anticancer activity of the LMW oat β-D-glucan, analyzing its possible toxicity for four cell lines: human pigmented malignant melanoma Me45, human epidermoid carcinoma A431, normal human keratinocyte HaCaT, and normal mouse macrophage P388/D1. The results suggested that oat β-D-glucans decreased the viability of both cancer cell lines and did not show a toxic effect on normal cells. In another study, Choromanska et al. [155] evaluated how LMW and HMW oat β-Dglucans affect normal keratinocytes, two lung cancer cell lines, and red blood cell hemolysis. The authors also confirmed tolerance to oat β-D-glucan by normal cells. Red blood cell hemolysis tended to be slowed to 51.64% by β-D-glucan treatment, with HMW being more effective in high concentrations than LMW β-D-glucan. In addition, MDA, the final product of lipid peroxidation, increased in a dose-dependent mode administrating HMW β-D-glucans to H69AR cells. Low and high concentrations of LMW β-D-glucans caused nucleus perturbations and abnormal chromatin condensation in A549 and HaCaT cells. All concentrations of HMW fractions caused actin fiber abnormalities in H69AR and HaCaT cells. A study on Me45 cells has shown that LMW oat β-D-glucans at a high concentration of 200 µg/mL in cell-growth media decreased the viability of melanoma cells to 19%, while in combination with electroporation to 12.5%, and caspase 3 expression increased significantly. At the concentration of 100 µg/mL, half of all cells were stained positively for cytochrome c. For caspase 12, a positive reaction was evident at 100 µg/mL and 200 µg/mL of oat β-D-glucans in media. This work evidences that LMW oat β-D-glucans have the potential to initiate the apoptotic process in melanoma cells involving cytochrome c, which participates in caspase activation, followed by the activation of dormant killer proteases [156].

(p11.8) Zhang et al. [157] evaluated the anticarcinogenic effect of three oat β-D-glucans with M w of 10 kDa, 200 kDa, and 500 kDa on mice inoculated in the flanks with B16F10 tumor cells. The polysaccharide solutions were injected intra-peritoneally in the tumor-bearing animals at 25 mg/kg. The control group of mice received PBS or dextran solution. A part of the mice were intravenously injected in the tail with B16F10 cells to generate lung metastasis. Similarly, in an osteosarcoma metastasis model, 5 K7 M2-luc2 mouse osteosarcoma cells were intravenously injected into Balb/c mice; the animals received 25 mg/kg of oat β-D-glucan (M w 200 kDa) intranasally. This preparation inhibited tumor growth the most effectively. Mice injected with B16F10 melanoma intravenously after treatment with the 200 kDa β-D-glucan demonstrated the lowest incidence of lung metastases. Tumors treated with oat β-D-glucans also showed microenvironmental differences, particularly regarding pro-inflammatory factors IFN-γ, TNF-α, and Th-1 chemokines (CXCL9 and CXCL10). The IRF1 and PDL-1 levels increased, and T cells, which produced Granzyme B and IFN-γ, infiltrated tumors. CD11 b+ and CD11 c+ cells, DC, T cells, and presumably NK cells supported the immune control of B16F10 treated with oat β-D-glucans. The authors hypothesized about an unidentified signaling pathway involved in the activation of DC by β-D-glucan-activated macrophages since conditioned media from later were more potent in DC activation than DC directly treated with β-D-glucan.

(p11.9) It is hard to speculate about the effectiveness of oat β-D-glucan of specific ranges of M w for cancer treatment. The mechanism of cytotoxicity on cancer cells can be related not only to the activation of immune cells by β-D-glucan molecules but also directly to GLUT1-related transport inside the cell. Since oat β-D-glucan shows no cytotoxicity on normal cells, further study on anticarcinogenic activity needs to investigate the specific effects of the various M w of β-D-glucan to address their use. For example, clarifying the cytotoxic effect through GLUT1 transporter involving different M w of oat β-D-glucan could be a beneficial contribution.
## (s23) Oats: Health Benefits and the Source of Mixed-Linkage β-D-Glucan
(p23.0) The oat (Avena sativa) is a well-known cereal and one of the first cultivated plants on Earth. Humans used this crop extensively in the last century, but in the present time, the area under oats in some countries has drastically decreased. Currently, world oat production is about 22 million tons per year (compared to 46.9 million tons in 1961 [34]), less than barley at 170 million tons per year and much less than the 772 million tons of wheat in 2021. The most widely grown species are common oat Avena sativa L., naked oat Avena nuda L., and red oat Avena byzantine [35,36].

(p23.1) Oat groats are rich in protein (usually 13-20%) and a source of unsaturated fatty acids. These properties make it one of the most popular and healthy cereals as plain oat porridge or in a mixture for quick-prepared mueslis. In the EU, Canada, and the U.S., oats are also found among gluten-free commodities, supplying the production line for gluten-free oatcontaining foods, and studies show the general safety of this cereal for celiac disease [37]. The human consumption of oats supports the growth of beneficial gut microbiota such as bacteria of the genera Bacteroides and Prevotella. In addition, a diet containing oats may increase levels of butyric acid and propionic acid, which can positively impact the gut microbiota as well as diabetes mellitus, the latter by altering glucose absorption [38]. In this context, oat fibers can improve brain function by stimulating the microbiota to produce more short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), which can cross the blood-brain barrier with neuroprotective effects [39]. Gao et al. [40] found that feeding oat fiber to male mice with LDL receptor knockout (LDLR−/−) for 14 weeks significantly improved the cognitive behavior of animals. Using an atherosclerosis model, they found that a high fat, high cholesterol diet promoted neuroinflammation in LDLR−/− mice, whereas 0.8% dietary oat fiber had an anti-inflammatory effect. This phenomenon correlated with the inhibition of GFAP and IBα1 expression in the cortex and GFAP decrease in the hippocampus. Both proteins are involved in Aβ plaques associated with Alzheimer's disease and cerebral amyloid angiopathy. In this study, Aβ plaques developed in the LDLR−/− mice regardless of oat fiber consumption; however, oat fiber administration decreased the Aβ plaque formation.
## (s26) Preparation of Oat β-D-Glucans with Various M w
(p26.0) Cereal (1 → 3) (1 → 4)-β-D-glucans with different M w are common in bread, flakes, and beverages [4], and the range of M w is highly dependent on processing technologies [77,78], including the temperature conditions [79][80][81], enzymatic treatment, fermentation, storage [82], and also on the oat breed [83]. In addition, the influence of environmental factors is also hard to estimate [36,84].

(p26.1) Amylolytic and proteolytic enzymes can improve the final viscosity of β-D-glucan extracts from oat-containing products [72]. For HMW β-D-glucan, viscosity increases by facilitating the release of this polysaccharide from the food matrix. On the contrary, for partially degraded LMW β-D-glucan, the final viscosity decreased without the contribution of starch and proteins. Microbial α-amylase, i.e., endo-α-1,4-glucanase (EC 3.2.1.1), produced by Bacillus licheniformis and pancreatin (EC 3.4.21.70) from pork pancreas, was the most effective for the release of oat β-D-glucan from food matrices (Table 2). Thus, these enzymes can be used in in vitro models to estimate the viscosity of oat-containing products in the lumen of the upper intestine.
## (s28) Influence on Gastrointestinal Diseases and Inflammation
(p28.0) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p28.1) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p28.2) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.

(p28.3) Wilczak et al. [113] modeled enteritis in rats by LPS supplementation in a small-scale animal study. They observed changes in IL-2, IL-10, and TNF-α levels in the rat colon. While LPS can reduce colon level of IL-10, HMW oat β-D-glucans fed to LPS-induced enteritis mice were able to normalize IL-10 and thus reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and TNF-α. Błaszczyk et al. [114] studied the transcriptomic profile in the peripheral blood of mice with LPS-induced enteritis and fed them with a diet containing either LMW or HMW oat β-Dglucans. The intravenous injection of LPS triggered an innate immune response to bacteria threat by activating TLR4 in the cell membrane of many immune cells. Mice obtaining a diet with HMW oat β-D-glucan showed a 2.35-fold decrease in the expression of Granzyme Clike protein compared to the LPS-only mice. The authors connected this with the potential anti-inflammatory activity of HMW oat β-D-glucans. About a 12.6-fold expression fall was shown for the Serp2 gene, while it was about 3.4 times upregulated in LPS-only mice. The Serp2 gene is responsible for encoding stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein family member 2, responsible for numerous pathways involved in the initiation step of inflammation, angiogenesis, and other processes. The authors connect the upregulation of Serp2 with the inhibition of immune response by binding to the IL-1β-converting enzyme with a reduction of the level of the active cytokine. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans can prevent the inhibition of the immune response in LPS-challenged mice. Another gene that underwent elevated expression was Nlrp1. Its product usually initiates the formation of an inflammasome complex in cells and appears to inhibit gastrointestinal inflammation and tumorigenesis. The authors noted that Nlrp1 expression was influenced only by HMW but not LMW oat β-D-glucans. Low Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans regulate the synthesis of specific proteins, most notable with the increase in IL34 and decreased prostaglandin E receptor 3, both involved in the inflammatory process.

(p28.4) Suchecka et al. [115] studied the effect of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans on LPSinduced chronic enteritis in rats. In rats, unlike in mice, healthy control animals fed with HMW β-D-glucan had a lower percentage of NK lymphocytes than their untreated counterparts, which suggests a possible species-specific response to the supplementation. The percentage values of total lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, Tc, and granulocytes decreased in animals with enteritis regardless of β-D-glucan M w supplementation. In enteritis rats, monocytes decreased under HMW oat β-D-glucan feeding. In rats with sodium deoxycholate-induced gastritis [116], treated with a diet supplemented with LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of oat β-D-glucan, a significant decrease in the levels of lipid oxidation occurred. The total antioxidant status increased in stomach tissue, especially for the HMW fraction. According to the authors, the purified fractions of oat β-D-glucans could be more beneficial for gastritis treatment than oat bran because the bran cellulose can cause issues in patients with gastric problems.

(p28.5) Gudej et al. [117] studied the effect of the 30-day supplementation of oat β-D-glucan on 129 patients with confirmed chronic gastritis using a diet containing LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of pure oat β-D-glucan. The daily consumption of 3 g of β-Dglucans resulted in molar mass-dependent changes, mainly in immunological parameters and fecal SCFA concentration. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the mucosal damage, and the normalized concentration of SCFA in feces positively influenced peripheral blood glutathione metabolism and antioxidant parameters.

(p28.6) Oat β-D-glucan can thus affect sophisticated molecular signaling involved in gut inflammation. Different M w fractions can have a similarly positive effect during colitis or induce autophagy during Crohn's disease, but this effect may be less consistent when investigated with a more detailed study of blood cell count and blood protein data. Species differences may also influence the response to the used supplementation. Nevertheless, according to the various shreds of evidence, fundamental differences in the anti-inflammatory action mechanism of HMW and LMW β-D-glucans can exist.

(p28.7) Many studies in the last few decades searched for the possible nutraceutical applications of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans, most notably as co-treatments for gastrointestinal diseases such as Crohn's disease, colitis, enteritis, and gastritis, associated with chronic inflammation.

(p28.8) Zyła et al. [108] modeled Crohn's disease in rats, i.e., 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenosulfonic acid (TNBSA)-induced colitis, and found that the LMW fraction (M w < 100 kDa) of oat β-D-glucans was more beneficial for animal weight gain and recovery because the macromolecules of this fraction are more accessible to the immune cells, inducing immunomodulation. Their effectiveness in stimulating Dectin-1 receptors expressed on the surface of dendritic cells and antigen-presenting cells is higher due to an increased proportion of 1,3-linkages. By contrast, in the same study, HMW β-D-glucan was more effective in reducing the inflammatory infiltration of mucosal and submucosal lymphocytes because of the ability of this fraction to form a protective layer on the mucosal surface against the irritating agent. When added to food, both LMW and HMW fractions of oat β-D-glucan significantly increased the percent of B cells compared to control animals with untreated colitis. The same authors [109] performed a similar experiment on Sprague Dawley rats with TNBSA-induced colitis. The experimental and control animals obtained a diet containing 1% LMW or HMW oat β-D-glucan; the control group's diet was free of this polysaccharide. In animals fed with LMW β-D-glucans, the gene expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, TNF-α) reduced, and their concentration in the colon was lower compared to control. The authors pointed out that this suppression activity could have a positive therapeutic effect in patients with Crohn's disease who also have mutations in the gene NOD2/CARD15 complex, an intracellular receptor that activates pro-inflammatory cytokine synthesis. When this gene is mutated, the reduction of inflammation cannot be regulated by anti-inflammatory cytokines, thus leading to persistent inflammation in the gut. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucan improved the overall recovery of tissue at the histological level. According to the authors, a diet containing oat β-D-glucan is neutral for the normal intestine.

(p28.9) Kopiasz et al. [110] studied the effect of supplementation with food containing 1% (w/w) of either HMW or LMW oat β-D-glucan on hematological and biochemical parameters in mice with early stages of TNBSA-induced colitis. Eighteen groups of animals obtained different diets. The experimental group with colitis was fed with TNBSA and its subgroups contained animals fed additionally with HMW, LMW, or without oat β-Dglucans for 3, 7, and 21 days. Similar subgroups were in the healthy control group, but 0.9% NaCl was given instead of TNBSA. The authors mentioned that during the first five days of observation, the control group consumed significantly more food than the group induced to colitis. During the same period, the mice with colitis fed with LMW β-D-glucan consumed more food than the colitis mice without β-D-glucan in their diet. The analysis of alanine aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.2), aspartate aminotransferase (EC 2.6.1.1), and alkaline phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.1) activities showed no significant difference in all groups, thus reporting the low hepatotoxicity of 1% β-D-glucans in food. Mice in both control and experimental groups that consumed β-D-glucans showed a higher percentage of T cells in the lymphocyte population, most evident after three days of supplemented diet intake, especially in the colitis group. After three days of feeding, control mice fed with LMW β-D-glucans showed the highest percentage of B cells. Platelet count was higher in the untreated colitis group, which did not obtain β-D-glucans, but did not differ among the groups at feeding days 7 and 21. Compared to the control, the percentage of NK cells was significantly higher in mice with colitis receiving β-D-glucans in the diet, regardless of their molecular weight. In the control group, an increase in NK cells was induced only by the HMW β-D-glucan. These authors [111] carried out a similar experiment with TNBSA on rats and measured the expression levels of protein-1 light chain 3, mammalian isoform B (LC3B), and Caspase-3 (the autophagy markers) and TLR and Dectin-1 receptors in colonocytes. Their results showed that colitis decreased the expression of TLR 4 and Dectin-1, but supplementation with β-D-glucans increased the expression of Dectin-1 and TLR 5. The intake of HMW and LMW oat β-D-glucans positively influenced the state of rats with colitis. The consumption of feed with HMW and LMW β-D-glucans by colitis mice committed to a higher expression of microtubule-associated LC3B, compared to other diets and after 21 days of the experiment this was on a similar level to the control group with a usual diet without β-D-glucans. Noteworthily, LC3B is a protein that plays one of the central roles in autophagy, and thus oat β-D-glucans can enhance this process in patients with Crohn's disease. Both fractions of β-D-glucans significantly reduced the expression of Caspase-3 in the experimental group compared to colitis mice without β-D-glucans in the diet and therefore protected the intestinal barrier via reducing the extent of apoptosis. Kopiasz et al. [112] showed that dietary oat β-D-glucans, especially those of HMW, can improve colitis by modulating the expression of chemokines, their receptors, and some Crohn's disease-associated proteins.

(p28.10) Wilczak et al. [113] modeled enteritis in rats by LPS supplementation in a small-scale animal study. They observed changes in IL-2, IL-10, and TNF-α levels in the rat colon. While LPS can reduce colon level of IL-10, HMW oat β-D-glucans fed to LPS-induced enteritis mice were able to normalize IL-10 and thus reduce pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-2 and TNF-α. Błaszczyk et al. [114] studied the transcriptomic profile in the peripheral blood of mice with LPS-induced enteritis and fed them with a diet containing either LMW or HMW oat β-Dglucans. The intravenous injection of LPS triggered an innate immune response to bacteria threat by activating TLR4 in the cell membrane of many immune cells. Mice obtaining a diet with HMW oat β-D-glucan showed a 2.35-fold decrease in the expression of Granzyme Clike protein compared to the LPS-only mice. The authors connected this with the potential anti-inflammatory activity of HMW oat β-D-glucans. About a 12.6-fold expression fall was shown for the Serp2 gene, while it was about 3.4 times upregulated in LPS-only mice. The Serp2 gene is responsible for encoding stress-associated endoplasmic reticulum protein family member 2, responsible for numerous pathways involved in the initiation step of inflammation, angiogenesis, and other processes. The authors connect the upregulation of Serp2 with the inhibition of immune response by binding to the IL-1β-converting enzyme with a reduction of the level of the active cytokine. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans can prevent the inhibition of the immune response in LPS-challenged mice. Another gene that underwent elevated expression was Nlrp1. Its product usually initiates the formation of an inflammasome complex in cells and appears to inhibit gastrointestinal inflammation and tumorigenesis. The authors noted that Nlrp1 expression was influenced only by HMW but not LMW oat β-D-glucans. Low Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans regulate the synthesis of specific proteins, most notable with the increase in IL34 and decreased prostaglandin E receptor 3, both involved in the inflammatory process.

(p28.11) Suchecka et al. [115] studied the effect of LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans on LPSinduced chronic enteritis in rats. In rats, unlike in mice, healthy control animals fed with HMW β-D-glucan had a lower percentage of NK lymphocytes than their untreated counterparts, which suggests a possible species-specific response to the supplementation. The percentage values of total lymphocytes, B lymphocytes, Tc, and granulocytes decreased in animals with enteritis regardless of β-D-glucan M w supplementation. In enteritis rats, monocytes decreased under HMW oat β-D-glucan feeding. In rats with sodium deoxycholate-induced gastritis [116], treated with a diet supplemented with LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of oat β-D-glucan, a significant decrease in the levels of lipid oxidation occurred. The total antioxidant status increased in stomach tissue, especially for the HMW fraction. According to the authors, the purified fractions of oat β-D-glucans could be more beneficial for gastritis treatment than oat bran because the bran cellulose can cause issues in patients with gastric problems.

(p28.12) Gudej et al. [117] studied the effect of the 30-day supplementation of oat β-D-glucan on 129 patients with confirmed chronic gastritis using a diet containing LMW (M w 70 kDa) and HMW (M w 2180 kDa) fractions of pure oat β-D-glucan. The daily consumption of 3 g of β-Dglucans resulted in molar mass-dependent changes, mainly in immunological parameters and fecal SCFA concentration. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the mucosal damage, and the normalized concentration of SCFA in feces positively influenced peripheral blood glutathione metabolism and antioxidant parameters.

(p28.13) Oat β-D-glucan can thus affect sophisticated molecular signaling involved in gut inflammation. Different M w fractions can have a similarly positive effect during colitis or induce autophagy during Crohn's disease, but this effect may be less consistent when investigated with a more detailed study of blood cell count and blood protein data. Species differences may also influence the response to the used supplementation. Nevertheless, according to the various shreds of evidence, fundamental differences in the anti-inflammatory action mechanism of HMW and LMW β-D-glucans can exist.
## (s29) Cholesterol Regulation and Bile Acid Binding
(p29.0) A substantial amount of data regarding the influence of oat β-D-glucan on blood cholesterol levels and bile acid binding is available. Forty-nine intervention trials between 1997 and 2019 reported total and LDL cholesterol lowering by oats [46]. These effects of oat β-D-glucan depend on their availability, M w , and viscosity. Gamel et al. [72] showed that the reduction of blood LDL cholesterol was more pronounced after consuming a beverage containing oat β-D-glucan than after consuming bread and cookies prepared with the same oat fiber. Compared to food with phytosterols only, oat HMW β-D-glucan included in a diet with phytosterols produced an additive effect on blood cholesterol reduction activity [118].
## (s30) Anti-Diabetic Activities
(p30.0) Among proven positive effects, β-D-glucans are potent in glycemic level reduction in the blood, thus in tandem with cholesterol regulation consistently reducing the possibility of developing cardiovascular diseases [126][127][128]. Regand et al. [129] studied food preparations containing different ratios of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and starch to see how much this addition influences starch digestibility and postprandial glycemic response (PPGR). According to their results, the M w of oat β-D-glucan correlates with starch digestibility in foods containing both these polysaccharides. The more viscous the β-D-glucan gel, the less resistant the starch is to digestion.

(p30.1) Based on the literature analysis, Noronha et al. [130] concluded that the M w of oat β-D-glucans plays a decisive role in the effectiveness of reducing glycemic response. The minimal amounts of oat β-D-glucan needed for this purpose are 0.2 g, 2.2 g, and 3.2 g per 30 g of available carbohydrates (avCHO) for HMW (M w > 1000 kDa), MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and LMW (M w 300 kDa) polysaccharides, respectively. Perez-Quirce et al. [55] reported that free glucose decreased in rice bread enriched with oat LMW β-D-glucans, and the starch digestibility index decreased in bread fortified with MMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans.

(p30.2) There is evidence that the 6 g/day dosage is much more effective in reducing glycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin than the 4 g/day recommended by the European Food Safety Authority [131]. It can be explained by the prolongation of gastric emptying, although there are still few articles with data about the long-term effects on other cardiovascular disease markers such as insulin sensitivity [132]. Zaremba et al. [133] found that even 4 g of HMW oat β-D-glucan added to food is effective in lowering appetite, compared to control food with the same amount of available carbohydrates per meal, i.e., 39.7 g in the control portion and 39 in that with β-D-glucan, with no effect on ad libitum eating. Therefore, foods containing HMW oat β-D-glucans can improve digestion and satiety, but in this study the impact of LMW oat β-D-glucan did not compare to that of HMW oat β-D-glucan.

(p30.3) Wolever et al. [134] confirmed the influence of oat β-D-glucans of various M w on PPGR; they found that a decrease in M w correlates with the time reduction for blood glucose to reach its peak, while HMW β-D-glucan demonstrated the opposite effect. Zurbau et al. [135], analyzing data from 103 trials (N = 538), found that oat β-D-glucans of different M w can affect important diabetes biomarkers such as postprandial blood glucose and insulin response dramatically. The glucose incremental area under the curve (iAUC), insulin iAUC, and glucose and insulin incremental peak-rise (iPeak) values were significantly reduced (glucose iAUC and iPeak by 23% and 28%, and insulin by 22% and 24%, respectively). The authors noted that the β-D-glucan-containing diet viscosity does not always have an impact on glycemic peaks because the concentration of this polysaccharide is changed by its interaction with gastric fluid secretions. Nevertheless, the LMW oat β-D-glucan did not have an impact on iAUC and iPeak, while MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and HMW (M w > 1000 kDa) oat β-D-glucans were capable of regulating glucose and insulin levels in the blood.

(p30.4) Zhang et al. [136] modeled glucose diffusion and absorption in the rat small intestine by different concentrations of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and found that glucose absorption reduced with the decreasing M w of added polysaccharides. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the concentration of available glucose in the small intestine more effectively than LMW oat β-D-glucans. Oat β-D-glucans inhibit starch digestion with a more pronounced effect of the HMW oat β-D-glucan. In the presence of oat β-D-glucans, the activity of Na + /K + -exchanging ATPase (EC 7.2.2.13) reduced in the small intestine mucosa of rats, and the inhibition of this activity was more pronounced when its M w and concentration increased. However, when the concentration of the β-D-glucan of defined M w increased, the Na + /K + ATPase activity increased because of higher gastrointestinal motility. The addition of oat β-D-glucans also reduced the activities of sucrose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.48) and maltose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.20), while the effect of HMW β-D-glucans was more pronounced than that of LMW β-D-glucans.

(p30.5) Overall, many studies are proving the M w -dependent lowering effect of oat β-Dglucans on the glycemic level, and more are expected in the future [137]. Based on the data available, HMW β-D-glucan appears to be the most active fraction. We can conclude that the diet should favor fewer processed oats in food due to the better retention of HMW β-D-glucan, which is much more effective in reducing glycemic response than LMW β-D-glucan [130].

(p30.6) Among proven positive effects, β-D-glucans are potent in glycemic level reduction in the blood, thus in tandem with cholesterol regulation consistently reducing the possibility of developing cardiovascular diseases [126][127][128]. Regand et al. [129] studied food preparations containing different ratios of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and starch to see how much this addition influences starch digestibility and postprandial glycemic response (PPGR). According to their results, the M w of oat β-D-glucan correlates with starch digestibility in foods containing both these polysaccharides. The more viscous the β-D-glucan gel, the less resistant the starch is to digestion.

(p30.7) Based on the literature analysis, Noronha et al. [130] concluded that the M w of oat β-D-glucans plays a decisive role in the effectiveness of reducing glycemic response. The minimal amounts of oat β-D-glucan needed for this purpose are 0.2 g, 2.2 g, and 3.2 g per 30 g of available carbohydrates (avCHO) for HMW (M w > 1000 kDa), MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and LMW (M w 300 kDa) polysaccharides, respectively. Perez-Quirce et al. [55] reported that free glucose decreased in rice bread enriched with oat LMW β-D-glucans, and the starch digestibility index decreased in bread fortified with MMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans.

(p30.8) There is evidence that the 6 g/day dosage is much more effective in reducing glycemia and glycosylated hemoglobin than the 4 g/day recommended by the European Food Safety Authority [131]. It can be explained by the prolongation of gastric emptying, although there are still few articles with data about the long-term effects on other cardiovascular disease markers such as insulin sensitivity [132]. Zaremba et al. [133] found that even 4 g of HMW oat β-D-glucan added to food is effective in lowering appetite, compared to control food with the same amount of available carbohydrates per meal, i.e., 39.7 g in the control portion and 39 in that with β-D-glucan, with no effect on ad libitum eating. Therefore, foods containing HMW oat β-D-glucans can improve digestion and satiety, but in this study the impact of LMW oat β-D-glucan did not compare to that of HMW oat β-D-glucan.

(p30.9) Wolever et al. [134] confirmed the influence of oat β-D-glucans of various M w on PPGR; they found that a decrease in M w correlates with the time reduction for blood glucose to reach its peak, while HMW β-D-glucan demonstrated the opposite effect. Zurbau et al. [135], analyzing data from 103 trials (N = 538), found that oat β-D-glucans of different M w can affect important diabetes biomarkers such as postprandial blood glucose and insulin response dramatically. The glucose incremental area under the curve (iAUC), insulin iAUC, and glucose and insulin incremental peak-rise (iPeak) values were significantly reduced (glucose iAUC and iPeak by 23% and 28%, and insulin by 22% and 24%, respectively). The authors noted that the β-D-glucan-containing diet viscosity does not always have an impact on glycemic peaks because the concentration of this polysaccharide is changed by its interaction with gastric fluid secretions. Nevertheless, the LMW oat β-D-glucan did not have an impact on iAUC and iPeak, while MMW (M w 300-1000 kDa) and HMW (M w > 1000 kDa) oat β-D-glucans were capable of regulating glucose and insulin levels in the blood.

(p30.10) Zhang et al. [136] modeled glucose diffusion and absorption in the rat small intestine by different concentrations of oat β-D-glucans of various M w and found that glucose absorption reduced with the decreasing M w of added polysaccharides. High Molecular Weight oat β-D-glucans reduced the concentration of available glucose in the small intestine more effectively than LMW oat β-D-glucans. Oat β-D-glucans inhibit starch digestion with a more pronounced effect of the HMW oat β-D-glucan. In the presence of oat β-D-glucans, the activity of Na + /K + -exchanging ATPase (EC 7.2.2.13) reduced in the small intestine mucosa of rats, and the inhibition of this activity was more pronounced when its M w and concentration increased. However, when the concentration of the β-D-glucan of defined M w increased, the Na + /K + ATPase activity increased because of higher gastrointestinal motility. The addition of oat β-D-glucans also reduced the activities of sucrose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.48) and maltose α-glucosidase (EC 3.2.1.20), while the effect of HMW β-D-glucans was more pronounced than that of LMW β-D-glucans.

(p30.11) Overall, many studies are proving the M w -dependent lowering effect of oat β-Dglucans on the glycemic level, and more are expected in the future [137]. Based on the data available, HMW β-D-glucan appears to be the most active fraction. We can conclude that the diet should favor fewer processed oats in food due to the better retention of HMW β-D-glucan, which is much more effective in reducing glycemic response than LMW β-D-glucan [130].
## (s31) Antioxidant Activity
(p31.0) The antioxidant activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w was tested by in vitro and in vivo experiments. Oat milling fractions, bran concentrate, and oat β-D-glucan extract contain a significant amount of polyphenols that may significantly impact the antioxidant activity of these preparations [104,105]. The antioxidant activity of oat β-D-glucans can be improved by complexation or mixing with tea polyphenols [102]; in vitro, the complex showed higher O 2

(p31.1) •− scavenging activity, while the mixture was better in the scavenging of OH • in vitro. In the in vivo experiments, the complex more effectively activates SOD (EC 1.15.1.1) and GPx (EC 1.11.1.9) in the liver than the mixture. However, the effects of both preparations on GPx activity, MDA level, and TAC in serum were comparable.

(p31.2) Du et al. [138] found that the results of the oxygen radical absorbance capacity (ORAC) and ferric reducing antioxidant power (FRAP) assays of fungal and oat β-D-glucans of various M w strongly depend on the source of these polysaccharides, but the effect of M w was less pronounced. However, oat HMW β-D-glucan (M w 1800 kDa) exhibited the highest value of ORAC, while for MMW β-D-glucan (M w 500 kDa) this value grew in a dose-dependent manner.
## (s32) Prebiotic Activity
(p32.0) The increasing interest in the microbiome and its composition has raised the issue of sustaining a healthy intestinal microflora supported by appropriate prebiotics, e.g., fibers or inulin. Generally, oat β-D-glucan can stimulate the growth of "good" human gut microbiota, e.g., Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium. Many studies have focused on oat bran and isolated β-D-glucan prebiotic activity, but only a few touch on the role of the M w in this phenomenon [141][142][143].

(p32.1) Oat β-D-glucan can influence the cardiovascular system via microbiota in a way that suggests it is a cardio-protector [144]. It can be fermented by intestinal bacteria in the colon, increasing the concentration of SCFA, i.e., acetate, butyrate, and propionate. These molecules are involved in the regulation of glucose and cholesterol metabolism via free fatty acid receptors FFA2 and FFA3 [145]. Activation of FFA2 can enhance insulin secretion and inhibit ghrelin secretion. Ligand-activated FFA2 downregulates NFkB by recruiting β-arrestin 2, leading to a reduction of pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. FFA3 in pancreas islets, when activated by propionate, inhibits insulin secretion. Dong et al. [146] revealed that oat β-D-glucan hydrolysates are better substrates (even as a single carbon source) for probiotic bacteria strains than the native oat β-D-glucan. Immerstrand et al. [90] studied the effect of a series of oat bran preparations characterized by β-D-glucans of M w 2348, 1311, 241, 56, 21, and <10 kDa on plasma lipids and the fecal formation of SCFA in C57BL/6NCrl mice. They concluded that diets with oat β-D-glucan with M w from 1311 kDa down to 10-20 kDa were equally effective in reducing plasma cholesterol in mice that developed high blood cholesterol due to an atherogenic diet. Despite that, the ratio of propionic acid and butyric acid contents to the acetic acid content increased with increasing M w of β-D-glucans, leading to the conclusion that as a component of a usual Western diet, the higher M w of oat β-D-glucan is more beneficial for microbiota. Wilczak et al. [113] have shown that both LMW and HMW oat β-D-glucans increased the numbers of LAB in feces in healthy rats and rats with enteritis. The administration of β-D-glucans improved the profile of SCFA in rat feces, characterized by decreasing hydroxybutyric acid levels and increasing lactic and propionic acid content. Increasing propionic acid can be explained by improved fermentation.
## (s33) Anticancer Activity
(p33.0) β-D-Glucans demonstrated suppressive effects on tumor growth and even the reduction of primary tumor mass, though this activity can differ depending on the source of β-D-glucans [151]. For example, Shah et al. [152] proved oat β-D-glucan to be a more potent anti-proliferative agent on the cell line Colo-205 than barley β-D-glucan.

(p33.1) Despite reports about β-D-glucan being effective in combination with anticancer treatments, only a few clinical trials to consistently study the anticancer activity of β-Dglucan were established [153]. Unfortunately, despite the authors often underlining the importance of the M w of the used β-D-glucan fraction, few works show the comparison in the activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w in the range of the same study.

(p33.2) Parzonko et al. [154] studied oat LMW β-D-glucan (M w 134 kDa) as an anticancer agent on human HTB140 melanoma cells using an MTT assay. At the β-D-glucan concentration of 200 µg/mL, the viability of cells was 50%, and the cytotoxic effect of this polysaccharide was concentration-dependent, as well as lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27) release into the culture media. There were also changes in the mitochondrial functions of HTB-140 cells. Intracellular ATP levels negatively correlated with the rise of the concentration of β-Dglucan, with the lowest value 50.8 ± 7.8% at 200 µg/mL. The authors stated that the same experiment conducted in parallel on the cell line of normal fibroblasts had shown no cytotoxicity. Choromanska et al. [67] studied the anticancer activity of the LMW oat β-D-glucan, analyzing its possible toxicity for four cell lines: human pigmented malignant melanoma Me45, human epidermoid carcinoma A431, normal human keratinocyte HaCaT, and normal mouse macrophage P388/D1. The results suggested that oat β-D-glucans decreased the viability of both cancer cell lines and did not show a toxic effect on normal cells. In another study, Choromanska et al. [155] evaluated how LMW and HMW oat β-Dglucans affect normal keratinocytes, two lung cancer cell lines, and red blood cell hemolysis. The authors also confirmed tolerance to oat β-D-glucan by normal cells. Red blood cell hemolysis tended to be slowed to 51.64% by β-D-glucan treatment, with HMW being more effective in high concentrations than LMW β-D-glucan. In addition, MDA, the final product of lipid peroxidation, increased in a dose-dependent mode administrating HMW β-D-glucans to H69AR cells. Low and high concentrations of LMW β-D-glucans caused nucleus perturbations and abnormal chromatin condensation in A549 and HaCaT cells. All concentrations of HMW fractions caused actin fiber abnormalities in H69AR and HaCaT cells. A study on Me45 cells has shown that LMW oat β-D-glucans at a high concentration of 200 µg/mL in cell-growth media decreased the viability of melanoma cells to 19%, while in combination with electroporation to 12.5%, and caspase 3 expression increased significantly. At the concentration of 100 µg/mL, half of all cells were stained positively for cytochrome c. For caspase 12, a positive reaction was evident at 100 µg/mL and 200 µg/mL of oat β-D-glucans in media. This work evidences that LMW oat β-D-glucans have the potential to initiate the apoptotic process in melanoma cells involving cytochrome c, which participates in caspase activation, followed by the activation of dormant killer proteases [156].

(p33.3) Zhang et al. [157] evaluated the anticarcinogenic effect of three oat β-D-glucans with M w of 10 kDa, 200 kDa, and 500 kDa on mice inoculated in the flanks with B16F10 tumor cells. The polysaccharide solutions were injected intra-peritoneally in the tumor-bearing animals at 25 mg/kg. The control group of mice received PBS or dextran solution. A part of the mice were intravenously injected in the tail with B16F10 cells to generate lung metastasis. Similarly, in an osteosarcoma metastasis model, 5 K7 M2-luc2 mouse osteosarcoma cells were intravenously injected into Balb/c mice; the animals received 25 mg/kg of oat β-D-glucan (M w 200 kDa) intranasally. This preparation inhibited tumor growth the most effectively. Mice injected with B16F10 melanoma intravenously after treatment with the 200 kDa β-D-glucan demonstrated the lowest incidence of lung metastases. Tumors treated with oat β-D-glucans also showed microenvironmental differences, particularly regarding pro-inflammatory factors IFN-γ, TNF-α, and Th-1 chemokines (CXCL9 and CXCL10). The IRF1 and PDL-1 levels increased, and T cells, which produced Granzyme B and IFN-γ, infiltrated tumors. CD11 b+ and CD11 c+ cells, DC, T cells, and presumably NK cells supported the immune control of B16F10 treated with oat β-D-glucans. The authors hypothesized about an unidentified signaling pathway involved in the activation of DC by β-D-glucan-activated macrophages since conditioned media from later were more potent in DC activation than DC directly treated with β-D-glucan.

(p33.4) It is hard to speculate about the effectiveness of oat β-D-glucan of specific ranges of M w for cancer treatment. The mechanism of cytotoxicity on cancer cells can be related not only to the activation of immune cells by β-D-glucan molecules but also directly to GLUT1-related transport inside the cell. Since oat β-D-glucan shows no cytotoxicity on normal cells, further study on anticarcinogenic activity needs to investigate the specific effects of the various M w of β-D-glucan to address their use. For example, clarifying the cytotoxic effect through GLUT1 transporter involving different M w of oat β-D-glucan could be a beneficial contribution.

(p33.5) β-D-Glucans demonstrated suppressive effects on tumor growth and even the reduction of primary tumor mass, though this activity can differ depending on the source of β-D-glucans [151]. For example, Shah et al. [152] proved oat β-D-glucan to be a more potent anti-proliferative agent on the cell line Colo-205 than barley β-D-glucan.

(p33.6) Despite reports about β-D-glucan being effective in combination with anticancer treatments, only a few clinical trials to consistently study the anticancer activity of β-Dglucan were established [153]. Unfortunately, despite the authors often underlining the importance of the M w of the used β-D-glucan fraction, few works show the comparison in the activity of oat β-D-glucans with different M w in the range of the same study.

(p33.7) Parzonko et al. [154] studied oat LMW β-D-glucan (M w 134 kDa) as an anticancer agent on human HTB140 melanoma cells using an MTT assay. At the β-D-glucan concentration of 200 µg/mL, the viability of cells was 50%, and the cytotoxic effect of this polysaccharide was concentration-dependent, as well as lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27) release into the culture media. There were also changes in the mitochondrial functions of HTB-140 cells. Intracellular ATP levels negatively correlated with the rise of the concentration of β-Dglucan, with the lowest value 50.8 ± 7.8% at 200 µg/mL. The authors stated that the same experiment conducted in parallel on the cell line of normal fibroblasts had shown no cytotoxicity. Choromanska et al. [67] studied the anticancer activity of the LMW oat β-D-glucan, analyzing its possible toxicity for four cell lines: human pigmented malignant melanoma Me45, human epidermoid carcinoma A431, normal human keratinocyte HaCaT, and normal mouse macrophage P388/D1. The results suggested that oat β-D-glucans decreased the viability of both cancer cell lines and did not show a toxic effect on normal cells. In another study, Choromanska et al. [155] evaluated how LMW and HMW oat β-Dglucans affect normal keratinocytes, two lung cancer cell lines, and red blood cell hemolysis. The authors also confirmed tolerance to oat β-D-glucan by normal cells. Red blood cell hemolysis tended to be slowed to 51.64% by β-D-glucan treatment, with HMW being more effective in high concentrations than LMW β-D-glucan. In addition, MDA, the final product of lipid peroxidation, increased in a dose-dependent mode administrating HMW β-D-glucans to H69AR cells. Low and high concentrations of LMW β-D-glucans caused nucleus perturbations and abnormal chromatin condensation in A549 and HaCaT cells. All concentrations of HMW fractions caused actin fiber abnormalities in H69AR and HaCaT cells. A study on Me45 cells has shown that LMW oat β-D-glucans at a high concentration of 200 µg/mL in cell-growth media decreased the viability of melanoma cells to 19%, while in combination with electroporation to 12.5%, and caspase 3 expression increased significantly. At the concentration of 100 µg/mL, half of all cells were stained positively for cytochrome c. For caspase 12, a positive reaction was evident at 100 µg/mL and 200 µg/mL of oat β-D-glucans in media. This work evidences that LMW oat β-D-glucans have the potential to initiate the apoptotic process in melanoma cells involving cytochrome c, which participates in caspase activation, followed by the activation of dormant killer proteases [156].

(p33.8) Zhang et al. [157] evaluated the anticarcinogenic effect of three oat β-D-glucans with M w of 10 kDa, 200 kDa, and 500 kDa on mice inoculated in the flanks with B16F10 tumor cells. The polysaccharide solutions were injected intra-peritoneally in the tumor-bearing animals at 25 mg/kg. The control group of mice received PBS or dextran solution. A part of the mice were intravenously injected in the tail with B16F10 cells to generate lung metastasis. Similarly, in an osteosarcoma metastasis model, 5 K7 M2-luc2 mouse osteosarcoma cells were intravenously injected into Balb/c mice; the animals received 25 mg/kg of oat β-D-glucan (M w 200 kDa) intranasally. This preparation inhibited tumor growth the most effectively. Mice injected with B16F10 melanoma intravenously after treatment with the 200 kDa β-D-glucan demonstrated the lowest incidence of lung metastases. Tumors treated with oat β-D-glucans also showed microenvironmental differences, particularly regarding pro-inflammatory factors IFN-γ, TNF-α, and Th-1 chemokines (CXCL9 and CXCL10). The IRF1 and PDL-1 levels increased, and T cells, which produced Granzyme B and IFN-γ, infiltrated tumors. CD11 b+ and CD11 c+ cells, DC, T cells, and presumably NK cells supported the immune control of B16F10 treated with oat β-D-glucans. The authors hypothesized about an unidentified signaling pathway involved in the activation of DC by β-D-glucan-activated macrophages since conditioned media from later were more potent in DC activation than DC directly treated with β-D-glucan.

(p33.9) It is hard to speculate about the effectiveness of oat β-D-glucan of specific ranges of M w for cancer treatment. The mechanism of cytotoxicity on cancer cells can be related not only to the activation of immune cells by β-D-glucan molecules but also directly to GLUT1-related transport inside the cell. Since oat β-D-glucan shows no cytotoxicity on normal cells, further study on anticarcinogenic activity needs to investigate the specific effects of the various M w of β-D-glucan to address their use. For example, clarifying the cytotoxic effect through GLUT1 transporter involving different M w of oat β-D-glucan could be a beneficial contribution.
