# Citation: Habitable Earth and Carbon Neutrality: Mission and Challenges Facing Resources and the Environment in China-An A Habitable Earth and Carbon Neutrality: Mission and Challenges Facing Resources and the Environment in China-An Overview

CorpusID: 255624116 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e704d5e5cd7590ffbb00eb737f92734d16c7792](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7e704d5e5cd7590ffbb00eb737f92734d16c7792)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) Methane Emitted from Coal Mines and Its Characteristics
(p4.0) Ma [21] calculated the CH4 emissions from coal mining and postmining activities in China from 2010 to 2016 using the national standard emission factor method for the key emission sources of coal emissions from underground coal mining and postmining activities, and using the default emission factor method for other emission sources. From 2010 to 2016, the CH4 emissions from coal mining and postmining activities in China increased first and then decreased, and the largest emissions were from underground mining. In 
## (s6) Methane Emitted from Coal Mines and Its Characteristics
(p6.0) Ma [21] calculated the CH 4 emissions from coal mining and postmining activities in China from 2010 to 2016 using the national standard emission factor method for the key emission sources of coal emissions from underground coal mining and postmining activities, and using the default emission factor method for other emission sources. From 2010 to 2016, the CH 4 emissions from coal mining and postmining activities in China increased first and then decreased, and the largest emissions were from underground mining. In 2010, fugitive CH 4 emissions totaled 25.25 million tons. Considering the pressure on resources and the environment, China has devoted many efforts toward adjusting the energy structure and reducing the proportion of coal consumption since 2011, thus forcing coal production to reach its peak in 2013; accordingly, fugitive CH 4 emissions reached a peak of 27.16 million tons. After that, it decreased to 22.69 million tons in 2016. During this period, the emissions from underground mining, postmining activities, open-pit mining, and abandoned mines accounted for 83%, 13%, 3%, and 1% of the total emissions, respectively. Due to the high gas content in underground coal mines and the low level of integration of mining and ore dressing, the proportion of emissions from underground mining and postmining activities in China is relatively high compared with that of other major coal-producing countries. From 2010 to 2016, the amount of CH 4 recovery and use from coal mining and postmining activities in China increased each year; the peak net CH 4 emissions, after deducting the amount of recovery and use, moved forward to 2011. Mine gas is the main hazard in the process of coal mine production. In addition, the CH 4 in the gas is a high-quality clean energy, so is a highly valuable resource. Therefore, the importance of CH 4 recycling is increasing. From 2010 to 2016, CH 4 recycling annually increased by 17.0%, and the proportion of recycling in total emissions increased from 9.4% to 26.6%. The actual net CH 4 emissions to the atmosphere, after deduction of the amount recovered, were further reduced.
