# Breakfast and School-Related Outcomes in Children and Adolescents in the US: A Literature Review and its Implications for School Nutrition Policy

CorpusID: 251771622 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1c4bb13bdb65a940efb6730bffe5ee133625775](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1c4bb13bdb65a940efb6730bffe5ee133625775)

Fields: Education, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Review Articles on Breakfast and School-Related Outcomes
(p3.0) Of the 16 studies selected, six were literature or systematic reviews that examined, at least in part, breakfast and schoolrelated outcomes in K-12 children and adolescents (Table 1). While ranging in the period of research covered, all six reviews included research in the US as well as beyond the US, primarily in developed countries. Although different in scope and focus, the reviews reached similar conclusions: the evidence was inconclusive on the impact of breakfast on children's cognition and school-related outcomes. Further, multiple authors pointed to methodological challenges that hampered the ability to assert stronger associations.

(p3.1) A systematic review conducted by Lundqvist et al. made the strongest assertion of conclusive findings on the favorable impact of breakfast consumption on cognition and academic performance [3]. The 26 studies identified in the review were published between 2003 and 2017, collected primary data, and clearly defined breakfast consumption S端nram-Lea 2019 [27] Review the evidence on the impact of breakfast-based glycemic response on cognition in school-aged children and adolescents 34 1977-2017 Some evidence of an association between a stable blood glucose profile and better cognitive functioning in the morning, but a lack of conclusive evidence on the effect of glycemic index on cognition due to methodological challenges 1 3 versus nonconsumption. Six of the 26 studies focused on cognition (none from the US) and 8 focused specifically on academic achievement, such as grades and test scores (including one conducted in the US). Lundqvist et al. concluded that these studies showed an association between breakfast consumption and improved cognitive and academic performance among children and adolescents. S端nram-Lea reviewed the evidence on breakfast-based glycemic response and cognition in school-aged children and adolescents [27]. After reviewing 34 studies conducted over a 40-year period in a wide variety of settings and countries, S端nram-Lea concluded that a more stable blood glucose profile was associated with better cognitive function across the morning. However, according to S端nram-Lea, the evidence was currently insufficient to allow clear nutrition recommendations related to glycemic index and cognition because studies have widely differed with respect to subject characteristics, cognitive tests used, and the timing of cognitive assessment.
