# fermentation A Review Unveiling Various Machine Learning Algorithms Adopted for Biohydrogen Productions from Microalgae

CorpusID: 257346609 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a49520fd4e23ff95a1e2e7cb443caba45e4568e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0a49520fd4e23ff95a1e2e7cb443caba45e4568e)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Hydrogen that is produced from microalgae, either through photo-fermentation or dark fermentation, is known as microalgal hydrogen. It is a subset of biohydrogen, defined as hydrogen that is produced biologically from microorganisms using renewable biomass materials [1,2]. Microalgal hydrogen production has garnered considerable interest from academia as well as industry due to its potential as an alternative energy source. However, the nature of the complex biological processes and factors involved have made studies and process modelling very arduous. Researchers have recently employed machine learning (ML) to overcome this concern. ML is defined as building algorithms that can predict an outcome based on a statistical analysis of input data. The application of ML to studies can generate regression models that describe the relationship between independent variables and dependent variables [3,4]. These algorithms come in various forms, depending on their purposes and effectiveness.
## (s2) Artificial Neural Networks
(p2.0) ANNs are defined as information processing paradigms that are designed following the inspiration of how the human brain processes information. The complex networks are established from multiple simple processing units that function similarly to a neuron cell with three distinct layer categories, namely, the input, hidden, and output layers. The input neurons receive data through data files that are manually entered or in real-time from measuring instruments. The output layer sends out the information after the data has gone through one or multiple hidden layers, each composed of various interconnected neurons. The arrangement of layers and the connection between each processing unit are what make each ANN different from the other. There are two types of connections between neurons where the variable strength of input is either added or reduced before being output to the next neuron [11,12]. Figure 1 illustrates the structure of a neural network [13,14]. After the ANN model is established for a particular application, it requires training that involves determining the adjustable weights, akin to the process of determining the coefficients of a polynomial equation via regression. A common supervised training algorithm is known as the backpropagation neural network, where the calculated error between the outputs generated by the model and the actual results is reduced by adjusting the weights after the error is propagated backward through the network. This process is repeated until the error falls below a pre-established criterion [15,16]. 
## (s4) Support Vector Machines
(p4.0) Support vector machines (SVM) are designed for binary classification in a multidimensional space. The working principle of SVM involves the identification of a hyperplane, a boundary that separates outcome categories to their full extent [18]. SVM applies a data transformation to the sample data and projects it to a desired dimensional space that is higher via a kernel function. A kernel function is defined as a function that returns the inner product (dot product) between the images of two data points (x, x') in the higherdimensional space. ML then takes place in this space [24]. An example of a dot product between x ij and x ij ' can be mathematically shown below:

(p4.1) There are multiple kernel functions available depending on the data set, as it needs to have its dimensionality increased to obtain the hyperplane (Table 1) [25]. These kernel functions of two data points all aim to reach the target space T. Among these equations, Karatzoglou and Meyer (2006) stated that the Gaussian radial basis function (RBF) is the most suitable when there is no pre-existing knowledge available regarding a data set [24]. They also stated that the linear kernel function is beneficial for large and inadequate data points. The performance of SVM is based on the established regularization parameter C (box constraint) and the kernel parameter (scaling factor), which make up the hyperplane parameter. Having a high value of C will cause the SVM to create a complex prediction function to greatly reduce the misclassification of data points. In contrast, a low value of C will lead to a simple prediction function [24]. Training an SVM algorithm involves mapping the decision boundary for each outcome category and specifying the hyperplane that separates the categories. The algorithm will then attempt to find the optimal hyperplane that has the highest margin between classes, which is proportional to the classification accuracy [14]. Figure 3 shows a simple 2-D illustration of the SVM algorithm. Any SVM algorithm aims to find the maximum margin hyperplane, situated at the maximum margin between all possible positive and negative hyperplanes that can be defined, which will separate the support vectors into two distinct categories. Misclassifications occur when a data set is mapped onto the wrong side of the hyperplane, which is affected by the box constraint.  [25].
## (s6) Regression
(p6.0) Another ML technique is regression analysis, a conventional method used to determine the correlation between a dependent variable and one (univariate) or multiple (multivariate) independent variables [26,27]. Since the nature of the correlation between variables exists, there are multiple types of regression being designed to cater to these relationships. These regression techniques all attempt to achieve the same objective, which is to illustrate the variable of interest as a mathematical function of independent variables that affect its value. The most straightforward type is the simple linear regression (SLR) method, which aims to fit the data into a straight line that can be expressed as follows:
## (s8) Importance of Machine Learning in Biohydrogen Production
(p8.0) The usage of machine learning (ML) techniques has become more widespread in microalgal hydrogen production and studies relating to it in recent years.  reported that ML had recently demonstrated great potential as a data-driven method. This is due to the fact that ML algorithms can handle complex multivariate data, predict nonlinear connections, and manage missing data [9]. The ML has now become a significant tool in microalgal hydrogen production studies since it is capable fo being adopted in various applications, which include studying the relationship between operation parameters and production outputs, classifying factors as being significantly impactful to the overall process, and predicting the produced microalgal hydrogen based on the set initial conditions.
## (s12) Comparative Analyses among ML Techniques
(p12.0) For each of the ML techniques mentioned earlier, there are benefits and drawbacks to employing them, depending on the nature of the study being conducted in the field of biohydrogen production. A comparison can be made among the ML techniques in terms of their advantages and disadvantages in determining which scenarios are most suitable for each technique.

(p12.1) The ANN is capable of managing and modelling complex interactions among components of a system. Flexibility is also an additional benefit, which allows for adaptation to new information that may change over time [12]. This makes ANN a strong technique in studies involving microalgal hydrogen, which involve complex interactive processes. De-spite these benefits, there are also a few disadvantages. Hossain et al. [44] stated that ANN required a large amount of training data in order to operate, which was time-consuming and costly to provide. Another significant setback is that they are unable to predict outputs based on inputs that are beyond the training data space [44]. This implies that the performance of the ANN is mostly based on the training data provided to the network. Based on these attributes, it can be inferred that ANN is most suitable for studies that already have a lot of training data available, whether from literature or manually attained from research works. ANN has been used in a variety of applications, indicating that it is a versatile technique in microalgal hydrogen research.
