# Chronic Nonbacterial Osteomyelitis and Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Literature Review-Based Cohort

CorpusID: 257351826 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f9ec240f5599f1bdfea1fe765c601b1fb97bc61](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4f9ec240f5599f1bdfea1fe765c601b1fb97bc61)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Inflammatory Bowel Diseases in Children: From Pathogenesis to Clinical Aspects
(p2.0) Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are a group of diseases characterized by immune activation and inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. IBDs include Crohn's disease (CD), ulcerative colitis (UC), and undifferentiated IBD (u-IBD) [33]. The pathogenesis of the disease is not yet clearly understood, but genetic factors, environmental insults, and dysbiosis seem to cooperate to determine the disease [34]. In spite of different phenotypes, approximately 30% of IBD-related genes are shared between CD and UC, suggesting common pathogenetic pathways; indeed, more than 50% of IBD susceptibility loci have also been related to other inflammatory/autoimmune diseases [34]. NOD2, C13orf31, and LRRK2 genes are associated both with susceptibility to CD and Mycobacterium leprae infection. Interestingly, NOD2 mutation has been shown to contribute to the dysfunction in the mucosal barrier integrity in CD. This has further led to an intense investigation into the impact of the gut microbiome dysbiosis in IBD.

(p2.1) In patients with a very early onset of IBD (before the age of 6), genetics acquires a priority role. In particular, IL-10 signaling pathway defects are associated with the development of early-onset IBD [35]. In contrast, IL23R allele variants have shown a protective role. In fact, T helper 17 lymphocytes from IBD patients (carriers of protective IL23R variant) show a decreased production in IL-17A in response to IL-23 stimulation [36,37]. In 20-30% of cases, IBDs are diagnosed in childhood or in young adulthood with male predominance [38]. The incidence of the disease is increasing in industrialized countries, suggesting that environmental and dietary factors play a key role [39,40]. In children, a positive family history of IBD remains an important risk factor for the development of IBD [41].

(p2.2) The most common symptoms and signs are diarrhea, weight loss, and abdominal pain. In UC, rectal bleeding is present in 83% of pediatric patients [42,43]. Fecal calprotectin, intestinal ultrasound, and magnetic resonance enterography may help with diagnosis, but esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy remain the gold standard for diagnosis and classification. Extra-intestinal manifestations (EIM) can affect musculoskeletal (arthri-tis, osteopenia), dermatologic (pyoderma granulosum, erythema nodosum), hepatobiliary (pancreatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis), renal (uveitis, episcleritis, iritis), and hematologic (anemia, deep venous thromboembolism) systems. Some EIM go hand in hand with intestinal inflammation, while others are independent (i.e., pyoderma gangrenosum) [33]. Joint involvement represents the most common EIM in IBD; commonly, it occurs within the first year after the onset of IBD symptoms. However, arthritis might be the presenting symptom of IBD in up to 4% of pediatric IBD cases [44]. The pattern of joint involvement might be heterogeneous: asymmetrical polyarticular or oligoarticular arthritis, arthralgia, enthesitis, and sacroiliitis [44]. During the disease course of pediatric IBD, sacroiliitis might be underrecognized due to the subtle symptoms, and can progress despite the IBD treatments. MR enterography (MRE) is used to assess IBD intestinal disease activity and might help to detect the underlining inflammation of sacroiliac joints. Indeed, a reevaluation of MRE in a cohort of children with IBD showed that, using the ASAS (Assessment of Spondy-loArthritis international Society) criteria for signs of sacroiliitis, 15% of patients have mild sacroiliitis at MRE despite not complaining of any musculoskeletal symptoms [45]. The link between IBD and joint/bone inflammation might rely on the alteration of IL-23 and/or IL-17 axis, dysbiosis, and subclinical gut barrier dysfunction as well as genetic factors such as the HLA B27 positivity and NOD2 variants [46,47].
## (s3) Association between CNO/CRMO and IBD
(p3.0) Since the first descriptions, the association with other inflammatory disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), psoriasis, and arthritis has been reported [26,48]. In particular, the relationship between bone and intestinal inflammation is still poorly understood. On the other hand, the prevalence of musculoskeletal involvement in IBD is not negligible (up to 46%) [49], but the impact of CNO is unknown. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in the role of the gut microbiome in CNO. Lukens et al. demonstrated that a high-fat diet reduced Prevotella levels and pro-IL-1-beta expression in distant neutrophils in osteomyelitis-prone cmo mice [50]. In another study, an alteration in oral microbiome in CNO/CRMO patients in response to NSAID treatment was described.

(p3.1) Another study described an alteration in the oral microbiome in CNO/CRMO patients responding to NSAID treatment [51]. A recent study has also highlighted compositional differences in fecal and oral microbiota between healthy controls and CRMO patients, drawing new attention to the potential role of dysbiosis in the pathology of CRMO [52].

(p3.2) This review aims to describe all the cases reported in the literature concerning the association between CNO and IBD and to compare them with data from our single-center cohort of patients affected by CNO but without a diagnosis of IBD. The comparison was assessed to comprehend if there are clinical or demographic differences between CNO alone or in association with IBD.
## (s6) Literature-Review-Based Cohort
(p6.0) We identified 32 articles, 4 of which were excluded since they lacked essential data or the article was unavailable. The remaining 28 were considered eligible for the study [11,. Fifty-seven patients with a defined diagnosis of CNO and associated IBD were described (female 26/47; 55%) through a literature review of published cases. The median age of onset of the disease (IBD or CNO) was 11 years (IQR 4.5); in particular, eight patients were adults at onset, while in the remaining patients, the condition had started before the age of 18. Among the patients, 35/42 (83%) had a polyostotic disease, while 7/42 (17%) had a mono-focal disease with a predominance of sternoclavicular involvement (3/7; 43%). The most frequent bone symptom was wrist pain (24%), followed by nonspecific pain in the lower extremities (19%). Constitutional symptoms were present in 21% of patients at the onset of the disease (n = 5 with a first diagnosis of CNO; n = 1 first diagnosis of IBD; n = 3 simultaneous diagnosis). Clinical features of the retrieved cases are summarized in Table 1. Table 1. Clinical and demographic characteristics of reviewed cases of CNO associated with IBD. The most commonly associated conditions were psoriasis (n = 5; 9%), sclerosing cholangitis (n = 2; 4%), and erythema nodosum (n = 2; 4%), while the other three patients suffered from Takayasu vasculitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. In 32/53 patients (60%), a histological diagnosis of CD was made, while 18 (34%) patients were classified as UC. In three (6%) cases, the bowel inflammation did not meet the histological criteria for the diagnosis of either condition, therefore, they were identified as u-IBD. The most frequent gastrointestinal symptoms at the onset of IBD were diarrhea (17/40; 43%), followed by hematochezia or blood in stools (12/40; 30%). In 28% (11/40) of patients, the only complained symptom was unspecific abdominal pain.
