# Medication-Related Osteonecrosis of the Jaw (MRONJ): A Review of Pathophysiology, Risk Factors, Preventive Measures and Treatment Strategies Production and hosting by Elsevier

CorpusID: 251314374 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a7e4dbcd3e5c5a036514842177467bee7fe2cc1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3a7e4dbcd3e5c5a036514842177467bee7fe2cc1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) In cases treated with sequential antiresorptive Drugs:
(p4.0) In a recent meta-analysis by Srivastava et al., it was found that there is a higher prevalence of MRONJ when it is associated with sequential antiresorptive drugs (ARDs) in comparison to single ARDs. It was ranged between 10% and 19% based on different ARDs, while bisphosphonates only was 5% and denosumab only accounted for 4% (Srivastava et al., 2021). Van Cann et al. found that the total MRONJ incidence was 11.1% in patients who were treated with ARDs. .
## (s9) Age and Gender
(p9.0) The occurrence of MRONJ is higher in both female and older patients (Kalra and Jain, 2013;Ruggiero et al., 2014). According to Jeong et al., among 320 osteoporotic patients, 11 patients developed MRONJ, and all 11 patients were above the age of 65 years old .
## (s11) Medical Factors
(p11.0) Medical comorbidities tend to be essential risk factors that raise the likelihood of developing MRONJ (Mucke et al., 2016). The most often reported medical risk factors were chemotherapy, corticosteroids and smoking (McGowan et al., 2018). The duration of malignancy, duration of bone metastasis and certain types of cancer are likely to be related to a higher chance of developing MRONJ (Hoff et al., 2008). Breast cancer, prostate cancer, and multiple myeloma are the most common cancers in which ONJ is found (Abu-Id et al., 2008). An elevated risk of MRONJ has been substantially linked with renal dialysis, erythropoietin therapy, diabetes and hypothyroidism (Jadu et al., 2007;Khamaisi et al., 2007;Thumbigere-Math et al., 2009). Diabetes mellitus (DM) was found in 17% (33/191) of those with ONJ in a case-control study, compared to 11% (63/573) of the control subjects (Barasch et al., 2011).
## (s12) Genetic Factors
(p12.0) To date, all genome-wide association studies (GWAS), candidate gene studies (CGS), and recently whole genome/ whole exome studies (WGS/WES) have not succeeded in showing any single gene associated with the risk for developing MRONJ. Many genes have shown the possibility of increased or decreased association (Sandro Pereira da Silva et al., 2019). Matrix metalloproteinase 2 was hypothesized to be a possible gene responsible for an elevated risk of developing MRONJ caused by bisphosphonates (Lehrer et al., 2009).
## (s14) Bisphosphonates
(p14.0) Among the primary antiresorptive medications are bisphosophonates (Shibahara, 2019;Aljohani et al., 2017). These drugs work at a cellular level, targeting osteoclasts and disturbing their activity (Shibahara, 2019;Aljohani et al., 2017). Depending on the strength, bisphosphonates can be given intravenously or orally. They are classified into nonnitrogencontaining or nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates (Shibahara, 2019;Ruggiero, 2009;Ruggiero et al., 2014). They are very effective at decreasing the possibility of fractures caused by osteoporosis as well as inhibiting the activity of osteoclasts. They work by inhibiting the remodeling mode and increasing the bone density.
## (s15) Denosumab
(p15.0) Denosumab is a recently developed antiresorptive drug. It acts on OPG produced by osteoblasts and is considered to be an anti-RANKL antibody (Shibahara, 2019). It functions to reduce the resorption of bone by inhibiting RANKL/RANK binding, thereby dysregulating the formation, differentiation, and osteoclast survival rate (Shibahara, 2019).

(p15.1) Denosumab has a short effect on bone, unlike the effects of bisphosphonates, because of its short half-life. Such RANKL inhibitors do not bind with bone and are generally eliminated within six months of cessation of treatment (Ruggiero et al., 2014).

(p15.2) Time of incidence is a major differentiating factor between BRONJ and denosumab-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (DRONJ). BRONJ can occur within 33 months (orally) and within 48 months (intravenously) (Shibahara, 2019). However, DRONJ often occurs soon after administration (McGowan et al., 2018).

(p15.3) Bisphosphonates have a direct effect by inducing osteoclast apoptosis, while denosumab indirectly prevents the maturation of osteoclast differentiation. Regardless of the mechanism, both cause delayed osseous healing (Kuroshima et al., 2016).
## (s16) Angiogenesis Inhibitors or Antiangiogenic Drugs
(p16.0) These monoclonal antibodies medications target receptors of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). VEGF inhibitors (e.g., bevacizumab) or tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g., sunitinib) are considered to be the most common antiangiogenic drugs (Kuroshima et al., 2019a;Kuroshima et al., 2019b).

(p16.1) Antiangiogenic drugs will inhibit the development of new blood vessels, which can result in ONJ through ischemia. These drugs are given to prevent cancer metastasis across the blood vessels and lymph nodes because angiogenesis by definition is the action on the formation of blood vessels by endothelial cell differentiation. This action can induce tumor diffusion through blood vessels and related lymph nodes, leading to tumor metastasis (Khan et al., 2017;Lombard et al., 2016). However, some studies have found that there is not enough knowledge regarding the pathophysiology of ONJ caused by angiogenesis inhibitors (Kuroshima et al., 2019a(Kuroshima et al., , 2019b.
## (s21) Management
(p21.0) According to the AAOMS, the management of ONJ ranges from conservative to surgical therapy based on severity Table 1. For stage 1 and II, conservative treatment was recommended; however, in stage III and in case of no response to conservative therapy in stage II, surgical debridement was recommended.

(p21.1) Bennardo et al. diagnosed eight patients with stage 3 MRONJ with facial cutaneous sinus tract. Those patients underwent medical and surgical treatment in combination with platelet-rich fibrin (PRF) injections once a week for one month starting from the same day of the surgical procedure. This study suggests that when (PRF) is combined with successful surgical and medical care, it can improve the healing of the facial sinus tract secondary to MRONJ (Bennardo et al., 2020a). According to a recent systematic review, the effectiveness of PRF in the treatment of MRONJ is still insufficient (Fortunato et al., 2020). Moreover, autofluorescence-guided surgery did not add any beneficial value compared with conventional surgical techniques regarding healing process and quality of life .
## (s22) Drug Holiday
(p22.0) It is still uncertain whether the discontinuation of antiresorptive therapy is effective for the prevention or reduction of ONJ. Studies vary regarding the considered effect of drug cessation from no effect to minimal effect or based on the staging condition. The AAOMS suggested interrupting oral bisphosphonate treatment for three months prior to invasive dental surgical procedures and three months after to decrease the possibility of ONJ ). This information was last revised in 2009. However, because there is not enough evidence to support the drug holiday's efficacy, this decision should be made in consultation with the prescribing physician (Yamashita and McCauley, 2012). Another option could be treating patients with lower cumulative doses (two years) of bisphosphonates or denosumab and continuing treatment during surgical dental procedures. This approach was suggested by the ADA Council on Scientific Affairs after reviewing their previous recommendations on drug holidays (Hellstein et al., 2011). Until now, there has been much controversy and no clear evidence regarding drug holidays (Lee et al., 2015). However, recently, some studies concluded that a 50% reduction in ONJ incidence was observed when a drug holiday was applied to a minipig model (Otto et al., 2020).
