# A Review of the Risk Factors for Iron Deficiency Anaemia among Adolescents in Developing Countries

CorpusID: 255592218 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/20c758c848422046b5dbb79149344581b7c52dd0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/20c758c848422046b5dbb79149344581b7c52dd0)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Adolescents undergo physiological and psychological growth to set the foundation of adulthood. Te biological well-being of adolescents requires improved nourishment. It has been revealed that prolonged insufcient intake of foods rich in micronutrients such as iron, zinc, and vitamin A relevant to support the biological metamorphosis in adolescents can adversely afect their growth and well-being [1]. Te majority of adolescents habitually skip breakfast, fruits, vegetables, and milk daily, reducing their dietary intake [2,3]. Adolescents with such dietary practices manifest micronutrient inadequacies such as iron, calcium, zinc, folic acid, and vitamins A, D, and C [4,5]. Tese defciencies expose adolescents to perpetual nutritional and health vulnerabilities.
## (s8) Study Selection.
(p8.0) A total of 2,252 articles were retrieved from the fve databases. Six hundred and eighteen (618) duplicates were removed and one thousand, four hundred and ninety-two (1,492) records were excluded after screening by title and abstract. One hundred and forty-two (142) articles were fully assessed for eligibility, and one hundred and twenty-seven (127) articles were also excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, ffteen (15) studies were included in the review ( Figure 1).

(p8.1) A total of 2,252 articles were retrieved from the fve databases. Six hundred and eighteen (618) duplicates were removed and one thousand, four hundred and ninety-two (1,492) records were excluded after screening by title and abstract. One hundred and forty-two (142) articles were fully assessed for eligibility, and one hundred and twenty-seven (127) articles were also excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, ffteen (15) studies were included in the review ( Figure 1).
## (s17) Educational Status.
(p17.0) Among the four studies that reported on educational status as a risk factor of anaemia, three studies indicated that maternal education was a key determinant [32,39,45]. El Sahn et al. [45]; reported that the risk of anaemia increased signifcantly with decreased level of education (OR = 3.5, 95% CI: 10.90-6.32). Adolescents with education up to the junior high school level or lower were found to have increased odds of being anaemic [32,33].

(p17.1) Among the four studies that reported on educational status as a risk factor of anaemia, three studies indicated that maternal education was a key determinant [32,39,45]. El Sahn et al. [45]; reported that the risk of anaemia increased signifcantly with decreased level of education (OR = 3.5, 95% CI: 10.90-6.32). Adolescents with education up to the junior high school level or lower were found to have increased odds of being anaemic [32,33].
## (s19) Rural Areas.
(p19.0) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.

(p19.1) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.
## (s20) Family Size.
(p20.0) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.

(p20.1) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.
## (s26) Guardian Education.
(p26.0) Low educational status of guardians, particularly mothers, has been linked to a high risk of anaemia in adolescents in diverse settings and studies [32,39,57]. Mothers with limited formal education may not be able to read and understand food labels. Knowledge levels of nutrition by mothers are critical as most are key kitchen persons in most homes infuencing food preparation, dietary choices, and intake of the family. Maternal education status has been shown to infuence children's normal haemoglobin levels [58]. Te education level of fathers and adolescents rarely led to iron defciency anaemia within our target group.

(p26.1) Low educational status of guardians, particularly mothers, has been linked to a high risk of anaemia in adolescents in diverse settings and studies [32,39,57]. Mothers with limited formal education may not be able to read and understand food labels. Knowledge levels of nutrition by mothers are critical as most are key kitchen persons in most homes infuencing food preparation, dietary choices, and intake of the family. Maternal education status has been shown to infuence children's normal haemoglobin levels [58]. Te education level of fathers and adolescents rarely led to iron defciency anaemia within our target group.
## (s36) Introduction
(p36.0) Adolescents undergo physiological and psychological growth to set the foundation of adulthood. Te biological well-being of adolescents requires improved nourishment. It has been revealed that prolonged insufcient intake of foods rich in micronutrients such as iron, zinc, and vitamin A relevant to support the biological metamorphosis in adolescents can adversely afect their growth and well-being [1]. Te majority of adolescents habitually skip breakfast, fruits, vegetables, and milk daily, reducing their dietary intake [2,3]. Adolescents with such dietary practices manifest micronutrient inadequacies such as iron, calcium, zinc, folic acid, and vitamins A, D, and C [4,5]. Tese defciencies expose adolescents to perpetual nutritional and health vulnerabilities.
## (s44) Study Selection.
(p44.0) A total of 2,252 articles were retrieved from the fve databases. Six hundred and eighteen (618) duplicates were removed and one thousand, four hundred and ninety-two (1,492) records were excluded after screening by title and abstract. One hundred and forty-two (142) articles were fully assessed for eligibility, and one hundred and twenty-seven (127) articles were also excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, ffteen (15) studies were included in the review ( Figure 1).

(p44.1) A total of 2,252 articles were retrieved from the fve databases. Six hundred and eighteen (618) duplicates were removed and one thousand, four hundred and ninety-two (1,492) records were excluded after screening by title and abstract. One hundred and forty-two (142) articles were fully assessed for eligibility, and one hundred and twenty-seven (127) articles were also excluded based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. Finally, ffteen (15) studies were included in the review ( Figure 1).
## (s53) Educational Status.
(p53.0) Among the four studies that reported on educational status as a risk factor of anaemia, three studies indicated that maternal education was a key determinant [32,39,45]. El Sahn et al. [45]; reported that the risk of anaemia increased signifcantly with decreased level of education (OR = 3.5, 95% CI: 10.90-6.32). Adolescents with education up to the junior high school level or lower were found to have increased odds of being anaemic [32,33].

(p53.1) Among the four studies that reported on educational status as a risk factor of anaemia, three studies indicated that maternal education was a key determinant [32,39,45]. El Sahn et al. [45]; reported that the risk of anaemia increased signifcantly with decreased level of education (OR = 3.5, 95% CI: 10.90-6.32). Adolescents with education up to the junior high school level or lower were found to have increased odds of being anaemic [32,33].
## (s55) Rural Areas.
(p55.0) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.

(p55.1) Two studies reported on rural areas and anaemia [36,38]. Te studies showed that adolescents living in rural areas had an increased risk of anaemia. Regasa and Haidar found that the odds were statistically signifcant.
## (s56) Family Size.
(p56.0) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.

(p56.1) Two studies assessed the relationship between family size and anaemia [36,42]. Te studies indicated that large family size increased the odds of anaemia. Ramzi et al. [42] showed signifcant association, while Shaka and Wondimagegne [36] indicated otherwise.
## (s62) Guardian Education.
(p62.0) Low educational status of guardians, particularly mothers, has been linked to a high risk of anaemia in adolescents in diverse settings and studies [32,39,57]. Mothers with limited formal education may not be able to read and understand food labels. Knowledge levels of nutrition by mothers are critical as most are key kitchen persons in most homes infuencing food preparation, dietary choices, and intake of the family. Maternal education status has been shown to infuence children's normal haemoglobin levels [58]. Te education level of fathers and adolescents rarely led to iron defciency anaemia within our target group.

(p62.1) Low educational status of guardians, particularly mothers, has been linked to a high risk of anaemia in adolescents in diverse settings and studies [32,39,57]. Mothers with limited formal education may not be able to read and understand food labels. Knowledge levels of nutrition by mothers are critical as most are key kitchen persons in most homes infuencing food preparation, dietary choices, and intake of the family. Maternal education status has been shown to infuence children's normal haemoglobin levels [58]. Te education level of fathers and adolescents rarely led to iron defciency anaemia within our target group.
