# Broomrapes (Orobanche spp.) the Challenge and Management: A review

CorpusID: 251633623 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02b8581fb408b432f4116e268eecc5fd6bb839f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/02b8581fb408b432f4116e268eecc5fd6bb839f6)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) CONTACT AND ATTACHMENT
(p2.0) Orobanche germinated seed extends a radicle (germination tube) that moves toward the host root system in a chemotropic response or bending movement in response to inhibitory chemicals in the host root exudates. Successful contact needs the radical locates host root, haustoria development, penetration into the host root, and connection between vascular systems of the parasite and host plant. Upon the contact sticky papillae adhere the parasite to the host root surface. Penetration occurs mainly by mechanical pressure on the host cells and hydrolytic enzymatic action (Veronesi et al., 2007). The primary haustoria and the tubercles are the major connecting organs. After attachment, the radicle doesn't act anymore. The haustoria swell forms tubercles or nodules and connect with the vascular system of host plants and s absorption of the required materials. The parasite functions as a powerful super sink strongly deprive water, mineral nutrients, and carbohydrates. Orobanche accumulates mannitol that lowers parasite osmotic potential much more negatively than the host. Upon haustorial growth, an underground tuber develops, shoot bud differentiates, elongates, and emerges above the soil only for flowering and seeding.

(p2.1) Orobanche seedlings have no chlorophyll and in absence of a suitable host, they soon shrivel and die. the life cycle of the parasite involves two phases, the onditioningtart, important for leaching germination inhibitors from parasite seeds and germination stimulates or related substances are accumulating, and the second phase is seedling attachment to the host root system and the start of true parasitism. The latter phase is further divided into the hypogeal stage occurs below the soil level and the epigeal stage during which the vegetative organ grows rapidly and produces reproductive organs above the soil. Emergence, flowering, and seeding of the parasite may take 15 to 18 days.
## (s17) Chemical Methods Fumigants
(p17.0) Methyl bromide had been used against Orobanche in cash crops but in a limited area, under tunnels, plastic, and glasshouses for the high-cost justification. Volatile compounds such as methyl bromide, ethylene dibromide for O. crenata control in pea (Pisum sativum L.), methamsodium for O. aegyptiaca in tomato (Jacobsohn et al., 1987), or formalin were found effective against broomrapes (Foy et al., 1989). The practice of soil fumigation has caused environmental problems (Shabana et al., 2003) and therefore, it was banned including Methyl bromide in different countries.
## (s23) Potato (Solanum tuberosum)
(p23.0) Single and sequential applications of rimsulfuron between 20 and 50 g a.i./ha significantly reduced O. ramosa shoot number and dry weight. Three applications were most effective (Haidar et al., 2005b). Best results on Orobanche control and potato selectivity were obtained with rimsulfuron (12.5 g a.i./ha) followed by sequential 3 foliar application of glyphosate at 100 g a.i./ha (Haidar et al., 2005b). Orobanche aegyptiaca and O. ramosa were controlled in potato-infested soils by split foliar applications of low rates of imazapic and rimsulfuron. Three applications of imazapic at 4.5 g/ha each, after crop emergence and reapplied at 2-week intervals, prevented Orobanche infestation (Goldwasser et al., 2001).

(p23.1) Vitch (Vicia spp.) Nadal et al. (2008) reported that glyphosate at 35-67 g a.i./ha, applied when O. crenata attachment was at the tubercle stage of development increased seed yield of narbon bean (Vicia narbonensis).
## (s28) Parsley (Petroselinum sativum)
(p28.0) Orobanche crenata and O. aegyptiaca were completely controlled with split foliar application of imazapic (2.5-5 gha-1) or glyphosate (36-72 gha-1); applied on 5-7 leaf parsley before the first cutting and on the young new growth after each cutting (Goldwasser et al., 2003).
## (s32) Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum)
(p32.0) Glyphosate and sulfosate applied twice at 30 to 50 g a.i./ha were effective against O. ramosa and O. aegyptiaca on tomato and eggplant but reduced tomato yield. Variations between tomato cultivars were detected for glyphosate treatment at 150 ppm. glyphosate in 250l water /ha applied at 2-true leaf stage (Foy et al., 1988).
