# Trust Management Techniques and their Challenges in Cloud Computing: A Review

CorpusID: 255709183 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d73afbd5e7268194a7914b7138156c21d66cc2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7d73afbd5e7268194a7914b7138156c21d66cc2e)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) In the current scenario, cloud computing serves as the frontal cortex of web design. Still, dispersed processing isn't perfect because it's constantly changing, hard to understand, not clear, and open to anyone. When it comes to what happens to their data once it has been uploaded to the cloud, customers have a dubious point of view. Before making any decisions, they think about who will have access to their data and how it will be kept, documented, shared, and used. Aside from that, the order of their data is not supported [1]. Customers experience a sense of vulnerability in this way when using cloud organizations.

(p0.1) Furthermore, any cloud organization's assurance depends on the QoS and limits set by expert centers. But the main problem is that clients need help measuring QoS for sure since the cloud's capabilities are constantly changing. Furthermore, the needs of customers shift depending on the requirements they have. Also, feedback from real customers is the most reliable way to figure out how cloud-based businesses are doing. However, this information is affected by a malicious component. Trust is used between a buyer and a provider to manage this fundamental obstacle.

(p0.2) Distributed registration gives you access to a pool of highquality cloud-based resources (association, operating system, application, storage, server) at a lower price [1]. It operates based on compensation that can be accessed from any location, device, or time. SLAs include all information about the congruence of the represented QoS (quality of service) between clients and service providers.

(p0.3) Distributed registering is the delayed result of the expansion of the infinite accumulation of virtualization, the organization of structured design, autonomic, and utility processing [2] development organization that helps their enrolment operations [3,4,5]. Trust is a common understanding between two substances that need to talk with each other for business purposes.

(p0.4) The trustworthiness is classified as theoretical or objective [6]. Through help-level agreements, target trust is assessed among administered and surveyed organizations. So, when the expert association helps out according to the plan, it builds more trust. Analysis evaluations presented by various assistance purchasers are associated with unique trust. It depends upon the consumer's data and organizational tendencies during their coordinated effort [7]. When a client
## (s1) REVIEW ARTICLE
(p1.0) gives an expert association unique information, that client's trust in the expert association grows. Trust is passionate and depends on the feedback provider's knowledge and skill set [8]. Objective trust connects allotted and surveyed organizations through a high-level plan [9].

(p1.1) Hence, the trust of the expert association increases when it offers different kinds of services, as shown by the course of action. The concept of trust is linked to analysis evaluations presented by various assistance buyers. It depends upon the client's data and organizational tendencies during their association. Suppose a purchaser trusts an expert center with extraordinary information and the trust increases. In any case, trust is theoretical and depends on the understanding and willingness of purchasers. But simultaneously, some aggravating hardships are accessible in this system.

(p1.2) The best way to solve this problem is to create a complete cloud trust scheme that creates a safe environment for controlled, cost-effective cloud investments. Even though cloud trust evaluation is an essential part of trust management, many research articles don't look at it systematically. The main goal of this study is to look at the existing trust models, highlight the most critical problems with managing trust in the modern world, and then suggest a way to confirm trust in the use of cloud services.
## (s2) CLOUD COMPUTING
(p2.0) Cloud computing is a conventional term that applies to getting administrations facilitated on the internet [10]. Cloud computing works on a per-utilized model, like water and power charges that are charged according to utilization. It is the reason why associations show their thoughtfulness regarding this innovation.

(p2.1) As per the American National Institute of Standards and Technology [11], "distributed computing is a model for qualifying on-demand network access to a common pool of adaptable figuring assets that can be immediately provisioned and conveyed with ostensible administration exertion on specialist organization affiliation." The functioning standards of distributed computing are virtualization and SOA (servicesituated architecture), which uphold the multi-tenure idea where a few administrations (framework, programming) are shared by a huge arrangement of shoppers on different host stages with heterogeneous execution.
## (s6) TRUST MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
(p6.0) In 1996, M. Burst introduced the concept of confidence (Matt Blaze. et.al 1999). In popular usage, trust is defined as an agreement between two entities, one of which serves the position of trustee and the other of which is the trustor. In the trust model, both parties exchange knowledge and resources to attain their respective goals. Trust is loose, like human conduct, and can't be portrayed and assessed quantitatively. "Trust depends on interpretation." Trust is a position that substantially distinguishes three perspectives: assumption, risk, and belief [18]. Similarly, the essential characteristic of trust is that it is difficult to attain and easy to lose. In addition, it is appropriate to note that the judgment is dynamic, as it can increase or decrease the value based on the trustee's continuous experience with various sources. There are several methods for measuring trust and esteem. Even though the processes would be distinct, the logic behind all equipment is the same and is known as the "Trust Model." TMS aims to improve the degree of confidence between consumers and service providers.
## (s13) Reputation-Based Trust Model
(p13.0) It is also known as the "feedback model." This model is based on feedback provided by historical cloud users or service providers, depending on the perspective from which the system is designed. Based on the providers' perception, the provided feedback is either positive or negative.

(p13.1) The perception of the feedback provider can be situationspecific or person-specific. The vital difference between reputation and recommendation is in the scenario of the reputation model where the trusted entity (CSP or CU) doesn't know the source of the feedback provider as there is no confidence in a relationship between entities.

(p13.2) Let 'x' be a cloud user with Tx trust threshold value. 'y' be a CSP with trusted relation with other CU Tr(y)={t1,t2,t3,.....tn} (other CU) and feedback provided by these users are Tf(y)={ f1,f2,f3....fn} (as represent in eq. 3) 

(p13.3) Multiple methods exist for trust value evaluation, such as game theory, fuzzy theory, Bayesian theorem, graph theory, data science, grey set theory, and probability theory. Still, the central objective is the same as the trust model or management system. The trust mechanism aims to increase confidence between consumers and service providers [18]. Trust management systems have proven useful in numerous decision-making services like grid computing, the web, and utility computing. In the past, the focus of most of the researchers was either on the subjective (recommender, feedback-based) or objective (Agreement based) trust evaluation [19]. The comprehensive summation of both trusts can provide better results because they can complement each other [20]. The consumer's faith in the expert associations in the cloud environment relies on the scenario, degree of involvement, 
## (s29) Parameters used by different Trust Models
(p29.0) These parameters, also known as "trust factors," are considered during service evaluation or selection. Multiple quality-of-service parameters are available at the time-ofservice selection. Moreover, there is another big problem for cloud users in deciding which parameters they select for assessing cloud services. The number and type of parameters depend on the requirements of the organization. These parameters are quantitative as well as qualitative in nature.

(p29.1) There is no globally recognized method or parameter to fathom the quality of a cloud service, the service measurement index (SMI) can be considered an initial step in this procedure. As in the present situation, many service distributors with various services and facilities are present creating conditions of ambiguity and confusion for the consumer [54], SMI proves to be important in such cases for the assessment of the service. Table 6 briefly compares the parameters used by different research articles.     Other concerns include reputation, interoperability, SLA, virtualization, trust administration, and service quality (QoS). The issues associated with cloud computing and trust management are depicted in Figure 4. It is evident from the graph below that security is the most problematic aspect of trust management. Figure 5 illustrates the number of Scopusindexed and published papers between March 2010 and September 2022, depending on several trust methodologies. The research related to trust management may be divided into four subcategories.
