# A R T I C L E Creativity in SMEs: A overview and agenda for future research

CorpusID: 250931276 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b46691ad2c93dc2149ebd1c52ff9f4849b0c11f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b46691ad2c93dc2149ebd1c52ff9f4849b0c11f)

Fields: Business, Psychology

## (s3) BiBliometric AnAlysis
(p3.0) Bibliometric methods are valuable tools to track and trace scientific processes (Benavides-Velasco et al., 2013;Wydra, 2020). They are increasingly used to help critical decision-making in research policies on highly specialized topics (Rons, 2018) since they provide useful information for researchers (Rey-Martí et al., 2016). Bibliometric indicators, such as cited counts and journal impact factors, are often used to evaluate the impact of articles (Pan et al., 2018). Therefore, the bibliometric analysis examines objective quantitative information (Albort-Morant & Ribeiro-Soriano, 2016).
## (s4) choice of dAtABAse
(p4.0) The information in the documents was retrieved from the SCI-Expanded of the Clarivate Analytics Web of Science, from all categories and all types of publications to obtain an interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary approach (Loi et al., 2016). The Web of Science (WoS) has traditionally been the primary source of scientific publications (Baier-Fuentes et al., 2019), and it has been established that Web of Science has a significant advantage over other databases in coverage of social science literature (Norris & Oppenheim, 2007).
## (s6) codificAtion process
(p6.0) The next step was to review the 278 publications identified manually, and those that did not address creativity, called false positives, were excluded (Vallaster et al., 2019). Although a series of documents focus on entrepreneurship, we decided to keep them, considering that the authors refer to the study of creativity in students, managers, or the director of SMEs. With the 137 resulting records, a single database was prepared in a flat file containing the complete record with the author, language, year of publication, type of research, country, research field, keywords, cited references, and citation variables publications search results.
## (s7) indicAtors
(p7.0) In the present study, activity indicators are used, which measure the productivity of a researcher, institution, or journal measured in the number of publications, quality indicators that are focused on measuring the frequency with which a publication, an author, or a journal is cited for other publications (Cadavid-Higuita et al., 2012) and bibliometric methods, these are, the co-citation, which arises when two articles are independently cited by one or more articles and the bibliographic association, which takes place when two articles make reference to a third common article in their bibliographies; indicating that there is a probability that the two articles deal with a related topic (Ferreira, 2018).

(p7.1) Measures of centrality and density are used to represent bibliometric networks (Callon et al., 1991). The centrality of Callon (Callon et al., 1991) measures the degree of interaction of a network contrasted to other networks. It is identified as indicated in (1), where k represents a word belonging to the subject and h a keyword belonging to another subject.

(p7.2) The density of Callon (Callon et al., 1991) measures the internal strength of a network and can be defined as (2), where i and j are keywords belonging to the subject and w the number of keywords (nodes) that frame the subject. 19 435 (i) Upper-right quadrant with high density and strong centrality represent topics that are important for structuring the field and are also well developed. (ii) Upper-left quadrant with high density and low centrality, these themes are well developed but are less critical for the field. (iii) Lower-left quadrant with low density and low centrality, they represent topics that are less developed and are of lower importance; and (iv) Lower-right quadrant themes with high centrality but low density, these topics, although not developed enough, are crucial for a research field (Reverte & Badillo, 2019).
## (s8) tools used
(p8.0) There are two tools used for the analysis, the free access software VOSviewer that allows the construction of bibliometric maps (Waltman & Van Eck, 2012), mainly used to create a map based on the constructed data (Cobo et al., 2011). Moreover, the second is software used called SciMAT, which allows the construction of scientific maps and the visualization of the evolution of a scientific area (Cobo et al., 2017) through strategic maps.
## (s10) descriptiVe AnAlysis
(p10.0) More than half of the articles have been published between 2014 and 2020, and the United States is the country with the highest contribution (15%), followed by England (10%) and Netherlands (8%). From a total of 328 authors, who have contributed with studies, Naser Valaei leads the research with four papers, followed by Sajad Rezaei with three papers. Twelve authors have published two papers, and 314 authors have published a single paper. The journals that have published most on the subject are Small Business Economics (8), Technovation (5), and Creativity and Innovation Management (5). 98% of the publications are in English. Of all them, 32% have been classified in the management area, 21% in business, 11% in economics, 6% in industrial engineering, and 29 categories represent the remaining 20%. Figure 1 shows a co-occurrence of author keywords with a minimum co-occurrence threshold of six appearances and the top co-occurrence links. The analysis shows 5 groups. The first is led by innovation and creativity, the second is led by performance, the third group is led by employee creativity, the fourth group on management, and the last group relates models and perspectives. Cooccurrence analysis of keywords generates a network of topics and relationships. The size represents the relevance of an element, and colors are used to group the elements, and distance suggests more significant co-occurrence among keywords when it is shorter (Mulet-Forteza et al., 2018).

(p10.1) The total of publications has been cited in 7,700 opportunities, with an h-index value equivalent to 44, which means that at least 44 articles have received at least 44 citations. Thus, 20% of articles received 72% of the total cited, and only 6% of the documents have been cited more than 200 times. Table 1 represents the number of articles classified according to quantify citations, and Table 2 shows the ten most cited articles. Source: Own Elaboration.  
## (s11) content AnAlysis
(p11.0) There are 9 themes developed when studying creativity in SMEs, in Table 3 presents the themes, including the values of centrality, density, the value h-index and number of citations, each of the concepts that structure the subject, and the number of associated documents is included. In Figure 2, the subjects are presented graphically, positioned according to the value of centrality in the horizontal axis and the value of density in the vertical axis. The evolution of the research in four periods of time is presented in Figure 3. The number within the circle represents the total number of keywords in the period. The arrows between two consecutive periods represent the number of shared keywords in both periods. The stability index is shown in parentheses, defined as an overlap fraction (van Eck & Waltman, 2009). The incoming arrows indicate the number of new keywords in the period, and the outgoing ones represent the keywords that have not been used in the next period. In Figure 4, the diagrams are presented by period considering centrality and density. The first period is not presented, given that the small number of words does not generate a network.

(p11.1) The individual analysis of the documents is organized in a framework presented in Figure 5, which includes three types of studies: empirical, theoretical, and case studies. The categories dependents and independents variables have been identified, and for the empirical studies, the scale of measurement of creativity, industries studied, and countries of the study of creativity in SMEs are added. The indicated values show the rate of occurrence in the review, establishing at least the threshold of 2 occurrences to group the concepts. Performance (18) Innovation (14) Creativity (10) Entrepreneurship (7) Product innovation (5) Innovation capacity (4) Innovator Behavior (4) Process innovation (3) Growth (3) Organizational innovation (2) Productivity (2) Empirical  (2) Creativity (5) Context (3) Characteristics (2) Entrepreneurial Orientation (2) Innovation (2) (2) Innovation (16) Impacts on the Organization (3) Characteristics (3) Creativity (3) Desing (2) Entrepreneurship (2) Ideas (3) Creativity (6) Networks (6) Innovation (3) Entrepreneurship (3) Innovation Activities (2) Knowledge management (2) Commitment (2) Barriers (2) Creativity (26) -Organizational learning (6) -Commitment (6) -Entrepreneurship (6) -Knowledge management (6) -Culture (5) -Transformational leadership (5) -Work environment (4) -Taking risks ( 4) -Self-efficacy (4) - (2) 
## (s13) DISCUSSION
(p13.0) The study sample is represented by 17% with theoretical studies, 27% case studies, and 56% empirical studies. Thus, it is possible to observe how initially the research has been approached more generally, articles that consider creativity as a construct, variable, or factor as part of the study of innovation, and articles that measure creativity in employees or entrepreneurs.

(p13.1) The research has evolved to more specific aspects. For example, the tools used by the authors respond to analyses to determine moderating effects of variables, fuzzy analysis, and modeling of structural equations to answer the hypotheses. In addition, empirical studies are more abundant.

(p13.2) Those themes positioned with greater centrality and density are called engines, which invites researchers to be reviewed when creativity is being studied in the SME. The first topic in this situation is called performance, and the network comprises studies that relate concepts, innovation, creativity, employee creativity, management, environment, and product innovation. The other topic is moderators, which incorporate those factors that moderate the studied relationships, and these are risk-taking, product, entrepreneurs, motivation, and workgroups.

(p13.3) The overlap fraction for the last period exhibits a value of 0.32. Thus, in SMEs' creativity, concepts are recently addressed and are interpreted as an evolving area that is important to researchers.

(p13.4) Theoretical studies have analyzed factors and possible connections between creativity, innovation, and entrepreneurship as fundamental processes (Shah, 2014;Ward, 2004) and theories that explain the organizational drivers of innovation, entrepreneurship, or new companies' emergence (Sklaveniti, 2017).
## (s15) An AgendA for future reseArch in creAtiVity in sme
(p15.0) The analysis carried out has shown that it is necessary to increase research on creativity in SMEs in a wide variety of topics. Future research should try to identify and test a series of factors so that creativity can generate economic development (Belitski & Desai, 2016). The opportunity arises to analyze what or how additional factors can influence the transformation of creativity in the company (Przychodzen et al., 2016). Moreover, background related to family businesses has been neglected in the general debate. So that we can classify in future lines of research that we have organized into five themes:
