# Bioactive Compound in Solanum torvum and Its Potential as Functional Food and Drink: A Review Corresponding author*

CorpusID: 259706754 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af3eed7e6dbcb3ed6b862d4eddf23013f4935a1e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/af3eed7e6dbcb3ed6b862d4eddf23013f4935a1e)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s8) Flour (dried powder)
(p8.0) The most common commercially used product, dried fruit powders are found to be an emerging functional ingredient. It has a long shelf life because of the water content and odorless materials (Phan, 2021). To make it efficient to combine with other food products, it is necessary to create Solanum torvum powder. Helilusiatiningsih, 2021 identifies the phytochemistry component of Solanum Torvum flour by doing 3 different methods of drying.The types of methods are sunlight drying, vacuum dryer, and try dryer. The result explains phytochemistry compounds and nutritional values.
## (s11) Juice
(p11.0) In Ghana, the fruits of Solanum Torvum are traditional healers for anemia and ailments. The fruit is processed into a drinkable juice. With a high concentration of iron, it is possible to be utilized as a healing treatment for anemia and iron deficiency. Iron is a mineral needed for human growth (Al-Jameil et al., 2014). Solanum torvum aqueous extract has the ability as immunomodulatory and haematinic properties where it could be used as a hematinic and food for patients with immunity problems (Koffuor, 2011). A study by Okoto (2015) investigated the components of Solanum Torvum Juice. The analysis shows that fruit juice has an abundance of water content (86,23%), carbohydrates 7.033%, proteins 2.322%, fats 0.278%, ash 0.143%, and crude fiber 3.993%. The analysis for important minerals content was conducted. According to the obtained results, Calcium was the highest amount of mineral (221.583 mg/kg), followed by Iron (76.869mg/kg), Zinc (21.460mg/kg), manganese (19.466 mg/kg), and copper (2.642mg/kg). Besides nutritional and mineral compounds, vitamin was found in the juice. The 100 grams of the sample contain 2.686 mg of vitamin C and 0.078 of Vitamin A.
