# Time is of the Essence: A Review of Electroencephalography (EEG) and Event-Related Brain Potentials (ERPs) in Language Research

CorpusID: 254224502 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce32d89c39770a58e74e0795337b285752eddee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce32d89c39770a58e74e0795337b285752eddee)

Fields: Psychology, Linguistics, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Electroencephalography(EEG) has come a long way since its discovery 140 years ago by an English physician Richard Caton. In 1875, he obtained the first EEG from open brains of monkeys and rabbits. Almost 50 years later, in 1924, Hans Berger made the first EEG recording on the human scalp, by using simple radio equipment in order to amplify the electrical activity of the brain, and obtained a written output on paper. He claimed that brain activity that is observed through the use of EEG can change in a consistent, reliable and recognizable fashion when the state of the patient changes, such as going from relaxation to alertness, sleep, lack of oxygen (Bronzino 1995). This breakthrough gave rise for the research of the years to come and the varied applications of EEG use today.

(p0.1) The average human brain has about 86 billion neurons (Herculano-Houzel 2009), and the communication between them is the key brain activity. They are excitable cells with intrinsic electrical properties, and their activity results in magnetic as well as electrical fields, which can then be recorded with the use of recording electrodes. The EEG is the recording of the summed electrical activity of populations of neurons called pyramidal cells, measured with the use of electrodes placed on the scalp and graphed over time. It is an alternating current that fluctuates from positive to negative depending on a number of factors, including changes in the permeability of the cell membrane that are induced by excitatory or inhibitory inputs from other neurons. There are two main types of neuronal activity: action potentials and postsynaptic potentials. Action potentials are the result of the very rapid depolarization of a neuron mediated mainly by changes in permeability of the membrane to sodium and potassium ions. They occur when the cell depolarizes to a certain degree from its negative resting state potential. Once that threshold is reached, there is a rapid firing of the action potential (about 1 ms.) from the beginning of the axon at the cell body down to the axon terminals. Postsynaptic potentials are mediated by a number of neurotransmitter systems and, as a result of synaptic activation, generally entail slower changes in membrane potentials (Lopes da Silva 2010). They are voltages produced when the neurotransmitters bind to the receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, making ion channels open or close. Reliably, EEG can only record postsynaptic potentials. Due to action potentials being very rapid and brief, in addition to having to travel down the axon at a fixed rate, the electrodes placed on the scalp simply cannot detect them. Postsynaptic potentials, on the other hand, represent the change in electrical charge outside the membrane and this lasts in the extra-cellular space for up to 200 ms. The extra-cellular electrical charge, positive or negative, is what is measured with electrodes placed on the scalp. Pyramidal cells are like little batteries in that they have polarity-if one end of the dendrite is positive, the other is negative. Whether the charge outside the dendrite at the top of a pyramidal cell is positive or negative depends on two factors; first, whether an inhibitory or excitatory stimulus has come to the synaptic junction from the axon of another cell and, second, whether that synapse is proximal or distal to the cell body. For example, if an excitatory stimulus comes in near the distal end of the dendrite (near the surface of the cortex) the change in permeability of the membrane allows Na + to rush into the cell at that point leaving the extracellular space negative (since the pyramidal cell acts like a battery, the extra-cellular space at the proximal end of the dendrite will be positive). The EEG electrode on the scalp will record a negative extracellular potential if the same thing is happening at the same time to a large number of pyramidal cells in the same macro-column of cells that lies below the electrode. The EEG thus represents the algebraic sum of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.

(p0.2) EEG plays a crucial role in many aspects of today's research. It is used in medicine, where monitoring brain activity (or the lack thereof) is useful in determining brain death in patients, areas of damage following a stroke or head trauma, epileptic activity, sleep disorders, and many others. In other research, it is useful in investigating various cognitive functions, such as memory or attention; it is also used in language and clinical research; for example, studies that investigate EEG patterns in individuals with aphasia.

(p0.3) Electroencephalography(EEG) has come a long way since its discovery 140 years ago by an English physician Richard Caton. In 1875, he obtained the first EEG from open brains of monkeys and rabbits. Almost 50 years later, in 1924, Hans Berger made the first EEG recording on the human scalp, by using simple radio equipment in order to amplify the electrical activity of the brain, and obtained a written output on paper. He claimed that brain activity that is observed through the use of EEG can change in a consistent, reliable and recognizable fashion when the state of the patient changes, such as going from relaxation to alertness, sleep, lack of oxygen (Bronzino 1995). This breakthrough gave rise for the research of the years to come and the varied applications of EEG use today.

(p0.4) The average human brain has about 86 billion neurons (Herculano-Houzel 2009), and the communication between them is the key brain activity. They are excitable cells with intrinsic electrical properties, and their activity results in magnetic as well as electrical fields, which can then be recorded with the use of recording electrodes. The EEG is the recording of the summed electrical activity of populations of neurons called pyramidal cells, measured with the use of electrodes placed on the scalp and graphed over time. It is an alternating current that fluctuates from positive to negative depending on a number of factors, including changes in the permeability of the cell membrane that are induced by excitatory or inhibitory inputs from other neurons. There are two main types of neuronal activity: action potentials and postsynaptic potentials. Action potentials are the result of the very rapid depolarization of a neuron mediated mainly by changes in permeability of the membrane to sodium and potassium ions. They occur when the cell depolarizes to a certain degree from its negative resting state potential. Once that threshold is reached, there is a rapid firing of the action potential (about 1 ms.) from the beginning of the axon at the cell body down to the axon terminals. Postsynaptic potentials are mediated by a number of neurotransmitter systems and, as a result of synaptic activation, generally entail slower changes in membrane potentials (Lopes da Silva 2010). They are voltages produced when the neurotransmitters bind to the receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, making ion channels open or close. Reliably, EEG can only record postsynaptic potentials. Due to action potentials being very rapid and brief, in addition to having to travel down the axon at a fixed rate, the electrodes placed on the scalp simply cannot detect them. Postsynaptic potentials, on the other hand, represent the change in electrical charge outside the membrane and this lasts in the extra-cellular space for up to 200 ms. The extra-cellular electrical charge, positive or negative, is what is measured with electrodes placed on the scalp. Pyramidal cells are like little batteries in that they have polarity-if one end of the dendrite is positive, the other is negative. Whether the charge outside the dendrite at the top of a pyramidal cell is positive or negative depends on two factors; first, whether an inhibitory or excitatory stimulus has come to the synaptic junction from the axon of another cell and, second, whether that synapse is proximal or distal to the cell body. For example, if an excitatory stimulus comes in near the distal end of the dendrite (near the surface of the cortex) the change in permeability of the membrane allows Na + to rush into the cell at that point leaving the extracellular space negative (since the pyramidal cell acts like a battery, the extra-cellular space at the proximal end of the dendrite will be positive). The EEG electrode on the scalp will record a negative extracellular potential if the same thing is happening at the same time to a large number of pyramidal cells in the same macro-column of cells that lies below the electrode. The EEG thus represents the algebraic sum of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.

(p0.5) EEG plays a crucial role in many aspects of today's research. It is used in medicine, where monitoring brain activity (or the lack thereof) is useful in determining brain death in patients, areas of damage following a stroke or head trauma, epileptic activity, sleep disorders, and many others. In other research, it is useful in investigating various cognitive functions, such as memory or attention; it is also used in language and clinical research; for example, studies that investigate EEG patterns in individuals with aphasia.
## (s7) What Do You Mean? The N400
(p7.0) N400 is one of the best and most studied language components. It was first reported by Kutas and Hillyard (1980). Over the last 30 years, it has been used as a dependent variable in more than 1000 studies, with topics ranging from language comprehension, through semantic memory, processing of faces and gestures, to clinical studies such as those that looked at developmental disorders. It was discovered by accident, in a modified experiment aimed at eliciting a P3b response for language materials (Kutas and Hillyard 1980). Participants were presented word-by-word with sentences, which had either a congruent ending (75% of stimuli), such as 'I shaved off my moustache and beard', and 25% of sentenced which either had a strange ending ('He planted string beans in his car') or completely incorrect endings ('I take my coffee with cream and dog'). As a result, a large negativity was elicited-largest for semantically anomalous sentences, but present also for those that had a strange, although theoretically possible, ending. It peaked around 400 ms after the onset of target word, and was labeled the N400 (Kutas and Federmeier 2011).

(p7.1) The N400 is found in a number of different experimental paradigms. Firstly, it has been well documented in lexical priming paradigms. The N400 effect (created by the different waves of the congruent-incongruent stimuli) is found when the target word is unrelated (for example, semantically or categorically) to the proceeding word (prime). The unrelated pairs induce larger N400 amplitudes as opposed to the related ones. Secondly, it has been found in auditory word presentation (Bentin et al. 1993). In those experiments, the N400 appears slightly earlier than in the case of visual word presentation (but only in natural speech; when presented at a fixed rate, there is no shift in timing) and lasts longer. It also has a more frontal topography, less concentrated on the right (Holcomb and Anderson 1993).

(p7.2) It is important to note that the N400 is not elicited to just any unexpected language manipulations. For example, it is not found in studies using capital letters for the target word when the rest of the sentence is in lower-cases (for example, 'I shaved off my moustache and BEARD') or those using simple grammatical violations, such as having a singular form of the noun when it should have been plural (for example, 'All turtles have four leg'). The N400 effect is not elicited as a response to just any violation, linguistic or not, but rather is very closely linked with the processing of meaning. It is especially powerful in language studies, however its application goes beyond that (Kutas and Federmeier 2011). The component's sensitivity to meaningful stimuli enabled a range of semantic investigations to take place, including those that focus on how the semantic memory is stored and retrieved in the brain (commonly referred to as semantic memory). Kutas and Federmeier (2011) point out that out of a range of different studies, two main streams of findings are prevalent. Firstly, there is a disparity between the behavioral outcomes (reaction times) and the ERPs. That is, only rarely do those two behave in a similar pattern. This is perhaps not surprising given that with behavioral measures such as RTs, a number of cognitive processes take place and get consolidated by the time the individual makes a response; whereas with the ERPs, the components of interest reflect only a specific fraction of the whole process. Secondly, the results obtained through the ERP analysis often fail to fully support an existing theory, thus supporting different elements of various theoretical approaches.
## (s12) Advantages
(p12.0) ERPs, because of their good temporal resolution, are useful in language research because language processing happens at a very fast pace. Individual words are recognized in much less than half a second, and a difference between a /d/ and a /t/ can be recognized in just a few milliseconds because it comes down to a difference in voicing onset (Kaan 2007). Only a method with an excellent temporal resolution can provide some insight into how language processing unfolds over time.

(p12.1) ERPs are particularly useful when working with clinical populations, such as individuals with aphasia, or infants and children. It is a technique that enables researchers to present the stimuli in spoken form, rather than in writing. Additionally, participants are not required to perform an extra task, again making it particularly useful when testing special populations. For example, in studies involving language comprehension, it is possible to assess the processing of a particular word, which might appear in the middle of the sentence. In classic behavioral experiments, it is necessary to wait until the sentence is fully presented for participants to make a response, thus relying on their memory. By that time, a number of cognitive processes are involved and it is not possible to accurately determine their effect. In experiments where an overt response by participants is needed, it is possible to establish which stage of processing is affected by a particular experimental manipulation, from the stimulus presentation to the response. This technique allows for the collection of continuous data, with very good temporal resolution. In many language experiments, the sampling rate (defined as the rate at which the waveform data is sampled so that it can be changed to a numerical format) is between 250 and 512 Hz (samples every second), which is in line with a rate of language comprehension and therefore enables the continuous online processing.

(p12.2) The ERPs are multidimensional, allowing researchers to draw conclusions about the type of processes involved and their relationship. An example might include studies involving the RTs and self-paced reading. In those cases, we do not know why people might struggle with reading, whereas with the ERPs we can say whether they are struggling with, for example, the semantics or syntax, as those are different components responsible for different processes and they are easily distinguishable in the ERPs.

(p12.3) Another advantage is that the effects can be seen almost immediately upon presenting participants with a particular, for example semantic, manipulation. Additionally, every single stimulus, not just targets, can be time locked in ERP research, thus providing not only instantaneous, but also continuous look at language processing.
## (s16) Introduction
(p16.0) Electroencephalography(EEG) has come a long way since its discovery 140 years ago by an English physician Richard Caton. In 1875, he obtained the first EEG from open brains of monkeys and rabbits. Almost 50 years later, in 1924, Hans Berger made the first EEG recording on the human scalp, by using simple radio equipment in order to amplify the electrical activity of the brain, and obtained a written output on paper. He claimed that brain activity that is observed through the use of EEG can change in a consistent, reliable and recognizable fashion when the state of the patient changes, such as going from relaxation to alertness, sleep, lack of oxygen (Bronzino 1995). This breakthrough gave rise for the research of the years to come and the varied applications of EEG use today.

(p16.1) The average human brain has about 86 billion neurons (Herculano-Houzel 2009), and the communication between them is the key brain activity. They are excitable cells with intrinsic electrical properties, and their activity results in magnetic as well as electrical fields, which can then be recorded with the use of recording electrodes. The EEG is the recording of the summed electrical activity of populations of neurons called pyramidal cells, measured with the use of electrodes placed on the scalp and graphed over time. It is an alternating current that fluctuates from positive to negative depending on a number of factors, including changes in the permeability of the cell membrane that are induced by excitatory or inhibitory inputs from other neurons. There are two main types of neuronal activity: action potentials and postsynaptic potentials. Action potentials are the result of the very rapid depolarization of a neuron mediated mainly by changes in permeability of the membrane to sodium and potassium ions. They occur when the cell depolarizes to a certain degree from its negative resting state potential. Once that threshold is reached, there is a rapid firing of the action potential (about 1 ms.) from the beginning of the axon at the cell body down to the axon terminals. Postsynaptic potentials are mediated by a number of neurotransmitter systems and, as a result of synaptic activation, generally entail slower changes in membrane potentials (Lopes da Silva 2010). They are voltages produced when the neurotransmitters bind to the receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, making ion channels open or close. Reliably, EEG can only record postsynaptic potentials. Due to action potentials being very rapid and brief, in addition to having to travel down the axon at a fixed rate, the electrodes placed on the scalp simply cannot detect them. Postsynaptic potentials, on the other hand, represent the change in electrical charge outside the membrane and this lasts in the extra-cellular space for up to 200 ms. The extra-cellular electrical charge, positive or negative, is what is measured with electrodes placed on the scalp. Pyramidal cells are like little batteries in that they have polarity-if one end of the dendrite is positive, the other is negative. Whether the charge outside the dendrite at the top of a pyramidal cell is positive or negative depends on two factors; first, whether an inhibitory or excitatory stimulus has come to the synaptic junction from the axon of another cell and, second, whether that synapse is proximal or distal to the cell body. For example, if an excitatory stimulus comes in near the distal end of the dendrite (near the surface of the cortex) the change in permeability of the membrane allows Na + to rush into the cell at that point leaving the extracellular space negative (since the pyramidal cell acts like a battery, the extra-cellular space at the proximal end of the dendrite will be positive). The EEG electrode on the scalp will record a negative extracellular potential if the same thing is happening at the same time to a large number of pyramidal cells in the same macro-column of cells that lies below the electrode. The EEG thus represents the algebraic sum of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.

(p16.2) EEG plays a crucial role in many aspects of today's research. It is used in medicine, where monitoring brain activity (or the lack thereof) is useful in determining brain death in patients, areas of damage following a stroke or head trauma, epileptic activity, sleep disorders, and many others. In other research, it is useful in investigating various cognitive functions, such as memory or attention; it is also used in language and clinical research; for example, studies that investigate EEG patterns in individuals with aphasia.

(p16.3) Electroencephalography(EEG) has come a long way since its discovery 140 years ago by an English physician Richard Caton. In 1875, he obtained the first EEG from open brains of monkeys and rabbits. Almost 50 years later, in 1924, Hans Berger made the first EEG recording on the human scalp, by using simple radio equipment in order to amplify the electrical activity of the brain, and obtained a written output on paper. He claimed that brain activity that is observed through the use of EEG can change in a consistent, reliable and recognizable fashion when the state of the patient changes, such as going from relaxation to alertness, sleep, lack of oxygen (Bronzino 1995). This breakthrough gave rise for the research of the years to come and the varied applications of EEG use today.

(p16.4) The average human brain has about 86 billion neurons (Herculano-Houzel 2009), and the communication between them is the key brain activity. They are excitable cells with intrinsic electrical properties, and their activity results in magnetic as well as electrical fields, which can then be recorded with the use of recording electrodes. The EEG is the recording of the summed electrical activity of populations of neurons called pyramidal cells, measured with the use of electrodes placed on the scalp and graphed over time. It is an alternating current that fluctuates from positive to negative depending on a number of factors, including changes in the permeability of the cell membrane that are induced by excitatory or inhibitory inputs from other neurons. There are two main types of neuronal activity: action potentials and postsynaptic potentials. Action potentials are the result of the very rapid depolarization of a neuron mediated mainly by changes in permeability of the membrane to sodium and potassium ions. They occur when the cell depolarizes to a certain degree from its negative resting state potential. Once that threshold is reached, there is a rapid firing of the action potential (about 1 ms.) from the beginning of the axon at the cell body down to the axon terminals. Postsynaptic potentials are mediated by a number of neurotransmitter systems and, as a result of synaptic activation, generally entail slower changes in membrane potentials (Lopes da Silva 2010). They are voltages produced when the neurotransmitters bind to the receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, making ion channels open or close. Reliably, EEG can only record postsynaptic potentials. Due to action potentials being very rapid and brief, in addition to having to travel down the axon at a fixed rate, the electrodes placed on the scalp simply cannot detect them. Postsynaptic potentials, on the other hand, represent the change in electrical charge outside the membrane and this lasts in the extra-cellular space for up to 200 ms. The extra-cellular electrical charge, positive or negative, is what is measured with electrodes placed on the scalp. Pyramidal cells are like little batteries in that they have polarity-if one end of the dendrite is positive, the other is negative. Whether the charge outside the dendrite at the top of a pyramidal cell is positive or negative depends on two factors; first, whether an inhibitory or excitatory stimulus has come to the synaptic junction from the axon of another cell and, second, whether that synapse is proximal or distal to the cell body. For example, if an excitatory stimulus comes in near the distal end of the dendrite (near the surface of the cortex) the change in permeability of the membrane allows Na + to rush into the cell at that point leaving the extracellular space negative (since the pyramidal cell acts like a battery, the extra-cellular space at the proximal end of the dendrite will be positive). The EEG electrode on the scalp will record a negative extracellular potential if the same thing is happening at the same time to a large number of pyramidal cells in the same macro-column of cells that lies below the electrode. The EEG thus represents the algebraic sum of excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic potentials.

(p16.5) EEG plays a crucial role in many aspects of today's research. It is used in medicine, where monitoring brain activity (or the lack thereof) is useful in determining brain death in patients, areas of damage following a stroke or head trauma, epileptic activity, sleep disorders, and many others. In other research, it is useful in investigating various cognitive functions, such as memory or attention; it is also used in language and clinical research; for example, studies that investigate EEG patterns in individuals with aphasia.
## (s23) What Do You Mean? The N400
(p23.0) N400 is one of the best and most studied language components. It was first reported by Kutas and Hillyard (1980). Over the last 30 years, it has been used as a dependent variable in more than 1000 studies, with topics ranging from language comprehension, through semantic memory, processing of faces and gestures, to clinical studies such as those that looked at developmental disorders. It was discovered by accident, in a modified experiment aimed at eliciting a P3b response for language materials (Kutas and Hillyard 1980). Participants were presented word-by-word with sentences, which had either a congruent ending (75% of stimuli), such as 'I shaved off my moustache and beard', and 25% of sentenced which either had a strange ending ('He planted string beans in his car') or completely incorrect endings ('I take my coffee with cream and dog'). As a result, a large negativity was elicited-largest for semantically anomalous sentences, but present also for those that had a strange, although theoretically possible, ending. It peaked around 400 ms after the onset of target word, and was labeled the N400 (Kutas and Federmeier 2011).

(p23.1) The N400 is found in a number of different experimental paradigms. Firstly, it has been well documented in lexical priming paradigms. The N400 effect (created by the different waves of the congruent-incongruent stimuli) is found when the target word is unrelated (for example, semantically or categorically) to the proceeding word (prime). The unrelated pairs induce larger N400 amplitudes as opposed to the related ones. Secondly, it has been found in auditory word presentation (Bentin et al. 1993). In those experiments, the N400 appears slightly earlier than in the case of visual word presentation (but only in natural speech; when presented at a fixed rate, there is no shift in timing) and lasts longer. It also has a more frontal topography, less concentrated on the right (Holcomb and Anderson 1993).

(p23.2) It is important to note that the N400 is not elicited to just any unexpected language manipulations. For example, it is not found in studies using capital letters for the target word when the rest of the sentence is in lower-cases (for example, 'I shaved off my moustache and BEARD') or those using simple grammatical violations, such as having a singular form of the noun when it should have been plural (for example, 'All turtles have four leg'). The N400 effect is not elicited as a response to just any violation, linguistic or not, but rather is very closely linked with the processing of meaning. It is especially powerful in language studies, however its application goes beyond that (Kutas and Federmeier 2011). The component's sensitivity to meaningful stimuli enabled a range of semantic investigations to take place, including those that focus on how the semantic memory is stored and retrieved in the brain (commonly referred to as semantic memory). Kutas and Federmeier (2011) point out that out of a range of different studies, two main streams of findings are prevalent. Firstly, there is a disparity between the behavioral outcomes (reaction times) and the ERPs. That is, only rarely do those two behave in a similar pattern. This is perhaps not surprising given that with behavioral measures such as RTs, a number of cognitive processes take place and get consolidated by the time the individual makes a response; whereas with the ERPs, the components of interest reflect only a specific fraction of the whole process. Secondly, the results obtained through the ERP analysis often fail to fully support an existing theory, thus supporting different elements of various theoretical approaches.
## (s28) Advantages
(p28.0) ERPs, because of their good temporal resolution, are useful in language research because language processing happens at a very fast pace. Individual words are recognized in much less than half a second, and a difference between a /d/ and a /t/ can be recognized in just a few milliseconds because it comes down to a difference in voicing onset (Kaan 2007). Only a method with an excellent temporal resolution can provide some insight into how language processing unfolds over time.

(p28.1) ERPs are particularly useful when working with clinical populations, such as individuals with aphasia, or infants and children. It is a technique that enables researchers to present the stimuli in spoken form, rather than in writing. Additionally, participants are not required to perform an extra task, again making it particularly useful when testing special populations. For example, in studies involving language comprehension, it is possible to assess the processing of a particular word, which might appear in the middle of the sentence. In classic behavioral experiments, it is necessary to wait until the sentence is fully presented for participants to make a response, thus relying on their memory. By that time, a number of cognitive processes are involved and it is not possible to accurately determine their effect. In experiments where an overt response by participants is needed, it is possible to establish which stage of processing is affected by a particular experimental manipulation, from the stimulus presentation to the response. This technique allows for the collection of continuous data, with very good temporal resolution. In many language experiments, the sampling rate (defined as the rate at which the waveform data is sampled so that it can be changed to a numerical format) is between 250 and 512 Hz (samples every second), which is in line with a rate of language comprehension and therefore enables the continuous online processing.

(p28.2) The ERPs are multidimensional, allowing researchers to draw conclusions about the type of processes involved and their relationship. An example might include studies involving the RTs and self-paced reading. In those cases, we do not know why people might struggle with reading, whereas with the ERPs we can say whether they are struggling with, for example, the semantics or syntax, as those are different components responsible for different processes and they are easily distinguishable in the ERPs.

(p28.3) Another advantage is that the effects can be seen almost immediately upon presenting participants with a particular, for example semantic, manipulation. Additionally, every single stimulus, not just targets, can be time locked in ERP research, thus providing not only instantaneous, but also continuous look at language processing.
