# Barriers and facilitators of vaccine hesitancy for COVID-19, influenza, and pertussis during pregnancy and in mothers of infants under two years: An umbrella review

CorpusID: 257281526 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3a4be7034c37014a2cba982de60ad2c02ef7a11](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3a4be7034c37014a2cba982de60ad2c02ef7a11)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Study selection
(p3.0) Search results were downloaded from EPSCO and ProQuest via a RIS file and uploaded onto Rayyan [33] for screening. Following removal of duplicates, reviewer BN screened the remaining studies against the inclusion criteria based on title and abstract, followed by the remaining articles based on full text. For both of these stages, a second reviewer (JM) independently screened 10%, with any differences in decisions resolved through discussion.
## (s6) Data analysis
(p6.0) Studies were first entered into a table mapping the primary studies contained within included systematic reviews, to analyse the degree of overlap between reviews. 'Calculated covered area' (CCA) was calculated to estimate degree of overlap in terms of a percentage, using the equation by Pieper et al. [39]. To aid in the discussion of the quality appraisal of included reviews by categorising reviews based on quality, the scoring system by Kilich et al. [40] was applied. Any item marked 'yes' scored two, items marked 'no' subtracted two, items marked 'unclear' subtracted one, and 'not applicable' did not affect the scores. Scores were categorised into very low, low, moderate, and strong. Overlap, quality of each review, and quality assessment of primary studies for the included reviews were mapped together onto one table.
## (s16) Discussion
(p16.0) Nineteen reviews of maternal vaccination hesitancy and the effectiveness of interventions were retrieved. Knowledge and information, previous receipt, and concerns around the safety were found to be the most consistent predictors of vaccination during pregnancy. Demographic predictors such as ethnicity and age were frequently cited, although results could be inconsistent, and the magnitude of their effect was low. Mapping onto the model for determinants of vaccine hesitancy [21], individual and social group factors were found to be the largest and most consistent predictors, with only sparse evidence for vaccine and vaccine-specific issues.
