# Citation: molecules Stereoselective Synthesis of Flavonoids: A Brief Overview

CorpusID: 255521564 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d55f6011a3d20f501717404f8fe2b448e0a027e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6d55f6011a3d20f501717404f8fe2b448e0a027e)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Flavonoids constitute a major group of polyphenolic compounds found in plants, fruits, vegetables, and nuts. They are associated with several roles in flora, namely, cell growth modulation and defence against extreme environmental conditions and oxidative stress. Moreover, they contribute to the perfume and colour in fruits and flowers, therefore promoting pollination [1,2]. In addition to flavonoids commonly found in terrestrial plants, some bioactive flavonoids can also be found in marine sources [3]. Structurally, flavonoids are composed of a 15-carbon scaffold with two aromatic rings (A and B) attached through a 3-carbon chain, which could be a heterocyclic ring denominated as a C ring. According to the degree of unsaturation and oxidation of the C ring and the position of the B ring, they can be categorised into different classes ( Figure 1). In nature, this wide array of moieties is obtained through the combination of shikimate and acetate pathways under enzymatic transformation, with chalcones being the intermediates for the biosynthesis of the other classes of flavonoids [2,4].
## (s2) Flavonoids Synthetic Approaches References
(p2.0) Chalcones Claisen-Schmidt reaction [21,30,31] Friedel-Crafts reaction [21] Heck coupling [32] Suzuki-Miyaura reaction [62] Flavonols Algar-Flynn-Oyamada reaction [21,34] Karl von Auwers reaction [60] Kostanecki methodology [29] Flavanones Intramolecular cyclisation of 2 -hydroxychalcones [36][37][38][39][40][41][42][43] Flavones
## (s3) Stereoselective Synthesis of Flavonoids
(p3.0) Due to their biological activities and current concernment in attaining enantiomerically pure forms, chiral flavonoids are gaining attention in the scientific field [66]. The isolation of these natural compounds can be time-consuming and associated with a low yield, which accentuate even more the demand for the synthesis of enantiomerically pure forms of them [67].

(p3.1) A variety of methodologies to produce these bioactive compounds with high enantiomeric excess and purity have been reported. These approaches include separation processes, such as chiral chromatography [68][69][70][71][72], and stereoselective synthesis.
## (s4) Stereoselective Chalcone Epoxidation Approach
(p4.0) As previously mentioned, chalcones play a major role as intermediaries for the synthesis of the various groups of flavonoids and, as a result, an asymmetric synthetic process was developed considering chalcones as building blocks. This procedure consisted of the asymmetric epoxidation of chalcones, giving rise to the respective epoxides and their later use as chirons for the synthesis of other flavonoids [73]. In 1976, the use of quinine benzylchloride and quinidine benzylchloride as chiral phase-transfer catalysts in the epoxidation of α,β-unsatured ketones was reported [74] (Figure 9), allowing the application of this method in the synthesis of chalcone epoxides. However, the resulting enantiomeric excess was low, therefore leading to investigations with the aim of improving enantioselectivity [74].

(p4.1) A variety of methodologies to produce these bioactive compounds with high enantiomeric excess and purity have been reported. These approaches include separation processes, such as chiral chromatography [68][69][70][71][72], and stereoselective synthesis.
## (s5) Stereoselective Chalcone Epoxidation Approach
(p5.0) As previously mentioned, chalcones play a major role as intermediaries for the synthesis of the various groups of flavonoids and, as a result, an asymmetric synthetic process was developed considering chalcones as building blocks. This procedure consisted of the asymmetric epoxidation of chalcones, giving rise to the respective epoxides and their later use as chirons for the synthesis of other flavonoids [73]. In 1976, the use of quinine benzylchloride and quinidine benzylchloride as chiral phase-transfer catalysts in the epoxidation of α,β-unsatured ketones was reported [74] (Figure 9), allowing the application of this method in the synthesis of chalcone epoxides. However, the resulting enantiomeric excess was low, therefore leading to investigations with the aim of improving enantioselectivity [74]. The turning point in this synthetic process arose from the implementation of three reaction components developed by Juliá et al. [75], comprising alkaline hydrogen peroxide, an organic solvent (carbon tetrachloride or toluene), and polymeric L-or Dalanine [75]. This synthetic process was later refined in a two-phase non-aqueous system in order to achieve higher enantiomeric purity [76]. Taking this into account, Nel et al. [77] proceeded to synthesise a series of enantiomeric (S)-and (R)-2′-methoxymethyl-βhydroxydihydrochalcones ( Figure 10), presenting some of them as an enantiomeric excess value in a range between 84% and 91%. These compounds constitute a resourceful tool in the industry, namely as sweeteners in candies and mouthwashes. Moreover, they assume a function of attracting insects in order to promote pollination in flora [77]. The turning point in this synthetic process arose from the implementation of three reaction components developed by Juliá et al. [75], comprising alkaline hydrogen peroxide, an organic solvent (carbon tetrachloride or toluene), and polymeric L-or D-alanine [75]. This synthetic process was later refined in a two-phase non-aqueous system in order to achieve higher enantiomeric purity [76]. Taking this into account, Nel et al. [77] proceeded to synthesise a series of enantiomeric (S)-and (R)-2 -methoxymethyl-β-hydroxydihydrochalcones ( Figure 10), presenting some of them as an enantiomeric excess value in a range between 84% and 91%. These compounds constitute a resourceful tool in the industry, namely as sweeteners in candies and mouthwashes. Moreover, they assume a function of attracting insects in order to promote pollination in flora [77]. 
## (s6) Sharpless Asymmetric Dihydroxylation, Mitsunobu Reaction, and Cycloaddition of 1,4-Benzoquinone
(p6.0) In 2000, the combination of the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation and Mitsunobu reaction was applied to obtain pure enantiomeric 3-hydroxyflavanones, resulting in a novel approach to synthesise this flavonoid class. The first reaction phase consisted of the formation of the (2R,3S)-diols (compound A, Figure 11) via Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation using AD-mix with an outstanding enantiomeric excess of 99%. The synthesis of the enantiomerically pure 3-hydroxyflavanones in the final phase was based on the intramolecular Mitsunobu pathway as verified in the configuration of the stereogenic centre ( Figure 11). This methodology was also used to obtain (2R,3R)-3′,4′-O-dimethyltaxifolin, which is a derivative of a 3-hydroxyflavanone with a protective role in the hepatic system [78].  
## (s7) Sharpless Asymmetric Dihydroxylation, Mitsunobu Reaction, and Cycloaddition of 1,4-Benzoquinone
(p7.0) In 2000, the combination of the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation and Mitsunobu reaction was applied to obtain pure enantiomeric 3-hydroxyflavanones, resulting in a novel approach to synthesise this flavonoid class. The first reaction phase consisted of the formation of the (2R,3S)-diols (compound A, Figure 11) via Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation using AD-mix with an outstanding enantiomeric excess of 99%. The synthesis of the enantiomerically pure 3-hydroxyflavanones in the final phase was based on the intramolecular Mitsunobu pathway as verified in the configuration of the stereogenic centre ( Figure 11). This methodology was also used to obtain (2R,3R)-3 ,4 -O-dimethyltaxifolin, which is a derivative of a 3-hydroxyflavanone with a protective role in the hepatic system [78].
## (s8) Sharpless Asymmetric Dihydroxylation, Mitsunobu Reaction, and Cycloaddition of 1,4-Benzoquinone
(p8.0) In 2000, the combination of the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation and Mitsunobu reaction was applied to obtain pure enantiomeric 3-hydroxyflavanones, resulting in a novel approach to synthesise this flavonoid class. The first reaction phase consisted of the formation of the (2R,3S)-diols (compound A, Figure 11) via Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation using AD-mix with an outstanding enantiomeric excess of 99%. The synthesis of the enantiomerically pure 3-hydroxyflavanones in the final phase was based on the intramolecular Mitsunobu pathway as verified in the configuration of the stereogenic centre ( Figure 11). This methodology was also used to obtain (2R,3R)-3′,4′-O-dimethyltaxifolin, which is a derivative of a 3-hydroxyflavanone with a protective role in the hepatic system [78].   The applicability of Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation extends to the synthesis of flavan-3-ols and isoflavonoid derivatives. Van Rensburg et al. [79] employed this methodology to synthesise polyoxygenated diarylpropan-1,2-diols from retro-chalcones, which would be then used to obtain the chiral flavan-3-ol scaffold [79]. These chiral moieties arouse interest in many fields, namely as building blocks of condensed tannins polymers ( Figure 12), which have been receiving attention for the development of eco-friendly food packaging, owing to their chemical properties [80].
## (s9) R PEER REVIEW 9
(p9.0) The applicability of Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation extends to the synth of flavan-3-ols and isoflavonoid derivatives. Van Rensburg et al. [79] employed methodology to synthesise polyoxygenated diarylpropan-1,2-diols from retro-chalco which would be then used to obtain the chiral flavan-3-ol scaffold [79]. These ch moieties arouse interest in many fields, namely as building blocks of condensed tan polymers ( Figure 12), which have been receiving attention for the development of friendly food packaging, owing to their chemical properties [80]. This approach was also extended for the synthesis of (+)-afzelechin and epiafzelechin by Wan et al. [81] with the aim of obtaining analogues of epigallocatechi gallate with a cancer-preventive effect. These flavan-3-ols were stereoselecti synthesised through the establishment of the stereogenic centres in the flav intermediate (compound C, Figure 13) by Sharpless dihydroxylation [81]. Moreover, pisatin, a natural isoflavonoid with a protective effect against microbial infections, synthesised encompassing a Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation in one of mechanism steps, resulting in an enantiomeric excess of 94% [82] (reaction phase 7, Fig  14). This approach was also extended for the synthesis of (+)-afzelechin and (-)-epiafzelechin by Wan et al. [81] with the aim of obtaining analogues of epigallocatechin-3-gallate with a cancer-preventive effect. These flavan-3-ols were stereoselectivity synthesised through the establishment of the stereogenic centres in the flavanol intermediate (compound C, Figure 13) by Sharpless dihydroxylation [81]. Moreover, (+)-pisatin, a natural isoflavonoid with a protective effect against microbial infections, was synthesised encompassing a Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation in one of the mechanism steps, resulting in an enantiomeric excess of 94% [82] (reaction phase 7, Figure 14).

(p9.1) Furthermore, it was reported that isoflavonoid derivatives could also be obtained in an enantiomerically pure form via the cycloaddition of 1,4-benzoquinone and 2H-chromenes catalysed by a Ti-TADDOLate complex, which was demonstrated by Engler et al. [83]. They applied this procedure to synthesise pterocarpans with 75% and 80% of enantiomeric excess in light of their relevance as antifungal and antibacterial agents [83] (Figure 15).  Furthermore, it was reported that isoflavonoid derivatives could also be obtained in an enantiomerically pure form via the cycloaddition of 1,4-benzoquinone and 2Hchromenes catalysed by a Ti-TADDOLate complex, which was demonstrated by Engler et al. [83]. They applied this procedure to synthesise pterocarpans with 75% and 80% of enantiomeric excess in light of their relevance as antifungal and antibacterial agents [83] ( Figure 15).   Furthermore, it was reported that isoflavonoid derivatives could also be obtained in an enantiomerically pure form via the cycloaddition of 1,4-benzoquinone and 2H chromenes catalysed by a Ti-TADDOLate complex, which was demonstrated by Engle et al. [83]. They applied this procedure to synthesise pterocarpans with 75% and 80% o enantiomeric excess in light of their relevance as antifungal and antibacterial agents [83 ( Figure 15).  
## (s10) Chiral Auxliaries Approach
(p10.0) Isoflavans are a group of isoflavonoids with a variety of biological effects [84]. Since these compounds belong to a series of molecules where stereogenic centres are confined in 2, 3, and 4 positions, the development of enantioselective pathways to achieve enantiomeric pure moieties at position 3 could unfold stereoselective routes to other similar structures. Regarding this, Versteeg et al. [85] attempted to obtain isoflavans through a stereoselective α-benzylation of phenyl acetic acid derivatives, using (4S,5R)-(+)-and (4R,5S)-(-)-imidazolidin-2-ones as chiral auxiliaries ( Figure 16). The implementation of this protocol brought an excellent outcome, with an array of enantiomeric excess between 94% and 99% and a chiral synthetic route for the 3-phenylchroman moiety [85].
## (s11) Chiral Auxliaries Approach
(p11.0) Isoflavans are a group of isoflavonoids with a variety of biological effects [84]. Since these compounds belong to a series of molecules where stereogenic centres are confined in 2, 3, and 4 positions, the development of enantioselective pathways to achieve enantiomeric pure moieties at position 3 could unfold stereoselective routes to other similar structures. Regarding this, Versteeg et al. [85] attempted to obtain isoflavans through a stereoselective α-benzylation of phenyl acetic acid derivatives, using (4S,5R)-(+)-and (4R,5S)-(-)-imidazolidin-2-ones as chiral auxiliaries ( Figure 16). The implementation of this protocol brought an excellent outcome, with an array of enantiomeric excess between 94% and 99% and a chiral synthetic route for the 3phenylchroman moiety [85]. In addition, imidazolidinones were also relevant as chiral auxiliaries in the total synthesis of ent-fissistigmatin C. This molecule structure embodies a fragment of a flavonoid and another of the sesquiterpenoid linked through carbon 4 and carbon 1″, which establishes the generation of two stereogenic centres in the natural compound. Xu et al. [86] developed a strategy to obtain fissistigmatin-C based on the reaction of a 2hydroxychalcone and an aliphatic aldehyde [86]. In this reaction step, the flavonoid formed from the coupling of the two compounds previously mentioned was synthesised via a collaborative catalytic action of a chiral imidazolidine, (R)-TRIP, and visible light (  In addition, imidazolidinones were also relevant as chiral auxiliaries in the total synthesis of ent-fissistigmatin C. This molecule structure embodies a fragment of a flavonoid and another of the sesquiterpenoid linked through carbon 4 and carbon 1", which establishes the generation of two stereogenic centres in the natural compound. Xu et al. [86] developed a strategy to obtain fissistigmatin-C based on the reaction of a 2-hydroxychalcone and an aliphatic aldehyde [86]. In this reaction step, the flavonoid formed from the coupling of the two compounds previously mentioned was synthesised via a collaborative catalytic action of a chiral imidazolidine, (R)-TRIP, and visible light ( Figure 17). On the molecular level, (R)-TRIP facilitated the attack of the enamine of the imidazolidinone in the si face by alleviating the steric hindrance, culminating with the formation of the flavonoid intermediate with 98% of the enantiomeric excess [86] (Figure 17).

(p11.1) Considering the bioactive potential of isoflavanones as antifungal and antibacterial agents, in 2000, an enantioselective synthesis of isoflavanones was reported by Vicario et al. [87]. They resorted an asymmetric aldol reaction between (S,S)-(+)-pseudoephedrine arylacetamides and formaldehyde to introduce chirality in the intended compound. Subsequently, it was given the synthesis of the B ring via aryl ether formation and the displacement of the chiral auxiliary, culminating in the formation of the desired isoflavanones through Friedel, Crafts acylation ( Figure 18). The chiral analysis by liquid chromatography showed that only one enantiomeric form was synthesised, boosting this methodology as an effective approach to obtain isoflavanones with a high degree of enantiomeric purity [87]. Considering the bioactive potential of isoflavanones as antifungal and antibacterial agents, in 2000, an enantioselective synthesis of isoflavanones was reported by Vicario et al. [87]. They resorted an asymmetric aldol reaction between (S,S)-(+)-pseudoephedrine arylacetamides and formaldehyde to introduce chirality in the intended compound. Subsequently, it was given the synthesis of the B ring via aryl ether formation and the displacement of the chiral auxiliary, culminating in the formation of the desired isoflavanones through Friedel,Crafts acylation ( Figure 18). The chiral analysis by liquid chromatography showed that only one enantiomeric form was synthesised, boosting this methodology as an effective approach to obtain isoflavanones with a high degree of enantiomeric purity [87].  Considering the bioactive potential of isoflavanones as antifungal and antibacterial agents, in 2000, an enantioselective synthesis of isoflavanones was reported by Vicario et al. [87]. They resorted an asymmetric aldol reaction between (S,S)-(+)-pseudoephedrine arylacetamides and formaldehyde to introduce chirality in the intended compound. Subsequently, it was given the synthesis of the B ring via aryl ether formation and the displacement of the chiral auxiliary, culminating in the formation of the desired isoflavanones through Friedel,Crafts acylation ( Figure 18). The chiral analysis by liquid chromatography showed that only one enantiomeric form was synthesised, boosting this methodology as an effective approach to obtain isoflavanones with a high degree of enantiomeric purity [87]. 
## (s12) Organocatalysis
(p12.0) Flavonoids can also be obtained through organocatalytic asymmetric processes with the aim of acquiring enantiomeric pure forms of these natural compounds. Biddle et al. [88] proposed an asymmetric synthesis of flavanones based on the intramolecular conjugated addition of α-substituted chalcones, using thiourea compounds as catalysts ( Figure 19). The application of this methodology culminated in the synthesis of the flavanone scaffold with 94% of enantiomeric excess [88].

(p12.1) Flavonoids can also be obtained through organocatalytic asymmetric processes with the aim of acquiring enantiomeric pure forms of these natural compounds. Biddle et al. [88] proposed an asymmetric synthesis of flavanones based on the intramolecular conjugated addition of α-substituted chalcones, using thiourea compounds as catalysts ( Figure 19). The application of this methodology culminated in the synthesis of the flavanone scaffold with 94% of enantiomeric excess [88]. In 2010, a research team elaborated a deracemization methodology catalysed by alkaloid derivatives to obtain α-substituted ketones [89]. This process encompassed hydrogen fluoride as a proton supplier for the formation of the ammonium cation stemming from the alkaloids' derivatives. This one, in turn, was responsible for the protonation of the silyl enolate intermediate previously synthesised, giving the desired products. Furthermore, it was proposed that the anion generated as a consequence of the protonation of the amine promoted the catalytic process, therefore enhancing the enantioselective transformation. In order to demonstrate the postulate, and bearing in mind the extent of the biological properties of flavonoids, they employed this strategy in the deracemization of homoisoflavones, resulting in the respective enantiomers with 78% and 81% of enantiomeric excess, and turning this process into a viable route to obtain enantiomeric pure forms of this flavonoid group [89] (Figure 20). In 2010, a research team elaborated a deracemization methodology catalysed by alkaloid derivatives to obtain α-substituted ketones [89]. This process encompassed hydrogen fluoride as a proton supplier for the formation of the ammonium cation stemming from the alkaloids' derivatives. This one, in turn, was responsible for the protonation of the silyl enolate intermediate previously synthesised, giving the desired products. Furthermore, it was proposed that the anion generated as a consequence of the protonation of the amine promoted the catalytic process, therefore enhancing the enantioselective transformation. In order to demonstrate the postulate, and bearing in mind the extent of the biological properties of flavonoids, they employed this strategy in the deracemization of homoisoflavones, resulting in the respective enantiomers with 78% and 81% of enantiomeric excess, and turning this process into a viable route to obtain enantiomeric pure forms of this flavonoid group [89] (Figure 20). 
## (s14) Organometallic Catalysis
(p14.0) In addition to the enantiomeric pure flavonoids mediated by organocatalysis, organometallic compounds were also employed to promote the stereoselective synthesis of this natural compound. Due to their major interest in obtaining these compounds in the enantiomerically pure form, Lestini et al. [90] focused on the conjugate addition of chromones and arylboronic acids via palladium(II)-pyridinooxazoline catalysis to achieve their goal. For the purpose of enhancing the efficiency of the methodology, they undertook the catalytic process in palladium-nanoreactors with the aim of resulting in a catalytic stability increment. Then, they functionalised pyridinooxazoline with an acrylate monomer, which, in turn, was linked to palladium(II) trifluoroacetate and, subsequently, integrated in the nanoparticle, where the enantioselective synthesis of flavanones occurred. The final products were obtained within a range of from 79% to 84% of enantiomeric excess, highlighting the scientific relevance of this method regarding the enantioselective synthesis of natural bioactive compounds with antitumor, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial activities [90] ( Figure 21). 
## (s15) Organometallic Catalysis
(p15.0) In addition to the enantiomeric pure flavonoids mediated by organocatalysis organometallic compounds were also employed to promote the stereoselective synthesis of this natural compound. Due to their major interest in obtaining these compounds in the enantiomerically pure form, Lestini et al. [90] focused on the conjugate addition o chromones and arylboronic acids via palladium(II)-pyridinooxazoline catalysis to achieve their goal. For the purpose of enhancing the efficiency of the methodology, they undertook the catalytic process in palladium-nanoreactors with the aim of resulting in a catalytic stability increment. Then, they functionalised pyridinooxazoline with an acrylate monomer, which, in turn, was linked to palladium(II) trifluoroacetate and, subsequently integrated in the nanoparticle, where the enantioselective synthesis of flavanones occurred. The final products were obtained within a range of from 79% to 84% of enantiomeric excess, highlighting the scientific relevance of this method regarding the enantioselective synthesis of natural bioactive compounds with antitumor, antiinflammatory, and antimicrobial activities [90] (Figure 21). Furthermore, a similar process previously developed by Stoltz et al. [91] was employed by Timmerman et al. [92] in the stereoselective synthesis of (-)-caesalpinnone A and (-)-caesalpinflavan: two natural flavonoids with cytotoxic activity against severa cancer cell lines [92]. Aiming to accomplish the aforementioned, they proceeded to use the palladium-catalysed conjugation addition methodology to create the sterogenic centre in the flavan portion of caesalpinnone A and caesalpinflavan B [92] (Figure 22) Subsequently, they established the chirality of C4″ in light of the work developed by Shenvi et al. [93], using a hydrogen atom transfer method to reduce the C3″-C4″ bond ( Figure 22), resulting in the synthesis of the chiral intermediates of flavan-chalcone hybrids with high enantiomeric excess [92]. Furthermore, a similar process previously developed by Stoltz et al. [91] was employed by Timmerman et al. [92] in the stereoselective synthesis of (-)-caesalpinnone A and (-)caesalpinflavan: two natural flavonoids with cytotoxic activity against several cancer cell lines [92]. Aiming to accomplish the aforementioned, they proceeded to use the palladiumcatalysed conjugation addition methodology to create the sterogenic centre in the flavan portion of caesalpinnone A and caesalpinflavan B [92] (Figure 22). Subsequently, they established the chirality of C4" in light of the work developed by Shenvi et al. [93], using a hydrogen atom transfer method to reduce the C3"-C4" bond ( Figure 22), resulting in the synthesis of the chiral intermediates of flavan-chalcone hybrids with high enantiomeric excess [92].

(p15.1) Moreover, in 2021, Yang et al. [94] focused on improving the palladium catalytic system used in the conjugate addition of arylboronic acids and chromones mentioned above with the goal of obtaining new chiral agrochemicals based on the flavanone scaffold. They successfully unravelled a synthetic route using a palladium-carboline (Pd-CarOx) (Figure 23) to obtain a library of chiral flavanones, in which some of them were synthesised with an enantiomeric excess of 84% to 97%. Subsequently, they established a structure-activity relationship pattern, culminating in the synthesis of (R)-pinostrobin through a mild reaction pathway as well as the attainment of the enantiomer R of a novel antifungal flavanonederivative as a promising lead compound [94] (Figure 23).

(p15.2) Additionally, this enantioselective reaction can also be employed using rhodium catalyst complexes. He et al. [95] applied this metallic element with a chiral diene to catalyse the enantioselective synthesis of flavanones via the 1,4-addition of arylboronic acids (Figure 24), resulting in products obtained with enantiomeric excess higher than 97% [95]. Moreover, in 2021, Yang et al. [94] focused on improving the palladium catalytic system used in the conjugate addition of arylboronic acids and chromones mentioned above with the goal of obtaining new chiral agrochemicals based on the flavanone scaffold. They successfully unravelled a synthetic route using a palladium-carboline (Pd-CarOx) (Figure 23) to obtain a library of chiral flavanones, in which some of them were synthesised with an enantiomeric excess of 84% to 97%. Subsequently, they established a structure-activity relationship pattern, culminating in the synthesis of (R)-pinostrobin through a mild reaction pathway as well as the attainment of the enantiomer R of a novel antifungal flavanone-derivative as a promising lead compound [94] (Figure 23). Additionally, this enantioselective reaction can also be employed using rhodium catalyst complexes. He et al. [95] applied this metallic element with a chiral diene t catalyse the enantioselective synthesis of flavanones via the 1,4-addition of arylboroni acids (Figure 24), resulting in products obtained with enantiomeric excess higher tha 97% [95]. 
## (s19) Chiral Pool Methodology
(p19.0) Another approach to achieve highly enantiomerically pure forms of chiral derivatives of flavonoids is through the chiral pool strategy. This method was employed As a consequence of the medicinal relevance of chiral flavanones, Zhu et al. [101] were inspired by a biomimetic asymmetric reduction in NAD(P)H-dependent to synthesise the enantiomeric forms of these flavonoids. They proceeded to elaborate on the chiral [2.2]paracyclophane-based NAD(P)H models (CYNAMs), in which, after reaction conditions' optimisation, one of the models was applied to obtain enantiomeric tetrasubstituted alkene flavanones (Figure 29), culminating in the formation of most chiral forms in an enantiomeric excess array between 90% and 99% [101]. With this methodology, they were able to reinforce the importance of biocatalysis and the respective cofactors to enable the stereoselective synthesis of flavonoids with higher enantiomeric purity. As a consequence of the medicinal relevance of chiral flavanones, Zhu et al. [101] were inspired by a biomimetic asymmetric reduction in NAD(P)H-dependent to synthesise the enantiomeric forms of these flavonoids. They proceeded to elaborate on the chiral [2.2]paracyclophane-based NAD(P)H models (CYNAMs), in which, after reaction conditions' optimisation, one of the models was applied to obtain enantiomeric tetrasubstituted alkene flavanones (Figure 29), culminating in the formation of most chiral forms in an enantiomeric excess array between 90% and 99% [101]. With this methodology, they were able to reinforce the importance of biocatalysis and the respective cofactors to enable the stereoselective synthesis of flavonoids with higher enantiomeric purity. 
## (s22) Other Synthetic Methologies
(p22.0) There are also reports of other synthetic processes with the goal of obtaining enantiomeric pure forms of flavonoids, namely the Diels-Alder reaction. As promising anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral agents, prenylflavonoids have been arousing interest from researchers. In 2014, Han et al. [107] reported a stereoselective biomimetic total synthesis of (-)-brosimone A (Figure 35), (-)-kuwanon I (scheme A, Figure 36), (+)kuwanon J (scheme A, Figure 36), and (-)-brosimone B (scheme B, Figure 36). In order to establish the stereogenic centres of these Diels-Alder natural products, they resorted to an asymmetric Diels-Alder cycloaddition of a 2′-hydroxychalcone derivative, using a chiral boron-VANOL complex as the catalyst. Lately, they have employed this methodology to obtain chalconoids (-)-nicolaioidesin C and (-)-panduratine A, with 96% and 87% of enantiomeric excess, respectively [108]. 
## (s23) Other Synthetic Methologies
(p23.0) There are also reports of other synthetic processes with the goal of obtaining enantiomeric pure forms of flavonoids, namely the Diels-Alder reaction. As promising anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antiviral agents, prenylflavonoids have been arousing interest from researchers. In 2014, Han et al. [107] reported a stereoselective biomimetic total synthesis of (-)-brosimone A (Figure 35), (-)-kuwanon I (scheme A, Figure 36), (+)-kuwanon J (scheme A, Figure 36), and (-)-brosimone B (scheme B, Figure 36). In order to establish the stereogenic centres of these Diels-Alder natural products, they resorted to an asymmetric Diels-Alder cycloaddition of a 2 -hydroxychalcone derivative, using a chiral boron-VANOL complex as the catalyst. Lately, they have employed this methodology to obtain chalconoids (-)-nicolaioidesin C and (-)-panduratine A, with 96% and 87% of enantiomeric excess, respectively [108].    Another method to synthesise Diels-Alder natural products was demonstrated by Qi et al. [109]. They embarked on a strategic stereodivergent reaction of a racemic mixture (RRM) to obtain (+)-sanggenon C and (-)-sanggenon O, involving an asymmetric [4+2] cycloaddition catalysed by a boron-BINOL complex ( Figure 37). Using this reaction Another method to synthesise Diels-Alder natural products was demonstrated by Qi et al. [109]. They embarked on a strategic stereodivergent reaction of a racemic mixture (RRM) to obtain (+)-sanggenon C and (-)-sanggenon O, involving an asymmetric [4+2] cycloaddition catalysed by a boron-BINOL complex ( Figure 37). Using this reaction process, these flavonoid derivatives were obtained with an enantiomeric excess of 98% and 93%, respectively [109].

(p23.1) As prior demonstrated, enantioselective biomimetic reactions enable synthesising chiral flavonoids with diverse biological activities. Taking into consideration the anticancer, antiinflammatory, antioxidant, and antibacterial potential of hybrid flavonoids, Gao et al. [110] developed a methodology based on the asymmetric coupling of 2-hydroxychalcone using an appropriate Brønsted acid as the catalyst, an adequate nucleophile, and a visible light as the reaction promotor [110]. Subsequently, this photochemical bio-inspired reaction was applied to obtain enantiomeric forms of hybrid flavonoids with indole, cyclohexa-1,3-dione, or phloroglucinol, highlighting the formation of the 2-hydroxychalcone phloroglucinol hybrid (compound E, Figure 38) as a result of the counter-anion-directed enantioselective addition of 2-hydroxychalcone and phloroglucinol with an enantiomeric excess of 70% [110]. process, these flavonoid derivatives were obtained with an enantiomeric excess of 98% and 93%, respectively [109]. As prior demonstrated, enantioselective biomimetic reactions enable synthesising chiral flavonoids with diverse biological activities. Taking into consideration the anticancer, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antibacterial potential of hybrid flavonoids, Gao et al. [110] developed a methodology based on the asymmetric coupling of 2-hydroxychalcone using an appropriate Brønsted acid as the catalyst, an adequate nucleophile, and a visible light as the reaction promotor [110]. Subsequently, this photochemical bio-inspired reaction was applied to obtain enantiomeric forms of hybrid flavonoids with indole, cyclohexa-1,3-dione, or phloroglucinol, highlighting the formation of the 2-hydroxychalcone phloroglucinol hybrid (compound E, Figure 38) as a result of the counter-anion-directed enantioselective addition of 2-hydroxychalcone and phloroglucinol with an enantiomeric excess of 70% [110].   As prior demonstrated, enantioselective biomimetic reactions enable synthesising chiral flavonoids with diverse biological activities. Taking into consideration the anticancer, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and antibacterial potential of hybrid flavonoids, Gao et al. [110] developed a methodology based on the asymmetric coupling of 2-hydroxychalcone using an appropriate Brønsted acid as the catalyst, an adequate nucleophile, and a visible light as the reaction promotor [110]. Subsequently, this photochemical bio-inspired reaction was applied to obtain enantiomeric forms of hybrid flavonoids with indole, cyclohexa-1,3-dione, or phloroglucinol, highlighting the formation of the 2-hydroxychalcone phloroglucinol hybrid (compound E, Figure 38) as a result of the counter-anion-directed enantioselective addition of 2-hydroxychalcone and phloroglucinol with an enantiomeric excess of 70% [110].  Another example of the implementation of a biomimetic reactional approach is the synthetic methodology developed by Yang et al. [111]. This approach was based on the application of a chiral anion phase in order to promote the addition of nucleophilic phenols to benzopyrylium salts (Figure 39), synthesising 2,4-diarylbenzopyran and 2,8-dioxabicyclo [3.3.1]nonane with enantiomeric excesses of 91% and 94%, respectively [111]. These scaffolds have crucial importance from a synthetic point of view due to the fact that they integrate flavonoidrelated compounds [111]; therefore, a reaction pathway was unfolded to access natural products with a diversified array of biological activities. application of a chiral anion phase in order to promote the addition of nucleophilic phenols to benzopyrylium salts (Figure 39), synthesising 2,4-diarylbenzopyran and 2,8dioxabicyclo [3.3.1]nonane with enantiomeric excesses of 91% and 94%, respectively [111]. These scaffolds have crucial importance from a synthetic point of view due to the fact that they integrate flavonoid-related compounds [111]; therefore, a reaction pathway was unfolded to access natural products with a diversified array of biological activities.  More recently, in this thematic field of stereoselective synthesis, and inspired by Metz et al. [112,113] and their previous works [114], Gaspar et al. [115] were able to enlarge the scope of ATH-DKR to obtain cis-3-phenylchroman-4-ols and, subsequently, use them as intermediates for the synthesis of chiral isoflavanones, which possess crucial biological activities [116]. With the aim of accomplishing their goal, they applied a Noyori-Ikariya ruthenium complex as the catalyst and sodium formate as the hydrogen source to the reaction (first reaction step, Figure 40), culminating in the formation of (R,R)-cis-alcohols in a range between 92% and 99% of the enantiomeric ratio [115]. Thereafter, they used a Dess-Martin periodinane (DMP) oxidation to synthesise two chiral natural isoflavanones (second reaction step, Figure 40), maintaining the enantiomeric ratios previously acquired [115]. More recently, in this thematic field of stereoselective synthesis, and inspired by Metz et al. [112,113] and their previous works [114], Gaspar et al. [115] were able to enlarge the scope of ATH-DKR to obtain cis-3-phenylchroman-4-ols and, subsequently, use them as intermediates for the synthesis of chiral isoflavanones, which possess crucial biological activities [116]. With the aim of accomplishing their goal, they applied a Noyori-Ikariya ruthenium complex as the catalyst and sodium formate as the hydrogen source to the reaction (first reaction step, Figure 40), culminating in the formation of (R,R)cis-alcohols in a range between 92% and 99% of the enantiomeric ratio [115]. Thereafter, they used a Dess-Martin periodinane (DMP) oxidation to synthesise two chiral natural isoflavanones (second reaction step, Figure 40), maintaining the enantiomeric ratios previously acquired [115]. Molecules 2023, 28, x FOR PEER REVIEW 28 of 34 Figure 40. Enantioselective synthesis of isoflavanones via asymmetric ATH-DKR and DMP oxidation.
