# DYADIC MODELS FOR FLUID EQUATIONS: A SURVEY

CorpusID: 252408511 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s14) Uniqueness and non-uniqueness.
(p14.0) It is known that a solution to the 3D NSE with high enough regularity satisfies the energy equality and is unique. In contrast energy conservation for the Euler equation, as indicated by Onsager's conjecture, the regularity threshold 1 3 separates the two opponent scenarios of energy conservation and anomalous dissipation. Such a threshold regularity value is not known to divide the uniqueness from non-uniqueness of solutions to the 3D NSE. However in the class of Leray-Hopf solutions, Ladyzhenskaya's condition L 8 (0, T ; L 4 (Ω)) and in general Prodi-Serrin's condition (1.4) ensure uniqueness.

(p14.1) In the context of dyadic models, more knowledge on the question of uniqueness and non-uniqueness is available thanks to the work of Filonov [41] and Filonov and Khodunov [42]. In particular, there is a critical value of the intermittency (intrinsically connected to the regularity of the solution) that separates uniqueness from non-uniqueness scenarios. These results are described below.
## (s23) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p23.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p23.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p23.2) for j ≥ 0 with a −1 = b −1 = 0 and external forcing f = (f 0 , f 1 , f 2 , ...), and d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p23.3) Here a j (t) = u(t) L 2 and b j (t) = B(t) L 2 , and θ = 5−d 2 (under the assumption that the intermittency dimension of the velocity field and magnetic field is the same). Denote the total energy by
## (s52) Uniqueness and non-uniqueness.
(p52.0) It is known that a solution to the 3D NSE with high enough regularity satisfies the energy equality and is unique. In contrast energy conservation for the Euler equation, as indicated by Onsager's conjecture, the regularity threshold 1 3 separates the two opponent scenarios of energy conservation and anomalous dissipation. Such a threshold regularity value is not known to divide the uniqueness from non-uniqueness of solutions to the 3D NSE. However in the class of Leray-Hopf solutions, Ladyzhenskaya's condition L 8 (0, T ; L 4 (Ω)) and in general Prodi-Serrin's condition (1.4) ensure uniqueness.

(p52.1) In the context of dyadic models, more knowledge on the question of uniqueness and non-uniqueness is available thanks to the work of Filonov [41] and Filonov and Khodunov [42]. In particular, there is a critical value of the intermittency (intrinsically connected to the regularity of the solution) that separates uniqueness from non-uniqueness scenarios. These results are described below.
## (s61) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p61.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p61.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p61.2) for j ≥ 0 with a −1 = b −1 = 0 and external forcing f = (f 0 , f 1 , f 2 , ...), and d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2

(p61.3) Here a j (t) = u(t) L 2 and b j (t) = B(t) L 2 , and θ = 5−d 2 (under the assumption that the intermittency dimension of the velocity field and magnetic field is the same). Denote the total energy by
