# THIRTY-TWO YEARS OF CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK IN LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LEARNING: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

CorpusID: 253028367 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/214643e007a323e288f63fbf07a90d905e74c280](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/214643e007a323e288f63fbf07a90d905e74c280)

Fields: Education, Linguistics

## (s7) Corrective feedback: From 2016 to 2022
(p7.0) As observed, corrective feedback has been one of the controversial topics in L2 teaching. More research is published each year to investigate CF. Although CF has a very long history (i.e., more than five decades), more research has been published. Still, the conclusions and results from previous research indicate that more investigations are needed to investigate CF from different theoretical lenses. Atmaca, (2016) investigated teachers' and students' perceptions towards WCF in an EFL context. The results showed no significant differences between the groups, but the results from the open-ended questions revealed some differences. Furthermore, the conclusions suggested that teachers should explain their expectations from the beginning of the classes not to make misunderstandings between the teachers and the students. Most published studies on WCF are about the effectiveness of WCF and its types. For example, Aghajanloo et al. (2016) conducted their study to examine how much teachers' CF is effective in focusing on some types (i.e., focused direct CF, unfocused direct CF, focused indirect CF, and unfocused indirect CF). The results showed that those participants who received the CF outperformed those who did not. Regarding the effective types of CF, the results illustrated that unfocused directive CF has to be the focused type and be used as an important learning tool.

(p7.1) Although CF research is more focused on WCF, there are studies on oral corrective feedback (OCF). Yang (2016) investigated learners' preferences for WCF concerning their cultural backgrounds and their proficiency levels. The study was carried out in a Chinese EFL context. The learners were given OCF on "phonological, lexical, grammatical, and pragmatic errors" (p.75). The results suggested that metalinguistic, explicit CF and recast were the most preferred types of CF among the learners. Teachers try to utilize effective tools to help their learners to master their language skills. Communication is not apart from the important language skills. Therefore, corrective feedback can be given on any aspect of learning the target language. For instance, Tavakoli and Zarrinabadi (2016) attempted to investigate explicit and implicit CF on learners' willingness to communicate. The participants were Iranian EFL low-intermediate groups. The results indicated that explicit CF did not influence the participants'' willingness to communicate, but explicit CF increased the effects. On the whole, explicit CF increased learners' willingness to communicate and confidence.

(p7.2) Much research investigated learners' preferences for CF in different contexts. Researchers and L2 teachers believe that understanding learners' preferences can facilitate teachers in choosing the more effective types of CF upon providing it. Chen et al. (2016) published their study to investigate learners' preferences for WCF in China. Quantitative and qualitative data were collected from participants whose proficiency levels were intermediate, advanced-intermediate, and advanced. The results showed that error correction was favourable among the participants, and they wanted comments on content and grammar. Overall, the results suggested that WCF is also seen as a valuable learning tool in EFL contexts.

(p7.3) Although much research was published on the benefits of CF and its types, researchers attempt to investigate CF in different countries and contexts to have valid data to give more evidence either against providing CF or in favour of it. For example, Park et al. (2016) examined the benefits of indirect CF among Korean EFL learners. The participants' proficiency levels were beginner and intermediate, and the results were compared to learners' prior language exposure. The results showed that learners could self-correct more than a third of their errors. The results also suggested that language teachers have to consider individual learner differences. Similarly, Tangkiengsirisin and Kalra (2016) studied the perfections of Thai learners towards direct and indirect WCF. The results showed that the group which received direct CF improved significantly compared to the group which received indirect CF.

(p7.4) From the beginning of writing on CF, the focus has been on the utilization of CF to improve learners' L2 skills (i.e., more on writing and grammatical accuracy), very little has been written on how CF can be used for teacher development. In this regard, Lee et al. (2015) conducted a study on teachers' attempts at feedback innovations in the writing classroom. The study was carried out with two secondary teachers in Hong Kong. They participated in a writing teacher education course. The results showed that the teachers could not implement the CF fully due to some environmental factors from the school such as inadequate time, and they were not supported by the school.

(p7.5) Many factors affect language learning such as internal factors and external factors (Mahmoudi, 2015), but not much research was conducted on how factors such as writing anxiety and motivation affect learners' self-evaluation judgment of corrective feedback. In a study by Tsao et al. (2017), the researchers investigated how anxiety and motivation predict learners' judgment of corrective feedback. The results showed that learners were motivated to reach a higher level of their proficiency, and it also showed that (37%) of the participants showed anxiety when trying to learn how to write in English.
