# Racial disparities in Black men with prostate cancer: A literature review

CorpusID: 252088857 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45b633fd3ac8c9df19692d900ff09bbe098108e7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45b633fd3ac8c9df19692d900ff09bbe098108e7)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s5) Kinrwali gi rf PCr wcihcin ihi Balrak armmuinciy
(p5.0) Nearly one half of Black men report being uneducated about PCa screening (e.g., PSA testing or digital rectal examination). 37,46,47 Studies evaluating PCa knowledge reported low scores among Black men across various ages, educational levels, and SES levels. 46,47 Assessing knowledge of PCa using a 12-item questionnaire, Ogunsanya et al. reported that 47% of 267 Black patients had no knowledge of the signs of the disease, PSA testing, guidelines for screening age, and posttreatment quality of life. 47 Black men were unlikely to be provided with information Cancer November 1, 2022 essential to shared decision-making (SDM) before PSA testing 35 and, when provided with information, remained confused compared with White men (13.1% vs. 4.8%; p = .008). 44 In addition, more Black men with aggressive, high-risk PCa misperceived the severity of their disease compared with White men and thus were unlikely to pursue treatment. 48 T irimiini raaiii fr Balrak miin
## (s9) DISCUSSION
(p9.0) Black men account for nearly 30% of all PCa deaths in the United States, and any intent to decrease deaths from PCa should include appropriate representation of this atrisk population. Black men hold a unique perspective on PCa care. Issues of particular concern include younger age and high-risk disease at diagnosis, multifactorial risk of suboptimal treatment, and a rationale for treatment intensification at earlier stages of disease to prevent or delay progression. Diverse factors contribute to racial disparities among US Black men with PCa, many of which have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. 3,17 Cultural factors include generalized mistrust of the health care system, poor physician-patient communication, and fear of a PCa diagnosis and the accompanying societal stigma ( Fig. 1; see also Video S1). 82 Economic disparities are prevalent within the Black community, and financial hardship influences the decision to seek and/or select PCa screening/treatment, in which costs of diagnostic tests and treatment, treatment time, and recovery time are key factors. The advancement and introduction of novel diagnostic technologies will only increase existing disparities; therefore, addressing socioeconomic factors through development of an equitable care delivery model ultimately can affect the outcomes of more patients (e.g., the Health Impact Pyramid). 83 An overriding goal is to educate Black men on the importance of screening, diagnosis, treatment, and follow-through on PCa care. Physician-patient relationships must be improved by educating physicians on the true extent of racial disparity within PCa, maintaining current knowledge of industry guidelines (particularly on initiating diagnostic tests and treatment for high-risk, specific ethnic populations), and increasing diversity among staff. It is crucial that representation of minority races is increased in medical schools, postgraduate education, and academia.

(p9.1) Patient-physician relationships must be nurtured. Improvements in the information provided to patients on PCa diagnosis and treatment, patient inclusion in the SDM process, and development of strategies with culturally aware patient advocates will aid patient relationships in the health care system. Importantly, physicians and other health care providers must spend extra time asking about and listening to Black patients' concerns regarding their health care. Family and friends (especially women) are more accessible and trusted sources of information among Black men and can be key in changing attitudes and promoting routine prostate monitoring, a strategy that requires optimization.

(p9.2) Grassroots initiatives could offer support for how facilities and clinicians can collaborate with the community to increase knowledge of PCa. These initiatives may also introduce other stakeholders to the battle against PCa, such as nonprofit organizations (e.g., the American Cancer Society) and government health services (e.g., VA). Embedding PSA screening into electronic medical records and routine health maintenance could aid in addressing screening differences that exist between races. The use of next-generation sequencing technologies and epigenomics in the diagnosis and management of PCa should continue to be developed with a focus on using a racially diverse patient population.

(p9.3) Black men are underrepresented in clinical trials, resulting in insufficient statistical power to compare clinical outcomes of Black men versus White men with PCa. Focused initiatives are required to increase Black enrollment in clinical trials, not because of a lack of willingness among the Black community but because of a lack of information on active clinical trials. To comprehensively address these disparities, areas of development may include identifying and educating physicians on the best practices for conveying information of active clinical trials, improving clinical trial matching and registries, and specific eligibility criteria and study design requirements that focus on patient-centered end points. Successful strategies to increase access to clinical trials would include clinical study sites in the community (where study assessments can be performed remotely) or health care centers located where Black men are commonly treated. Industry sponsors would have a significant impact on racial disparities in PCa by building clinical trial infrastructure with diverse clinical trial research teams at these sites. Likewise, clinical trial designs that include specific questions regarding race or ancestral differences in the population would also enhance Black patient engagement and improve credibility among sponsors.
