# Citation: Whole-Process Risk Management of Soil Amendments for Remediation of Heavy Metals in Agricultural Soil-A Whole-Process Risk Management of Soil Amendments for Remediation of Heavy Metals in Agricultural Soil-A Review

CorpusID: 256133386 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/999fc56b9cdbbdde7b174dd55cc0cf602de1ef93](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/999fc56b9cdbbdde7b174dd55cc0cf602de1ef93)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s4) Pre-Remediation
(p4.0) This covers the process from initial preparation to pre-application amendment preparation (Table 3). To date, a variety of passivating materials have been developed and tested, including industrial solid waste, agricultural waste, clay minerals, and synthetic materials [48]. However, some studies have considered only the efficiency of amendments in fixing to heavy metals and have ignored the potential risks to soils and crops of passivating materials containing pollutants [49][50][51]. For example, steel slag, red mud, fly ash and other industrial wastes contain heavy metals. If industrial solid wastes with a high sodium-ion content, such as red mud, are applied to soil, the pH of the soil is increased, and the biological availability of some heavy metals is reduced. However, the growth of crops in the soil is also affected [42,43]. Biochar made from crop stalks can also be used as an amendment, but often contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) [52][53][54]. The authors of [55] found that, when organic fertilizer was used as an amendment, the mobility of arsenic in soil was enhanced, possibly through methylation, by converting arsenic into organic arsine. When farmland soil is contaminated by multiple heavy metals, especially anionic heavy metals such as chromium, or cationic heavy metals such as cadmium and lead, the application of amendments with an obvious effect on the immobilization of cationic heavy metals may activate chromium and other heavy metals, thereby increasing the risk of heavy metals pollution [56]. In addition, before the amendment is applied to the soil, it needs to be transported by fuel-powered vehicles to the soil repair site. These vehicles emit gaseous pollutants such as nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds. Powdered amendments are also prone to dust pollution, and often require short-term storage or processing after being transported to the site. If there are no effective anti-shower, windproofing, or anti-see-through measures in place during the storage process, the amendment itself may cause dust pollution and/or runoff pollution in rainy, snowy, or windy weather conditions. On-site crushing, mixing and other processes can also cause atmospheric or surface water pollution, if no environmental protection measures are taken.
## (s5) Treatment
(p5.0) This covers the process from application of the amendments to contaminated farm soil until the time when their stabilization capacity is lost (Table 3). Excessive application of amendments may affect the physical and chemical properties of soil. For example, the application of biochar in large quantities can cause acidification of the soil [57]. One study found that synthetic zeolite used as an amendment in Cd-polluted soil changed the properties of the soil, resulting in compaction [58]. Changes in the physical and chemical properties of soils can also affect the growth of crops. In addition, when a large amount of amendment is applied to soil, any amendment attached to the surface layer then enters the surrounding surface water through surface runoff, and this may cause secondary pollution problems. For example, the excessive application of phosphate amendment may lead to the eutrophication of surrounding water. Methods for mixing amendments and soils have not yet been standardized, and environmental pollution can easily be caused. The smaller the particle size of the amendment, the more easily it enters the atmospheric environment during the process of mixing with soil. For example, nanomaterials and powdered biochar materials readily enter the atmosphere when such mixing takes place on a site and can also enter the respiratory systems of construction workers [59]. In practice, if there is no adequate investigation of the hydrogeological conditions of the remediation site, the mixing depth of the soil and the amendment may exceed the depth of the groundwater level. In such a case, the amendment may cause the problem of groundwater environment pollution [60]. For example, saline-alkali soil can promote the activation of cadmium [61], and sandy soil can affect the fixation of heavy metals [62]. Such examples highlight the need for adequate analysis of the physical and chemical properties of soils on remediation sites which takes into account the findings of field experiments. Without such analysis, routine addition modification may not significantly reduce the availability of heavy metals in the soil.
## (s8) Application depth
(p8.0) The application depth is too deep, and the groundwater environment is affected / [95] The application depth is too shallow, the amendment acts on the non-rhizosphere soil, and cannot inhibit the uptake of heavy metals in rhizosphere soil Field experiment [15,57] Tillage depth is too deep, leading to the vertical migration of soil surface pollutants Field experiment [74] The application depth is too shallow, the amendment fails to enter the soil environment, but enters the surface water environment through surface runoff, or diffuses into the atmospheric environment Field experiment [96,97] Effect of soil properties

(p8.1) The physical and chemical properties of the soil may affect the passivation effect; for example, salinized soil increases the activity of Cd. If the soil particle size is too large (as in sandy soil), the passivation effect is poor Pot experiment [61] Post-remediation
