# A review of fish diversity, decline drivers, and management of the Tanguar Haor ecosystem: A globally recognized Ramsar site in Bangladesh

CorpusID: 253987061 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2111567e5cc427d9d5806060da0ab5017996aa2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2111567e5cc427d9d5806060da0ab5017996aa2c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Methodology
(p1.0) Following the guidelines of Haddaway et al. (2015), we conducted a systematic review of the literature. We concentrated on peer-reviewed studies, PhD and Master's theses, and scientific reports regarding TH that were written in English and published online ( Figure 2). The data search was conducted in three comprehensive databases of scholarly publications-Web of Science, Google Scholar and Scopus between January and December 2021. We conducted a preliminary assessment of a subset of articles prior to the main search to determine the search-string combination to utilize. All results were evaluated for relevancy and to avoid papers that were not related to our focus for each search-string. Each string was tested individually. Examples of the search-strings include: water quality parameters, fish diversity, decline factors, management, conservation, livelihood profile and Tanguar Haor. Then, we found 87, 18, 16 peer reviewed papers from google scholar, web of science and scopus, respectively. Finally, we have reviewed 22 papers. Relevant studies were identified by a step-by-step approach as shown in Figure 2 using EndNote X9. The step-by-step eligibility criteria were: All studies must include information on the author(s), year of publication and titles, duplicates were removed; article titles and abstracts were screened to include only studies conducted in TH; and the criteria for subsequent inclusion were that the articles, when fully read, considered water quality parameters, fish diversity, driving forces of biodiversity decline, socio-economic profile of engaged fishers, conservation and management strategies of the TH.
## (s4) Temperature
(p4.0) The water temperature of the TH varied from 22.4 C to 31.0 C with an annual mean around 26.0 C (Bhuiyan et al., 2019(Bhuiyan et al., , 2020. Solayman et al. (2018) determined the temperature ranged from 27.2 C to 29.4 C with a mean value of 28.28 C from Rupaboi beel, Muinsakhali beel, Chatrar beel, Boddof beel, and Kolma beel of the haor. Similarly, Mamun et al. (2013) found 27.98 C as the mean value of water temperature and recorded the minimum value 27.8 C and the maximum value 28.1 C.
## (s5) pH variation
(p5.0) The water pH value of the haor normally fluctuates between 8.1 and 9.7 from December to March and 7.5-7.7 from April to September (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). However, the study of Bhuiyan et al. (2019) recorded the pH values range between 7.2 and 9.7 in the Rauar area of TH throughout the year. Solayman et al. (2018) found the average pH value ranges from 7.3 to 8.7, while Mamun et al. (2013) reported that the average value spans from 6.9 to 7.6. However, the average water pH value in TH is suitable for survival of fish as the pH value 6.5 to 8.5 is considered normal for fisheries (ECR, 1997). Solayman et al. (2018) recorded the average DO content ranged from 4.27 mg/l to 8.56 mg/l. Mamun et al. (2013) discovered 5.5 mg/l as the peak DO value, 4.5 mg/l as the lowest DO value, and 5.02 mg/l as the mean DO value. Surface water with a DO value of 5 mg/l or higher is favorable for fisheries (ECR, 1997) which supports the diversified fisheries of TH.
## (s7) Total dissolved solid (TDS)
(p7.0) Compared to other waterbodies in Bangladesh, TH has a relatively low TDS (mean ¼ 63.5 mg/l). The TDS value ranges from 51 to 85 mg/l in Rauar area and from 58 to 77 mg/l in watch tower area of TH throughout the year (Bhuiyan et al., 2019(Bhuiyan et al., , 2020. However, Mamun et al. (2013) and Solayman et al. (2018) found the ranges from 731 to 1020 mg/l and 670-1036 mg/l, respectively. The authors of both pieces of research opined that the higher TDS value of water may be ascribed to the high dissolved ion content of upstream water and domestic contaminants (Mamun et al., 2013;Solayman et al., 2018). Bhuiyan et al. (2020) measured and recorded the mean electrical conductivity of TH water at 80.75 μS/cm. However, the conductivity value  fluctuates from 60 to 110 μS/cm throughout the year (Bhuiyan et al., 2019). On the other hand, the study from Mamun et al. (2013) Mamun et al. (2013) and Solayman et al. (2018) with the values found in other waterbodies.
## (s9) Water transparency
(p9.0) The Secchi disc depth is a limnological measure that has been incorporated in European legislation as one of the main criteria in assessing water quality (Domínguez G omez et al., 2009). With a Secchi disk depth of 2.48 m on average, the water transparency of TH remained reasonably steady (2.08-3.0 m) throughout the year (Bhuiyan et al., 2019(Bhuiyan et al., , 2020. The fairly low Secchi depth findings depicted that the haor is devoid of biotic and abiotic dissolved materials.
## (s10) Nutrient content
(p10.0) The nutrient profile analysis is an important part to think about the productivity of any waterbody, although the TH was found to be deficient in nutrients. Different studies have found that the soluble reactive phosphorus (SRP) levels, soluble reactive silicate (SRS) levels, NO 3 -N levels and NH 4 þ levels were ranges from 9.76 to 30.05 μg/l, 4.45-16.14 mg/l, 0.25-0.48 mg/l and 270-1380 μg/l, respectively, at the watch tower area of the haor (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). However, the highest concentrations of SRP (30.05 μg/l) SRS (16.14 mg/l), and NH4þ (1380 μg/l) were observed in September, March, and April, respectively (Bhuiyan et al., 2020). In the Rauar area of TH, SRP, SRS, NO 3 -N, and NH 4 þ concentrations ranged from 5.43 to 36.43 μg/l, 4-14.58 mg/l, 0.06-0.31 mg/l, and 238-1230 μg/l, respectively (Bhuiyan et al., 2019).

(p10.1) Highest amounts of NH 4 þ (905 and 1230 μg/l) was found during winter season. According to Bhuiyan et al. (2019), the highest concentration of NH 4 þ in winter season could be due to a presence of higher population of migratory birds during that time. The Watch Tower area has a higher concentration of vital nutrients, such as SRP, NO 3 -N, SRS, and NH 4 þ , than the Rauar area (Bhuiyan et al., 2020).
## (s11) Phytoplanktonic biomass
(p11.0) Phytoplanktonic biomass (Chl-a) concentrations ranged from 1.35 to 8.45 μg/l, while its degradation product pheophytin concentrations ranged from 0.08 to 3.5 μg/l in TH was recorded by Bhuiyan et al. (2019).

(p11.1) A low chl-a value indicates a low phytoplankton standing crop as because of the low concentrations of SRP, SRS, and TDS, occurs (Bhuiyan et al., 2019). Lower phytoplankton biomass in TH might have led in low DO and conductivity.
## (s24) Income determinants of the fishermen in haor region
(p24.0) The income of the fishermen can be affected by several factors, such as the fish catch, age of fishermen, and training program provided in the area (Ahmed et al., 2021). To analyze these factors, Tikadar et al. (2022) carried out a multiple linear regression model in haor area and a summary of that finding is presented in Table 9. The results show that age of the fishermen, education rate, training program and NGO membership of the fishermen influence their income positively and significantly. Older fishermen tend to have greater experience than the younger. They catch more fish because they are well-versed in the ecology of the floodplains. Additionally, they have better market knowledge, which helps them negotiate a higher price for the fish.
