# Technologies for pollutant removal and resource recovery from blackwater: a review

CorpusID: 256549930 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/992049eb09b313145bda04c8cfa36a0afaf0c59d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/992049eb09b313145bda04c8cfa36a0afaf0c59d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The sharply growing world population has made human excreta an outstanding problem. The safe disposal of human excreta is essential not only to human health, but also to the environment, as poor excreta management will lead to the contamination of water bodies and soils (Rose et al., 2015;Schmitt et al., 2017). Currently, up to 4.5 billion people in the world still lack access to safely managed sanitation services ). An estimated 850,000 people die annually because of a lack of access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene (Reynaert et al., 2020). One of the key solutions to this dilemma is the improved sanitation systems and sustainable treatment technologies for toilet wastewater.
## (s1) Characteristics
(p1.0) The main components within BW include human excreta and flushing water. Toilet paper, with insoluble fiber (i.e., cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin) being the main component, may also be contained in BW (Li et al., 2019). In many cases, however, toilet paper is always collected separately from excreta and removed from the source (Knerr et al., 2011). Although the volume ratio of BW is not large in domestic wastewater, it is rich in organics, N and P. For this reason, it is suggested by the "source separation" principle that BW be treated and reused separately from GW (Lam et al., 2015;Andersson et al., 2018). Additionally, as most of the pathogens and nutrients existing in domestic wastewater originate from BW, it is of great necessity to characterize BW with respect to its physical and chemical parameters, and microbial indicators.
## (s3) Treatment technologies of blackwater
(p3.0) In general, the objective of BW treatment can be classified into two aspects (Fig. 2). One is the removal of pollutants to meet the corresponding discharging or reuse standards. The other is the application of certain methods to recover organic matter or nutrients to produce energy, fertilizer, or other high value-added products. Prior to further treatment, a pretreatment step has always been recommended to decrease the subsequent processing load, or remove the insoluble or suspended solids. For water or nutrient reuse, a post-treatment process should be employed to meet the requirement for microbial or pathogenic indicators (Cid et al., 2022).
## (s6) Ecological systems
(p6.0) Ecological systems represent an alternative to biological and physical systems, in which both physical removal and biological degradation processes are likely to occur (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Compared to biological treatment processes mentioned in former sections, ecological systems including constructed wetlands (CWs) and subsoil filtration offer the advantages of low cost and energy consumption, high treatment capacity, convenient maintenance, and user-friendliness (Masi et al., 2010;Paulo et al., 2013;Jin et al., 2018b). They may also gain economic benefits through the harvest of crops as well. Therefore, ecological systems are particularly common in rural areas of developing countries. Normally, an ecological system always undergoes both physical processes through a filtration medium, and biological processes via microorganisms within the system (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Processes including chemical precipitation, adsorption, and microbial interactions and uptake by vegetation are also believed to occur in the system (Kivaisi, 2001  Tunisia and Turkey. Multistage CW configurations were tested, consisting of horizontal and vertical subsurface flow CW for secondary treatment and free water system as the tertiary stage. The results indicated that all systems obtained efficient COD reduction (up to 98%) and nitrification (92%-99%) for BW. The effluent BOD 5 , NO 3 --N and NH 4 + -N concentrations were below 15, 1 and 0.5 mg/L, respectively, suggesting the feasibility of CW application in the Mediterranean area. Paulo et al. (2013) used a natural system for the treatment and reuse of source segregated domestic wastewater. The BW fraction was treated by an evapotranspiration tank (TEvap) and digester. The effluent, as well as the GW fraction, was treated subsequently by a compact setup including a grease trap, sedimentation tank and two CWs. The results showed that this ecological and low-cost system realized the reuse of greywater and nutrients in BW, and was essentially maintenance free.

(p6.1) Although labeled low cost, low mechanical operation and low energy consumption, ecological systems also suffer from problems such as large land occupation, bad odors and long HRT (Boyjoo et al., 2013;Lansing et al., 2017). In the meantime, although CWs, especially hybrid wetland systems, have shown activity in pathogen and fecal indicator removal (Wu et al., 2016), ecological systems are generally not efficient in pathogen removal. It may be a potential risk for the transmission of airborne and waterborne diseases (Walton, 2012), and a disinfection process is still needed or recommended for an effluent containing few pathogens.

(p6.2) Ecological systems represent an alternative to biological and physical systems, in which both physical removal and biological degradation processes are likely to occur (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Compared to biological treatment processes mentioned in former sections, ecological systems including constructed wetlands (CWs) and subsoil filtration offer the advantages of low cost and energy consumption, high treatment capacity, convenient maintenance, and user-friendliness (Masi et al., 2010;Paulo et al., 2013;Jin et al., 2018b). They may also gain economic benefits through the harvest of crops as well. Therefore, ecological systems are particularly common in rural areas of developing countries. Normally, an ecological system always undergoes both physical processes through a filtration medium, and biological processes via microorganisms within the system (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Processes including chemical precipitation, adsorption, and microbial interactions and uptake by vegetation are also believed to occur in the system (Kivaisi, 2001  Tunisia and Turkey. Multistage CW configurations were tested, consisting of horizontal and vertical subsurface flow CW for secondary treatment and free water system as the tertiary stage. The results indicated that all systems obtained efficient COD reduction (up to 98%) and nitrification (92%-99%) for BW. The effluent BOD 5 , NO 3 --N and NH 4 + -N concentrations were below 15, 1 and 0.5 mg/L, respectively, suggesting the feasibility of CW application in the Mediterranean area. Paulo et al. (2013) used a natural system for the treatment and reuse of source segregated domestic wastewater. The BW fraction was treated by an evapotranspiration tank (TEvap) and digester. The effluent, as well as the GW fraction, was treated subsequently by a compact setup including a grease trap, sedimentation tank and two CWs. The results showed that this ecological and low-cost system realized the reuse of greywater and nutrients in BW, and was essentially maintenance free.

(p6.3) Although labeled low cost, low mechanical operation and low energy consumption, ecological systems also suffer from problems such as large land occupation, bad odors and long HRT (Boyjoo et al., 2013;Lansing et al., 2017). In the meantime, although CWs, especially hybrid wetland systems, have shown activity in pathogen and fecal indicator removal (Wu et al., 2016), ecological systems are generally not efficient in pathogen removal. It may be a potential risk for the transmission of airborne and waterborne diseases (Walton, 2012), and a disinfection process is still needed or recommended for an effluent containing few pathogens.
## (s23) Introduction
(p23.0) The sharply growing world population has made human excreta an outstanding problem. The safe disposal of human excreta is essential not only to human health, but also to the environment, as poor excreta management will lead to the contamination of water bodies and soils (Rose et al., 2015;Schmitt et al., 2017). Currently, up to 4.5 billion people in the world still lack access to safely managed sanitation services ). An estimated 850,000 people die annually because of a lack of access to clean water, sanitation and hygiene (Reynaert et al., 2020). One of the key solutions to this dilemma is the improved sanitation systems and sustainable treatment technologies for toilet wastewater.
## (s24) Characteristics
(p24.0) The main components within BW include human excreta and flushing water. Toilet paper, with insoluble fiber (i.e., cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin) being the main component, may also be contained in BW (Li et al., 2019). In many cases, however, toilet paper is always collected separately from excreta and removed from the source (Knerr et al., 2011). Although the volume ratio of BW is not large in domestic wastewater, it is rich in organics, N and P. For this reason, it is suggested by the "source separation" principle that BW be treated and reused separately from GW (Lam et al., 2015;Andersson et al., 2018). Additionally, as most of the pathogens and nutrients existing in domestic wastewater originate from BW, it is of great necessity to characterize BW with respect to its physical and chemical parameters, and microbial indicators.
## (s26) Treatment technologies of blackwater
(p26.0) In general, the objective of BW treatment can be classified into two aspects (Fig. 2). One is the removal of pollutants to meet the corresponding discharging or reuse standards. The other is the application of certain methods to recover organic matter or nutrients to produce energy, fertilizer, or other high value-added products. Prior to further treatment, a pretreatment step has always been recommended to decrease the subsequent processing load, or remove the insoluble or suspended solids. For water or nutrient reuse, a post-treatment process should be employed to meet the requirement for microbial or pathogenic indicators (Cid et al., 2022).
## (s29) Ecological systems
(p29.0) Ecological systems represent an alternative to biological and physical systems, in which both physical removal and biological degradation processes are likely to occur (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Compared to biological treatment processes mentioned in former sections, ecological systems including constructed wetlands (CWs) and subsoil filtration offer the advantages of low cost and energy consumption, high treatment capacity, convenient maintenance, and user-friendliness (Masi et al., 2010;Paulo et al., 2013;Jin et al., 2018b). They may also gain economic benefits through the harvest of crops as well. Therefore, ecological systems are particularly common in rural areas of developing countries. Normally, an ecological system always undergoes both physical processes through a filtration medium, and biological processes via microorganisms within the system (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Processes including chemical precipitation, adsorption, and microbial interactions and uptake by vegetation are also believed to occur in the system (Kivaisi, 2001  Tunisia and Turkey. Multistage CW configurations were tested, consisting of horizontal and vertical subsurface flow CW for secondary treatment and free water system as the tertiary stage. The results indicated that all systems obtained efficient COD reduction (up to 98%) and nitrification (92%-99%) for BW. The effluent BOD 5 , NO 3 --N and NH 4 + -N concentrations were below 15, 1 and 0.5 mg/L, respectively, suggesting the feasibility of CW application in the Mediterranean area. Paulo et al. (2013) used a natural system for the treatment and reuse of source segregated domestic wastewater. The BW fraction was treated by an evapotranspiration tank (TEvap) and digester. The effluent, as well as the GW fraction, was treated subsequently by a compact setup including a grease trap, sedimentation tank and two CWs. The results showed that this ecological and low-cost system realized the reuse of greywater and nutrients in BW, and was essentially maintenance free.

(p29.1) Although labeled low cost, low mechanical operation and low energy consumption, ecological systems also suffer from problems such as large land occupation, bad odors and long HRT (Boyjoo et al., 2013;Lansing et al., 2017). In the meantime, although CWs, especially hybrid wetland systems, have shown activity in pathogen and fecal indicator removal (Wu et al., 2016), ecological systems are generally not efficient in pathogen removal. It may be a potential risk for the transmission of airborne and waterborne diseases (Walton, 2012), and a disinfection process is still needed or recommended for an effluent containing few pathogens.

(p29.2) Ecological systems represent an alternative to biological and physical systems, in which both physical removal and biological degradation processes are likely to occur (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Compared to biological treatment processes mentioned in former sections, ecological systems including constructed wetlands (CWs) and subsoil filtration offer the advantages of low cost and energy consumption, high treatment capacity, convenient maintenance, and user-friendliness (Masi et al., 2010;Paulo et al., 2013;Jin et al., 2018b). They may also gain economic benefits through the harvest of crops as well. Therefore, ecological systems are particularly common in rural areas of developing countries. Normally, an ecological system always undergoes both physical processes through a filtration medium, and biological processes via microorganisms within the system (Boyjoo et al., 2013). Processes including chemical precipitation, adsorption, and microbial interactions and uptake by vegetation are also believed to occur in the system (Kivaisi, 2001  Tunisia and Turkey. Multistage CW configurations were tested, consisting of horizontal and vertical subsurface flow CW for secondary treatment and free water system as the tertiary stage. The results indicated that all systems obtained efficient COD reduction (up to 98%) and nitrification (92%-99%) for BW. The effluent BOD 5 , NO 3 --N and NH 4 + -N concentrations were below 15, 1 and 0.5 mg/L, respectively, suggesting the feasibility of CW application in the Mediterranean area. Paulo et al. (2013) used a natural system for the treatment and reuse of source segregated domestic wastewater. The BW fraction was treated by an evapotranspiration tank (TEvap) and digester. The effluent, as well as the GW fraction, was treated subsequently by a compact setup including a grease trap, sedimentation tank and two CWs. The results showed that this ecological and low-cost system realized the reuse of greywater and nutrients in BW, and was essentially maintenance free.

(p29.3) Although labeled low cost, low mechanical operation and low energy consumption, ecological systems also suffer from problems such as large land occupation, bad odors and long HRT (Boyjoo et al., 2013;Lansing et al., 2017). In the meantime, although CWs, especially hybrid wetland systems, have shown activity in pathogen and fecal indicator removal (Wu et al., 2016), ecological systems are generally not efficient in pathogen removal. It may be a potential risk for the transmission of airborne and waterborne diseases (Walton, 2012), and a disinfection process is still needed or recommended for an effluent containing few pathogens.
