# materials A Review of Pectin-Based Material for Applications in Water Treatment

CorpusID: 257475506 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bff7d48c03e0627b5224d3630db727351e62635c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bff7d48c03e0627b5224d3630db727351e62635c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Water is at the basis of social and economic development; it is vital to every human being; it is essential for growing food, health, and safety. Moreover, water is related to the economic vitality of our society, and, at present, there is no substitute for water on the earth's crust. Water has a Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) that is dedicated exclusively to its promotion (Goal 6, "Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all"), and it has a crucial role in a good number of the SDGs while forming an essential factor in others. Nevertheless, due to the effects of climate change, which are being felt right now [1], water is becoming a more scarce and less predictably available resource in many world regions [2]. Water scarcity is among the principal problems that many societies and the entire world will face during the XXI century, and it is already affecting every continent.

(p0.1) Water on the planet is under pressure because of population growth (we need more and more water to produce food), the overexploitation of freshwater resources used in different industries, and climate change. As the population grows and the environment is affected by climate change, access to drinking water decreases. More than 1300 children under five die every day because of diseases caused by unsafe drinking water, poor sanitation, and hygiene. The global demand for freshwater will rise by 40% in 2030, putting pressure further stressing water as 90% of all power generation is water-demanding. The world is heading toward a global water crisis, and it is urgently necessary to secure freshwater for all.
## (s3) Pectin-Chemical Structure
(p3.0) Pectin is an anionic heteropolysaccharide that is present in vegetable cell walls. Pectin is particularly predominant in fruit peels, especially in citrus peel and apple pomace, but also in passion fruit rind, pomelo, and banana peel [90]. The pectin backbone chain comprises α-(1,4)-linked D-galacturonic acid (GalA) residues [91] (mainly homogalacturonan (HG), rhamnogalacturonan I (RG-I), rhamnogalacturonan (RG-II)) linked by α 1-4 glycosidic bond. The homogalacturonan domain (HG) is the most abundant and linear domain (around 60%). Additionally, as shown in Figure 3a, pectin has different branch domains, such as xylogalacturonan with sugars (xylose, apiose, rhamnose, galactose, arabinose, fructose, among others).

(p3.1) The carbon 6 of the D-galacturonic acid residues can be methyl-esterified (COOCH 3 ) or carboxylated (COO − , in its deprotonated form), as indicated in Figure 3b. It also can be acetylated at the O-2 and/or O-3 position of the GalA residues, although this is less common [91]. Depending on the ratio of the methyl-esterification of these residues, pectin shows a different esterification degree (DE).
## (s4) Insoluble Pectin-Cross-Linking Agents That Generate Gelation
(p4.0) As mentioned above, pectin is a water-soluble material. Therefore, it must be insolubilized to be used as an adsorbent to remove pollutants from water. Different ionic crosslinking agents were used for pectin, with the cations that were monovalent (Na + , K + ), divalent (Ca 2+ , Cu 2+ , Sr 2+ Ni 2+ Zn 2+ Cd 2+ Pb 2+ or Mg 2+ ), or trivalent (Al 3+ , La 3+ , and Fe 3+ ) being most used. Pectin can also be cross-linked using non-ionic cross-linkers such as glutaraldehyde [111] or laccase [112]. However, ionic crosslinking is the most widely used and suitable method because it has the principal advantage of releasing contaminants (in some cases, recovering a priceless pollutant) and recovering the absorbent that can be reused.

(p4.1) Among all the possible ions, the divalent cations are the most commonly used elements for LM pectin gelation. After cross-linking (independent of the cross-linking agent), pectin undergoes gelation, producing a three-dimensional network in the form of xerogels (vacuum drying), hydrogels (wet gels), aerogels (supercritical CO 2 drying), and cryo-gels (freeze-drying) depending on the drying conditions [113]. The primary characteristic of wet gels is their ability to bind considerable quantities of water, thus increasing their volume. In addition, the swelling favors the access of pollutants to pectin.
## (s6) Historical Perspective of Structural Models Induced by Calcium
(p6.0) In 1973, Grant and coworkers [125] first proposed the interaction between a polysaccharide chain (such as alginate or pectin) and divalent cations in terms of the egg-box model. Initially, this model introduced alginates: a non-branched polysaccharide composed of two monosaccharides, α-L guluronic and β-D mannuronic acids [146]. Using circular dichroism, the authors suggested a cooperative inter-chain mechanism of ion binding involving two chains associated with the coulomb interaction between the active sites and the metal ion. More specifically, two opposite α-L-guluronate sequences paired together to form a structure with cavities, within which Ca 2+ ions were accommodated through specific coordination interactions between two free carboxyl groups.

(p6.1) Five years later, Morris et al. [147] studied alginate chain gelation by X-ray diffraction coupled with circular dichroism using different calcium concentrations. Their results showed that the primary inter-chain association mechanism was regularly dimerizing alginate or poly (guluronate) chain segments. This structure results in cross-linked dimers with a geometric design that resembles an egg box (see Figure 4). Compared with the first proposal of the "egg-box" model, the dimers can further aggregate laterally into multimers, as revealed by small-angle X-ray scattering. In addition, the sugar ring belonging to guluronic acid and the polymer chain adopts a characteristic zigzag shape. Studying the lateral aggregation of dimers is essential to understanding the properties of these biomaterials in terms of their structure to explain what happens during a water remediation process. On the other hand, knowing the correct features and operating principle of the "egg-box" model helps to understand the possible pollutants of adsorption models from wastewater. aterials 2023, 16, x FOR PEER REVIEW Five years later, Morris et al. [147] studied alginate chain gelation by coupled with circular dichroism using different calcium concentratio showed that the primary inter-chain association mechanism was regula ginate or poly (guluronate) chain segments. This structure results in cro with a geometric design that resembles an egg box (see Figure 4). Compa proposal of the "egg-box" model, the dimers can further aggregate lat mers, as revealed by small-angle X-ray scattering. In addition, the sugar guluronic acid and the polymer chain adopts a characteristic zigzag sha lateral aggregation of dimers is essential to understanding the proper materials in terms of their structure to explain what happens during a w process. On the other hand, knowing the correct features and operatin "egg-box" model helps to understand the possible pollutants of adsorp wastewater. In 1981, Walkinshaw and Arnott [148] added, for the first time, th junction zone for the "egg-box" model for poly(galacturonic) acid and a tion degree of calcium pectate (i.e., pectin cross-linked with metal ions). I for poly(galacturonic) acid, chain-chain interactions were stabilized by in drogen bonds formed between several adjacent D-galacturonic acid uni bic bonding between methyl esters. Similarly, hydrophobic binding from thyl groups and specific intermolecular hydrogen bonds stabilized calc main interactions between pairs of chains could be the bridges formed which incorporate into their coordination shells two-polyanion oxygen chain and three from the other. In addition, in 1982, Powell et al. [149] in nose distribution for the formation of stable poly(galacturonic) acid inte for high and low degrees of methyl(esterification). Their results confirm and Arnott hypothesis [148]. They also indicate that the length of the p acid sequences between rhamnose interruptions (i.e., hairy regions) is ap stant (i.e., they prove the existence of the junction zone). In 1981, Walkinshaw and Arnott [148] added, for the first time, the concept of the junction zone for the "egg-box" model for poly(galacturonic) acid and a high methoxylation degree of calcium pectate (i.e., pectin cross-linked with metal ions). In this new model, for poly(galacturonic) acid, chain-chain interactions were stabilized by intermolecular hydrogen bonds formed between several adjacent D-galacturonic acid units and hydrophobic bonding between methyl esters. Similarly, hydrophobic binding from segments of methyl groups and specific intermolecular hydrogen bonds stabilized calcium pectate. The main interactions between pairs of chains could be the bridges formed by calcium ions, which incorporate into their coordination shells two-polyanion oxygen atoms from one chain and three from the other. In addition, in 1982, Powell et al. [149] investigated rhamnose distribution for the formation of stable poly(galacturonic) acid inter-chain junctions for high and low degrees of methyl(esterification). Their results confirm the Walkinshaw and Arnott hypothesis [148]. They also indicate that the length of the poly(galacturonic) acid sequences between rhamnose interruptions (i.e., hairy regions) is approximately constant (i.e., they prove the existence of the junction zone).

(p6.2) Later, Kohn [150] studied the interaction between carboxyl groups and divalent cations in pectin fragments, resulting in a complex formation. The interaction exhibits different affinities towards divalent cations: Ca 2+ , Sr 2+ , and Zn 2+ ions are bound according to the well-known "egg-box" model, whereas Cd 2+ , Cu 2+ , and Pb 2+ form intra-and intermolecular complexes. This work proved that the "egg-box" structure only formed with specific metal ions. This revolutionized the egg-box model because, depending on the concentration and interaction with metal ions, LM-pectin could be cross-linked in different ways with different properties.
## (s21) Temperature
(p21.0) At high temperatures, a chain scission is promoted, and, as a consequence, dimers are formed. These junction zones are stabilized upon cooling through hydrogen bonding, which is accompanied by cooperative calcium immobilization.

(p21.1) Ventura and coworkers [158] published a SAXS analysis of Ca 2+ -LM pectin gels with different calcium concentrations, coupled with molecular dynamics simulation studies. They proposed a new "egg-box" model considering semi-flexible and no linear chains. This chain flexibility was not considered in any of the previous models developed. They showed [158] that rod-like and point-like cross-links between neighboring pectin molecules could occur. With the increased Ca 2+ concentration, the number of road-like cross-links decreased while the number of point-like cross-links increased. In this study, the authors proposed that the cross-linking scheme was mainly governed by the branched nature of pectin, as opposed to the linear nature of alginate.

(p21.2) Wang et al. [159] studied the high and low methoxyl pectin self-assembly molecules, which were regulated by calcium ions using atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the following years. The addition of calcium ions increased the viscosity of the low-methoxyl pectin solution. Otherwise, the viscosity of the high-methoxyl pectin solution remained stable. AFM confirmed that the esterification degree and calcium concentration cause different binding methods with calcium ions between pectin governed by the branched nature of pectin [158]. The formation of dimers by lateral aggregation was observed only for the LM-pectin. However, for the HM-pectin, the large number of esterified galacturonic acid residues limits pectin fiber aggregation due to the nonspecific hydrophobic interaction and hydrogen bonds. This study was another confirmation of the two-step binding behavior of calcium to pectin. The AFM study showed that there were two possible ways of dimer aggregation. In accordance with the Walkinshaw and Arnott hypothesis [148], the lateral aggregation of dimers involved hydrogen bonds between hydroxyl groups of different pectin fibers. However, dimers can aggregate along the pectin fiber, as the picture shows.
## (s22) Recent Evolution of Structural Models for Pectin Is Cross-Linked with Other Metals
(p22.0) As mentioned above, pectin is susceptible to cross-links with other cations apart from calcium. Specifically, in 2015, Assifaoui et al. [160] published the structural differences found in LM pectin when cross-linked with Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ . These results show that Ca 2+ cations only interact with carboxyl groups and form more homogeneous pectin network fibers (i.e., the well-known "egg-box" dimers). In contrast, Zn 2+ also interacts with hydroxyl groups, resulting in a less homogeneous cross-linked pectin network (see Figure 7).

(p22.1) In 2016, Huynh et al. [161] investigated the binding mechanism using different cationic metals (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by isothermal titration calorimetry, viscosity measurements, and molecular dynamics simulations in poly (galacturonic) acid. In this framework, a monodentate interaction meant the interaction between a carboxyl group of galacturonic acid and a cation. In contrast, a bidentate interaction means the binding of two oxygen atoms of the galacturonic acid (from two different pectin chains) and a cation. They reported that the interaction between divalent cations and poly (galacturonic) acid is monodentate for Mg 2+ and Zn 2+ and bidentate for Ba 2+ and Ca 2+ . Moreover, the binding mechanism for the divalent cations, Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , can be associated with mono-complexation and point-like cross-links or related to the appearance of the dimmers formation, depending on the molar ratio between the divalent cation and galacturonic acid (R = Metal 2+ /Gal). This conclusion was based on the number of water molecules coordinated with the different cations. In the case of Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , the coordination with water was weaker in strength than those of Mg 2+ . During the cross-link, the metal ions lose one water molecule for the Zn 2+ and two for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ , respectively. However, Mg 2+ strongly interacts with water and remains weakly bound to poly(galacturonic) acid by sharing water molecules from its coordination shell with the carboxylate groups. Finally, two years later, Huynh et al. [162] studied the gelation kinetics of pectin induced from divalent cations (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by viscoelastic and turbidity measurements. Their results confirmed that the cations' diffusion kinetics was lower for Zn 2+ than for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ . However, for the Mg 2+ , the gel was not formed, supporting a previous study [161].
## (s23) Recent Evolution of Structural Models for Pectin Is Cross-Linked with Other Metals
(p23.0) As mentioned above, pectin is susceptible to cross-links with other cations apart from calcium. Specifically, in 2015, Assifaoui et al. [160] published the structural differences found in LM pectin when cross-linked with Ca 2+ and Zn 2+ . These results show that Ca 2+ cations onl interact with carboxyl groups and form more homogeneous pectin network fibers (i.e., th well-known "egg-box" dimers). In contrast, Zn 2+ also interacts with hydroxyl groups, result ing in a less homogeneous cross-linked pectin network (see Figure 7). In 2016, Huynh et al. [161] investigated the binding mechanism using different cati onic metals (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by isothermal titration calorimetry, viscosity measure ments, and molecular dynamics simulations in poly (galacturonic) acid. In this frame work, a monodentate interaction meant the interaction between a carboxyl group of galac turonic acid and a cation. In contrast, a bidentate interaction means the binding of tw oxygen atoms of the galacturonic acid (from two different pectin chains) and a cation They reported that the interaction between divalent cations and poly (galacturonic) acid is monodentate for Mg 2+ and Zn 2+ and bidentate for Ba 2+ and Ca 2+ . Moreover, the bindin mechanism for the divalent cations, Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , can be associated with mono complexation and point-like cross-links or related to the appearance of the dimmers for mation, depending on the molar ratio between the divalent cation and galacturonic acid (R = Metal 2+ /Gal). This conclusion was based on the number of water molecules coordi nated with the different cations. In the case of Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , and Ba 2+ , the coordination with water was weaker in strength than those of Mg 2+ . During the cross-link, the metal ions los one water molecule for the Zn 2+ and two for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ , respectively. However, Mg 2 strongly interacts with water and remains weakly bound to poly(galacturonic) acid b sharing water molecules from its coordination shell with the carboxylate groups. Finally two years later, Huynh et al. [162] studied the gelation kinetics of pectin induced from divalent cations (Zn 2+ , Ca 2+ , Ba 2+ , Mg 2+ ) by viscoelastic and turbidity measurements. Thei results confirmed that the cations' diffusion kinetics was lower for Zn 2+ than for Ca 2+ and Ba 2+ . However, for the Mg 2+ , the gel was not formed, supporting a previous study [161].

(p23.1) To finish this section, Table 3 summarizes the milestones in developing the structura models of pectin when cross-linked with metal cations. To finish this section, Table 3 summarizes the milestones in developing the structural models of pectin when cross-linked with metal cations. Table 3. Historical development of the binding mechanisms between divalent cations and both poly(galacturonic) chains or pectin.
