# OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY Medicinal herbs and multiple sclerosis: Overview on the hard balance between new therapeutic strategy and occupational health risk

CorpusID: 253425568 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61258be2f310d5ef2e316502b6a600fa2a993364](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/61258be2f310d5ef2e316502b6a600fa2a993364)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s4) Pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis
(p4.0) Multiple sclerosis is a complex pathology with continuous inflammatory activity within the CNS (Central Nervous System), giving rise to tissue damage that results in brain and spinal cord atrophy and irreversible neurological disability. MS affects over 2.5 million people worldwide, especially women and young, usually with an age of onset between 18 and 40 years, seriously reducing the life quality and causing a significant financial burden (Walton et al., 2020).
## (s5) Herbal products with therapeutic efficacy in multiple sclerosis
(p5.0) Herbal products are natural formulations, made from whole medicinal plants, or from their parts and their derivatives, not containing synthetic or semi-synthetic products. The definition "piante officinali" is exclusively an Italian definition, originating from the term "opificina," which identified the place where the plants were used to produce preparations for therapeutic use, food, liquor, food supplements, cosmetics, medical devices, drugs, etc. The herbal products use continues to expand rapidly around the world. According to the WHO, between 35,000 and 70,000 plant species are worldwide used for various functional purposes but studies have been carried out on only 5,000 of them.

(p5.1) To date, herbal drug regulation, differ across countries (Bhat et al., 2019), and regulatory authorities and the scientific community are working to evolve regulations of herbal medicines more effectively and convergence of different environments. In Europe, these products are instead called using the terms botanical or herbal. The European legislation is very articulate and includes Directives and Regulations concerning both food and medicinal products for human use.

(p5.2) Several studies, conducted mainly in East Asia, have shown that several plants and their compounds have positive effects on MS (Yadav et al., 2010;Dayapoglu and Tan, 2016;Kim et al., 2018). As reported by Peng et al. (2021) there are many prescriptions for Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) to treat MS/experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), while there isn't enough information about the efficacy of CHM for MS patients.
## (s10) Ginkgo biloba
(p10.0) The study of Noroozian et al. (2011) showed that 8 weeks of Ginkgo biloba (G. biloba) treatment can improve memory and QoL in people with MS, and a pilot study on people with MS showed that G. biloba determines beneficial effects, reducing inflammation and fatigue, and reversing cognitive impairment .
## (s11) Cannabis sativa
(p11.0) The Cannabis sativa (C. sativa) properties have been identified a long time ago. Current studies on the endocannabinoid system allowed the development of new therapeutic targets for the treatment of several diseases such as MS. A double-blind randomized placebo-controlled study pointed out the efficacy of smoking a marijuana cigarette, containing 1.54% A9-tetrahydrocannabinol, in improvement of spasticity, neuropathic pain, urinary complications, and sleep disorders (Greenberg et al., 1994;Pertwee, 2002;Baker and Pryce, 2008).
## (s15) Hypericum perforatum
(p15.0) Hypericum perforatum (H. perforatum) is used for treating inflammation-related disorders, cancers, and neurodegenerative diseases (Werneke et al., 2004), and for its antidepressant, antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects can be recommended to MS patients. In fact, in its extract, phloroglucinols, naphthodianthrones, hypericin, pseudohypericin, phenolic compounds, and flavonoids are present, with anti-inflammatory, anti-apoptotic, and antioxidant activities.
## (s18) Safety of medicinal herbs suggested for the treatment of multiple sclerosis patients
(p18.0) In MS patients were evaluated adverse reactions or toxicities of several medicinal plants such as G. biloba, which acts as an antiplatelet agent, and it is important to consider its potential interaction with anticoagulant drugs, as well as its monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitory function (Diamond et al., 2000). A clinical trial on 56 MS patients, showed 29 adverse events such as headache, rash, nausea, insomnia, and flu-like syndrome recorded during ginseng administration compared to 26 that occurred during placebo intake (Kim et al., 2011).

(p18.1) Cannabis sativa in MS patients is extensively studied, and clinical trials monitoring the safety characteristics of cannabis showed few cases of urinary retention and detrusor sphincter dyssynergia (Vaney et al., 2004). In reverse, the clinical study of P. ginseng is very limited, and no serious adverse events were observed in MS patients during follow-up (Etemadifar et al., 2013).

(p18.2) The growing demand for herbal products requires intensive and prolonged agricultural production that needs the use of fertilizers and pesticides. Since "natural" does not necessarily mean "safe, " the effects of pesticide residues' presence and their quantity must be monitored, because they may represent a serious health risk to consumers. In fact, plant-based drugs may contain pesticide residues, including their metabolites and/or degradation products, which accumulate in the soil and plants during farming (tillage, fumigation, spraying) so becoming a contamination source (Kunle et al., 2012). This makes the safety of herbal products a major public health concern, given the cumulative, additive, or synergistic effects of pesticides on human health.

(p18.3) Unfortunately, at this time many of the plants used in alternative medicine, potentially effective, have not been subjected to the evaluation of toxicity, interference with drugs, and safety. There are no regulated manufacturing standards for many herbal products and some of them have been found contaminated by toxicants or other drugs.
## (s19) Medicinal herbs: Quality assurance and quality control
(p19.0) The mechanisms of action and bioavailability of herbal medicines should be determined, and preclinical assessment for safety and efficacy must be performed in animal and in vitro models before clinical studies in humans. Cytotoxicity assays (CTAs), that use cell culture, detected how cellular functions may be affected by herbal products. Recently, to predict both helpful and hazardous effects of herbal compounds, DNA sequencing, gene expression, protein, and metabolite profiling were used. If cellular assays are predictive of potential toxicity, the use of animal models allows the evaluation of toxicity signs occurring in response to the gradual increase in the dose of the substance, considering that the biological response could be species-specific and an active ingredient in animals could be completely inactive in humans.

(p19.1) The intricacy of the chemical composition of medicinal herbs and the presence of hazardous agents (pesticides, herbicides, radioelements and microorganisms and heavy metals) is the basis of quality control analyses performed by several methods, such as Nuclear Mass Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR), thin-layer chromatography (TLC), High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), and Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy (LC-MS), and the choice of the analytical method, among the many available, is a crucial point that mainly depends on the analytical purposes set. In thinlayer chromatography (TLC), the analytical tool extensively used because of its easiness, relative cheapness and high sensitivity, the compounds may be separated quickly by planar chromatography on silica, cellulose, polyamide or chemicallymodified plates, and detected, either directly or after reacting with a specified reagent (Boland et al., 2007). HPLC used to separate, identify, and quantify each component in a mixture has been significantly upgraded, leading to greater separation efficiency, adaptability and speed. Atomic absorption and atomic emission spectroscopies are used for qualitative and quantitative analyses and search for contaminants in herbal drugs (Isaac and Kerber, 2015).

(p19.2) Genetic analyses represent are a new and powerful tool for the reliable identification of a given species, even in a mixture, Allowing to identify traces of DNA in liquid and dry extracts also after repeated processes of dilution/concentration/separation (Novak et al., 2007).
