# Role of imaging in morphea assessment: A review of the literature

CorpusID: 259651791 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/757093f8395f96818eceac79d3831fae142fbbae](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/757093f8395f96818eceac79d3831fae142fbbae)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Localized scleroderma (LoS), also known as morphea, is a rare connective tissue disorder characterized by inflammation and fibrosis of the skin as well as the soft tissue that causes the imbalance of collagen production and destruction. [1][2][3][4] Although the exact pathogenesis of morphea remains unclear, it is believed that genetic predisposition, immune system dysregulation, trauma, and iatrogenic factors might be responsible for causing the disease. 1,2 Morphea, which is seen in all age ranges, is divided into four major subtypes: plaque type (circumscribed), linear, generalized, and mixed.

(p0.1) Notably, plaque type and linear morphea are the most common types and main focus of most studies. 2 The clinical presentation of morphea differs according to its subtype, degree of involvement, and stage In addition, computerized surface area measurement is insensitive to improvement. Moreover, durometer has poor correlation with clinical skin scores, and its sensitivity to change is unknown. Cutometer has not been validated in morphea, and thermography is incapable of distinguishing between active and inactive phases. 4 Some imaging modalities are utilized in assessing patients with morphea, such as high-frequency ultrasonography (US), shear-wave elastography (SWE), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These imaging modalities are promising tools in the diagnosis and monitoring of morphea lesions. Furthermore, they seem to be more reliable and quantitative than other currently applied methods. However, there is no consensus on the definite monitoring criteria for morphea yet. 3,4 The aim of this study was to review the literature on the role of imaging modalities in assessing patients with morphea in terms of disease activity, discriminating between different phases, and response to the treatment.
## (s4) Elastography
(p4.0) Elastography is a novel method to quantitatively assess tissue stiffness and is performed in two ways: strain elastography (SE) and did not analyze different stages of the disease and also did not explore the association between skin stiffness and pathologic findings. 21 All of the abovementioned studies are cross-sectional and did not follow skin stiffness by SWE ultrasound after treatment. We conducted a cohort study of morphea patients and experimentally use shear-wave elastography performed with Aixplorer (SuperSonic Imagine) using 20 MHz probe and calculate dermal and hypodermal elasticity by using copious amount of gel and minimal hand pressure and report tissue stiffness average of three measurements express in kPa for normal and abnormal dermis and hypodermis at baseline and then follow them in 3 and 6 months interval after treatment ( Figure 2). Data will be published soon.
## (s6) CONCLUSION
(p6.0) One of the most challenging issues in treating morphea patients is the lack of globally accepted assessment tools for monitoring the results of treatment and disease activity. [33][34][35][36] In this regard, ultrasound is a potential and reliable imaging modality in the quantitative morphea assessment. However, ultrasound has limitations such as being operator dependent and lack of consistent intra or interoperator measurement of tissue thickness. It should be considered that there are discrepancies in available literature because of different cross-sectional study designs, using A-mode scan and various probe frequencies, and small sample sizes. To establish a quantitative, valid, and reproducible outcome measure, larger prospective cohort studies using higher probe frequencies should be conducted. In addition, shear-wave elastography can be used for disease monitoring and assessing therapeutic effects. SWE is a novel tool that is not universally available and it is not FDA approved for skin so far. To determine the role of SWE in detecting lesion progression and changes overtime, future studies are needed.

(p6.1) MRI provides complementary information about the depth of the disease especially in deep or generalized morphea (GM) as well as neurologic manifestations of localized craniofacial scleroderma. MRI has also limitations, including being expensive, time-consuming, infeasible in routine clinical settings, and a low signal-to-noise ratio for superficial layers intrinsically.

(p6.2) In conclusion, we recommend color Doppler ultrasound with high frequencies probe (18-20 MHz) and if available, SWE for assessing and monitoring superficial soft tissue involvement. In GM or DM, MRI helps to determine the depth of disease, particularly as a first-line and followup diagnostic tool. In addition, brain MRI may be useful for patients
