# UAV Traffic Management : A Survey On Communication Security

CorpusID: 253447399 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7931e5771beef1a7931c822480daae3bec610a5a)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) Unmanned aerial systems applications and traffic management
(p1.0) The most common application for a civil UAV in 2022 is the recreational use. However they have proven to be critical in operations that humans cannot carry out in a safe and timely efficient manner [56]. The number of UAVs around the world grows by 13% each year, and a lot of research focuses on improving their operating capabilities. Their performance is continuously improving and they are the best solution for a growing number of applications. For infrastructure monitoring, areas scanning as well as urgent delivery services and other applications, they are already the most relevant and cost-efficient solution. They can also be used for agriculture by monitoring and spraying the fields, for transport to help limiting the congestion in city centers, for the surveillance of areas where security camera are unusable or more expensive, for telecommunication purposes and for media and entertainment as cheap aerial cameras or to create new shows. They also can play a major role in smart cities and be used in Internet of Things (IoT) systems or Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) [25].

(p1.1) A UAS includes all the parts used to operate a UAV and their communication means. The simplest ones are comprised of a UAV and a Ground Control Station (GCS). Many different actors are taking part in advanced UAS such as UTM systems and intermediate ground stations managing communication between different UAVs and their end users. UAS characteristics cause most communication links to be wireless. As shown in Figure 2, three main communication axis can be found in a UAS. There are links between any UAV and a GCS, where command, telemetry, video and other mission specific data is transmitted. These links can be physically or logically separated, as these different types of data are not always sent on the same channel. A second axis exists between any UAS and the UTM systems when flying in controlled airspace. From the drone or the GCS, there is telemetry information sent to the UTM systems, which uses it to monitor the traffic and organize the airspace. And from the UTM systems, there are emergency geofencing zones broadcast, and, depending on the level of authority of the UTM, trajectory suggestions or direct trajectory modifications sent to a specific UAV or GCS. The third type of communications are between two UAVs. They can share environmental information with one another, or be used as routers to transmit data to a remote GCS or the UTM. Depending on the sensitivity of the information in each transmission, the security goals will be different.
## (s3) UTM safety and security
(p3.0) UAS will need to meet a great number of security requirements in order to operate over populated areas. Among those a great deal will be focused on communication security. They will need to be included in a controlled airspace, managed by UTM systems synchronised with existing Air Traffic Management (ATM) system [40]. Most of the information exchanged by UAS and UTM systems is sensitive, if not critical for safe operations. A secure UTM requires solutions to protect communications. The research field has anticipated this and several works have focused on securing UAS communications [28,55,57].
## (s11) Asymmetric encryption
(p11.0) Asymmetric encryption uses a pair of keys for each entity. The secret (or private) key is never shared with anyone, while the public key is, as its name suggests, shared with everyone. If someone wants to send a message to an entity, the message is encrypted with the public key of the recipient, and can only be decrypted with the corresponding secret key. This provides confidentiality to the encrypted message, as the secret key is never shared.

(p11.1) Asymmetrical encryption is based on hard mathematical problems, such as the integer factorization for Rivest Shamir Adelman (RSA) [51], or the discrete logarithm for ElGamal encryption scheme [21]. Even if the aforementioned problems are not generically proven NP-hard, the best known algorithms solving these problems have at least sub-exponential complexity, making them hard to solve in reasonable time for cryptographic-size parameters.
## (s21) UAS communication vulnerabilities
(p21.0) 3.1 Sensitive data interception attack 3.1.1 Eavesdropping : description and operational impact Eavesdropping, sniffing or passive listening is a simple attack that can be performed on any electromagnetic signal. The attacker only has to intercept the communication. In any wireless setting it is achieved simply by setting up a receiver and observing the communication between two parties. If the attacker is then able to extract sensitive information from the signals, the attack is successful. Even when the signal is encrypted, if the identity of the source and destination are not hidden from the attacker, some private information is leaked as well.

(p21.1) Current protocols for telemetry, like the MAVlink are particularly vulnerable to eavesdropping. Kwan et al. [36] detail these flaws in an empirical analysis of the MAVlink protocol. The lack of confidentiality can cause privacy issues, even with the telemetry being the only information leaked. The MAVlink can be transmitted over a secure channel, but as telemetry is not usually considered sensitive, operators do not generally bother and simply use the MAVlink over unencrypted channels.

(p21.2) The video link is particularly vulnerable to data interception, as it can contain sensitive images. The security of the video link varies a lot depending on the UAV and its camera. UAV manufacturers either include the video feed in their main communication link between the drone and the GCS (this is usually done by Wi-Fi enabled UAVs), or they use a separate channel to transmit the video (this is common on long range UAVs using LoRa or similar protocols for the command link). In this second case, an unprotected method can be used to transmit the video. National Television System Commitee (NTSC), Phase Alternating Line (PAL) or Sequential Color and Memory (SECAM) are the analog standards for video broadcast used by most CCTVs and off the shelf wireless cameras. UAVs that encode their video with those protocols are not protected. Any receiver can decode these signals and therefore no privacy exists with these transmission methods.
## (s22) Eavesdropping : mitigation and countermeasures
(p22.0) Recording and analysing ambient signals is a passive task. It is impossible to detect if someone is listening on a wireless channel. An attacker will always be able to log the signals and try to extract information. The signals can however be protected.

(p22.1) In a multiple UAVs system, it is possible to use other nodes to send artificial noise, confusing the eavesdropper. Zhong, Yao and Xu presented a cooperating jamming approach [72] that uses a second UAV to mask the confidential information transmitted to the GCS. The solution assumes that the system knows the location of the GCS and estimates the eavesdropper's position. It then adjusts the UAV's trajectories overtime to facilitate the jamming. This solution is only viable when the eavesdropper's approximate position is known in advance, and requires the full control of a second UAV for the entire communication period.

(p22.2) The physical layer can be protected. Poor and Shaefer [48] present the research in the abilities of the wireless physical layer to provide security. The properties of radio channels such as diffusion and superposition can provide secrecy in wireless data transmission. This is an active field of research, and this solution is not often applied in operational context.

(p22.3) Data confidentiality is added with encryption. If correctly utilized it makes it impossible for the attacker to extract any information from the sniffing. This confidentiality needs to be sustained as the information remains sensitive even long after the flight. The commands and telemetry links can be encrypted using symmetric algorithms. The AES algorithm is however not recommended for constrained systems as it induces a lot of computation overhead. Lightweight algorithms have been developed to solve this problem (see Section 4.3).

(p22.4) An analog video link cannot be encrypted without being converted into a digital signal. Then encryption becomes possible. As a video feed is a real-time sensitive part of multimedia systems, Chen et al. have designed a secure video communication system using chaos based encryption [12]. This system has excellent real-time performances but is extremely costly in terms of computational power and is therefore not optimized for small UAVs. The use of lightweight symmetric algorithms will be more optimized for UAS. In order to limit hardware addition, computation overhead and communication overhead, it will be recommended that the video feed from the UAV is included in a single link to the GCS with the commands.
## (s24) Communication channel jamming : description and operational impact
(p24.0) An attacker can interfere with a wireless signal by broadcasting a strong noise over the communication channel. This can cause the disruption of the communication between parties as the signals they want to transmit to the other will be drowned under the noise created by the jammer. The jamming strategy requires the ability of broadcasting signals that will be strong enough to disrupt the real communication upon reception. A jammer that simply broadcasts random noise over a single frequency is called a spot jammer. Jamming simultaneously a large bandwidth by changing frequency extremely rapidly is barrage jamming, but requires an immense power output to still be effective over the whole bandwidth. Some more advanced techniques exist, such as sweep jamming where the jammer jumps from one spot to another in order to disrupt a larger communication channel with similar power output to a spot jammer. The sweep jamming technique does not block the entire signal, and some data will get through. Sweep jammers rely on the fact that they sufficiently disrupt the communication to induce a Denial of Service (DOS). The jamming strategy works on many different communication links used by UAVs. Wi-Fi, LoRa, cellular networks, GNSS signals, Bluetooth and many more [46].

(p24.1) Jamming the different links in a UAS causes a DOS on the targeted service. This has various consequences depending on the link and the type of UAS. For autonomous UAVs, the temporary loss of the C2link and video link will compromise any in-flight input by the GCS, but the drone will pursue its mission. This causes a threat to flying objects in the vicinity for emergency cases. The detect and avoid systems should mitigate the risk, but a loss of C2link and video link is unacceptable for more than a few seconds for BVLOS flights. In the case of less autonomous UAVs the loss of the control links is a lot more critical.

(p24.2) Pärlin, Alam and Le Moullec [45] have developed a protocol-aware jamming system for UAVs, improving the service disruption for low jam-to-signal ratios in comparison to sweeping jammers. A simple Software Defined Radio (SDR) is used to effectively perform a DOS attack on the command link of the UAV. The authors tested their jammer on two generic remote control systems (FASST and ACCST). By comparing the distance of effectiveness at a fixed power output, they determined that their system was an improvement over the sweeping jammer by a factor of 2.4 for the FASST and 5.7 for ACCST.
## (s27) Communication links spoofing : description and operational impact
(p27.0) Spoofing is a situation where an attacker successfully usurps the identity of a legitimate user or network node. By taking the identity of a GCS, the UTM or a UAV, an attacker can perform Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attacks, compromising the entire UAS through data injection or DOS.

(p27.1) Spoofing the command link from the GCS to send false information to the drone gives control of the drone to the attacker. In [65], this is used on the Parrot AR 2.0 drone. The authors captured the signals used by the GCS for different commands and analyzed their structure. They were then able to generate fake commands, spoofing the IP address of the controller and the drone interpreted these messages as legitimate.
## (s28) Communication links spoofing : mitigation and countermeasures
(p28.0) A smart Intrusion Detection System (IDS) can detect spoofing [7]. It requires monitoring from a central overseeing position to be most effective. This system works better on Ad-Hoc networks, and is based on the identification of malicious packets. Machine Learning (ML) techniques can then be used to distinguish legitimate nodes from spoofed ones. New spoofing techniques will however potentially work undetected.

(p28.1) Spoofing is strongly countered by proper authentication. The use of cryptographic primitives with correct implementation ensures the authentication of all parties. Over the internet the TLS protocol ensures such properties with the use of https. The particular conditions of UAS makes it incompatible with TLS due to the bandwidth overhead and computational power required for a sustained used of TLS. Lightweight authentication techniques are detailed in Section 4.2.
## (s31) False data injection : mitigation and countermeasures
(p31.0) The IDS proposed in [54] is able to detect ADS-B attacks by cross-checking the ADS-B information with the location estimated with signal intensity and round trip time data. This IDS also verifies the coherence of environmental information with the other drones in the network, but this depends on the sufficient presence of legitimate users in the area. The IDS can raise an alarm and the UAS will deal with the compromised node.

(p31.1) These attacks can be countered by cryptographic methods (see Section 4) that ensure authentication and integrity. If the UAVs are trustworthy and the integrity of the signals is verified, the attack is no longer possible as an outside attacker will not be able to counterfeit authenticated data.
## (s34) Malicious detection : mitigation and countermeasures
(p34.0) The authentication scheme behind Remote ID and other potential identification frameworks can be protected for privacy. In [5], Alsoliman, Rabiah and Levorato developed an extension of the Remote ID framework with privacypreserving capabilities. This solution allows for an anonymized authentication where the pilot and the operator's identities are known only by the authorities. It is also able to verify the flight permissions of a UAV flying in a specific area without revealing the UAV's entire flight path. In this work, the flight plans are sliced, and the Remote-ID messages are modified with a pseudonymous certificate, allowing for UAV authentication and authenticated flight permission for the current area.
## (s36) Black hole and gray hole : mitigation and countermeasures
(p36.0) In [54], the IDS is able to detect black and gray hole attacks thanks to a trusted supervisor that monitors packet loss. The system raises an alarm when a node is failing to forward a number of packets superior to a threshold representing natural packet loss.
## (s38) Wi-Fi enabled attacks against UAS : description and operational impact
(p38.0) Wi-Fi enabled UASs are mostly recreational and usually have little to no focus on information security. Their security properties rely mostly on the security properties of the communication link, the Wi-Fi. Some do not have any security and have an open Access Point (AP) that is easily hijacked. Others use old protocols such as WEP that have been rendered obsolete by modern cryptanalysis. Recent Wi-Fi enable UAVs generally use a private AP secured by WPA2, but they are still extremely vulnerable. The use of WPA3 is not yet widespread, but is more strongly defended with the correct settings. WPA2 is vulnerable, particularly when the credentials are not randomized. Some bruteforce attacks on the secret key such as the PMKID attack will even work at low resource with weak passwords. Rogue AP can be used for MITM attacks.

(p38.1) He, Chan and Guizani [29] have performed standard Wi-Fi attacks on UAS. The WEP protocol is extremely weak, only the WPA2 can remain strong against low resource bruteforce attacks. They used the Aircrack-ng suite to compromise the Wi-Fi network used by the drone. It is also possible to crack the key using ARP replay attacks, as the drone will always respond to ARP requests with variable Initialization Vectors (IVs), which helps in cracking the key. A deauthentication attack is also effective, the attacker can send deauthentication frames, disrupting the connection with the legitimate user.

(p38.2) Westerlund and Asif [65] evaluated two commercial Wi-Fi enabled UAVs : the Parrot AR 2.0 and the Cheerson CX-10W. They investigated several Wi-Fi attacks to test the security of the communication links of these drones. In particular they performed DOS attacks by deauthentication, MITM by deauthentication and reconnection to fake AP, deauthentication and reconnection to an illegitimate controller. Most of these attacks are induced by the lack of pilot credential in the native system. The authors then built a UAV disabler for the Parrot with a Raspberry Pi3, using their previous findings to exploit the communication vulnerabilities.
## (s39) Wi-Fi enabled attacks against UAS : mitigation and countermeasures
(p39.0) Wi-Fi enabled drones can be protected by the Wi-Fi security features. Using proper security provided by the WPA2 protocol, with a strong random key mostly protects against low resource attacks.

(p39.1) In [31], Hooper et al. explore the security flaws of the Parrot Bebop UAV and propose a security framework to defend the AP of Wi-Fi enabled UAVs. This research proposed solutions against the ARP poisoning attack, as well as DOS created by the presence of multiple potential controllers. The authors discuss the importance of a multi-layered security framework against zero-day vulnerabilities. They argue that the low importance given to security aspects of small UAS causes a lot of zero-day vulnerabilities to exist, and that only a multilayer security approach remains protected when a new attack is discovered.
## (s46) UAS specific research
(p46.0) A lot of research has focused on improving the performance of cryptographic solutions for authentication in a UAV context. Lightweight AKAs have been proposed by several authors. A lot of them use the IoD control architecture as a model.

(p46.1) Wazid et al. have proposed an AKA scheme for the IoD architecture [64]. It provides a mutual authentication between a drone and a user. The user authentication is done with three factors : user password, smart card (replaced by a mobile device) and user biometrics. Registration needs to be done over a secure channel, as the server generates secrets for users and drones. The scheme is lightweight, and uses only hash functions and Exclusive Or (XOR) operations (excluding the biometrics extraction). The server generates and stores every secret key, and is a Single Point Of Failure (SPOF) of the scheme. User password and biometrics can be updated, and drone-to-drone session keys can be generated. This scheme was tested with the AVISPA tool, and compared with other lightweight AKAs through simulation, using SHA-1 for the hash function in their comparison. As this protocol is designed for an IoD architecture, the hardware is owned by a service provider who has overarching capabilities on the drones through the server that manages all secret keys.

(p46.2) In [60], Srinivas et al. have proposed TCALAS, a lightweight AKE for the IoD architecture. It only uses hash primitives, and XOR operations. The ground station server manages every key for drones and users. This scheme provides mutual authentication, parameter updates and user or drone revocation. A formal security analysis shows the resistance against various attacks. Performance comparison have been done with the SHA-1 algorithm as the hash function.

(p46.3) Ali et al. have proposed an improvement over TCALAS in [4] called iT-CALAS. It is scalable, allows for multiple flying zones, provides user anonymity and defends against stolen verifier attacks. The security is evaluated with a formal security analysis, and with the ProVerif tool.

(p46.4) The Lake-IoD AKE is a solution developed by Tanveer et al. for the IoD architecture [62]. It is a 3-party AKE protocol based on AEGIS (see Section 4.3) and SHA-256 algorithms. User parameters can be updated, drones and users can be dynamically deployed and revoked by the system. This scheme requires the management system to store keys for every user and UAV. The management system is always involved in communications and is a SPOF.

(p46.5) There have been propositions using internal physical properties of the hardware to generate unclonable reproducible randomness. This allows any integrated circuit to provide a physically defined footprint that cannot be reproduced. This is called a Physical Unclonable Function (PUF), and has been used as a physical authentication basis of UAVs by Pu and Li [49]. They use a PUF of the drone to create a challenge response pair that is stored only in the GCS. This challenge is only reproducible by the original hardware and a new one is generated each time an authentication mechanism is completed.

(p46.6) In [71], Zhang et al. propose an AKA for the IoD based on passwords. It requires a hash primitive and bitwise XOR operations and is faster and lighter than the schemes it compares to.
## (s47) IoT research
(p47.0) In 2014, Turkanivic, Brumen and Höbl have proposed a lightweight authentication scheme based on hash functions and XOR operations [63]. It provides mutual authentication between parties, password protection, free password choice, password changing and dynamic node addition. It is a two-factor (user password and smart card) authentication scheme. Unfortunately, it has since been proven to be vulnerable to stolen smart card and MITM attacks [24]. It also does not provide properties such as forward and backwards secrecy and untraceability. [24] tries to correct these issues at the cost of some performance. Amin et al. [6] proved that some vulnerabilities remained and corrected them.

(p47.1) In [61], Suarez-Albela et al. made a performance comparison between ECC and RSA for signature algorithms. It shows that ECDSA is two times faster for low security (128 bits) and that the gap grows with the level of security.

(p47.2) In [52], Roy et al. propose an anonymous three-factor user authentication scheme. It is based on a hash primitive, a fuzzy extractor and Chebyshev maps. Chebyshev chaotic maps are better suited to resource-constrained devices than ECC and RSA. A formal security analysis of this scheme has been done with the ProVerif 1.93 tool, and its performance is evaluated against other chaotic map-based solutions.
## (s48) Medical field research
(p48.0) The medical field has similar constraints to UAS's for certain systems. For example, healthcare sensors or pacemakers are critically important and resource limited. These characteristics allow the protocols developed for these systems to also be relevant for UAS security.

(p48.1) In [11], an ECC based AKE is proposed for wireless healthcare sensors. This protocol provides mutual authentication, and a three-factor authentication for users : smart card, password and biometrics. It supports smart card revocation and parameters update methods. three-factor authentication protocols have been proposed for UASs, by swapping the smart card for a mobile device (see Section 4.2.2). The lightweight properties of the system have been optimized, and the computational and bandwidth overheads are limited.
## (s53) Usual algorithms
(p53.0) The Chacha20 algorithm is the preferred current lightweight symmetric encryption algorithm for IoT [35]. It performs better than the AES standard in terms of energy cost, time cost and memory usage. Chacha20 is 2 to 3 times more efficient than any version of AES-128 for time and energy consumption, as well as using less memory for a shorter time. It uses 256 bits keys (or 128 bits keys that are expanded to 256) and are twice as secure as AES-128. However with the use of hardware acceleration, the computation time of AES can be greatly improved.

(p53.1) An improvement over the Chacha20 algorithm has been proposed [38] where the complexity of the bruteforce attack grows from 2 248 to 2 512 , while only reducing the performance by about 20 %. 512 bits of security is however not needed in any current application. This solution may be useful only for long-term secrets or if a technological jump allows for a great improvement in computation capabilities.
## (s54) UAS specific research
(p54.0) In [8], Avdonin et al. propose using OTP to secure communication. Beside being the only perfectly secure encryption scheme (in an information theory way of speaking), encryption is performed using only elementary bit-operation XOR. This means it is by far the lightest possible solution in terms of computations required. There is a big drawback however: it requires a shared random key, as long as the data transmitted, and usable only once. The memory storage on the drone side would be enormous, but on the server side, with one key per drone it will be multiplied. The solution may still be viable for communication channels which require very little data flow, such as emergency channels. Theoretically, Quantum Key Distribution could provide a secure way to exchange such keys on the fly without resorting to an encryption layer, assuming it is feasible to maintain a quantum communication channel between the ground station and the flying drone. Such assumptions do not seem realistic to the authors, and even by using a classical communication channel with an encryption layer, OTP encryption does not seem to be close to optimal in practice.
## (s55) Discussion
(p55.0) Symmetrical algorithms are the simplest way to maintain authenticated communication. They do not use considerably more bandwidth than the cleartext (AEAD algorithms can add a few bytes). Chacha20 is old enough to have been thoroughly investigated for faults, and is the more reliable option. If stronger security is required, [38] may be a better alternative. For systems with hardware acceleration for AES, AEGIS is also a good alternative. The key exchange will have to be adapted to the algorithm, as the level of security given to the session key needs to be as high as the symmetrical algorithm's.

(p55.1) If a secure way of transmitting (or storing) very long keys is found however, the OTP solution will be by far the fastest and most secure. It is however currently incompatible with the limits of the system.
## (s57) Securing ADS-B-like communication
(p57.0) It has been proposed to add integrity, authentication and confidentiality to the already formatted ADS-B packets in order to communicate with UTM services. Even for the commercial aviation there have been numerous propositions to secure the system, as even if ADS-B is not the primary source of information for critical systems, it is used more and more often for secondary applications.

(p57.1) The authentication framework proposed by Baek et al. [9] adds an identitybased signature to secure ADS-B, using a trusted third party to generate their secret key. It has been adapted into a three-level hierarchical identity-based signature (HIBS) by Yang et al. [68]. This improvement reduces the runtime of the protocol, both in signature generation and verification by adding a batch verification mechanism to the system. This system has some lightweight properties, but requires modifications to the ADS-B protocol to be implemented, or needs to use a different channel to send the signatures. It does not provide confidentiality regarding the identity of the aircraft.

(p57.2) Another approach for an ADS-B security solution was proposed by Yang et al. [69]. This scheme uses a trusted third party to generate secrets and transmit them to relevant parties. It ensures privacy by using Format-preserving, Feistelbased encryption (FFX) on the unique identification of an aircraft to anonymize them. Attackers are then unable to correlate valuable information to any aircraft. The format preserving nature of FFX makes it compatible with current ADS-B systems. The scheme also provides integrity and authentication with the TESLA protocol, using a special identifier on 4 additional ADS-B packets to transmit the Message Authentication Code (MAC) and keys instead of standard ADS-B information. This solution requires a loose time synchronization, and has a polynomial overhead in terms of bandwidth and computation. The authors then extended their work [70], achieving adaptive TESLA and solving other problems. They also implemented their solution in a real airport environment, demonstrating the feasibility of their solution. This proposition was designed for commercial aviation and is not optimized for the scale and constraints of UAS.
## (s58) Cellular networks
(p58.0) ADS-B is not the preferred solution for the UAV-UTM link. Most proposed alternatives use cellular network as their communication link, either with the UAV directly, or through the GCS. 4G and 5G networks include security features, including an authenticated key agreement for a symmetric encryption of the traffic. Therefore the vulnerabilities of the UAV-UTM link would be dependant on the vulnerabilities discovered within the cellular networks. Ahmad et al. have compiled the security issues in cellular networks in a survey [3]. They outline that some issues remain even with the latest versions of these networks, and summarize the potential solutions to clear those issues.

(p58.1) These solutions cannot be implemented everywhere however, as the cellular coverage will not be available for certain missions. Protecting those communications can be done on the transport layer, with TLS for example. This is far from being the best solution as TLS is very demanding in terms of performance, and is more optimized for larger data flows.
