# The versatile role of Serpina3c in physiological and pathological processes: a review of recent studies

CorpusID: 258835180 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/67404ec482e00617561a65cf3d2d08f8766b9ff7)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s9) Atherosclerosis of arteries
(p9.0) Atherosclerosis is characterized by chronic inflammation, the accumulation of lipids in plaques, and eventually leads to myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke (92). Abnormal proliferation and migration of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) is an important part of the pathological process of atherosclerosis. With the accumulation of inflammatory factors, growth factors, cytokines and vasoactive substances to the pathological level, the expression of cell proliferation-related proteins in VSMCs increased, resulting in excessive proliferation of VSMCs, then neointima and plaques are formed (92). Many studies have shown that thrombin plays an important role in atherosclerosis caused by abnormal proliferation and migration of VSMCs (93). It has been reported that some serpins can be used as thrombin inhibitors to inhibit blood coagulation (94). For example, both SerpinD1, SerpinC1 and SerpinE2 can participate in physiological processes such as blood coagulation, fibrinolysis and inflammation by inhibiting thrombin (13). Recently, researchers have The beneficial roles of Serpina3c in NAFLD. In normal liver, Serpina3c can inhibit Wnt/b-catenin signal pathway, promotes ubiquitination-mediated degradation of b-catenin, inhibits JNK/NF-kB signal pathway, reduces the expression of inflammatory cytokines interleukin 18 (IL-18), MCP-1, TNFa, and decreases the expression level of intercellular adhesion molecule 1(ICAM-1) and TGF-b. These will reduce liver inflammation and fibrosis. However, in the NAFLD livers of Apoe and Serpina3c double knockout mice fed with HFD, due to the lack of Serpina3c, Wnt/b-catenin signal pathway could not be inhibited, making the entry of b-catenin into the nuclei, which interacts with Foxo-1 to activate TLR4 transcription. Increased expression of TLR4, and activation of downstream receptor interaction protein 3 (RIP3) and phosphorylation mixed lineage kinase domain-like pseudokinase (MLKL) will then induce hepatocyte necroptosis. The deletion of Serpina3c leads to the activation of JNK/NF-kB signal pathway and the increase of the expression of ICAM-1 and TGF-b. The content of extracellular matrix (ECM) will be increased. Together, these lead to more severe inflammation and fibrosis in the liver. (Created with BioRender.com).

(p9.1) found that the P1-P1' of Serpina3c has the same amino acid sequence as SerpinD1, and they speculate that Serpina3c can be used as a thrombin inhibitor like SerpinD1 (22). Their conjecture was verified by protein-protein docking technique and co-immunoprecipitation, and confirmed that Serpina3c can interact with thrombin in the liver and aortic cusp.

(p9.2) The researchers then constructed Apoe and Serpina3c double knockout mice to study the role of Serpina3c in atherosclerosis. They found that the double knockout mice developed more severe atherosclerosis than the Apoe single knockout mice. Their results showed that the absence of Serpina3c led to increased neointima formation due to increased thrombin activation and elevated numbers of VSMCs and macrophages (22). Previous studies have shown that thrombin is a serine protease, which can promote cell proliferation and migration by activating protease-activated receptor (PARs) to trigger intracellular signaling pathways. Therefore, Serpina3c may regulate the proliferation of VSMCs through thrombin/PAR pathway. Next, they verified that Serpina3c reduces the activation of PAR-1 by inhibiting thrombin, thus inhibiting the proliferation of VSMCs. Thrombin can cleave the extracellular N-terminal domain of PAR-1, resulting in changes in its transmembrane domain and subsequent intracellular signal transduction. PAR-1 intracellular signal transduction can lead to thrombin-stimulated cell proliferation through a variety of kinases, including ERK1/2 and JNK kinases. In addition, the researchers found that ERK1/2 and JNK regulate the proliferation and migration of VSMCs, which are downstream signaling pathways of thrombin-PAR-1 axis. Serpina3c deletion stimulates the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK, but overexpression of Serpina3c in VSMCs inhibits the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 and JNK, and this inhibition is mediated by blocking the thrombin/PAR-1 axis. Therefore, Serpina3c can bind to thrombin and inhibit its activity, reduce the binding of thrombin to PAR-1, and inhibit the phosphorylation of intracellular signals ERK1/2 and JNK, thus reducing the abnormal proliferation and migration of VSMCs and blocking the progression of atherosclerosis ( Figure 6A). At the same time, one study has shown that compared to wild-type mice, transgenic mice with human SerpinA3 overexpression had increased elastin content in the aorta, which may be associated with a more stable aortic phenotype. Additionally, a study revealed that the mRNA expression of SerpinA3 was reduced by 80% in biopsy samples of human abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) (95), suggesting that SerpinA3 plays a role in maintaining the structural and functional status of the arterial vessel wall. Overall, the studies on Serpina3c and SerpinA3 indicate that they may play protective roles against arterial diseases, and have significant implications for understanding the pathogenesis and treatment of arterial diseases.
