# An Overview of IoT Solutions in Climate Smart Agriculture for Food Security in Sub Saharan Africa: Challenges and Prospects

CorpusID: 252230782 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54022dc7a1f686c81013f0a079d3673ac3c56ca4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54022dc7a1f686c81013f0a079d3673ac3c56ca4)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Food Insecurity Status in Sub Saharan Africa and Aggravating Factors
(p1.0) Food security as defined by the 1996 world food summit organized by the food and agriculture organization (FAO) of the United Nations (UN) is a situation where all people irrespective of time and geographic location have physical, social, and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious foods that meets their dietary needs and food preferences for a healthy life (3). Food security is composed of four components i.e. food availability, food access, utilization, and stability (4). Food availability deals with the availability of food in sufficient quantity and quality; food access is the ability of people to acquire appropriate foods in the context of nutritious diets through adequate resources within the community in which they live; food utilization deals with the ability to utilize food through adequate diet, clean water, sanitation, and health care to reach a state of nutritional well-being which meets all physiological needs; stability is when a population have access to adequate food at all times (4). For these four components to be fully satisfied, a lot of objectives must be met. The challenges associated with meeting the objectives that will guarantee food security varies from one region of the world to another owing to differences in weather, climatic conditions, and other natural factors. However, proper utilization of modern technologies such as IoT, broadband, cloud computing, Big Data Analytics and AI will go a long way to providing optimal solutions.

(p1.1) In this section of the paper, attention will be focused on sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) as a region where we will discuss the factors that have made it very challenging for SSA to meet all the four components of food security despite the abundance of arable lands and favorable climatic conditions as shown in Fig. 1(5), which shows that temperature changes in SSA have been minimal for almost 60 years; this failure has made SSA an "insecure global region" in terms of food insecurity as shown in Fig. 2(6) which shows that moderate and severe food insecurity is very prevalent. Numerous research articles have been published by agricultural scientists on the current status of food security in SSA; a common denominator to all research findings in literature is that the major persistent issues that have been exacerbating food insecurity in SSA include lack of access to modern technologies like Broadband, IoT, Cloud computing, Artificial Intelligence (AI), and Big Data Analytics (7).
## (s2) Climate Smart Agriculture
(p2.0) Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) can be defined as an integration farming technique by which agricultural resources and products including croplands, forests, livestock, crops, and fisheries are managed efficiently in a systematic procedure that mitigates the interlinked challenges of climate change and food security (26-32). It can also be defined as the approach by which agricultural strategies can be developed to guarantee food security under a changing climate (27). Accordingly, CSA aims to achieve the objectives of increasing productivity and incomes sustainably, making agriculture adaptive to the changing climate, and where possible reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases (27). To realize these objectives, CSA is divided into four important components which include(27):

(p2.1) • The management of crops, farms, livestock and aquaculture to achieve a near-term balance in food security and livelihoods. • The management of landscapes and ecosystems to preserve ecosystem services that are critical for agricultural development, food security, adaptation, and mitigation. • Enable better farm and land management by providing services on climate impacts and mitigation actions to managers of these resources. • Enhancing the derivable benefits of CSA through demand-side measures and value chain interventions.

(p2.2) To achieve these four components, agriculture in SSA must transform to meet the dual challenges of climate change and population growth; this is important as Africa has the highest rate of global population growth as shown in Fig. 4. Having 60% of the world's uncultivated arable land (33) which is quite suitable for the production of crops, SSA has the potential to improve productivity through CSA and become a net exporter of food. This will entail the adoption and enhancement of CSA approaches and practices to guarantee better production systems and farmers' confidence through policies and concrete actions. For this paper, the first and third components are tangential, and one effective way they can be achieved is the deployment of the digital technologies in agriculture which comprise IoT, broadband technologies, cloud computing, Big data analytics, and AI. IoT can be defined as the internet connection of physical devices and systems which are actively involved in the collection and the sharing of data. Cheap processors and wireless networks have been the key enablers of this emerging technology. As of 2017, 20.35 billion devices were actively involved in IoT (34), and these devices are being used in the development of intelligent transportation, agricultural, environmental protection, positioning, and public safety systems. Devices involved in IoT are interconnected to each other and the internet through communication techniques like RFID, GPS, infrared, and wireless sensor networks (35). The connection with the internet makes it possible to perform cloud computing on the vast amount of data generated by IoT devices. The conceptual connection between IoT devices to each other and the internet is shown in Fig. 5.
## (s6) Application Programming Interface (API) -Oriented Architecture
(p6.0) The API architectures based on Representational State Transfer (REST)-based methods were developed as an alternative to SOA and remote method invocation (RMI) schemes, and their major requirements are network bandwidth, computational capacity, and storage capacity. This architecture is well-suited for building IoT applications that connect to physical systems and devices differently. Consider a typical scenario as shown in Fig.  6b (40) in which two different IoT objects with different protocols are connected to the same IoT service platform through the API architecture based on REST. The RESTbased API takes care of the different communication protocols from IoT objects making the job of the IoT service platform easier. As a result of this, the API architecture based on REST enables service providers to focus on the functionality and the performance of their products and services rather than presentation. This architecture also allows multitenancy because it offers efficient service monitoring and tools for pricing which are better than service-oriented approaches (37).
## (s32) Challenges, Solutions, and Open Issues in Application of IoT in Agriculture in SSA
(p32.0) In the application of IoT in agriculture in SSA, several challenges must be overcome if IoT is to become ubiquitous with universal penetration across the continent. These challenges include finance, illiteracy, technical skills, and local content.

(p32.1) Finance is a major determinant in the success of the application of IoT in agriculture because the cost of commercial IoT devices is on the high side for most lowincome countries, especially in SSA (110). As a result of this, any attempt by SSA countries to deploy IoT in agricultural programs may be impeded by finance.
