# OPEN ACCESS EDITED BY A review of the geometrical basis and the principles underlying the use and interpretation of the video head impulse test (vHIT) in clinical vestibular testing

CorpusID: 258051501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccb1049b3822d6da992842485583e9aaca3b79bc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ccb1049b3822d6da992842485583e9aaca3b79bc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction Historical overview
(p0.0) In 1988 Halmagyi and Curthoys introduced a subjective test of semicircular canal function-the head impulse test (HIT)-in which the clinician observed whether there was a corrective saccade after giving the patient a brief, abrupt, passive, horizontal head turn (a head impulse) as the patient was instructed to fixate an earth fixed target (the clinician's nose) (see Figure 1A) (1,2). Vestibular loss results in an inadequate eye movement response during the head turn so that eye velocity does not match and correct for head velocity. The consequence is that the eye is dragged, with the head, off the target so at the end of the head impulse there is an eye position error: so the patient's gaze is not directed at the target.
## (s15) VOR gain Di erent methods of VOR gain calculation
(p15.0) One continuing issue in vHIT testing is VOR gain. The demand from most people carrying out the tests is to reduce this complex VOR response to a single number. Historically, the two main techniques to quantify VOR performance have been velocity gain (also called instantaneous gain), i.e., the ratio between eye and head velocity at a given point in time, and regression gain, which gives the ratio between the slopes of eye and head velocity over a given period (37). However, (9) determined that a position gain obtained by dividing the area under the desaccaded eye velocity curve by the area under the head velocity curve over the duration of the impulse, was the most effective technique to minimize the quantitative effect of goggles slip artifacts on the vHIT. The position gain (also called the area gain) is calculated from the onset of the impulse until the moment the head velocity once again crossed the zero line (see Figure 12).

(p15.1) In early studies of the VOR, gain was defined using engineering technology-gain was measured by taking the ratio of eye velocity to head velocity during maintained sinusoidal horizontal angular acceleration. But for isolated single stimuli, such as individual head impulses, this has problems because the ratio of eye velocity to head . /fneur. . The head velocity stimulus is the same in each case, but just changing gaze position reduces the measured VOR gain from around . to around . . However, note that the reduced VOR gain is not corroborated by corrective saccades. The lack of corrective saccades in vertical canal testing with reduced VOR gain, is an indicator that it is incorrect gaze direction which is causing the apparent reduced VOR gain.
## (s22) VOR gain + saccades
(p22.0) An index which includes both VOR gain and saccade quantification has been reported to improve diagnostic accuracy (50). This is not surprising because these two indicators are complementary measures, so combining both should improve precision of diagnosis. However, the above analysis shows that saccades do not directly measure semicircular canal function. With the appropriate instructions they complement VOR gain measures, but saccades are subject to many other control mechanisms, so they are not a direct indicator of semicircular canal function. Combining .
## (s26) Instructions
(p26.0) It is necessary that the patients can see the target (some colorblind people have difficulty), and understand the instructions, and that the goggles are tight and have minimal slippage. The participant must be able to identify the target, however it is not required to see it sharply. The test can even be conducted if the person is blind in the right eye but can still see the target with the left eye. The usual instructions to the test subjects are to ask them to maintain fixation on an earth-fixed target at one meter distance because fixation distance affects the actual response [close fixation distance increases VOR gain (76)]. The test can be conducted in full light because visual input in this test has a fairly long latency, so it does not contribute to the early SPV response. Similarly, neck input in most healthy people is very small (77). During the test the clinician needs to keep exhorting the patient to look at the spot, relax their neck and not "help" with three repeated requests:
## (s31) Interocular di erences
(p31.0) Our earlier measures with binocular 3D scleral search coils in healthy subjects during a head impulse showed that the two eyes do not move exactly conjugately. Thus, for the leftward impulses, the left eye showed a higher gain than the right eye and vice versa, for rightward head impulses the right eye showed a higher gain than the left eye. In other words: it is the adducting eye which has the higher gain with a side difference of ca. 15% between the two eyes (80). This is probably a cause of some of the sidedness differences which have been reported in the past in carrying out these tests.
