# Application of crop wild relatives in modern breeding: An overview of resources, experimental and computational methodologies

CorpusID: 253598601 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aeff64fbfec6541b656ed445729243b7f2e58c6a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/aeff64fbfec6541b656ed445729243b7f2e58c6a)

Fields: Biology, Computer Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s2) Software/tool-based platforms
(p2.0) Software/tool-based platforms are essential for data visualisation or organisation and help to gain a better understanding of the accessions stored in genebanks. For example, the Crop wild phylorelative platform (CWP in Table 1) (Viruel et al., 2021) helps to predict the phylogenetic distance (through housekeeping genes or whole genome analysis) and cytogenetic compatibility for breeding programs to help estimate the CWR gene pool classification (Brozynska et al., 2016;Viruel et al., 2021). Alternatively, plaBiPD provides an online platform that visualizes the phylogenetic relationship of genome sequences of flowering plants including CWRs. Furthermore, the associated Mercator online tool allows for the assignment of functional annotations to land plant protein sequences (Schwacke et al., 2019;Bolger et al., 2021).
## (s6) Pangenomes to capture CWRs genetic variation
(p6.0) In recent years, advances in genome sequencing and bioinformatic tool development have extended the means to fully catalogue genetic variation among domestication and CWR populations through the construction of pangenomes Jayakodi et al., 2021;Tay Fernandez et al., 2022). Pangenomes achieve this by providing a comprehensive genomic reference to which both small variants, including single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), and structural variants, including presence/absence variation of large nucleotide sections (PAVs), can be identified across diverse populations (Danilevicz et al., 2020). In addition, analysis of pangenomics allows for the more accurate predication of underlying genetics that are associated with phenotypic variation, such as transposable elements, recombination and double-stranded break/repair (Saxena et al., 2014;Dolatabadian et al., 2020;Song et al., 2020). As pangenomes excel in capturing large structural variation, as is increasingly found between highly divergent populations, they are ideally suited for the comparison of domesticated genomes to CWR taxa to capture 'wild genes' that would be overlooked when using a traditional reference genome (Khan et al., 2020). For example, a pangenome assembly of Brassica oleracea with 87 domesticated accessions (Bayer et al., 2021b) identified 58,347 genes across all individuals in comparison to a study that included 8 domesticated accessions and 1 CWR (Golicz et al, 2016) (8 landraces and 1 CWR), which identified a higher number of genes (63,865) (Golicz et al., 2016;Bayer et al., 2021b). Similar findings have been shown in sorghum  and rice (Xu et al., 2012), where the inclusion of CWR individuals led to large increases in the breadth of genes uncovered.
## (s7) Machine learning and CWRs
(p7.0) The application of machine learning (ML) has proven its efficiency in handling huge amounts of data and is becoming more popular in various plant science fields including gene identification and classification, and biodiversity analysis (Bayer et al., 2021a). For example, in Arabidopsis a ML model was developed to identify candidate stress-related genes by comparing whole genome expression data between the control and stress samples (Wegrzyn et al., 2014). In soybean, a ML model was developed to predict agronomically important traits, including yield, protein, oil, moisture and height, using SNP markers (Liu et al., 2019). Similarly, Ma et al., 2018., successfully developed a ML model to predict eight phenotypic traits among 2000 wheat individuals using 33,709 DArT (Diversity Array Technology) markers (Ma et al., 2018). ML is now also being used to predict mature yield in early development using a combination of image and genotype data (Danilevicz et al., 2021;Danilevicz et al., 2022). Recently ML models were developed for identification of core and dispensable genes in Oryza sativa L. and Brachypodium distachyon (L.) P. Beauv. using existing pangenomic information. The significant potential of these models is to identify core and dispensable genes in a new species without construction of pangenome (Yocca and Edger, 2022), such approaches can facilitate and speed up genes identification in new cultivated and wild species.
## (s9) (Ariani et al, 2018)
(p9.0) Physalis pruinose Genome editing (de novo domestication Edited orthologues of cultivated tomato in the distant relative P. pruinose to improve plant architecture, flower production and fruit size. (Lemmon et al., 2018) Oryza alta Genome editing (de novo domestication Established the first ever polyploid rice by genome editing the allotetraploid relative O. alta. (Yu et al., 2021) Aegilops tauschii Association genetics with resistance gene enrichment sequencing (AgRenSeq)

(p9.1) Developed the AgRenSeq methodology and identified two novel wheat stem rust resistance genes, Sr46 and SrTA1662, in a wild wheat progenitor. (Arora et al., 2019) Solanum americanum Resistance gene enrichment sequencing and single-molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT RenSeq)
## (s10) Modern breeding and CWRs
(p10.0) There are now avenues to harness CWRs and overcome some of these barriers. For instance, wild-derived genes conferring desirable alleles can now be introduced through precise genome editing into elite backgrounds without the need for lengthy introgression regimes, bypassing the barriers of linkage drag and reduced fertility that so often complicate the use of CWRs (Bohra et al., 2021). These modern approaches, utilising the advances in genomics and genome editing, provide promising pathways to overcome long-standing challenges and push CWRs to the forefront of crop improvement. Table 3, included examples of successful application of CWRs for crop improvement via modern breeding approaches.

(p10.1) Genomics provides an avenue to explore the genetic diversity in CWRs and identify agronomically valuable genes or QTL. Sequencing CWRs followed by de novo assembly can generate reference assemblies that underpin downstream applications, such as the functional characterization of genes and targeted genome editing. Although initially lagging behind cultivated crop genomes, a number of CWRs assemblies are now becoming available, including relatives of barley, rice, soybean, tomato and wheat (Brozynska et al., 2016;Bohra et al., 2022). Often in combination with high-throughput phenotyping, these genome assemblies have enabled the identification of several important genes and QTL from CWRs, for example numerous disease resistance genes in wheat (Yahiaoui et al., 2009;Periyannan et al., 2013;Saintenac et al., 2013) and QTL associated with oil content in soybean (Zhou et al., 2015). High-quality assemblies based on third generation long read sequencing are now becoming the standard for reference genomes in major crops. Advances in long-read sequencing in terms of increased accessibility and lower price points, will be vital for the construction of high-quality long read assemblies in a broad range of CWRs, which will unlock an arsenal of beneficial CWR genetic diversity ready to be harnessed for crop improvement.
## (s11) Conclusion
(p11.0) Crop wild relatives have remained under-utilised during crop domestication and intense crop breeding, despite the fact they harbour beneficial traits such as disease and pest resistance, and tolerance to abiotic stresses. CWRs have the potential to widen selection sources for breeders beyond the existing variation among cultivated crops to meet future foods' quality and quantity demands. A multi-resource integrative approach that utilises many of the resources outlined here will enable CWRs to be effectively used as a source of valuable genetic diversity. For example, ML strategies based on FIGS in combination with genomic and pangenomic resources that capture the gene diversity that exists in CWRs, will help to rapidly identify adaptative traits based on environmental parameters which will in turn guide the identification of genes underpinning these traits. However, realisation and utilisation of the full potential of the genes and diversity presented in CWRs will ultimately depend on the availability of resources and experimental techniques to support breeding programs (Hajjar and Hodgkin, 2007). There are a number of resources and databases that both researchers and breeders can benefit from, but ongoing efforts are crucial to keep these data well organised and up-to-date. This is only possible with the great collaboration between ecological/biological conservation sectors, who manage CWR ex/in -situ conservation and prevent extinction, researchers in the field of computer science, plant biology, for example plant genomics and agricultural industries, who assist with identification of traits/genes of interest among CWRs and only with this multidisciplinary effort is there a chance to guarantee the future food demands.
