# Anti-leucine-rich glioma inactivated-1 autoimmune encephalitis: A review of diagnosis and treatment

CorpusID: 255214481 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fc25aeb0426eeff05af79625c4553d4b0930ef8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6fc25aeb0426eeff05af79625c4553d4b0930ef8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Autoimmune encephalitis (AE) generally refers to a type of encephalitis that is mediated by autoimmune mechanisms. AE can be divided into three main types according to different anti-neuronal antibodies and their corresponding clinical syndromes: anti-N-methyl-Daspartate receptor (NMDAR) encephalitis, limbic encephalitis (including anti-leucinerich glioma inactivated-1 [LGI1] antibody, anti-γ-aminobutyric acid type B receptor [GABA B R] antibody, and anti-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor [AMPAR] antibody-related encephalitis), and other AE syndromes [1] . LGI1 is a neuronal secretory glycoprotein, mainly expressed in the hippocampus and temporal lobe cortex. It participates in the development and physiological function of the central nervous system [2] . LGI1 antibody-associated limbic encephalitis was discovered by Irani et al. in 2010, accounting for about 25% of autoimmune encephalitis [2] . It is common in https://doi.org/10.36922/an.v1i3.237
## (s2) Etiology and pathogenesis
(p2.0) LGI1 is a glycoprotein secreted by the presynaptic membrane. It is mainly expressed in the hippocampus and temporal cortex but is also weakly expressed in the basal ganglia and the inner cerebral cortex [3,4] . It connects presynaptic voltage-gated potassium channels (VGKC) and postsynaptic α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid receptor (AMPAR) [5,6] . LGI1 antibody inhibits the binding of LGI1 protein to A Disintegrin And Metalloproteinase 22/23 (ADAM22/23) [7] , a metalloproteinase in the synaptic space, through its epitempin (EPTP) domain, and reduces the AMPAR function of inhibitory interneurons. In the hippocampus, inhibitory interneurons constitute a strong feedback or feed forward inhibition loop; thus, the decreased activity of inhibitory interneurons may lead to over-excitation of the whole network [8] , resulting in the occurrence of FBDS. It has been found [5] that the knockout of LGI1 gene may cause autosomal dominant lateral temporal epilepsy (ADLTE) [9,10] .
## (s3) Advanced Neurology
(p3.0) The diagnosis and treatment of anti-LGI1 autoimmune encephalitis C*07:06 HLA I alleles in patients with anti-LGI1 AE, suggesting that the pathogenesis of this disease may also be related to HLA I genes [24] . A French study that performed HLA genotyping in patients with anti-LGI1 AE [27] has found that 88% of patients carried DRB1*07:01, with noncarriers being more likely to be young women and less likely to have psychiatric symptoms. It may be that estrogen can alter the expression of HLA [28] . However, the only study in the Chinese Han population has shown no evidence of association between DRB1*07:01~DQB1*02:02 haplotypes and this disease [21] . These inconsistent results may be due to the fact that the study populations are of different races; thus, it is speculated that genetic factors may play an important role in the etiology of this disease. Future studies with larger samples and more races are needed to verify this hypothesis.

(p3.1) In recent years, several literatures have reported that anti-LGI1 AE may be a rare complication of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccination [29,30] , with a strict time relationship between the onset and vaccination (about 2 weeks from vaccination to disease onset). Molecular mimicry and immune cross reaction may be involved in its pathogenesis. Asioli et al. have reported four patients who developed anti-LGI1 AE after receiving two different messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) vaccines, with one patient vaccinated with a viral vector vaccine. However, since there are too few reported cases of vaccinationrelated anti-LGI1 AE, it is not possible to determine whether the cause of the disease is related to specific types of COVID-19 vaccines.
## (s6) Cognitive disorders
(p6.0) The majority of patients have rapidly progressive memory impairment, short-term memory loss, and impaired orientation. Other clinical manifestations include language ability deficits, impaired executive function, impaired visuospatial ability, and calculation disturbance [44] . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination shows that the hippocampus, temporal lobe, and basal ganglia are the main lesion sites [37,45,[46][47][48][49] . At present, it is believed that inflammation in the acute phase is associated with atrophy in the recovery stage, which may be the cause of persistent cognitive impairment in patients with anti-LGI1 AE. Studies by Thompson et al. [31] have shown that patients with both cognitive impairment and FBDS have more abnormal examination results than patients with FBDS alone. Abnormal findings of brain MRI and electroencephalogram and hyponatremia were almost exclusively observed in patients with cognitive impairment. There is evidence that cognitive impairment can be prevented by early termination of FBDS [31] .
## (s9) Hyperkinetic movements (HMs)
(p9.0) In contrast to the extensive discussion on FBDS, HMs have been overlooked in the past. HMs are characterized as a group of jerk-like or twisting movements [43] . This type of manifestation has only been described in a few case reports [43,[52][53][54] . HMs may occur when the patient is asleep or awake, and they do not interrupt the patient's autonomous movements. As a result, only a small number of patients would notice such symptoms and inform the doctor at the time of admission. According to Liu et al. [43] , HMs are very common in anti-LGI1 AE and can be promoted by sleep. Therefore, it is inferred that HMs are the result of the imbalance of the motor cortex, basal ganglia, thalamus, and substantia nigra/red nucleus. HMs may also be the potential cause of sleep disorders.
## (s12) Cerebrospinal fluid examination
(p12.0) Cerebrospinal fluid examinations of patients with anti-LGI1 AE are often non-inflammatory and without any apparent specificity. Lumbar puncture pressure can be normal or slightly increased, and the white blood cell count in cerebrospinal fluid can also be normal or slightly increased, especially lymphocytes [1,51,57] . Cerebrospinal fluid routine biochemical examinations are usually normal. However, few patients may show slightly increased cerebrospinal fluid protein and glucose [58] , with positive oligoclonal bands [59] .
## (s13) Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
(p13.0) Brain MRI is the first choice for an early diagnosis of anti-LGI1 AE. In most patients, brain MRI shows unilateral or bilateral medial temporal lobes (amygdala and hippocampus) with long T1 and long T2 signals in the acute phase, and slightly higher signals can be seen on diffusionweighted imaging (DWI) sequence. T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintensity can be seen on both plain and enhanced MRI [58] . Amygdaloid hypertrophy, which is sensitive to FLAIR sequence, can be found in some patients. Abnormal signals in basal ganglia can also be observed in the brain MRIs of some patients. However, the brain MRIs of some patients may be normal. Significant reductions in brain connectivity involving inferior frontal gyrus, anterior and posterior cingulate gyri, several regions of the default mode network (DMN), and higher visual networks have been demonstrated in patients with anti-LGI1 AE using resting-state functional MRI (fMRI) [3] . Irani et al. [38] have shown that the hippocampal volume of patients was significantly smaller than that of matched normal controls during the follow-up period after recovery, although the brain MRIs revealed no abnormal signals in their hippocampus in the acute phase, thus suggesting that anti-LGI1 AE may be caused by brain atrophy.
## (s14) 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose position emission tomography ( 18 F-FDG PET)
(p14.0) According to current research, 18 F-FDG-PET is considered to be more sensitive than MRI in the diagnosis of anti-LGI1 AE [42,60] . Parietal and frontal cortex hypometabolism and medial temporal lobe (MTL), basal ganglia (BG), and occipital lobe hypermetabolism can be detected by 18 F-FDG PET in patients with anti-LGI1 AE [42] . The hypometabolism may be a result of functional impairment propagated along cortical and subcortical networks, arising from the sites of primary abnormalities in MTL and BG [3] . Occipital https://doi.org/10.36922/an.v1i3.237
## (s15) Advanced Neurology
(p15.0) The diagnosis and treatment of anti-LGI1 autoimmune encephalitis hypermetabolism, on the other hand, may be a compensatory mechanism during the acute/early phase of the illness. In the acute phase of the disease, FDG uptake shows a significant increase, followed by a gradual decrease, which eventually returns to normal after treatment [46,61] . Therefore, 18 F-FDG PET can be used as a tool to measure disease activity and evaluate patients' responses to treatment.
## (s16) Electroencephalogram (EEG)
(p16.0) The proportion of abnormal EEG during FBDS attacks is only 21% to 30%. During the interictal period of FBDS, mild diffuse slow wave or bilateral frontotemporal slow wave can be seen, or the EEG may also be completely normal [37] . Navarro et al. have found that FBDS originates from the primary motor cortex (M1) [35] . Before muscle contraction, EEG shows focal, contralateral, and frontal slow waves. The previous studies have demonstrated the superiority of longlasting EEG monitoring over short-lasting routine EEG in revealing subclinical and recurrent seizures [62,63] , which enables clinicians to adjust the treatment plan in time.
## (s18) Tumor markers
(p18.0) According to the previous studies, the incidence of tumors in anti-LGI1 AE patients was found to be 0% to 13% [43] , which was comparatively less than other types of autoimmune encephalitis [65,66] . In addition, the serum tumor markers of anti-LGI1 AE patients are often negative. Due to the lack of specific recommendations for tumor screening in anti-LGI1 AE, the tumor screening methods for paraneoplastic syndromes (PNS) [67] can be referenced: a second screening shall be repeated after 3-6 months, followed by regular screening every 6 months for 4 years. Patients with concurrent neoplasia may seek chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and/or surgery after AE is controlled.
## (s19) Differential diagnosis
(p19.0) Anti-LGI1 AE needs to be differentiated from central nervous system infection (such as herpes simplex virus meningitis), metabolic encephalopathy, toxic encephalopathy (such as Wernicke's encephalopathy, hepatic encephalopathy, and pulmonary encephalopathy), Hashimoto's encephalopathy [68] , central nervous system neoplasms (such as cerebral gliomatosis, primary central nervous system lymphoma, and metastatic cancer), hereditary diseases (such as mitochondrial encephalopathy, methylmalonic acidemia, and adrenoleukodystrophy), and neurodegenerative diseases (such as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Lewy body dementia, multiple system atrophy, and hereditary cerebellar degeneration).
## (s20) Treatment and prognosis
(p20.0) Early identification, diagnosis, and rapid initiation of immunotherapy are all very important to improve the prognosis of patients with anti-LGI1 AE [31,38] . However, the median time from onset to diagnosis of patients with anti-LGI1 AE in China is about 2 months [69] , indicating that many patients would have had missed the best opportunity for diagnosis and treatment.
