# A review of rabbit models of meibomian gland dysfunction and scope for translational research

CorpusID: 258008128 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9c093aa319f0154497f9ea755c76d0371ba9118](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9c093aa319f0154497f9ea755c76d0371ba9118)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Animal-Based Models of MGD
(p2.0) Animal models can offer vital information to advance medicine and enhance our understanding of human illnesses. The complexity of DED itself and the demands for modern-day pharmacotherapy or interventions have escalated the need for more refined animal models. [20,[38][39][40] However, given the multifactorial etiology and heterogeneity of DED, it is not easy to come up with a single ideal model satisfying all the requirements. An appropriate animal model for investigating MGD must include some, ideally all, of the clinical characteristics of the human disease, including gland blockage, keratinization of the ducts, ductule enlargement, atrophy of the glands, and eventual gland drop-out. [14,18,41] Generation of MGD in an animal model should diffusely involve the entire eyelid in a chronic and progressive manner mimicking the disease in humans. Animal models might be used to research spontaneous MGD, like what is seen in humans, or experimental MGD models can be generated to induce the disease, depending on the goals of the study.
## (s7) Systemic 13-cis retinoic acid-induced model
(p7.0) Lambert et al. had developed a rabbit MGD model using systemic administration of 13-cis retinoic acid. They administered Isotretinoin at a dose of 10 and 20 mg/kg body weight and followed up with these rabbits for 12 weeks. [55] All treated rabbits showed a decrease in the number and size of acini with the thickening of the epithelial lining of the ducts and ductules. In rabbits treated with a higher dose of isotretinoin, peri-acinar fibroblastic tissue replaced the acini. These rabbits also developed systemic toxicity simulating hypervitaminosis A with features like dry skin and alopecia. This study showed that isotretinoin has an inhibitory effect on meibomian acinar differentiation while stimulating the proliferation of duct epithelium. Isotretinoin also has been reported to have an additional lipolytic effect, thereby destabilizing the tear film. [56] Histopathological changes observed in this rabbit MGD model were similar to that seen in human skin sebaceous glands following isotretinoin administration. [56,57] Ibrahim et al. had reported amelioration of isotretinoin-induced MGD in albino rats by using dehydroepiandrosterone due to its androgenic effect. [58] Thus, newer drugs with androgenic activity can be tested in these animal models to study their potential therapeutic effect in MGD.
## (s11) Unmet Needs and Future Directions
(p11.0) Although MGD is the most common sub-type of DED impacting the quality of life of millions, the exact pathophysiological mechanisms governing it remain elusive. It is vital to understand the exact pathogenesis and natural history of the disease and to test novel diagnostic and therapeutic modalities to provide better care to our patients. The complexity of DED itself and the demands of modern-day pharmacotherapy and interventions have escalated the need for more refined animal models. The major drawback of existing animal models of MGD is that most of them are short-term models. As MGD is a chronic progressive disease, having long-term models can improve our understanding of the evolution of the disease and detect windows of opportunity to halt or slow down its progression with targeted therapies. Many of the dry eye tests used in animal studies are not standardized for correlation with humans. [62] Thus, standardizing or modifying these tests for different species can improve their predictability especially with the use of noninvasive tear film imaging devices and optimize these models for correlation with humans. Extensive research focusing on biomarkers for early detection of disease and the impact of hormonal therapy, various systemic medications, and environmental stress on meibomian glands can be beneficial. [50] Hence, future research focussing on long-term MGD rabbit models can enhance our understanding of the natural history of the disease and facilitate the use of newer noninvasive diagnostic platforms for the objective assessment of DED and draw parallels with humans. [64] Also, developing models with varied severity of MGD can help test the efficacy of numerous novel diagnostic and therapeutic modalities across the entire disease spectrum.
