# Advances and strategies for capillary electrophoresis in the characterization of traditional Chinese medicine: A review of the past decade (2011-2021)

CorpusID: 257120179 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e5fa537093553509d18d65f0d44a3b17330c29d9)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a health and wellness approach that the Chinese have practiced for thousands of years. Since ancient times, TCM has been recognized and is currently used in many countries worldwide for many reasons. The benefits of TCM suggest its potential as a therapeutic option for patients with various diseases. Recently, TCM has attracted increased attention and acceptance due to its better therapeutic effects, lower toxicity, and affordability. Hence, analyzing bioactive components in TCMs must be reviewed and enhanced to promote the development and use of TCMs worldwide Leong et al., 2020). As reported by DrugBank, 97 FDA-approved drugs are derived from TCMs (Fang et al., 2020). One example is ephedrine, which is obtained from the TCM herb Ma Huang (Herba Ephedrae) and is now used as an anti-asthmatic drug . Another example is artemisinin (qinghaosu), derived from the Chinese herb qinghao (Herba Artemisiae annuae), which is now considered the first-line drug for the treatment of malaria (Tu, 2011). Nevertheless, the knowledge of Chinese herbs and their combinations as prescriptions is built upon many years of testing and identifying their clinical efficacy for disease treatment. Therefore, isolating the active ingredients in TCM will allow the dissection of their mechanisms of action, opening new therapeutic possibilities (Harvey et al., 2015;Xu et al., 2019). However, due to their propensity to provide immediate therapeutic outcomes while also carrying considerable safety risks, TCMs have recently been termed "two sides of the coin" (Tu et al., 2021). Also, due to their extensive worldwide, TCM quality issues might lead to medical mishaps in practice. Hence, quality control is critical in TCM.
## (s2) Identification of studies on TCM analysis by capillary electrophoresis
(p2.0) Studies in the last decade have examined and reviewed the status of capillary electrophoresis (CE) for the separation, subsequent determination, quantitation, and quality control of TCMs (Table 1). CE and CE-mass spectrometry (MS) have attracted research attention (Ma et al., 2018;Gackowski et al., 2021;Przybylska et al., 2021), as detailed in our search discussed in the following sentences. In particular, CE has played a vital role in TCM analysis as a reliable and sensitive analytical tool; thus, CE is a suitable platform for TCM identification, separation, and quality control. Additionally, CE has gained prominence in recent years due to its high separation efficiency, minimal solvent consumption, small sample volume, low running cost, repeatability, and adaptability of various separation modes. Moreover, CE has recently been classified as an eco-friendly, powerful tool for analyzing different types of active constituents present in TCM, medicinal plants, and natural products used in TCM .

(p2.1) Supplementary Figure S1 depicts the flowchart for the literature search. Four databases (PubMed, ScienceDirect, SciFinder, and Web of Science) were searched using five search terms ("CE analysis of TCM," "CE-MS for TCM," "quality control of TCM," "hyphenated CE techniques," and "characterization of TCM by CE") from 2011 to 2021. The data search identified 1,749 articles from ScienceDirect, 230 articles from PubMed, 250 articles from SciFinder, and 308 articles from Web of Science. The abstracts and the citations of all 2,537 articles were retrieved through EndNote.

(p2.2) The exclusion criteria of duplicate findings; non-English language; reports, abstracts, papers including enzyme inhibition, and papers not meeting the requirements of TCM and CE analysis published in 2011-2021 were removed to finalize the articles of interest. We only included studies that used electromigration techniques like capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), micellar electrokinetic chromatography (MEKC), and capillary electrochromatography (CEC) coupled with UV-Vis, MS, and other detectors for the analysis of various active constituents of TCM. A total of 20% (n = 518) of articles published before 2011 and the duplicates of publications that represent 8% (n = 197) of articles were removed using EndNote. Additionally, 3% (n = 75) of publications in the Chinese language, abstracts, and reports were not included in this review. Papers describing only TCM without mentioning CE as the analytical technique (25.3%, n = 641) and the application of CE for the analysis of various components other than TCM such as in soil, water, environment, food, plasma, proteins, enzymes, blood serum, urine, and drugs (37%, n = 934) were also eliminated. Finally, 2.6% (n = 67) of articles describing the application of CE for enzyme inhibition were also disqualified from the final selection. After removing all the articles, 98 research articles and seven review papers (a total of 105 articles) published in the last decade based on TCM analysis by CE were selected for inclusion in the review of various active components in TCM using CE. These numbers indicated the considerable research activity in TCM analysis by CE published in 33 journals in the past decade. As illustrated in Figure 2, among 98 research publications on the CE technique for TCM, 21 were published in the Journal of Separation Science, 15 in Electrophoresis, eight in the Journal of Chromatography A, seven in the Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis, and fewer than five in various journals.
## (s3) Scope of review
(p3.0) This review aimed to highlight the developments of CE in TCM from 2011 to 2021. The other review articles mentioned in Table 1 do not address the same topic. A recently published review by Xu et al. (2021) in another journal covered the application of CE for TCM analysis but with a limited number of papers analyzing TCM. However, the present review covers CE analysis for all types of active constituents present in TCM, medicinal plants, and current natural products used as TCM. Furthermore, this review offers updates on the CE analysis of TCM over the last 10 years, emphasizing key milestones. This review also compares the 
## (s5) Overview of capillary electromigration techniques for TCM
(p5.0) The microscale CE technique primarily identifies, separates, and quantifies various chemical constituents in complex TCM mixtures. Consequently, CE with UV detection has been considered the most advanced technology for the analysis of herbal raw materials in the past 20 years (Przybylska et al., 2021). The typical separation modes of CE utilized for TCM are CZE, MEKC, and CEC, whereas capillary isotachophoresis (CITP) is used as a preconcentration technique.

(p5.1) The CZE mode is the simplest of the CE techniques. In this mode, the analytes are separated inside an open tubular capillary filled with a buffer or electrolyte solution. Therefore, CZE is also called free solution CE. The separation in CZE is based on the differences in migration velocities due to the analyte's charge, mass, and size, in response to an applied voltage-generating electric field across the capillary. The movement of analyte ions in an electric field is called electrophoretic flow. The electroosmotic flow (EOF) represents a bulk flow of all ions and neutrals in the liquids inside the capillary, even though the migration of buffer cations is the primary driving force for the EOF. The buffer pH is crucial for the charged states of the analytes. Several classes of non-dissociated (uncharged or neutral TCM molecules) are not separated from each other but can migrate through the bulk solution's movement by EOF and elute at the dead time. Because of its simplicity, CZE-UV is the most extensively utilized mode in TCM. CZE has been primarily used to quantify secondary metabolites in plant extracts and active components in herbal medicines, mainly with UV detection. Although the molecular absorption method of detection has been used to determine most TCM analytes, alternative detection methods such as fluorometric, electrochemical methods (conductometry, amperometry, and potentiometry), chemiluminescence, as well MS methods have also been reported. In CE-MS, an ionization source is present at the cathodic end of the capillary to generate gas-phase ions analyzed by a mass analyzer to generate a mass spectrum, providing information about the mass-to-charge ratio of the ionic species.

(p5.2) Tables 2-Tables 3 list types of TCM tested by CZE. To achieve a good separation of TCM by CZE, multiple variables must be optimized, including capillary type, pH, voltage, injection mode, buffer composition, and concentration, as well as the types and concentrations of buffer additives. The MEKC mode of CE allows for the resolution of neutral and charged molecules and can be used to analyze a wide range of active TCM ingredients, such as flavonoids, in herbal raw materials (Table 4). The separation in MEKC mode is more complex than that in CZE mode because surfactant and/or cyclodextrin are often added to the running buffer in the former mode of CE. Therefore, the MEKC running buffer is reinforced with charged or uncharged surfactants present at higher concentrations than their critical micelle concentration (CMC), resulting in micelle formation. Because of the influence of dispersed surfactants, the micelles form a pseudostationary phase (PSP) that allows the differential separation of analyzed compounds based on the chargeto-mass ratio and hydrophobicity.
## (s6) Alkaloids
(p6.0) Lycoris radiata Galanthamine; homolycorine, lycorenine, and tazettine ultrasonic-assisted extraction 0.10 g sample + 10 ml ethanol, ultrasonicated for 10 min, centrifuged (3,500 rpm for 10 min), and repeated twice. The extracts were combined and evaporated under a dry nitrogen stream at 60°C, diluted to 25 mL with distilled water, and filtered CZE-ECL: An uncoated fused-silica capillary (75 μm I.D x 50 cm); BGE: 10 mM phosphate buffer comprising 0.2% PVP (pH 8.0); voltage: 10 kV; three-electrode system: a Pt wire as the auxiliary electrode; a Pt disk as the working electrode; and Ag/AgCl (saturated KCl) as the reference electrode Sun et al. (2017) Alkaloids
## (s9) Flavonoids
(p9.0) Cacumen platycladi Rutin; Quercitrin, kaempferol, and quercetin SLE 2 g sample was dispersed in 50 mL of methanol, kept in a 60°C water bath for 3 h, cooled, sonicated, filtered, and the residue was dissolved in 10 mL methanol. The obtained solution was diluted using 50 mM sodium borate buffer (pH 9.2) at a volume ratio of 10 (1-10) prior to CE analysis CZE-AD: A fused-silica capillary (25 μm I.D. x 50 cm length); BGE: 50 mM sodium borate buffer (pH 9.2); graphene/poly (ethylene-co-vinyl acetate); voltage: 12 kV; a three-electrode electrochemical cell consisting of a disc detection electrode, a platinum auxiliary electrode, and an Ag/AgCl wire as the reference electrode Sheng et al. (2013) Anthraquinones  Gao et al. (2015) Frontiers in Analytical Science frontiersin.org a capillary column (coated or packed with particles or a monolith) to generate EOF. Due to its high efficiency, high selectivity, and low sample consumption, the use of CEC has been reported for complex TCM samples (Table 4, rows 27-31). Additionally, the reverse-phase mechanism of HPLC makes this method reliable and adaptable for variable structural classes of TCM compounds, as shown in Figure 1. Moreover, CEC is entirely suitable for pharmaceutical analysis and can replace other less selective techniques for complex mixtures of compounds in TCM .
## (s12) Solid-liquid extraction (SLE)
(p12.0) A schematic model of SLE shows a simple extraction process in which the solute (i.e., a component of interest) is extracted from a mixture of solids by dissolving it in an appropriate solvent (Supplementary Figure S3). In the first phase, the sample is dried and ground to increase its surface area and, consequently, its extraction rate. Following extraction, filtering separates the soluble chemicals from the solids. The extraction efficiency can be influenced by various factors such as particle size, solid-to-liquid ratio, solvent polarity, time, temperature, and mechanical agitation.

(p12.1) The SLE is the most extensively utilized approach for extracting polar TCM (polyphenols, flavonoids, glycosides, amino acids, and alkaloids) in medicinal plant materials, shrubs, herbs, and TCM formulations employing different polar solvents in the CE analysis of various TCM samples. The common SLE solvents used for TCM sample matrices include water, methanol, sodium dihydrogen phosphate solutions, aqueous and anhydrous ethanol, acetonitrile as pure solvents, and the combination of two or more solvents. Methanol is the most widely used solvent in many publications. Before conducting SLE, TCMs from various complex sources must be processed and ground into fine powders. This simple technique has been utilized to extract alkaloids in Samgiumgagambang  . SPE was also significant in extracting essential alkaloids and amino acids from Toki, Bukuryo, Sojutsu, Takusha, Shakuyaku, and Senkyu by CE-MS (Iino et al., 2011) and saponins from licorice . Nonaqueous (NA)-CE-MS with SPE preconcentration technique has also   Asparagine, threonine, valine, lysine, serine, tyrosine, glycine, isoleucine, alanine, citrulline, homoserine, phenylalanine, arginine, N-acetyllysine, N acetylvaline; octopamine, ornithine, N-acetylornithine, N-ethylglutamine, and N-methylalanine
## (s16) Far infrared-assisted extraction (FIAE)
(p16.0) Infrared (IR) radiation is a type of electromagnetic radiation that exists in the electromagnetic spectrum between visible light and microwaves. Fu et al. applied FIAE to isolate flavones and phenolic acids in the dried leaves of Rhododendron mucronulatum Turcz by MEKC with amperometric detection (AD). The extraction duration was significantly decreased to 6 min with FIAE compared to hot solvent extraction (HSE) time of 3 h . Carbohydrates are abundant in herbal medicines as major watersoluble components. The extraction time was reduced to 7 min with the help of far-IR radiation, compared to 3 h for HSE (Fu et al., 2011). Furthermore, the extraction efficacy of the FIAE method was higher than that of the heat-reflux extraction method (Tang et al., 2012). Mao et al. developed a far IR solvent removal system for the methanolic extract of the dried root of Belamcanda chinensis (Mao and Chen, 2019).
## (s23) CZE analysis of flavonoids, anthraquinones, and terpenoids
(p23.0) As shown in Table 2, substantial research has been carried out on flavonoids, anthraquinones, and terpenoids by CZE in the last decade. CZE has become a progressively important method for the fingerprint characterization and biomarker determination of complex medicine and natural medicinal materials. For example, CZE is used for quality control and the quantitation of flavonoids in Rhizoma Smilacis Glabrae (Zhang and Cheung, 2011), Pollen Typhae (Han et al., 2012), and Coreopsis tinctoria  with simple UV detection. CZE-UV provides high specificity for the selective determination of flavanones and phenolic acids such as scutellarein and caffeic acid in Abelia triflora leaves using a simple SLE and 40 mM borate buffer (Alzoman et al., 2018). Other studies have also reported the efficient analysis of flavonoids and isoflavones by CZE-UV analysis using sodium borate as a BGE (Zhang and Cheung, 2011;Deng et al., 2017;Alzoman et al., 2018;Wang et al., 2018).

(p23.1) A rapid and straightforward CE-UV method also has applications for the chiral separation of isomers of triterpene acids (oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, and betulinic acid) by the addition of β-CD (Ren and Xu, 2018). Another literature report noted that CZE-UV with BGE containing 5 mM β-CD as a modifier showed enhanced selectivity for analyzing flavonoids and triterpenes in TCMs (Gao et al., 2015). Recently, a CZE approach coupling ultrasound extraction with FASS was used to separate five flavonoids in reverse polarity mode using only 30 mM borate buffer . Based on a dual CD system of 30 mM α-CD and 9 mM sulfobutylether β-CD, isoflavonoids were analyzed in several herbal tablets and capsules  of TCMs with enhanced sensitivity.

(p23.2) Because of the excellent sensitivity, selectivity, and miniaturization of the AD system, researchers have great expectations for its application as a detector for CE. A combination of CE-AD, with FIAE, SLE, and ultrasonic extraction was evaluated by Gan et al. (2012), Sheng et al. (2013), and Wang et al. (2020) for the rapid extraction of rutin and quercetin and other flavonoids with a short analysis time. Li et al. proposed a CE-AD method to inherently exemplify the content of each electrochemically active ingredient (acacetin, diosmetin, chlorogenic acid, kaempferol, apigenin, luteolin, p-hydroxy benzoic, and caffeic acids) in Valeriana plant samples, with detection limits ranging from 0.01 to 0.12 μg/mL (Li et al., 2014). However, Mao et al. showed further improvement in CE-AD by using carbon nanotubes and polylactic acid composite electrodes constructed by melt compounding to detect tectoridin and irigenin in the commonly used Belamcandae Rhizoma TCM . This advanced CE-AD method showed enhanced sensitivity, with LODs of 0.24 and 0.21 µM for tectoridin and irigenin, respectively.

(p23.3) In recent years, more emphasis has been placed on new, superior alternatives utilizing lab-on-a-chip microfluidic technologies. MCE combined with LIF detection showed improved detection limits compared to UV detection. Xiao et al. showed a rapid estimation of two anthraquinones (aloin A and B) in a variety of aloe plants in 40 s with cross-channel microchip CE paired with LIF detection (Xiao et al., 2018).
## (s26) CZE analysis of glycoside, saponins, and organic and amino acids
(p26.0) Several studies have proposed that CZE coupled with UV or AD in alkaline pH is a desirable method for analyzing glycoside, saponins, and organic and amino acids in TCMs and natural medicinal plant materials used as TCMs (Table 3). A BGE mixture of borate and phosphate with 5 mM β-CD as a complexing agent enhanced the separation of glycosides and aglycones (homovanillyl alcohol, caffeic acid, hydroxytyrosol, and 3,4-dimethoxycinnamic acid) in two TCM (Lamiophlomis rotata and Cistanche) (Dong et al., 2014). Saponin β escin from Aesculus hippocastanum was quantified without any matrix interference with high accuracy ranging from 98% to 105% within 6 min using an optimized CZE-UV method (Dutra et al., 2013). A mixture of organic acid and amino acids was separated into three TCM extracts obtained by ultrasonication. To improve the CE-UV detection sensitivity, a suitable FESS method with a reverse electrode polarity-stacking was used for sample preconcentration before separating organic acids to achieve detection limits at the ng/mL level (Zhu et al., 2012).
## (s27) MEKC analysis of various TCMs
(p27.0) Many active components of TCMs are neutral, and separating elements in TCM with identical structural and physicochemical characteristics is challenging. The traditional CZE method, which focuses on disparities in analyte electrophoretic mobilities, is ineffective for separating neutral components in TCM, as these components move toward the detector at the same rate as the EOF. MEKC is an electrophoretic technique that expands the application of CE to neutral components that cannot be analyzed by free solution CE (Hancu et al., 2013). As discussed in Section 2, MEKC differs from CZE because it uses an ionic micellar solution instead of a simple buffer salt solution. The MEKC mode may differentiate ionic and neutral molecules, whereas CZE is often used to separate ionic components alone. Consequently, when separating compounds, including both ionic and neutral analytes, MEKC has a significant advantage over CZE. The results of the present review showed that MEKC combined with UV detection is the most common detection method for the CE analysis of TCMs compared to other detectors mentioned for CZE. Like CZE, AD and LIF detection interfaced to MEKC are expected to achieve an LLOD for separating analytes in TCM. However, one study has reported TCM evaluation by MEKC with AD, and one study applied the LIF detection method compared to twenty-four reports for MEKC with UV detection ( Table 4).

(p27.1) The holistic analysis in Table 4 reveals several vital features. First, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as a micelle-forming surfactant was reported in most of the MEKC applications of TCM analysis, followed by a few studies using sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Other miscellaneous reagents include ionic liquids (ILs) and non-ionic surfactants used only as additives. The dissolved organic carbon (DOC), which is not an IL, is reported as a PSP but only in one TCM application. Second, in most studies, alkaline buffers (sodium borate, and sodium dihydrogen phosphate), were used in pH ranges of 7.4-10.4. Third, ultrasonication was the predominant method for extracting analytes from various TCM matrices, and hydrodynamic (pressure) injection was used in most MEKC applications, with few reports of electrokinetic injection. Finally, as mentioned previously, UV detection was the most used detector for MEKC of TCMs without any significant preconcentration method reported in this review period.

(p27.2) Three main types of anionic surfactants forming micelles were used for the analysis of TCMs, including SDS, SDC, and sodium cholate (SC). In contrast, only a few reports used cationic butylimmidazolium (BMIM)-IL and only in combination with nonionic Triton X-100 or Tween 20 surfactant without their single use as a separation media. Additionally, dissolved organic carbon is an interesting application as a PSP. At least four reports described CD modified with MEKC (aka. CD-MEKC); however, in all applications, different types of neutral and derivatized CDs were exclusively combined with SDS.
## (s29) Capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (CE-MS) for the analysis of TCMs
(p29.0) CE-MS is a novel hyphenated technique that integrates the highresolution separation of CE with highly sensitive and selective MS detection. It is a powerful method for detecting trace quantities of analytes ranging from micro to macro molecule size . A volatile buffer solution is used in this approach to prevent salts from interfering with ionization. The charged analytes can be separated by electrophoretic mobility in the CE column depending on the strength of the applied electric field to the column and the rate of analyte migration. Positively charged analytes move freely toward the anode, while negatively charged analytes move freely toward the cathode. The rates of migration depend on the buffer pH. The capillary is inserted through the nebulizer (sprayer) in the ESI-MS interface, where the analyte is sprayed orthogonal to the electrospray ionization (ESI) source to form gas-phase ions before they enter the mass spectrometer. A schematic of solute migration in CZE-MS under positive polarity using a co-axial sheath flow system is depicted in Figure 7. As shown, under neutral to basic pH conditions, highly mobile cations with a small mass (or largest charge-to-mass ratio, z/m) elute first, followed by low-mobility cations with a small charge-tomass ratio as they move in the same direction as the EOF. While the neutrals in CZE-UV cannot be distinguished, a CZE-MS electropherogram can be used to detect them. In the CZE buffer solution, neutral compounds will stay unionized; however, if they have an ionizable functional group in the gaseous state, they may ionize in Frontiers in Analytical Science frontiersin.org the electrospray. The migratory order of cations, neutrals, and anions based on the mass-to-charge ratio is as follows: small cations < large cations < neutrals < large anions < small anions (Patel et al., 2021). The separation capillary is surrounded by the sheath liquid, which is surrounded by the nebulizer gas (nitrogen). In the co-axial delivery of sheath liquid to the end of the CE column, the separation capillary serves as an outlet electrolyte reservoir to prevent current drop during CE-MS runs without an outlet vial. For CZE with UV detection, buffers such as borate and phosphate are often used. These buffers are non-volatile and cannot be ionized in an ESI source. Therefore, the buffers utilized in CE-ESI-MS must be volatile to be compatible with the ESI procedure and to reduce background noise. Combinations of ammonium acetate (NH 4 COOH)/formic acid (HCOOH), ammonium formate (NH 4 COOH)/formic acid (HCOOH) (NH 4 CH 3 COO)/acetic acid (CH 3 COOH), and ammonium hydroxide/-NH 4 CH 3 COO are frequently used buffers, which cover the total acidic, neutral, and basic pH range, respectively. Because of its ease of use and ability to ionize many components in complicated matrices, ESI is the most employed ionization source for online CE-MS coupling in TCM analysis. CE-ESI-MS uses two commercially available interfaces: sheath flow and sheathless.
## (s30) Aqueous CE-MS
(p30.0) Compared to UV detection, employing an MS detector may improve the sensitivity and selectivity of TCM analysis . ESI is the most extensively used ionization source among the many MS ion sources due to its high specificity. To date, at least nine applications of aqueous CE-MS have been reported for TCM analysis (Table 5), eight of which reported CZE-MS, with only one application using CEC-MS and none using MEKC-MS. Furthermore, most of the CE-MS studies used a sheath liquid interface, ESI ionization source, and ion-trap mass spectrometer (IT-MS).

(p30.1) The experimental conditions of all the developed CE-MS methods for various TCM herbs analyses are detailed in Table 5 (rows 1-9). Toki-Shakuyaku-San is a TCM comprising several herbal medicines. To elucidate the composition of these herbs, non-targeted profiling of the amino acid and alkaloids metabolite and quantitation of extracts of these herbs was achieved using a non-targeted CE-TOF-MS (Iino, 2011). The loading plots demonstrated that amino acids and alkaloids are metabolite constituents. Several clusters overlapped in the tested herbs using the large-scale metabolomic approach, which is complementary to traditional quality control methods. Four hydrophilic phenolic acids (danshensu, salvianolic acid B, caffeic acid, and lithospermic acid) in plant-derived samples were evaluated for their antioxidant activity in the negative ion mode of ESI-MS (Duan et al., 2012). The spray chamber parameters (drying gas flow rate, drying gas temperature, and nebulizer pressure) and sheath liquid parameters (composition and flow rate of the sheath liquid) in combination with FAS injection increased the sensitivity by 50-fold without any matrix interference. CE-MS was used to analyze phenolic acids in the Danshen TCM. The isomers of bavachin (BC) and isobavachalcone (IBC) had similar mass spectra and fragmentation pathways when negative ESI-MS was used in combination with IT-MS . The product ions at m/z 221 for each were further subjected to MS 3 analysis to distinguish the two isomers. The formation of a product ion at m/z 203 occurred due to the neutral loss of H 2 O, whereas the formation of a fragment ion at m/z 159 from the parent ion at m/z 203 occurred due to the neutral loss of C 3 H 8 . However, the intensities of the BC dimer and its product ions were higher than those of the deprotonated molecule ion of the IBC dimer and its product ions. This abundance difference was the basis for discriminating BC from IBC in IT-MS.

(p30.2) A nanospray interface for CE-MS was applied to identify four alkaloids in the TCM Rhizoma coptidis. In response to the need to develop a stable and reliable sheathless interface, Liu et al. performed detailed optimization of emitter geometry, emitter position, emitter cleanliness, spray voltage, and buffer composition . The absolute (mass) LOD of four alkaloids ranged from 16 to 24 fg, which was 1000-fold lower than that for ultra-high-pressure HPLC-MS. CE-MS was combined with affinity CE to analyze the active components in Licorice extract for anti-HIV activity . The interaction between the licorice extract and R15 K (core sequence of V3 loop in the R15K envelope protein) demonstrated its potential for the development of an anti-HIV-1 ingredient in this TCM extract.

(p30.3) CE coupled to quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF)-MS and SPME was developed for the analysis of three alkaloids (peimine, peiminine, and peimisine) in Fritillariae Thunbergii Bulbus . The developed CE-MS method was superior due to the lower consumption of sample and dispersant, shorter grinding time, and greener elution solvent (water). The results demonstrated the satisfactory LODs (1.32-1.59 ng/mL), recoveries (86.63%-98.12%), and repeatability (peak areas RSDs<0.87%) of the CE-MS method. Two of the alkaloids (peimine and peiminine) were also analyzed in another TCM, Bulbus Frittillariae thunbergii using a robust polyetheretherketone (PEEK) capillary column . The PEEK column cannot tolerate the high content of organic solvents but also ensures high mechanical and chemical stability to stabilize ESI. Utilizing 85% (v/v) methanol and 60 mM NH 4 OAc in the running buffer enhanced the resolution of the two hydrophobic alkaloids mentioned previously with a total analysis time of <17 min.

(p30.4) Recently, an enantioselective CE-MS method was developed for the simultaneous analysis of d/l-tetrahydropalmatine and R/ S-canadine in Corydalis Rhizoma extract using 20 mM 2HP-β-CD as chiral selector and 20 mM NH 4 COOH (Yan et al., 2020). Because HP-β-CD is a non-volatile chiral reagent, a partial filling mode was used to avoid contamination of the chiral selector in ESI-MS. Furthermore, to facilitate ionization, a microvial CE-MS interface allowed a low flow rate (2 μL/min) for the post-column modifier (e.g., 0.1% (v/v) of HCOOH in 80/20 methanol-water) without any drying (sheath) gas, eliminating the suction effect that lowers the resolution of closely eluting enantiomers. Figure 8 shows the electropherograms for the analysis of Corydalis Rhizoma extracts, with well-separated enantiomers of d/l-tetrahydropalmatine ( Figure 8A) by tandem MS/MS. However, the (R)-canadine peak was relatively small compared to that of (S)-canadine ( Figure 8B). An internal standard (IS) (papaverine hydrochloride) was added to the extract due to its structural similarity to canadine and hydropalmatine (electropherogram not shown). The use of IS improves the analysis accuracy and repeatability. Furthermore, the analysis showed no interfering compound for papaverine in the Corydalis Rhizoma extract.

(p30.5) As mentioned previously in this section, only one reported study has described CEC-MS for TCM. The lower number of reports is mainly due to the lack of suitable and rugged CEC columns that interface with MS instruments. The column must also be compatible with commonly used volatile BGEs and have strong enough EOF to Frontiers in Analytical Science frontiersin.org reasonably elute compounds. Liu et al. developed a CEC-MS  for evodiamine, rutaecarpin, and limonin in Evodiae Fructus fruit using homemade monolithic columns such as methyl-vinyl imidazole functionalized organic polymer monolith as stationary phases. The monolithic column offered extreme efficiency and outstanding separation selectivity by CEC-MS to analyze Evodiae Fructus. The authors observed at least 4-16-fold improvements in sensitivity for MS detection (LOD = 0.15-3.1 μg/mL) compared to UV detection (LOD = 2-12.5 μg mL −1 ).
## (s31) Non-aqueous CE-MS
(p31.0) A significant obstacle in developing a CE-MS system is the possible contamination of the MS ionization source by non-volatile reagents such as borate and phosphate in the running buffer. Non-aqueous capillary electrophoresis (NACE) is a powerful tool for improving the selectivity of hydrophobic compounds that are hard to separate by electrophoresis in aqueous buffers . The detailed experimental conditions for NACE-MS methods in TCM analysis are listed in Table 5 (rows 10-14). Due to the comparatively high volatility and low surface tension of most organic solvents, NACE is well suited for online coupling with MS compared to traditional CE. The separation buffer in NACE comprises an organic solvent or a combination of two or more organic solvents containing dissolved electrolytes. Organic solvents offer a higher separation efficiency, lower electric current, and lower joule heat, enabling higher voltage and shorter analysis time (Kenndler, 2014).
