# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Overview of Sigma-1R Subcellular Specific Biological Functions and Role in Neuroprotection

CorpusID: 256165453 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1b5718f799c73425a74da3f81ab4d1a27b90ea8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e1b5718f799c73425a74da3f81ab4d1a27b90ea8)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Autophagy
(p1.0) Another mechanism initiated at the MAM [39], critical for maintaining cell homeostasis and cell survival, is autophagy. This lysosomal catabolic process is essential for recycling or removing damaged organelles, for breaking down toxic protein aggregates, and for clearing pathogens. It is a multi-step process that requires the nucleation of a phagophore, that originates from the omegasome (a phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate enriched ER membrane) and the MAM. During the elongation step, the phagophore matures into a double membrane autophagosome (AP), while engulfing cargos that will later be degraded upon AP fusion with lysosomes (autolysosomes) (Figure 3) [40]. Dysregulation of autophagic activity has been associated with many neurodegenerative diseases [41]. Interest in the S1R role in autophagy regulation increased when it was first shown to co-localize with protein aggregates and autophagy markers (such as p62/SQSTM1 and LC3) in the brain and cells of patients affected by neurodegenerative disorders [42,43]. In addition, a genetic variant of S1R (p.E102Q) has been linked to juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and was shown to impair APs fusion with the lysosome and thus, to enhance the accumulation of APs within cells [43]. Aggregation of autophagy markers was also associated with two S1R variants (p.E138Q and p.E150K) causing distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMNs). Both variants were shown to impair ER-mitochondria tethering and Ca 2+ signalling in SH-SY5Y [44]. Yang et al. (2019) later showed S1R involvement in mitophagy (selective autophagic degradation of mitochondria). Through interaction with ATG14, STX17, and VAMP8 (key proteins involved in autophagosome-lysosome fusion), S1R was shown to increase APs fusion with the lysosome in multiple models (mouse retina, NSC34, SH-SY5Y, and HEK293 cells) [45]. localize with protein aggregates and autophagy markers (such as p62/SQSTM1 and LC3) in the brain and cells of patients affected by neurodegenerative disorders [42,43]. In addition, a genetic variant of S1R (p.E102Q) has been linked to juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and was shown to impair APs fusion with the lysosome and thus, to enhance the accumulation of APs within cells [43]. Aggregation of autophagy markers was also associated with two S1R variants (p.E138Q and p.E150K) causing distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMNs). Both variants were shown to impair ER-mitochondria tethering and Ca 2+ signalling in SH-SY5Y [44]. Yang et al. (2019) later showed S1R involvement in mitophagy (selective autophagic degradation of mitochondria). Through interaction with ATG14, STX17, and VAMP8 (key proteins involved in autophagosome-lysosome fusion), S1R was shown to increase APs fusion with the lysosome in multiple models (mouse retina, NSC34, SH-SY5Y, and HEK293 cells) [45]. Interestingly, Wang et al. also revealed that S1R expression or S1R agonist (pridopidine) indirectly induced autophagy by facilitating TFEB nuclear translocation, hence supporting TFEB-mediated autophagy-related gene (ATG) transcription and lysosome biogenesis [46]. Agonist-induced activity of S1R with ANAVEX2-73 was also shown to increase autophagy flux in HeLa cells and C. elegans [47]. However, deeper characterization of the mechanisms driven by S1R during autophagosome fusion and autophagy induction is required. In fact, it would be interesting to understand which autophagy signal is promoting S1R action within the pathway, and if these upstream signals can guide S1R involvement toward bulk autophagy or selective autophagy. Given that ANAVEX and pridopidine induce autophagy through different pathways, it would be of great interest to better characterize these compound effects on upstream autophagy regulators.

(p1.1) Altogether, the impact of S1R in calcium signaling and autophagy defines the necessity of S1R functions in supporting mitochondria metabolism and maintaining MAM integrity. It demonstrates that S1R localization at the MAM facilitates its binding to BiP (and other partners) and allows it to quickly sense changes in Ca 2+ homeostasis (or other ER-stressors), and to effectively promote, for instance, cell survival signaling pathways or steroidogenesis by supporting ER-mitochondria exchange (e.g., Ca 2+ and cholesterol) and autophagy.
## (s9) Gene Transcription and mRNA Translation
(p9.0) Very few studies have investigated the functions of S1R at the NE. An original study on this subject showed that upon agonist exposure, i.e., (+)-pentazocine and cocaine, S1R was able to translocate from ER-LD to NE in NG108 cells [79]. S1R localization at the NE was further supported by an electron microscopy study showing S1R mainly located at the NE in mouse retinal neurons (including photoreceptor, bipolar, and ganglion cells) [88]. Later, it was established that upon cocaine stimulation, S1R translocation to NE enabled it to recruit chromatin-remodeling components, including Emerin, Lamin A/C, BAF (barrier-to-autointegration factor), and HDAC (histone deacetylase). Recruitment of these components was found to repress MAOB (monoamine oxidase B) gene expression through association with the transcription factor Sp3 (specific protein 3), in NG108 and Neuro2a cells ( Figure 6) [80]. Interestingly, S1R modulation of gene transcription and mRNA translation was also described in neurons of dorsal root ganglia (DRG) in a spare nerve injury model of neuropathic pain [89]. In this study, the authors proposed that S1R translocation from ER to NE is supported by Sec61β, a transport protein mainly residing at the ER ( Figure 6). Once at the nucleus, S1R was shown to interact with c-Fos and to bind 4E-BP1's promoter, thereby enhancing its expression and indirectly reducing Cav2.2 mRNA translation through inhibition of eIF4E [89]. Taken together, these studies demonstrated S1R localization at the NE and shed some light on the role of S1R within this organelle. Indeed, S1R scaffolding and chaperoning abilities not only promote and stabilize the NPC assembly, but also facilitate the nucleocytoplasmic transport, and recruitment of chromatin-remodeling components. Conse- Figure 6. Role of S1R at the ER-NE contact site and its role in nucleocytoplasmic transport, stabilization of the NPC, and gene transcription.
