# Effects of saponins from Chinese herbal medicines on signal transduction pathways in cancer: A review

CorpusID: 257775194 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ca059038f810b32491438e33f10ce54e790164d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3ca059038f810b32491438e33f10ce54e790164d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Conclusion and perspective
(p11.0) Cancer is a complex pathological process with multifactorial involvement and multiple implicated pathways. The activation or inhibition of many cell signal transduction pathways drives the genesis and development of tumors, and saponins derived from CHM interact with them to inhibit cancer. An ongoing understanding of the role of saponins on signaling pathways involved in cancer development and progression will help us fight cancer in a more precise manner. Therefore, the development of saponins to act against different targets of cancer is of extreme importance. This review summarizes the classification, composition, structure, and extraction methods of saponins. Moreover, the function of saponins in regulating NF-κB, PI3Ks-Akt-mTOR, MAPK, Wnt-β-catenin, JAK-STAT3, APMK, p53, and EGFR signaling pathways are summarized, which may be useful for broadening their anti-cancer activity spectrum. This is expected to enhance researchers' understanding of the anti-tumor effects of herbal saponins to a certain extent.

(p11.1) Saponins of CHM are a large class of ingredients with low side effects, low cost, easy availability, and significant antitumor activity, and are new antitumor agents worthy of further research and development. This review provides good evidence for its potential application in tumor treatment and the improvement of related diseases. However, existing studies still have some limitations. First, most of the research on Chinese herbal saponins is limited to in vitro cell-based or animal experiments, and there is a lack of relevant scientific and standardized clinical experimental studies. The effectiveness and safety of saponins for humans need to be verified. Therefore, in future investigations, clinical studies on the involvement of saponins in cancer prevention and treatment through multiple cell signaling pathways should be conducted to provide a more reliable theoretical basis for their clinical promotion. Second, clinical antitumor drugs are often combined, and in the studies summarized herein, we found that saponins had outstanding anticancer effects when combined with other drugs (Erlotinib/ Ginsenoside Rg3, Jiang et al., 2017b), so synergistic effects of between saponins and other components and the mechanisms that regulate the relevant cell signaling pathways warrant further investigation. Saponins are characterized by low bioavailability and corresponding limitations in clinical application, which may be aided by chemical modification and artificial synthesis, as mentioned above (Compound 1C); therefore, in future research, combining modern technical means and existing research results, multidisciplinary crossover in-depth study of the anti-cancer mechanism of saponins, and development of prominent efficacy and clearer action targets of anti-tumor drugs should be explored. The depth and breadth of research on the treatment of cancer by Chinese herbal saponins should be increased in subsequent studies to reflect their role and value in the prevention and treatment of cancer and better promote the development and utilization of these CHM resources.
