# The responses of poplars to fungal pathogens: A review of the defensive pathway

CorpusID: 256973454 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6a1e1c9e2ad89e0b93aeb14ece73174a1bace98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6a1e1c9e2ad89e0b93aeb14ece73174a1bace98)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Constitutive defense responses
(p2.0) Biotrophic fungal pathogens such as rust and powdery mildew produce invasive filaments through appressorium, and penetrate the cuticle, and form haustoria in the epidermal cells to absorb nutrients from the hosts, and produce cell wall degrading enzymes and sporulate without killing the host cells (Maupetit et al., 2018). Whereas most necrotrophic fungi kill their hosts by secreting cell wall-degrading enzymes or toxins to impair cuticles and cell walls to facilitate infection (Shi et al., 2016). Biotrophic fungal pathogens spend most of their life cycle on living plant tissues, therefore, their fitness appeared to be more influenced by constitutive defense (Maupetit et al., 2018). Constitutive defense is the first line of protection, including physical structures and phytochemicals. Woody plants have many mechanical barriers to against pathogen invasion, such as the leaf cuticle, the pectin and lignin of cell walls. Cuticle and cell wall are the first line of defense in plants, the components of cell wall are cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin, and lignin (Ziv et al., 2018). Many biotrophic fungal species use their appressoria to penetrate the cuticular layer and then infect internal cells. The cuticle is a polyester that is partly covered with waxes (epicuticular and intracuticular) (Serrano et al., 2014). A study found PtoMYB142 could directly regulate the transcriptional activity of wax biosynthesis genes, e.g., fatty acid hydroxylase (CER4) and 3-ketoacyl CoA synthase (KCS6), to adapt drought conditions for poplars (Song et al., 2022). But the contribution of wax biosynthesis on poplar disease resistance is poorly studied. However, many rust fungi failed to penetrate the cuticle and thus had to invade the mesophyll cells through the stomata by germ tubes, hyphae or appressorium (Rinaldi et al., 2007), but the cuticle was also found to contribute to non-host resistance to leaf rust by impeding the germination and growth of urediniospores from M. larici-populina (Yu et al., 2019). Lignin also acts as physical barrier during pathogen infection, preventing water and nutrients transferring from host cells to pathogens (Ellinger et al., 2013;Miedes et al., 2014). Genes involved in lignin biosynthesis are critical for plant cell walls in immunity, e.g., phenylalanine ammonia lyase (PAL), cinnamate 4-hydroxylase (C4H), 4coumarate-CoA ligase (4CL), cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD), cinnamoyl-CoA reductase (CCR) and hydroxycinnamoyl transferase (HCT), were highly expressed after attack by fungi pathogens (Azaiez et al., 2009;Polle et al., 2013;Huang et al., 2022). Interestingly, in incompatible interaction, localized lignin formation was observed, while there was an accumulation in compatible interaction when poplars infected with Melampsora (Boyle et al., 2010). In the incompatible interactions, abundant lignin was deposited around leaf vessels (Rinaldi et al., 2007). Regulation of the lignification pathway may be critical for improved poplar tolerance (Polle et al., 2013). Dirigent (DIR) proteins have been identified in many plants, which are involved in process of plant lignin synthesis. Furthermore, overexpression of PtDIR11 in poplars could improve lignin biosynthesis and enhance poplar resistance to Septotis populiperda (Li et al., 2022). These results imply that lignins are effective antifungal chemical defenses against pathogens infection.

(p2.1) Some necrotrophic fungus prefer to plants with cell walls are rich in pectins because they possess a strong pectin decomposition machinery. Pectin methylesterase (PME), a class of pectin modification enzyme, plays an important role in cell wall modification, pectins function not only in primary cell walls, but also in secondary cell walls. It is an effective way in restricting necrotrophic fungal pathogens to inhibit PME (Pelloux et al., 2007). It has been reported PtoPME35 involved in stomatal closure, and the overexpression of its homologous gene AtPME35 in Arabidopsis leading to plant lodging, but overexpression of PtoPME35 do not influence poplar growth, indicating that woody plants have more complex defensive networks than annual herbs (Yang et al., 2020). However, cell wall-related genes showed differential expression patterns when two susceptible poplars infected by hemibiotrophic pathogen of M. brunnea. For example, pectin methylesterase inhibitors were enriched in P. deltoids but they were mostly reduced in P. alba. Transcriptomic data showed that P. deltoids differentially expressed genes were most responsive at the initial biotrophic stage, while P. alba was mainly responsive to Marssonina brunnea at the necrotrophic phase . Additionally, when susceptible poplars suffered two specific forms of M. brunnea, the number of DEGs expressed among three stages of infection were changed in a significantly different pattern. The results showed there were more differentially expressed genes in the necrotrophic stage than biotrophic stage when poplars infected with M. brunnea. In particular, pectinlyase was significantly induced in multi-strain infections during the initial invasion phase, but not expressed in monoculture infections (Ren et al., 2020).
## (s4) HR and ROS inhibit fungus infection
(p4.0) HR is the most typical response after infection and causes programmed cell death (PCD). HR has been extensively described with relation to biotrophic fungi, but promote necrotrophic pathogens infection (Mayer et al., 2001). A study found that several genes in poplars that cause HR were upregulated at 96 hpi (necrotrophic phase) when response to M. brunnea, indicating that necrotrophic fungus may induce HR in poplars to increase their susceptibility . HR varies among different poplar-pathogen interaction types. In incompatible Populus-Melampsora interactions, HR appears the day after infection, and poplars then show PCD characteristics at 7 dpi, however, there is no HR performance in the compatible interaction (Rinaldi et al., 2007). One of the most striking features accompanying HR is the burst of ROS after pathogen infection. ROS burst is one of the earliest responses of plants to fungus, leading to necrosis of host tissue, which develop an effective defense against biotrophic fungi but may increase susceptibility to necrotrophs (Mayer et al., 2001). Therefore, ROS homeostasis regulation is important for regulating plant resistance to different pathogens.
## (s6) JA/ET-mediated signaling pathway against pathogens
(p6.0) Meanwhile, the JA/ET pathway is generally required for the predominant defense response against necrotrophic pathogens and herbivores (Yang et al., 2015). Genes involved in JA synthesis including lipoxygenase (LOX), allene oxide synthase (AOS), allene oxide cyclase (AOC), 12-oxophytodienoate reductase (OPR) and acyl-coenzyme oxidase (ACX) were induced during biotrophic or necrotrophic pathogens infection (Azaiez et al., 2009;Huang et al., 2022). Interestingly, LOX can regulate the ROS accumulation in poplars to against pathogens (Huang et al., 2022). Genes involved in JA signal transduction pathways were also significantly induced, such as the MYC proteins, which are positive regulators in the JA signaling pathway, were upregulated during pathogen infection. While JAZ, which contains TIFY domains, a negative regulator of JA signal transduction (Pauwels and Goossens, 2011), was mainly downregulated during pathogen infection. The transcription factor TIFY has also been found to be a key element that contributes to phytohormone or stress responses. TIFY genes can be divided into four subfamilies, TIFY, JAZ, ZML and PPD (Xia et al., 2017). It has been reported that there are 24 TIFY genes in poplars (Xia et al., 2017). A study showed that most of the TIFY genes could respond to M. larici-populina infection, while genes expression patterns were different at different time points (Xia et al., 2017).

(p6.1) F u r t h e r m o r e , E T s y n t h e s i s g e n e s i n c l u d i n g 1aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthase (ACS), and 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate oxidase (ACO) were also induced after pathogens infection (Azaiez et al., 2009;Huang et al., 2022). ET activated PtoRbohD/RbohF expressions, which encode NADPH oxidases to induce H 2 O 2 production in poplars to Dothiorella gregaria fungi . ET response factors (ERFs) bind to the ethylene-responsive element GCC-box, and the target genes are related to wounding and pathogen infection . A recent study showed that the transcript levels of 21 ERF genes were strikingly upregulated and 72 genes were downregulated in P. nigra × P. deltoides under M. larici-populina infection at 4 dpi, and the inactivation of ERF genes and disease resistance-related ERF target genes might result in poplar susceptibility to rust disease . Therefore, JA/ET pathway not only enhances necrotrophic fungus resistance on poplars, but also regulates the susceptibility of poplars to biotrophic fungus, which relate to the timing of the infection.
## (s7) Crosstalk of SA and JA in poplar disease resistance
(p7.0) It is generally assumed that SA and JA are antagonistic in disease resistance in Arabidopsis, rice and tomato. Plants have to balance the costs and potential benefits of investing in defense to external stimulus (Pieterse et al., 2012;Thaler et al., 2012), but this antagonism is not obvious in poplar against rust disease. A study reported that both SA and JA contents were increased upon rust infection in black poplars, and transgenic poplar lines with high SA levels increased JA and flavonoid contents, and enhanced rust resistance (Ullah et al., 2019a;Ullah et al., 2022). Therefore, SA and JA pathways interact positively in poplars to decrease biotrophic pathogen growth (Figure 2). This difference may attribute to perennial woody plants can store large reserves of resources for defense, might have evolved SA-and JA-mediated co-defense systems without antagonism, while annual plants lack the defensive resources.
## (s11) Conclusion and prospects
(p11.0) Currently, the formation mechanism of plants induced disease resistance has been preliminarily revealed in some model species. However, the mechanisms of plants induced disease resistance are complex and may correspond with plant and pathogen species. Woody plants have more receptors and R proteins than herbs, providing them with better defenses strategies (Duplessis et al., 2009). When receptor proteins and R proteins sense the pathogen, then activate downstream signals. Different with Arabidopsis, SA and JA cooperated to against both biotrophic and necrotrophic fungus in poplar and the genes regulated SA signaling may be different from Arabidopsis (Ullah et al., 2019a;Ullah et al., 2022). Because perennial woody plants have higher resource utilization efficiency than annual plants, they generally use more resources for defense.

(p11.1) Although development and application of omics technologies have provided broadened insights into poplars defensive responses against fungal pathogens, there are still many gaps in our understanding of poplar defense against fungus. For instance, the mechanisms of diverse R proteins and receptors in poplar that sense different fungus are still unclear. Many plant-pathogen interaction candidate genes, such as PRs, WRKYs, ERFs, TIFY, NDR1, EDS1 and RISP, which play important roles in poplar disease resistance, still need to be explored. In addition, plants defensive responses are complex, it is urgent to explore diverse crosstalk between different types of defensive responses in woody plants. The mechanism by which phytohormones interact with signaling molecules, e.g., ROS and NO, to influence poplar defense against pathogens also need to be investigated further. Further studies on the functions of ncRNAs in disease resistance and in regulating transcription and RNA silencing are of great significance.
