# BMC Geriatrics An overview of innovative living arrangements within long-term care and their characteristics: a scoping review

CorpusID: 259952382 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae65c6a584e22420074dd087fe9d08c2c21e7f93](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ae65c6a584e22420074dd087fe9d08c2c21e7f93)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) In long-term care, during the past decades, there has been a shift in perspective from a medical approach (e.g. predominant focus on physical care needs) to a more psychosocial approach (e.g. primarily focus on quality of life) [1,2]. In nursing homes, the traditional focus has primarily been on quality of care and health outcomes. As a consequence there has been an increased orientation towards physical care needs rather than on improving or maintaining quality of life [3]. This medical approach is reflected by the care environment of traditional nursing homes, which are often closed environments, isolated from the community, leading to residents being largely inactive throughout the day [4]. However, residents living in an environment that is less constrained may provide the residents with opportunities to maintain meaningful relationships [5].

(p0.1) The limitations of traditional nursing homes are increasingly being recognized and are leading to a change in culture, one that promotes a resident-directed approach as well as emphasis on quality of life. New insights show that the physical, social, and organizational environment of living arrangements and their interplay are important for achieving positive outcomes for residents [6]. Consequently, alternative living arrangements, which aim to better fit this culture change, have been, and are being, developed. These alternative living arrangements attempt to drastically change the physical, social, and organizational environment to create a better person-environment fit with the aim to improve functioning and quality of life. Examples of alternative living arrangements are, for example, small-scale living (e.g. a joint household with small groups of residents and a fixed team of care staff, centered around household task) [7] or green care farms (e.g. a homelike care environment where agricultural activities are combined with care activities) [8].
## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) A scoping review was conducted following the five stages described by Arksey and O'Malley [22]. Furthermore, to increase reliability and transparency, the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses with extension, for scoping reviews (PRISMA-ScR) was used; see Supporting File 1 for the word file PRISMA-ScR Checklist [23].
## (s4) Stage 3: study selection
(p4.0) Articles published in the Dutch or English language between 2012 and May 2023 were included. As the purpose of this review was to identify recent developments within the long-term care landscape, this review focuses on articles published in the last decade. Articles were included if they: (1) consisted of original research articles describing primary data; (2) described a living arrangement as an alternative to regular nursing homes that offer 24-hour care; (3) presented a description of an innovative living arrangement; (4) described an innovative living arrangement that offers 24-hour care (psychogeriatric as well as somatic care needs) to older adults with complex care needs. An article was excluded when: (1) it did not present original data (e.g. opinion paper); (2) the innovative living arrangement described did not offer 24-hour long-term care; (3) the described innovative living arrangement was not yet operational; (4) the living arrangement focused on short-term stay, rehabilitation, or hospital stay. See Table 1 for overview of the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
## (s17) Discussion
(p17.0) This scoping review has presented an overview of alternative living arrangements within long-term care and their core characteristics. Seven overarching living arrangements have been identified: small-scale living, the green house model, shared housing arrangements, green care farms, dementia villages, group homes, intergenerational living, and an 'other' category. Emerging themes of these living arrangements are the importance of stimulating and supporting autonomy. Furthermore, most living arrangements focus on creating a small-scale and/or homelike environment. The other themes -involvement of the community, focus on nature, integration of tasks staff members, and involvement of family membersare emphasized in some of the described living arrangements. Quality of life, and outcomes related to daily/ social life have been the most studied measures.

(p17.1) In most articles, the main focus is on the physical environment, where the features of the indoor and outdoor areas are often described in detail. For example, the authors describe what makes a location 'homelike' , including the physical features (e.g. the furniture is recognizable and placed in a manner that facilitates social interaction, there are animals present, personal belongings are present). Even though recent insights highlight the importance of the social and organizational environment [6], most descriptions of alternative living arrangements lack specific information on these components. It is important to have congruence between the physical, social and organizational environment to promote optimal well-being and daily functioning [6]. Only describing and focusing on the physical environment gives an incomplete overview of the functioning of living arrangements. When looking at the example of at-homeness, research shows that it is more than just the physical environment. It also entails a feeling of autonomy, feeling safe and respected by staff members and other residents, and building meaningful relationships [81]. A meaning of home is a combination of physical, social, and individual aspects [82], showing that next to a home-like physical environment, older adults perceive 'feeling at home' as being able to preserve their personal identity, experiencing continuity in life, feelings of belonging, and being active [83]. This illustrates that the social and organizational features are just as important as physical features in understanding how a living arrangement operates.
