# Overview of the Use of Nanoparticles in Vaccine Development

CorpusID: 259261087 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff842733c8852fbd1c073776b2a4f8231a4a56c8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ff842733c8852fbd1c073776b2a4f8231a4a56c8)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) Conventional Vaccines
(p1.0) As stated by the WHO, vaccines are pharmaceutical formulations that generate protective immunity against a disease by activating the production of specific antibodies by the immune system against a pathogen [12]. Vaccines are considered the most effective method to control epidemics, such as measles, diphtheria, and, eventually, SARS-CoV-2. The first vaccine used in the Western world was discovered by E. Jenner at the end of the eighteenth century against smallpox, a terrible cause of mortality at the time [13]. This vaccine was based on the cowpox virus. E. Jenner was a rural physician who realized that cattle workers who recovered from cowpox disease were protected against smallpox. However, he did not know that the disease was caused by a virus; an infectious agent that was not discovered and described until the twentieth century.
## (s3) New Vaccine Technologies
(p3.0) Over the years, conventional vaccines saved lives and prevented disease, eradicating smallpox and reducing the incidence of other diseases such as polio and measles. The next generation of vaccines focused on obtaining similar efficacy to conventional vaccines, but without their risks or limitations. This was achieved through improved knowledge in areas such as immunology, pathology, and microbiology, which helped to adopt more rational designs. These minimalist compositions provide improvements in safety and production costs, although they may lead to lower immunogenicity [27].
## (s8) Extracellular Vesicles
(p8.0) Another approach currently being studied is the use of extracellular vesicles (EVs) as vehicles [46]. Evs are a heterogeneous group of extracellular bilayers produced by almost all cell types, including exosomes (50-150 nm), which are processed by the endosome as well as LNPs. These Evs also have good biocompatibility and immunogenicity and are being used in diagnosis, prognosis, and therapeutics of different diseases. In this regard, the cellular source from which these EVs are derived is crucial, as it was shown that EVs can reproduce the properties of the cells from which they originate and could also work for their specific delivery, in combination to their transport function. The limitations associated with this approach focus on the characterization, isolation, and purification of homogeneous EVs as well as the loading and release of the drugs that they carry [46].
## (s10) DNA Technology
(p10.0) Nucleic acid vaccines, including DNA vaccines for animal and human diseases as well as RNA vaccines for cancer and viral infections, were studied in the last twenty years to improve recombinant vaccines and reduce their limitations [21,48,49]. mRNA vaccines were described in other part of this review and will not be considered here. In this sense, DNA-based vaccines were more actively developed than mRNA-based vaccines during the last few years.
## (s17) Immune Stimulating Complexes
(p17.0) The immune stimulating complexes (ISCOMs) are vaccine delivery systems consisting of colloidal saponins (glycosides) together with phospholipids and cholesterol [85]. They are structured as geometrical arrangements of micelles containing the saponin and lipids, which are held together by hydrophobic interactions and stabilized through their negative surface charge. Several antigens were investigated with this system; for example, antigens derived from herpes simplex or influenza virus. These lipid-based nanoparticles already showed potential as adjuvants and vectors for certain antigens aiming at prophylactic and/or therapeutic vaccination through different ways of administration [85].
## (s18) Inorganic Nanoparticles
(p18.0) From an inorganic point of view, the most studied nanoparticles in the area of vaccine technology are gold, carbon, and silica NPs, and most of them focused on transporting different types of DNA plasmids expressing different antigens, such as influenza or hepatitis B [86,87].
## (s19) Liposomes and Lipid Nanoparticles
(p19.0) One of the most important components of both liposomes and lipid nanoparticles are phospholipids, so this is why they exhibit an excellent biocompatibility. Liposomes have a lipid bilayer on the surface with an aqueous core where they can encapsulate the pathogen antigens, if they are hydrophilic, or in the bilayer, which can be single or multilayered, if they are hydrophobic [88]. However, one of the weaknesses of liposomes is that they are easily degraded, either by the action of certain enzymes, pH, or the immune system, which is why more robust systems such as lipid nanoparticles were developed [87].

(p19.1) Unlike conventional liposomes, which use cationic lipids to transport negatively charged nucleic acids, lipid nanoparticles use ionizable cationic lipids, which remain neutral in the bloodstream, thus reducing their potential toxicity. They only become positively charged inside cells, favoring the intracellular release of the transported nucleic acid. In addition, these LNPs also contain cholesterol, to promote their stability and some flow capacity; other conventional phospholipids that help package messenger RNA; and polyethylene glycol on their surface, to promote their stability and protect them from the immune system [86]. Most LNPs compositions are very similar and where there is perhaps more variation, and, of course, more protected intellectual property, is in the ionizable lipids, which is one of the major differences between the vaccines developed by Moderna and Pfizer BioNTech, with all other ingredients being virtually the same.

(p19.2) Normally, LNPs are produced using a microfluidic system where the aqueous phase containing the RNA is mixed with the organic phase containing the lipids dissolved in ethanol through microchannels, resulting in the precipitation of lipid nanoparticles. The size of the produced LNPs can be controlled with the gradient and speed of the precursor flows when they mixed up to nanoprecipitate the particles [89].
## (s20) Nanoparticle Platforms as Vaccine Adjuvants
(p20.0) Adjuvants were conventionally described as those substances that in combination with a specific antigen can produce a more robust immune response than the antigen alone. Thus, nanoparticles can deliver either antigens or adjuvants to the targeted cells at predetermined rates and durations looking for optimal immune responses. Taking into account that nanoparticles can encapsulate antigens preventing their premature degradation and prolonging the antigen exposure, they can act as delivery platforms and adjuvants simultaneously. In fact, the different composition, size and morphology of nanoparticles allow them to selectively induce many different types of immune responses and/or release the transported antigens into specific sites, as it was commented above. Some typical adjuvants employed in vaccine technologies included both inorganic nanoparticles, such as aluminum, calcium phosphate, gold, and silica nanoparticles; and organic nanoparticles, such as chitosan or lipid-based nanoparticles [90].
## (s22) Success Case of Vaccines Based on Nanoparticles to Fight SARS-CoV-2
(p22.0) Nanoparticles constitute promising delivery vectors for effective and safe vaccin Among them, biologically derived nanoparticles, such as virus-like particles, extracellu vesicles, and protein nanocages, are able to mimic both the structure and function of l pathogens, being unable to replicate and, therefore, are not infectious. While a comp hensive review on this type of vaccines can be found somewhere else [94], we will foc the next section on the success of nanovaccines for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2.

(p22.1) The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic saw an extraordinary effort on vaccine developme which resulted in the extraordinary success of nucleic acid vaccines, mainly mRNA v cines. The use of these vaccines confirmed their usefulness against intracellular path gens, such as viruses with a high mutation rate, bacteria including Mycobacterium, or p asite protozoa which evade host antibodies by infecting and residing in host phagocy cells. In these cases, the cellular immune response, especially that of CD8 + cells, result in better and longer protection against these types of pathogens given that protection pr its from durability of cellular action as well as from extent of memory capability, wh contributes to contain reinfections [95].
## (s23) Success Case of Vaccines Based on Nanoparticles to Fight SARS-CoV-2
(p23.0) Nanoparticles constitute promising delivery vectors for effective and safe vaccines. Among them, biologically derived nanoparticles, such as virus-like particles, extracellular vesicles, and protein nanocages, are able to mimic both the structure and function of live pathogens, being unable to replicate and, therefore, are not infectious. While a comprehensive review on this type of vaccines can be found somewhere else [94], we will focus the next section on the success of nanovaccines for the treatment of SARS-CoV-2.

(p23.1) The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic saw an extraordinary effort on vaccine development which resulted in the extraordinary success of nucleic acid vaccines, mainly mRNA vaccines. The use of these vaccines confirmed their usefulness against intracellular pathogens, such as viruses with a high mutation rate, bacteria including Mycobacterium, or parasite protozoa which evade host antibodies by infecting and residing in host phagocytic cells. In these cases, the cellular immune response, especially that of CD8 + cells, resulted in better and longer protection against these types of pathogens given that protection profits from durability of cellular action as well as from extent of memory capability, which contributes to contain reinfections [95].
## (s24) Jonhson & Johnson/Jansen and Oxford/Astra Zeneca Vaccines
(p24.0) The development of these vaccines was based on using a known DNA technology, where an adenovirus vector was engineered to carry the DNA with the information to produce the surface spike protein of the COVID virus. Concretely, the Johnson & Johnson vaccine is based on an adenovirus type 26 modified to produce the SARS-CoV-2 Spike protein. This adenovirus vaccine was designed to be employed as a single intramuscular injection-the first of this type available that comes in a single dose-and when it enters a cell, it produces the vaccine protein but cannot replicate inside the cell or cause illness. This vaccine was shown an average of 66% protection against moderate or severe COVID-19, but more importantly, this vaccine showed 85% protection against severe disease, with no differences across countries or age groups.

(p24.1) The Oxford/Astra Zeneca vaccine is also based on DNA transported by an adenovirus vector-a modified version of a chimpanzee adenovirus, known as ChAdOx1-to transport the genetic information to produce the surface spike protein of the virus. One of the benefits of this type of vaccines is that they are more rugged than the mRNA vaccines. This is because DNA is not as fragile as RNA, and the adenovirus's tough protein coat helps protect the genetic material inside. Consequently, the Oxford/Astra Zeneca vaccine does not have to be stored frozen. In fact, this vaccine was expected to last for at least six months when refrigerated at ca. 4 • C. In 2020, it was shown that the efficacy of the vaccine was ca. 76% at preventing COVID-19 following the first dose and ca. 81% after the second dose [118].
## (s25) Moderna and Pfizer Vaccines
(p25.0) The development of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines based on the use of messenger RNA technology encapsulated in lipid nanoparticles was a success case in the use of nanoparticles for vaccine manufacture [44]. Messenger RNA is the key intermediary in protein synthesis, but it is a very large and negatively charged molecule, so it cannot cross cell membranes on its own. Thus, messenger RNA needs a vehicle to cross these cellular barriers, and this is where LNPs played a major role.
