# Citation: Scafetta, N.; Bianchini, A. Overview of the Spectral Coherence between Planetary Resonances and Solar and Climate Oscillations. Overview of the Spectral Coherence between Planetary Resonances and Solar and Climate Oscillations

CorpusID: 257822196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/46b65c94d3e69298625b2447da1b8960eb0b302f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/46b65c94d3e69298625b2447da1b8960eb0b302f)

Fields: Environmental Science, Physics

## (s2) Empirical Evidences for the Planetary Origin of Solar and Climate Variability Cycles
(p2.0) Several academics have recently investigated the idea that the planets of the solar system might have an impact on solar activity since, especially over the last 15 years, more and more scientific data have been discovered to support this hypothesis. Many of these findings were examined by Scafetta and Bianchini [26]. Let us now overview the most supporting evidences. Section 3.1 demonstrates that realistic tidal models predict a tidal cycle of 10-12 years, which corresponds to the observed Schwabe 11-year sunspot cycle. Section 3.2 provides additional data in support of a planetary synchronized solar dynamo hypothesis.
## (s4) Empirical Evidences for Planetary Control of Solar Variability across Several Timescales
(p4.0) The spectral compatibility of the tidal planetary models with an 11-year solar cycle is just the first piece of evidence supporting the planetary synchronized solar dynamo theory. There is a substantial body of data showing that the primary planetary frequencies do indeed characterize changes in solar activity at all timescales, from the monthly to the multimillennial ones.

(p4.1) The main planetary harmonics that could have a possible physical relevance are the orbital periods, spring tidal periods, synodic conjunction periods, and their combinations, which were labeled orbital invariant inequalities [7]. Here, we give a brief summary of what we consider to be the most important empirical findings supporting the planetary theory of solar activity changes.
## (s5) Monthly to Annual Timescales
(p5.0) Bigg [91] discovered a minor but constant periodicity in the relative daily sunspot number records at the sidereal period of the planet Mercury, modified by Venus, Earth, and Jupiter. This author came to the conclusion that extrasolar factors could have an impact on the creation of sunspots.
## (s6) Multidecadal to Millennial Timescales
(p6.0) A large number of scientific data indicate that the Sun's activity is also characterized by a variety of unique oscillations that occur across timeframes ranging from decades to millennia. These periods seem to fall into distinct ranges. The most frequently documented solar oscillations cover the periods of 40-45 years, 55-65 years, 80-105 years (Gleissberg cycle), 115-150 years, 170-240 years (Jose and Suess-de Vries cycles), 800-1200 years (Eddy cycle), and 2000-2500 years (Bray-Hallstatt cycle) [35,59]. These oscillations fall into the major clusters created by the body of the planetary periods, as described by Scafetta and Bianchini [26] and their cited references. Let us now review the key findings.

(p6.1) (1) Scafetta [37] developed a multiscale harmonic solar and climatic model based on the Jupiter-Saturn neap-spring tidal oscillation, Jupiter's orbital tidal oscillation, and a solar dynamo cycle that was hypothesized to have a period of 10.87 years (see Figure 6). Four primary beats with periods of P S13 = 60.95 years, P S12 = 114.78 years, P S23 = 129.95 years, and P S123 = 983 years result from the combination of the three cycles. The model successfully predicts all the major secular solar activity maxima and minima over the last millennium, including the Oort, Wolf, Spörer, Maunder, and Dalton grand solar minima ( Figure 8A), which are approximately given by the quasi-115-130-year oscillation predicted by the model and are observed in all solar activity proxy records, including the 14 C and 10 Be radionucleotide [38,53]. The same model also predicts a quasi-1000-year oscillation, which has been well observed in detailed temperature reconstructions of the Northern Hemisphere over the last 2000 years ( Figure 8B). Finally, Figure 8C compares the same solar harmonic model against a global surface temperature record from 1850 to 2010 [37], where a similar 60-year modulation plus a secular upward trend is observed. Figure 8C, which was published in 2012 by Scafetta [37], predicted an incoming grand solar minimum from 2015 to 2045, induced by the interference of the 115-130-year oscillation and the 60-year oscillation produced by the planetary model following the Maunder, the Dalton, the 1900-1920, and the 1970s grand solar minima. An alternative planetary model based on the Venus, Earth, and Jupiter tides did the same [98,99]. Courtillot et al. [100], still using planetary resonances, predicted the same modern solar minimum. Scafetta [37] also predicted a new solar maximum between 2050 and 2070, which would also coincide with the millennial solar cycle maximum. Indeed, Scafetta [37] predicted the incoming grand solar minimum from 2015 to 2045, also from the similitude of solar cycles 1-6 with the solar cycles 20-24. Scafetta [7] and Scafetta and Bianchini [26] observed that planetary resonances are not distributed randomly but rather cluster around specific frequency ranges. This could explain why different models based on planetary resonances can produce comparable findings.  10 Be and 14 C cosmogenic isotopes [52,53]. (B) The identical model (red) overlaid over a reconstruction of the Northern Hemisphere's proxy temperature [101]. (C) The same planetary-solar model (red) is displayed against the HadCRUT4 global surface temperature record (black) [102], which was combined in 1850-1900 with Moberg et al. [103] proxy model (blue). The green curves illustrate the skewness of the quasi-millennial oscillation, which approximates the millennial temperature oscillation from 1700 to 2013 [37,48]. The black dots represent the maxima of a quasi-60-year oscillation produced by the model and also observed in the climate records.
## (s11) The "Homeopathic" Tiny-Tidal Problem
(p11.0) It is currently believed that a solar dynamo operating in the convective solar zone is responsible for fluctuations in solar activity [141]. A common critique against the possibility that the planetary motions could somehow have synchronized the solar dynamo activity and the climate on Earth is that the amplitude of the planetary tidal acceleration on the Sun (and/or the Earth) is very small [142,143]. This is a fact that has been known since the 19th century, which is still presented as if it were a conclusive argument against the planetary hypothesis. Moreover, Charbonneau [144] noted that the planetary tidal forcings could only have what he labeled a "homeopathic" effect on the solar tachocline and came to the conclusion that they should not be able to synchronize the solar dynamo. However, he also rightly stressed that the issue was not insurmountable, because it could be solved under the condition of discovering a solar mechanism that greatly amplifies the impact of the tidal forces.

(p11.1) Scafetta et al. [131] answered Jager and Versteegh [142] and Callebaut et al. [143] by arguing that such a kind of reasoning is only based on a classical Newtonian understanding of the tidal phenomenon. In reality, the most obvious objection to such a critique could be that more mechanisms instead of just a basic Newtonian one could be simultaneously at play. Therefore, the critique could not serve as a persuasive refutation of the planetary hypothesis of solar variability.

(p11.2) In fact, the ability of the Sun to generate large amounts of energy through H-burning could make possible a significant amplification of the tidal harmonic perturbations [74,145]. Under specific circumstances, these periodic perturbations might become strong enough to synchronize the solar dynamo-which is an oscillator in and of itself-to external planetary frequencies [26]. Thus, in order to examine and evaluate the planetary hypothesis of solar activity variation, it should be required to look into this option.
## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) The scientific evidences presented in Section 2 suggest that the Sun is subject to planetary influence from monthly to millennial timescales. The most frequently documented solar cycles are those with periods of 0. Many of these oscillation are also found in climate records and could be used to forecast an important component of the natural climate variability [48,85]. On the contrary, the idea that changes in solar activity might be only governed by internal dynamo mechanisms appears to still fall short of fully explaining why all of these solar cycles coincide with the most significant planetary periods derived from the planets' orbits, spring tides, synodic cycles, and invariant inequalities.
