# Pupil dilation as an index of effort in cognitive control tasks: A review

CorpusID: 256211362 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/875792aeabfbda0f73243601db777c5e2ecc18d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/875792aeabfbda0f73243601db777c5e2ecc18d8)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) Mathematical problems
(p2.0) Mathematical problems have been used to investigate taskevoked pupil dilations and task difficulty by a bulk of studies. The seminal study on pupil dilation and mental arithmetic by Hess and Polt (1964) showed that the pupil dilates more with increasing difficulty, which was interpreted as that pupil dilation Bcan be used as a direct measure of mental activity.^Since then, this finding has been replicated by a large body of studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979;Boersma, Wilton, Barham, & Muir, 1970;Bradshaw, 1968;Klingner et al., 2011;Payne, Parry, & Harasymiw, 1968;Schaefer, Ferguson, Klein, & Rawson, 1968). The majority of these studies have used multiplication problems, which evoke significantly more pupil dilation than adding problems (Jainta & Baccino, 2010). Boersma et al. (1970) reported that with increasing task difficulty overall pupil dilation increased, although at the later phase of the response period pupil dilation was actually larger for easy then for difficult stimuli, possibly reflecting diminished sustained engagement in the latter condition. Another study has revealed that relatively difficult auditory presented multiplication problems result in larger evoked dilation than relatively easy visual presentation of problems (Klingner et al., 2011). Ahern and Beatty (1979) have revealed that the link between arithmetic performance and pupil dilation is moderated by individual differences in intelligence. Their study has shown that more intelligent individuals show smaller pupil dilation and respond more accurately for all levels of task difficulty as compared to less intelligent individuals. This finding suggests that intelligent individuals require less effort because they process information more efficiently. In contrast to these findings, a more recent study by van der Meer and colleagues  has reported that individuals with higher fluid intelligence solve an analogical reasoning task faster and more accurately, while also showing larger pupil dilations as compared to normal controls. The reason for the discrepancy between these two studies might be the different tasks involved: In contrast to the former study using an arithmetic task, the reasoning task was not highly overlearned thus making it more sensitive to differences in effort mobilization driven by variability in fluid intelligence. Consistent with this account, another study found that fluid intelligence was correlated with pupil dilation in an analogy task, whereas it was not significantly associated with pupil dilation in an algebra task .

(p2.1) Mathematical problems have been used to investigate taskevoked pupil dilations and task difficulty by a bulk of studies. The seminal study on pupil dilation and mental arithmetic by Hess and Polt (1964) showed that the pupil dilates more with increasing difficulty, which was interpreted as that pupil dilation Bcan be used as a direct measure of mental activity.^Since then, this finding has been replicated by a large body of studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979;Boersma, Wilton, Barham, & Muir, 1970;Bradshaw, 1968;Klingner et al., 2011;Payne, Parry, & Harasymiw, 1968;Schaefer, Ferguson, Klein, & Rawson, 1968). The majority of these studies have used multiplication problems, which evoke significantly more pupil dilation than adding problems (Jainta & Baccino, 2010). Boersma et al. (1970) reported that with increasing task difficulty overall pupil dilation increased, although at the later phase of the response period pupil dilation was actually larger for easy then for difficult stimuli, possibly reflecting diminished sustained engagement in the latter condition. Another study has revealed that relatively difficult auditory presented multiplication problems result in larger evoked dilation than relatively easy visual presentation of problems (Klingner et al., 2011). Ahern and Beatty (1979) have revealed that the link between arithmetic performance and pupil dilation is moderated by individual differences in intelligence. Their study has shown that more intelligent individuals show smaller pupil dilation and respond more accurately for all levels of task difficulty as compared to less intelligent individuals. This finding suggests that intelligent individuals require less effort because they process information more efficiently. In contrast to these findings, a more recent study by van der Meer and colleagues  has reported that individuals with higher fluid intelligence solve an analogical reasoning task faster and more accurately, while also showing larger pupil dilations as compared to normal controls. The reason for the discrepancy between these two studies might be the different tasks involved: In contrast to the former study using an arithmetic task, the reasoning task was not highly overlearned thus making it more sensitive to differences in effort mobilization driven by variability in fluid intelligence. Consistent with this account, another study found that fluid intelligence was correlated with pupil dilation in an analogy task, whereas it was not significantly associated with pupil dilation in an algebra task .
## (s3) The n-back task
(p3.0) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p3.1) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p3.2) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.

(p3.3) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p3.4) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p3.5) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.
## (s5) The Sternberg task
(p5.0) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p5.1) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p5.2) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.

(p5.3) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p5.4) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p5.5) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.
## (s6) Summary
(p6.0) To sum up, most studies using updating tasks have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing task demands. When approaching working memory capacity limitations, pupil dilation plateaus or drops, depending on task instructions. Moreover, although not found in all studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979), some studies on inter-individual differences have revealed that increased pupil dilation is associated with enhanced performance (Rondeel et al., 2015;Van Der Meer et al., 2010), suggesting that in these contexts pupil dilation might index the amount of effort allocated to the task at hand.
## (s7) Pupil studies on the inhibition component of cognitive control
(p7.0) Inhibition refers to the ability to overcome dominant or automatic responses in order to respond appropriately in a certain situation (Miyake et al., 2000). Miyake et al. (2000) has used the Stroop task (for an extensive review see Macleod, 1991;Stroop, 1935), the antisaccade task (Hallett, 1978), and the stop-signal task (Logan & Cowan, 1984) to measure inhibition ability. In addition to these tasks, other inhibition paradigms such as the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), Simon task (Simon & Rudell, 1967), and Go/No-Go task have also been related to pupil dilation as reviewed below.

(p7.1) Inhibition refers to the ability to overcome dominant or automatic responses in order to respond appropriately in a certain situation (Miyake et al., 2000). Miyake et al. (2000) has used the Stroop task (for an extensive review see Macleod, 1991;Stroop, 1935), the antisaccade task (Hallett, 1978), and the stop-signal task (Logan & Cowan, 1984) to measure inhibition ability. In addition to these tasks, other inhibition paradigms such as the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), Simon task (Simon & Rudell, 1967), and Go/No-Go task have also been related to pupil dilation as reviewed below.
## (s8) The Go/No-Go task
(p8.0) Studies using the Go/No-Go paradigm have revealed that No-Go trials (requiring motor inhibition) evoke significantly smaller pupil dilations than Go trials (Reinhard & Lachnit, 2002;Richer, Silverman, & Beatty, 1983;Schacht, Dimigen, & Sommer, 2010;van der Molen, Boomsma, Jennings, & Nieuwboer, 1989). However, it is difficult to attribute pupil dilation effects of No-Go versus Go trials to differences in effort because they are confounded by the absence versus presence of motor execution, a process that may independently contribute to pupil dilation effects.

(p8.1) Studies using the Go/No-Go paradigm have revealed that No-Go trials (requiring motor inhibition) evoke significantly smaller pupil dilations than Go trials (Reinhard & Lachnit, 2002;Richer, Silverman, & Beatty, 1983;Schacht, Dimigen, & Sommer, 2010;van der Molen, Boomsma, Jennings, & Nieuwboer, 1989). However, it is difficult to attribute pupil dilation effects of No-Go versus Go trials to differences in effort because they are confounded by the absence versus presence of motor execution, a process that may independently contribute to pupil dilation effects.
## (s9) The antisaccade task
(p9.0) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.

(p9.1) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.
## (s10) Conflict paradigms
(p10.0) Conflict tasks typically involve conflict between responses activated by the target and distractor stimuli, and cognitive control is needed to respond to the relevant information while inhibiting the irrelevant information (Botvinick et al., 2001). For example, in the Stroop task participants are asked to name the ink color whereas the word itself needs to be ignored, in the flanker task target information is surrounded by irrelevant distractors, and in the Simon task there is a match or mismatch between the spatial location of the target and the spatial location of the target key.
## (s17) Mathematical problems
(p17.0) Mathematical problems have been used to investigate taskevoked pupil dilations and task difficulty by a bulk of studies. The seminal study on pupil dilation and mental arithmetic by Hess and Polt (1964) showed that the pupil dilates more with increasing difficulty, which was interpreted as that pupil dilation Bcan be used as a direct measure of mental activity.^Since then, this finding has been replicated by a large body of studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979;Boersma, Wilton, Barham, & Muir, 1970;Bradshaw, 1968;Klingner et al., 2011;Payne, Parry, & Harasymiw, 1968;Schaefer, Ferguson, Klein, & Rawson, 1968). The majority of these studies have used multiplication problems, which evoke significantly more pupil dilation than adding problems (Jainta & Baccino, 2010). Boersma et al. (1970) reported that with increasing task difficulty overall pupil dilation increased, although at the later phase of the response period pupil dilation was actually larger for easy then for difficult stimuli, possibly reflecting diminished sustained engagement in the latter condition. Another study has revealed that relatively difficult auditory presented multiplication problems result in larger evoked dilation than relatively easy visual presentation of problems (Klingner et al., 2011). Ahern and Beatty (1979) have revealed that the link between arithmetic performance and pupil dilation is moderated by individual differences in intelligence. Their study has shown that more intelligent individuals show smaller pupil dilation and respond more accurately for all levels of task difficulty as compared to less intelligent individuals. This finding suggests that intelligent individuals require less effort because they process information more efficiently. In contrast to these findings, a more recent study by van der Meer and colleagues  has reported that individuals with higher fluid intelligence solve an analogical reasoning task faster and more accurately, while also showing larger pupil dilations as compared to normal controls. The reason for the discrepancy between these two studies might be the different tasks involved: In contrast to the former study using an arithmetic task, the reasoning task was not highly overlearned thus making it more sensitive to differences in effort mobilization driven by variability in fluid intelligence. Consistent with this account, another study found that fluid intelligence was correlated with pupil dilation in an analogy task, whereas it was not significantly associated with pupil dilation in an algebra task .

(p17.1) Mathematical problems have been used to investigate taskevoked pupil dilations and task difficulty by a bulk of studies. The seminal study on pupil dilation and mental arithmetic by Hess and Polt (1964) showed that the pupil dilates more with increasing difficulty, which was interpreted as that pupil dilation Bcan be used as a direct measure of mental activity.^Since then, this finding has been replicated by a large body of studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979;Boersma, Wilton, Barham, & Muir, 1970;Bradshaw, 1968;Klingner et al., 2011;Payne, Parry, & Harasymiw, 1968;Schaefer, Ferguson, Klein, & Rawson, 1968). The majority of these studies have used multiplication problems, which evoke significantly more pupil dilation than adding problems (Jainta & Baccino, 2010). Boersma et al. (1970) reported that with increasing task difficulty overall pupil dilation increased, although at the later phase of the response period pupil dilation was actually larger for easy then for difficult stimuli, possibly reflecting diminished sustained engagement in the latter condition. Another study has revealed that relatively difficult auditory presented multiplication problems result in larger evoked dilation than relatively easy visual presentation of problems (Klingner et al., 2011). Ahern and Beatty (1979) have revealed that the link between arithmetic performance and pupil dilation is moderated by individual differences in intelligence. Their study has shown that more intelligent individuals show smaller pupil dilation and respond more accurately for all levels of task difficulty as compared to less intelligent individuals. This finding suggests that intelligent individuals require less effort because they process information more efficiently. In contrast to these findings, a more recent study by van der Meer and colleagues  has reported that individuals with higher fluid intelligence solve an analogical reasoning task faster and more accurately, while also showing larger pupil dilations as compared to normal controls. The reason for the discrepancy between these two studies might be the different tasks involved: In contrast to the former study using an arithmetic task, the reasoning task was not highly overlearned thus making it more sensitive to differences in effort mobilization driven by variability in fluid intelligence. Consistent with this account, another study found that fluid intelligence was correlated with pupil dilation in an analogy task, whereas it was not significantly associated with pupil dilation in an algebra task .
## (s18) The n-back task
(p18.0) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p18.1) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p18.2) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.

(p18.3) Another frequently used updating paradigm is the n-back task. The n-back task requires participants to indicate whether the currently presented letter or number is the same stimulus presented n trials back. Thus, task difficulty increases with increasing n (Kirchner, 1958). The n-back task is unique in its demands, because participants must constantly allocate attention to the task to perform well.

(p18.4) Multiple studies have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing n (Belayachi et al., 2015;Brouwer, Hogervorst, Holewijn, & van Erp, 2014;Hopstaken, van der Linden, Bakker, & Kompier, 2015;Karatekin, Marcus, & Couperus, 2007;Niezgoda et al., 2015;Pehlivanoglu, Jain, Ariel, & Verhaeghen, 2014;Scharinger, Soutschek, Schubert, & Gerjets, 2015). Notably, a recent study using classification algorithms has shown that pupil dilation alone can be sufficient to distinguish high from low cognitive load up to an accuracy of 75 %. When compared to other measures such as electroencephalography, skin conductance, respiration, cardiac measures, and eye blinks, only the first exceeded this value with an classification accuracy of 80 % . This finding shows that pupil dilation might be used as an index of cognitive load, thus is even suitable for applied contexts.

(p18.5) Regarding the link between pupil dilation and performance, one recent study has shown that an increased pupil dilation to the target stimuli of a 2-back task predicted improved performance in terms of a lower error rate (Rondeel, van Steenbergen, Holland, & van Knippenberg, 2015). This correlation at the inter-individual level suggests that pupil dilation reflects effort supporting improved performance.
## (s20) The Sternberg task
(p20.0) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p20.1) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p20.2) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.

(p20.3) The Sternberg task (Sternberg, 1966) consists of an encoding and a search phase. In the encoding phase a string of digits of varying length is presented. After a delay of a few seconds, the search phase starts: Participants search in a new string for the letters that they have seen in the previous string. Task difficulty increases with increasing length of the digit string.

(p20.4) One pupillometry study on the Sternberg task has revealed that for young people two dilation peaks were present that increased with increasing task difficulty: one during the encoding and one during the search phase (Van Gerven, Paas, Van Merriënboer, & Schmidt, 2004). In older people, pupil dilation did not increase with increasing workload during the search phase. Notably, together with the absence of pupil dilation during the search phase, older participants also showed longer reaction times, whereas young participants did display increased pupil dilation and were faster. The authors interpreted the pupil as a sensitive measure of cognitive load, that might become less sensitive and thus less reliable with increasing age.

(p20.5) The influence of cognitive load has also been shown in a visual search task where pupil diameter increased for a more difficult version of the task and for larger search sets (Porter, Troscianko, & Gilchrist, 2007). More recent work has confirmed that pupil dilation increases with set size (Kursawe & Zimmer, 2015). Moreover, pupil size plateaus when set size exceeds capacity limitations (Unsworth & Robison, 2015, 2017b.
## (s21) Summary
(p21.0) To sum up, most studies using updating tasks have shown that pupil dilation increases with increasing task demands. When approaching working memory capacity limitations, pupil dilation plateaus or drops, depending on task instructions. Moreover, although not found in all studies (Ahern & Beatty, 1979), some studies on inter-individual differences have revealed that increased pupil dilation is associated with enhanced performance (Rondeel et al., 2015;Van Der Meer et al., 2010), suggesting that in these contexts pupil dilation might index the amount of effort allocated to the task at hand.
## (s22) Pupil studies on the inhibition component of cognitive control
(p22.0) Inhibition refers to the ability to overcome dominant or automatic responses in order to respond appropriately in a certain situation (Miyake et al., 2000). Miyake et al. (2000) has used the Stroop task (for an extensive review see Macleod, 1991;Stroop, 1935), the antisaccade task (Hallett, 1978), and the stop-signal task (Logan & Cowan, 1984) to measure inhibition ability. In addition to these tasks, other inhibition paradigms such as the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), Simon task (Simon & Rudell, 1967), and Go/No-Go task have also been related to pupil dilation as reviewed below.

(p22.1) Inhibition refers to the ability to overcome dominant or automatic responses in order to respond appropriately in a certain situation (Miyake et al., 2000). Miyake et al. (2000) has used the Stroop task (for an extensive review see Macleod, 1991;Stroop, 1935), the antisaccade task (Hallett, 1978), and the stop-signal task (Logan & Cowan, 1984) to measure inhibition ability. In addition to these tasks, other inhibition paradigms such as the flanker task (Eriksen & Eriksen, 1974), Simon task (Simon & Rudell, 1967), and Go/No-Go task have also been related to pupil dilation as reviewed below.
## (s23) The Go/No-Go task
(p23.0) Studies using the Go/No-Go paradigm have revealed that No-Go trials (requiring motor inhibition) evoke significantly smaller pupil dilations than Go trials (Reinhard & Lachnit, 2002;Richer, Silverman, & Beatty, 1983;Schacht, Dimigen, & Sommer, 2010;van der Molen, Boomsma, Jennings, & Nieuwboer, 1989). However, it is difficult to attribute pupil dilation effects of No-Go versus Go trials to differences in effort because they are confounded by the absence versus presence of motor execution, a process that may independently contribute to pupil dilation effects.

(p23.1) Studies using the Go/No-Go paradigm have revealed that No-Go trials (requiring motor inhibition) evoke significantly smaller pupil dilations than Go trials (Reinhard & Lachnit, 2002;Richer, Silverman, & Beatty, 1983;Schacht, Dimigen, & Sommer, 2010;van der Molen, Boomsma, Jennings, & Nieuwboer, 1989). However, it is difficult to attribute pupil dilation effects of No-Go versus Go trials to differences in effort because they are confounded by the absence versus presence of motor execution, a process that may independently contribute to pupil dilation effects.
## (s24) The antisaccade task
(p24.0) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.

(p24.1) Studies using the antisaccade task have shown that antisaccade trials requiring an eye movement to the opposite side of the presented target are associated with larger pupil dilations than prosaccade trials that require an eye movement to the target (Karatekin, Bingham, & White, 2010;Wang, Brien, & Munoz, 2015;Wang, McInnis, Brien, Pari, & Munoz, 2016). Additionally, larger pupil dilations were observed during the preparatory interval of antisaccades, as compared to the preparatory interval of correct prosaccades or erroneous prosaccades made in the anti-saccade condition. Notably, analyses on intra-individual correlations for the anti-saccade condition have revealed that larger preparatory dilations are associated with faster saccades (Wang et al., 2015.
## (s25) Conflict paradigms
(p25.0) Conflict tasks typically involve conflict between responses activated by the target and distractor stimuli, and cognitive control is needed to respond to the relevant information while inhibiting the irrelevant information (Botvinick et al., 2001). For example, in the Stroop task participants are asked to name the ink color whereas the word itself needs to be ignored, in the flanker task target information is surrounded by irrelevant distractors, and in the Simon task there is a match or mismatch between the spatial location of the target and the spatial location of the target key.
