# Review Article Efficacy of Acupuncture in the Treatment of Essential Hypertension: An Overview of Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses

CorpusID: 258254576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f27c5835276d315d9dc50399f4dc26fa20da154](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f27c5835276d315d9dc50399f4dc26fa20da154)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Materials and Methods
(p1.0) The methodology of this overview follows the Cochrane Handbook, and the report of this overview is in line with the preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses (PRISMA) 2020 checklist [22]. This overview has been registered with the PROSPERO website (registration number: PROSPERO CRD42022361514).
## (s4) Literature Screening and Data Extraction.
(p4.0) Two researchers (MX-F and XQ-W) independently screened and extracted the literature and cross-checked them. The disagreement (if any) was discussed and negotiated or subjected to the decision of a third author (GH-D). The extracted literature information included authors, publication year, nationality, sample size, intervention measures, quality assessment tools, and main conclusions.

(p4.1) 2.4. Quality Assessment. Two researchers (MX-F and XQ-W) independently assessed the methodological and evidence quality of the included SRs/MAs; any discrepancies were resolved by consensus or adjudication by a third author (GH-D).

(p4.2) 2.4.1. Methodological Quality Assessment. In 2007, clinical epidemiology and evidence-based medicine experts from research institutions in Netherlands and Canada developed and published a measurement tool to assess systematic reviews (AMSTAR). In the following 10 years, AMSTAR became an internationally recognized and most widely used evaluation tool. Subsequently, a large number of relevant documents using AMSTAR tools appeared. Research shows that the use of AMSTAR has played a positive role in standardizing the production and reporting of SRs/MAs and promoting the generation and dissemination of high-level evidence. A measurement tool to assess systematic reviews 2 (AMSTAR-2) [23] is a quality evaluation tool of SRs/ MAs methodology newly developed on the basis of the first version of AMSTAR, with good consistency and practicality among evaluators.
## (s5) 2.4.2.
(p5.0) Risk of Bias Assessment. The risk of bias in systematic review (ROBIS) [24], which aims at the bias risk of system evaluation, is used not only to evaluate the bias risk in the process of producing and interpreting the results of multiple SRs/MAs such as intervention, diagnosis, etiology, and prognosis but also to evaluate the correlation between the SRs/MAs problems and the practical problems to be solved by users. ROBIS is useful for assessing the extent of bias in four domains: (1) eligibility criteria for each study; (2) the identification and selection of studies; (3) data collection and study appraisal; and (4) overall synthesis and major findings. Within each domain, specific questions were used to determine the risk of bias, which was rated as "low," "high," or "unclear." 2.4.3. Report Quality Assessment. SR/MA is an important evidence to guide clinical practice. The clarity of its report affects the realization of its clinical value. Standard reports can reduce the bias between actual research results and published results and increase the transparency of articles. The PRISMA report guide is designed to help authors improve the quality of their reports, obtain key information, and improve readability and credibility.

(p5.1) The quality of each SR/MA report for the included SRs/ MAs was assessed by the PRISMA 2020 [22] checklist, and each of the 27 items included in PRISMA 2020 was scored as "yes," "partially yes," or "no." 2.4.4. Evidence Quality Assessment. In order to be useful to decision-makers, clinicians, and patients, the SRs/MAs must provide not only the effect estimates of each result but also the information needed to judge the correctness of these effect estimates. The grading of recommendation assessment, development, and evaluation (GRADE) [25] provides a structure for SRs/MAs and clinical practice guidelines to ensure that it addresses all key issues of outcome evidence quality evaluation related to a specific issue in a consistent and systematic manner.

(p5.2) The quality of evidence for each SR/MA outcome was evaluated by the GRADE system. Since the initial quality of evidence for RCTs is high, the quality of evidence for the outcomes of the study was evaluated based on downgrading factors such as limitations, inconsistencies, indirectness, imprecision, and publication bias of the study. According to the downgrading level, they were rated as "high," "moderate," "low," and "very low."
