# A Review of the Therapeutic Targeting of SCN9A and Nav1.7 for Pain Relief in Current Human Clinical Trials

CorpusID: 258515616 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc7f32892fa6b4ed6ec47cf1ff74f0269c0df16c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bc7f32892fa6b4ed6ec47cf1ff74f0269c0df16c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Conclusion
(p4.0) As one looks at the past and present human clinical trials targeting SCN9A and Nav1.7 a challenge picture emerges. Small molecules seem not to be very effectives in the management of pain associated with mutation of the SCN9A gene leading to the malfunction of the Nav1.7 sodium channel (clinicaltrials.gov). Gene therapy could be a more targeted way of engaging the SCN9A therapeutically.

(p4.1) For example, the CRISPR/Cas9 system has been used successfully in the area of genomic editing and genomic regulation. 88 The CRISPR/Cas9 system was utilized to cause a down regulation of SCN9A leading to the repression of Nav1.7 within the dorsal root ganglia located within the lumbar region. The studied mouse models using this intervention did show decreased tactile allodynia when the mouse was in a neuropathic state. Also, there was the indication of thermal hyperalgesia that had been reduced, while there was no reduction in the motor function of the mice. 89 Even with the preliminary results, there may be challenges associated with the use of adenovirus vector to deliver the CRISPR/Cas9 system therapeutics targeted intervention for the treatment of chronic pain via the down regulations of SCN9A.

(p4.2) There are several disadvantages for using an adenovirus vector in the area of gene therapy including immunogenicity, 90 non-integration, 91 and replication competence. 92 The AAV vector packaging capacity is small.

(p4.3) The adeno-associated virus (AAV) needs a genomic helper for replication. In addition, manufacturing to produce a stock can be very challenging. 93 There is an alternative technology that could be utilized that could target SCN9A.

(p4.4) PepVax, Inc. has a drug delivery system called SMARTmid (tm) is a DNA plasmid vector drug delivery platform that has been configured to target and down regulated SCN9A gene to be used in the treatment of chronic pain. Preliminary data showed that there was a 50% reduction of the SCN9A gene expression which also coincided with the similar decrease in Nav1.7 protein expression in the cell line in vitro (data not shown). Using SMARTmid (tm) instead of an AAV delivery has many more advantages including increased insert packaging capability, replication competence, and lack of permanent integration. In addition, AAV cannot be used more than once due to its immunogenicity which can make it a limiting platform for gene therapy. 94 Based on the review of the information (Tables 1-3), a conclusion can be reached that small molecules may not be effective in the treatment of consideration of mutations associated with SCN9A. The best treatment could be the use of DNA plasmid vectors which can be used over and over again without having to be reconfigured. Further    Notes: The positively charged sodium ions are transmitted through these channels generating and transmitting electrical signals. The SCN9A gene is involved in the making of the alpha subunit of its protein expression which assembles into the sodium channel called Nav1.7. Nav1.7 is found in key locations within the peripheral nervous system and is involved in the transmission of pain signals. There is presently six human clinical trials studies that are associated with the understanding of SCN9A that are listed on http://www.clinicaltrials.gov as of December 2022. Of the several studies listed, only one indicated a human clinical phase III study completion. That study looked at small fiber neuropathy treated by the therapeutics lacosamide. Lacosamide is a therapeutic that is used to control seizure, namely partial onset seizures, in both adults and children from the age of one month and older. The results were in conclusion. Therefore, there is a presently no Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of a small molecule that can be used to treat chronic pain no matter the source of pain. The small lack of therapeutic studies could indicate the challenges of a moving a small molecule through human clinical trials targeting SCN9A. Yet, there is significant evidence that the targeting of the gene has the potential bring to bear hope to millions that suffering from chronic pain. A success treatment targeting SCN9A could be the answer to the opioid crisis by presenting a viable therapeutic alternative. 
