# Laser-Based Powder Bed Fusion Processing of Al Alloys and Potential Solutions from the Literature-A materials Ongoing Challenges of Laser-Based Powder Bed Fusion Processing of Al Alloys and Potential Solutions from the Literature-A Review

CorpusID: 256351230 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddab7c0a201fd2202fe873e6cf5724edabf3d57](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9ddab7c0a201fd2202fe873e6cf5724edabf3d57)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent decades, additive manufacturing (AM) has been widely explored in industry and academia and has consequently become a key driver for the fourth industrial revolution [1]. Among AM techniques, the laser-based power bed fusion (PBF-LB/M) process stands out for producing complex-shaped functional components with good surface quality, excellent dimensional tolerance and unprecedented mechanical properties [2]. During this process, a tightly focused laser beam selectively melts a bed made of fine metal powder layer-by-layer achieving extremely high cooling rates (up to 10 5 K/s) [3]. The portfolio of metallic materials which can be processed via PBF-LB/M is continuously expanding. Among the alloys currently available, Al-based alloys are gaining increasing interest, especially in the automotive and aerospace sectors, thanks to their excellent strength-to-weight ratio and resistance to cyclic loads [4]. Therefore, the PBF-LB/M processing of commercial Al-based alloys and the development of new Al-based compositions are growing areas and, consequently, present numerous challenges. Considering the significant impact of processing quality on the mechanical and fatigue behaviour of final components [5], intense efforts at the research and industrial level need to be devoted to overcoming these challenges.

(p0.1) The literature reports numerous works describing the major and minor achievements in this area, but often the unsolved or hidden problems of the solutions proposed are not mentioned. In order to fill this gap, the present work has explored and reported the main challenges related to the design and characterisation of Al-based alloys presented

(p0.2) The literature reports numerous works describing the major and minor achievements in this area, but often the unsolved or hidden problems of the solutions proposed are no mentioned. In order to fill this gap, the present work has explored and reported the main challenges related to the design and characterisation of Al-based alloys presented in the literature. Since several aspects need to be considered during the development of an alloy this review paper has divided them into activities occurring pre, during and post-PBF LB/M production (as summarised in Figure 1).
## (s5) Process Parameters Optimisation and Defect Prediction
(p5.0) One of the main drawbacks of the PBF-LB/M technique is the incomplete densification that could occur in the final component due to internal defects, such as porosities or cracks [53]. The prominence of internal defects that could cause an early failure of the component is directly linked with the PBF-LB/M parameters [54]. Their optimisation is, therefore, crucial to manufacture dense parts with high mechanical performance. However, Craeghs et al. [55] stated that more than 50 process parameters are involved in the PBF-LB/M process, making the optimisation and monitoring highly challenging. In addition, the process parameters require to be optimised for each powder and PBF-LB/M machine, so it is overly time-consuming.

(p5.1) The design of experiments (DOE) approach schematised in the red box in Figure 5, is generally used to systematise the optimisation process. The DOE is a powerful statistical tool that deals with planning, conducting, and analysing controlled tests to investigate the relationship between multiple variables (parameter sets) and key output variables (quality). In PBF-LB/M, the DOE approach usually involves the production of cubic samples with different process parameters and aims to optimise the level of densification. The large number of parameters of the PBF-LB/M process implies that most the work in the literature used the volumetric energy density (VED) for process optimisation. This value embodies the main parameters according to the following equation:

(p5.2) where P is the laser power, v is the laser scan speed, hd is the hatch distance and l is the layer thickness. This approach in which the VED plays a central role is not always the most suitable for the process optimisation. Several factors are involved in the densification phenomena which may be differently influenced by one or more of the parameters embedded in the VED. Among the rare studies providing a comparison between parts produced with constant VED values but under different process conditions, the work of Scipioni et al. [56] stands out. The latter showed the different results that could be obtained by fixing the VED and varying the values of P and v. The relevance of this work lies in having revealed the relevant limitations of using VED as an exclusive design parameter for PBF-LB/M are discussed. The necessity to pay attention to individual PBF-LB/M parameters leads the DOE approach to require a very high number of samples to be produced and analysed, resulting in a time-consuming and powder-wasting procedure.

(p5.3) To streamline the DOE approach, a preliminary process parameter screening was recently introduced, exploiting single scan tracks (SSTs) method (reported in the yellow box in Figure 5) [57]. An SST corresponds to a laser track scanned on a single powder layer previously spread onto a substrate. This approach is based on the idea that PBF-LB/M parts are made of overlapping SSTs, therefore, the properties of the part strongly depend on the geometry of each SST and the interaction among them. To produce SSTs, only P and v can be varied, but a wide range of their combinations can be explored, thanks to rapid production and analysis. Considering the width and the continuity of entire SSTs in an ontop investigation and the cross-section morphologies, a restricted range of P-v combinations suitable for bulk production can be quickly identified [57][58][59]. The SSTs cross-sectional analysis involves a complex and time-consuming sample preparation procedure however the on-top evaluation is strongly affected by the operator error. To numerically evaluate the quality of a SST, an automatic computer-aided method was recently developed by the authors in a previously published work [60]. Although this approach still requires a DOE of bulk samples for full optimisation, a further streamlining of the procedure was enabled by Gheysen et al. [59] and Bosio et al. [61] who developed a method to derive the optimal hd value directly from SSTs. In particular, the optimal hd value can be set by calculating the width of the SSTs and considering an adequate overlapping among them. The latter can be fix at 0% as recommended in Bosio et al. [61] or calculated considering some geometrical on top parameters of the SST using the equation developed by Gheysen et al. [59]. Although the SST approach avoids parameters that would lead to the scan track defects, it cannot fully predict phenomena associated with the layer-by-layer scanning typical of the PBF-LB/M production, as demonstrated by Martucci et al. [62]. This problem is particularly evident with crack-prone Al-based alloys. Therefore, the challenge of optimising the PBF-LB/M process parameters without incurring huge DOEs of bulk samples appears to be not yet completely overcome.

(p5.4) A parameter poorly considered with both optimisation approaches is the layer thickness. In particular, its value is often selected based on the literature of the same alloy family without a proper optimisation procedure. However, some recent studies demonstrated that a correct setting of the layer thickness can allow an impressive increase in the PBF-LB/M productivity by maintaining a good surface finish, an optimal densification and high the mechanical properties of parts [63,64]. This crucial parameter is highly complex to optimise without a large experimental study as it depends on several factors, including the material thermophysical properties, PSD and packing density [65,66]. For this reason, the implementation of an unequivocal rule for calculating the optimum layer thickness considering the materials thermophysical properties, the powders characteristics and the PBF-LB/M machine features remains an ongoing challenge.
## (s7) Consolidation Phenomena
(p7.0) The absorption rate of a laser beam during a PBF-LB/M process is quite complicated to predict due to the influence of many factors, including the material, the powder surface roughness and the wavelength of the laser. Generally, based on literature results and on the graph reported in Figure 6, the shorter the wavelength, the higher the absorption rate [71].

(p7.1) Looking at the trend of aluminium absorbance as a function of wavelength (in light blue in Figure 6), it is evident that the use of the common YAG laser is a critical aspect in the processing of Al-based alloys by PBF-LB/M due to their low absorption rate and consequent high reflectivity at that wavelength. To mitigate consolidation issues that may occur during YAG laser processing of these alloys resulting in undesired defect formation, very high VED values are usually set. According to the results reported by Prasad et al. [72], a solution could be the use of energy sources at lower wavelengths such as green lasers.

(p7.2) In their study, the use of the green laser increased the aluminium absorption more than twofold compared to the use of YAG laser [72]. Despite this evidence, scarce literature can be found on the processing of Al-based alloys with this type of laser. However, the presence over the past five years of several patents on green laser technology (US 8675698B2, US 2022/0314366A1), on converting a laser radiation of longer wavelength to a laser radiation of shorter wavelength (US 9042419B1) and on the use of multi-lasers with different wavelengths (US 2017/0021455A1, US 2015/0246412A1) suggests a clear trend in the PBF-LB/M machine market towards this technology. Prima Industrie S.p.A and Trumpf-Gruppe were pioneers in launching PBF-LB/M machines with green lasers onto the market. The development and commercialisation of these machines will open up new research frontiers and, thus, many new challenges will need to be faced in the coming years. By modifying the laser absorption conditions, the heat transfer processes of the powder bed are also altered. The heat transfer arises based on three main mechanisms: radiation, the convection with the environment, and conduction within the powder bed and between the powder bed and the substrate, as illustrated in Figure 7.
## (s9) In-Situ Prediction of Defect Formation and Forward-Looking Machine Learning
(p9.0) The pores formed during the additive process impair the mechanical performance of final components, severely hampering their widespread application. In-situ monitoring allows the formation of defects to be detected in real time, enabling the operator to stop the job, modify some process parameters, and resume component production. Among the in-situ monitoring tools, X-ray technologies have recently gained increasing attention in this field. Exploiting X-ray technologies, the dynamics of spatter [108], pore formation [109], transfer of gas trapped in the powder into the bulk component, keyhole dynamics and keyhole pore formation [110], melt flow [111], solidification and phase transformation [112] may be investigated in real time. In-situ monitoring can also be used to improve the process repeatability by considering any changes in the powder bed [113]. Although the research world is suddenly evolving towards in-situ monitoring, cloud and edge computing still pose significant challenges to the processing and transmission of real-time sensing data due to the high sampling rate and the heaviness of the data. Furthermore, the real research frontier would be to use data from in-situ monitoring as input for machine learning (ML) techniques. The latter is essential to minimise trial-and-error experimentation, overcome the limitations of simulation systems and increase the repeatability of PBF-LB/M processes. Moreover, current machine learning techniques are merely used in a black-box modelling framework, and the results are not explainable and cannot directly compensate for the understanding of process dynamics [114]. Based on these considerations, much effort is required to investigate this field over the next few years. Creating a loop of in-situ monitoring, ML and online parameters readjustment is important not only for research purposes but also for industries with the aim of enabling additive processes for reliable mass production. This industrial interest is also evident from the numerous recent patents granted by the major additive companies. For example, General Electric holds a patent published in 2021 (US2021146480A1) on a diagnostic system of an additive manufacturing machine. This device allows the determination of parameters from in-situ sensors, the continuous comparison of these parameters with threshold values and, based on this comparation, the determination of a failure mode among a plurality of possible failure modes. General Electric also holds a further recently published patent (US2022035358A1) on a diagnostic system with multiple modules. Looking at the patents published by leading additive companies provides a concrete idea of what is to come on the market and thus of new frontiers for research.
## (s11) Defect Investigation in Bulk Samples
(p11.0) Although the PBF-LB/M process allows parts with a high level of densification to be easily produced, defects cannot be completely avoided. Since defects could seriously compromise mechanical properties acting as crack nucleation sites, the determination of the specimen densification level appears essential. Several methodologies are available to assess the density of a sample, some density-based such as Archimedes method and pycnometer and others defect-based such as image analysis of a cross-section of the sample and X-ray computed tomography (CT). As all these methods have strengths and weaknesses, as described in Figure 9, they are often used synergistically. Looking closer at the density-based analyses, the Archimedes method stands out for not requiring a long analysis time and any specific equipment. Using the Archimedes method, the sample density can be evaluated from the difference in the buoyancy of an object weighed in air and immersed in a fluid. As demonstrated by Spierings et al. [115], the Archimedes method proved to be accurate and repeatable in absolute density measurements, showing an overall standard deviation for 120 measurements of less than 0.1%. However, to deduce the part porosity, the evaluated density should be compared to the material nominal reference density. Unfortunately, this latter operation introduces calculation errors, as the material nominal reference density cannot be considered reliable for non-homogeneous parts. Furthermore, as a density-based methodology, it does not allow the shape and distribution of defects to be determined. The other density-based approach to consider is pycnometry, a methodology similar to the Archimedes method but with slightly more expensive equipment. The pycnometer evaluates part density by measuring part volume (determined by gas displacement) and considering the part mass which is evaluated separately. In line with Archimedes, part porosity is derived from the correlation between the evaluated part density and the nominal material density, introducing the same inaccuracy above mentioned. In the pycnometer method, such as in the Archimedes approach, an insufficient accuracy for bulk samples with a high level of densification could be obtained [116]. Moreover, even with this method it is not possible to localise defects or assess their morphology. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to use defect-based methodologies.

(p11.1) As defect-based methodologies, image analysis and CT investigation can be mentioned. The first one could be considered as the most widely employed approach. The image analysis is a destructive method in which samples need to be cut and polished using the standard metallographic procedure before to take several micrographs with an optical microscope. Subsequently, the micrographs require processing using dedicated software which is able to distinguish the pores after thresholding and thus calculate the mean porosity level, the defects distribution and the pores morphology. This methodology is considered accessible, as it merely requires widespread and inexpensive equipment, but the sample preparation and analysis procedure hide several pitfalls. For example, the magnification chosen for the micrographs and the cut plane (parallel or perpendicular to the growth direction) may significantly influence the density measurements. As demonstrated by Spierings et al. [115], the impact of the magnification value and of the analysis plane (horizontal or vertical) on the density measurement is significant for high porosity levels and becomes less remarkable when porosity levels are minimal. In their work, it was proved that the magnification value must be set appropriately to achieve a good compromise between image resolution and the number of images taken, ensuring the identification of even the smallest porosities while having good statistical results. Since samples produced via PBF-LB/M might be characterised by inhomogeneities in the porosity distribution along the growth direction, choosing a plane parallel to the growth direction as the analysis plane is recommended to obtain more representative data [115]. However, inhomogeneities have also been detected in the plane perpendicular to the growth direction, but the literature is not in agreement on this point. For example, Sanaei et al. [117] reported that the highest defect volume fraction and the highest defect concentration is placed near the outer surfaces of specimens. In contrast to this theory there is the research of Spierings et al. [115], where bigger more numerous pores are detected towards the centre of the part. The prediction of defect distribution is highly complex and depends on several factors such as the part orientation, scanning strategy, contour parameters, etc. Since the inhomogeneity of defect distribution is so challenging to predict, examining different sections of the samples is recommended. However, this procedure is more laborious and time-consuming. Another defect-based methodology often described as the best performing is the CT. In line with image analysis, the CT technique permits the investigation of the defect shape, size and distribution. In contrast to image analysis, however, this is a non-destructive technique that allows the entire volume of the sample to be scanned and not merely a section. During a CT scan, the specimen is placed on a rotating stage and irradiated with an X-ray beam. The result is a series of 2D X-ray projections at various angles that are then used to reconstruct a 3D model of the sample with a dedicated software. The reconstruction is in greyscale and a thresholding operation is required to distinguish air from bulk material to transform the 3D reconstruction into binary. From the binary 3D reconstruction, it is possible to extract all morphological and distributional information of the defects present. However, the high cost of equipment and the high operating time remain weaknesses of the CT method. In fact, the minimum size of detectable defects is closely related to the resolution, and high resolutions require long analysis times. Another drawback to point out is the maximum material thickness that can be penetrated by X-rays ( Table 1). The latter depends on the material attenuation coefficient and the energy of the X-ray photon. For this reason, although aluminium allows greater thicknesses to be scanned than steel samples, the sample size is still limited. CT is currently the method that offers the most comprehensive and accurate evaluation of defects; however, many challenges still need to be resolved. In particular, to take full advantage of this powerful technique, increasing the resolution without excessively increasing the analysis time, reducing the heaviness of the data and improving the scanning of multi-material objects could be some of the aspects to be improved.
## (s12) A Promising Post-Processing Procedure for Defect Mitigation
(p12.0) As previously explained, defects formed during the PBF-LB/M process can be minimized by process optimization but may not be completely avoided. Intrinsic defects in the PBF-LB/M process, such as lack of fusion, gas porosity and unmelted particles, are critical for fatigue, as crack nucleation usually takes place at stress concentration points. In order to achieve a near-perfect level of densification and thus obtain mechanical performance suitable for the high-criticality applications, post-processing techniques for defect mitigation have taken hold in the PBF-LB/M field in recent years. A performing method widely used in powder metallurgy and cast metals is the HIP. During the HIP process, the part is submerged in inert atmosphere (Ar) and simultaneously subjected to high temperature and confining gas pressure [118]. The temperature is set to reduce the yield strength below the gas pressure, thus allowing plastic flow, while high pressure causes substantial shrinkage or complete closure of pores [119]. Considering the efficiency of the HIP in closing pores with a diameter up to 5 mm in Ti6Al4V casting samples and the fatigue strength improvement of about 50% over the non-HIPped specimens recorded in an A356 casting sample, the application of this method was extended to the PBF-LB/M sector [120,121]. On AlSi10Mg samples produced by PBF-LB/M, an impressive decrease in the porosity volume fraction of about 64% was observed as a consequence of HIP [122]. Although the porosity could be significantly reduced with this technique, some critical aspects could be identified:
## (s14) Heat Treatments
(p14.0) The high cooling rate typical of the PBF-LB/M process results in an extremely fine non-equilibrium microstructure compared to conventional processes. This allows the grain refining strengthening to be exploited, resulting in high mechanical performance already from the as-built state. Moreover, as can be observed from the yellow schematisation in Figure 10, the peculiar microstructure of Al-Si alloys in the as-built state is characterised by a fine eutectic phase network, a matrix of α-Al with supersaturated Si and some fine and uniformly dispersed Si particles. This condition allows synergistic exploitation of solid solution and precipitation reinforcement in addition to grain refinement strengthening. However, the main weakness of the high cooling rate lies in the generation of considerable residual stresses in the as-built components. The need to decrease the tensional state of the built samples led to applying stress-relieving treatments after the PBF-LB/M process [125]. In addition, to increase the strengthening of PBF-LB/M alloys, different thermal postprocessing treatments are often performed. The heat treatments generally adopted for Al-Si alloys are artificial ageing treatments such as the T5 treatment-direct ageing and the T6 treatment, which consists of a combination of solubilisation and ageing. These treatments and their effects on melt pool morphology and microstructure of Al-Si systems have been illustrated in Figure 10. As reported in blue in Figure 10, the stress relieving treatments for Al-based alloys usually involve temperatures in the 270-350 • C range maintained for 2-4 h. Although this allows the component residual stresses to be significantly reduced, the grains result coarsened, the eutectic phase network globalised and the Si particles grown [126]. Up to now, no stress-relieving treatment has been found that does not compromise all the beneficial effects of the as-built microstructure of the PBF-LB/M process. One approach attempted in the literature was to adjust the composition of aluminium base alloys by adding alloying elements that induce the precipitation of intermetallic phase with a strong coarsening resistance [127]. Designing alloys that can age at higher temperatures, close to the stress relief temperature of 300 • C, would allow stress relief and strengthening goals to be achieved with single high-temperature ageing treatment. For example, this approach led to the patenting of Scalmalloy. The addition of slow-dissolving Sc and Zr to the non-heat-treatable Al-Mg system has, in fact, been demonstrated to induce impressive age hardening, achieving excellent stress-relieving and strengthening results with a simple post-heat treatment at 300-400 • C [128]. However, due to the high cost of these alloying elements, it is necessary to continue researching and developing tailored stress-relieving treatments for non-heat-treatable Al-based alloys without implying a change in the alloy formulation also on standard composition.
