# Phytochemical Analysis of Abrus precatorius Seeds: A Review P

CorpusID: 258553097 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45e31e08dff292af288cd3aa471e929a99ee8afb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/45e31e08dff292af288cd3aa471e929a99ee8afb)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s10) Hemamalini K et al (2012) 36
(p10.0) Coarsely powdered Abrus seed material is successively extracted with 75% ethanol and distilled water separately for 24hrs in a round-bottomed flask at room temperature by a simple triple maceration method. Extracts were filtered through Whatman filter paper no.1. The filtrate was allowed to dry in a hot air oven, and ethanolic and water extracts were scrapped, weighed, and stored in an airtight container at 4oC till further investigation. The phytochemical analysis of abrus seeds extract with 75% ethanol and water shows the presence of alkaloids, carbohydrates, saponins, tannins, phytosterols, flavonoids, and triterpene. 37 1 gram of the seed coat was boiled in 20ml of water and the extract was examined for different biological activities. Phytochemical analysis of aqueous extracts of the seed coat of A. precatorius was conducted following the standard procedures. The aluminum chloride colorimetric method was followed from the procedure described by Woisky and Salatino with slight modifications for the estimation of total flavonoid. Quercetin was used to make the calibration curve; 10 mg of quercetin was dissolved in 80% ethanol and then diluted to 25, 50, and 100 μg/ml. The diluted standard solutions (0.5 ml) were mixed separately with 1.5 milliliters of 95 percent ethanol, 0.1 milliliters of 10 percent aluminum chloride, 0.1 milliliters of 1M potassium acetate, and 2.8 milliliters of distilled water. After incubation at room temperature for 30 minutes, the absorbance of the reaction mixture was measured at 415 nm with a Shimadzu UV-160A spectrophotometer (Kyoto, Japan). The amount of 10% aluminum chloride was substituted by the same amount of distilled water in the blank. The total phenolics in the extract were estimated using the Folin-Ciocalteu method as described by Kujala et al. 5 ml of Folin-Ciocalteu (Sigma-Aldrich) and 4 ml Sodium carbonate (7% w/v) was added to each sample solution (1.0 ml) and the standard (gallic acid) and shaken. The solution was allowed to stand for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, after which absorbance was measured at 765 nm using a spectrophotometer. The number of total phenolics was expressed as gallic acid equivalent (GAE) in milligrams per gram dry plant extract using the expression; C = c x V/m.
