# International Journal of Molecular Sciences SARS-CoV-2 Transplacental Transmission: A Rare Occurrence? An Overview of the Protective Role of the Placenta

CorpusID: 257252976 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d42fb6957c631e1165e76f22d07f701aa934ed10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d42fb6957c631e1165e76f22d07f701aa934ed10)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s3) SARS-CoV-2 Cell-Entry Pathways
(p3.0) Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites that depend solely on hosts for survival and generate new infectious particles. Of the myriad viruses that infect human beings, only a handful can cross the placental barrier, where the resulting infections can cause fetal growth restriction, preterm delivery, or birth defects. These viruses include rubella virus, herpes simplex virus, human cytomegalovirus, Zika virus, and possibly the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Transmission of virus from the mother to her fetus in utero can occur either via maternal circulation or by ascending from the lower genital tract [29].

(p3.1) Maternal viremia is a prerequisite for maternal-fetal transmission by transplacental route. From maternal circulation, these pathogens can be transmitted to placental trophoblasts from infected maternal blood macrophages/vascular endothelium or through paracellular routes to fetal capillaries [30,31]. The underlying mechanisms of how these viruses can circumvent the placental defense barrier and get to the fetus has been a puzzle. Generally, viruses need to stay within the target cell in order to survive. The exact mechanism of how SARS-CoV-2 transplacental transmission occurs however is still poorly understood.

(p3.2) Generally, there are two main mechanisms employed by the viruses in order to gain entry into the host cell: (i) through direct fusion with the cell plasma membrane via attachment to the host cell-surface receptors or (ii) through an internalization process into endosomes and further release into the cytoplasm [32]. The tropism of viruses for the decidua and placenta depends largely on the expression of specific viral entry receptors in these tissues as well as on the maternal immune response. Consequently, infection can result in disease outcomes ranging from no effect to pregnancy loss by miscarriage or to fetal infection with subsequent congenital viral syndromes [33].
## (s4) The Effects of SARS-CoV-2 Infection on the Placenta
(p4.0) Following successful infection, viruses may hsve a negative impact on pregnancy outcomes through various proposed pathogenic processes, which include modulation of regulated cell death (by apoptosis, necroptosis, pyroptosis, and novel ferroptosis) and induce excessive inflammatory and repair responses.

(p4.1) Ferroptosis, a unique form of non-apoptotic, regulated lipotoxic cell death, has been recently implicated as a culprit for multiorgan damage in COVID-19-infected individuals. It is characterized by disproportionate iron-dependent hydroxy-peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA)-containing phospholipids in the cell membranes and a depletion of lipid peroxidation repair capacity [49]. Invading SARS-CoV-2 virus may cause cytotoxic effects to the host cells. Influx of iron following SARS-CoV-2 resulted in iron overload in the infected host cells. Iron oxidizes lipids in the Fenton reaction, a hallmark of ferroptosis which generates massive lipid reactive oxygen species (ROS) causing cell membrane damage.
## (s6) Placental Embryology and Development
(p6.0) The placenta is the first and the largest chimeric organ that develops from the blastocyst following conception, made of both the fetal and maternal tissues. Its main functions are to nurture and provide nutrients to support the development of the conceptus, besides serving as physical and functional barriers against intruding pathogens and protection from maternal immune rejection to the semi-allogenic fetus [62]. Understanding the unique architecture and function of the placenta will provide a framework to address the key physical and immunomodulatory defense pathways employed by the placenta against SARS-CoV-2 transplacental infection.

(p6.1) The human placenta originates from the trophectoderm, the outermost layer of the blastocyst [62]. Following implantation of the embryo into the maternal endometrium (decidua), the trophectoderm differentiates into the first trophoblast lineages: early mononuclear cytotrophoblasts and the highly invasive primitive syncytium at day 8 post-conception. The latter further expands and invades into the maternal decidua, forming an expanding syncytiotrophoblastic mass. At day 9 post-conception, a system of confluent vacuoles (lacunae) appears within the syncytiotrophoblastic mass. Uteroplacental circulation is established with the formation of blood-filled lacunae following the breaching of syncytiotrophoblasts into maternal uterine capillaries at around day 12 [63].
## (s9) Physical Barrier
(p9.0) The intrinsic defense of the placenta is entrenched in its unique microarchitecture. The outermost syncytiotrophoblast cells form a fused multinucleated cell layer, lacking intercellular gap junctions that can be exploited by microorganisms through intercellular unions [82].
## (s10) Chemical Barrier: Cytokines, Exosomes, and microRNAs Cytokines
(p10.0) The placenta secretes antimicrobial components that target a wide range of viruses. Interferons (IFNs) are key cytokines involved in innate host defense against pathogens, particularly RNA viruses, DNA viruses, intracellular bacteria, and parasites [85]. There are three types of IFNs namely type I IFNs (including IFN-α, β, ε, τ, and δ), type II IFN (IFN-γ) and type III IFNs (IFN-λ1, λ2, λ3, and λ4). While type I IFNs function in a broad systemic manner, type III IFNs control infection locally restricted to barrier surfaces including the maternal-fetal interface, blood-brain barrier, gastrointestinal, and respiratory epithelial surfaces.
## (s11) Exosomes and Trophoblastic microRNAs
(p11.0) Placental trophoblasts produce and release high levels of exosomes. Exosomes are regarded as small cargo vehicles that serve to transfer nucleic acids, proteins, lipids, and other biomolecules to maternal, fetal, or placental cells. Exosomes are enriched in microRNAs (miRNAs).

(p11.1) MiRNAs are small endogenous non-coding, single-stranded RNA that post-transcriptionally regulate the expression of a variety of target genes. MiRNAs are approximately 22 nucleotides in length and possess a longer half-life and stability that is 10 times stronger than mRNAs. They govern gene expression by mRNA degradation or by translational repression, depending upon their 3 -untranslated region (UTR) complementarity [94,95]. They serve as critical regulators in various cellular biological processes including cell proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis, immune cell development, and apoptosis [96].

(p11.2) By far, more than 2000 mature miRNAs have been discovered in the human genome, among which over 600 miRNAs are identified in the human placenta [97]. A high proportion of placental-derived miRNAs originate from a large miRNA cluster located on chromosome 19 (termed chromosome 19 miRNA cluster (C19MC). C19MC contains 56 highly homologous miRNA genes within a 100 kb genomic region, and is exclusively expressed in human trophoblasts, embryonic stem cells, and some cancer cells [98]. Placental-derived miRNAs are released into the maternal circulation through encapsulation into the exosomes, and transfer their contents into other cells, mediating tri-directional communication between the mother, the placenta, and her fetus.

(p11.3) Studies identified at least three members of the C19MC family (miR517-3p, miR516b-5p, miR512-3p) that exhibit potent antiviral properties against RNA and DNA viruses [99]. These trophoblast-derived exosomes and C19MC-associated miRNAs attenuate viral replication by robustly inducing autophagy, conferring viral resistance to nonplacental recipient cells in autocrine and paracrine manners [99].
