# Exploring mHealth applications for self-management of chronic low back pain: A survey of features and benefits

CorpusID: 258931224 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/63642d5da06142eeb9709088329e23e0095a2ae1)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s4) Methodology
(p4.0) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p4.1) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.

(p4.2) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p4.3) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.
## (s7) Health professionals' viewpoint
(p7.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p7.1) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.

(p7.2) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p7.3) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.
## (s13) Application search strategy
(p13.0) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.

(p13.1) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.
## (s16) Results and analysis
(p16.0) We review previous research and investigate the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward mHealth applications for managing CLBP. The following results analyse the application marketplace landscape and how it suits the needs of actual CLBP stakeholders at the time of this analysis in November 2022. The applications in our search process reflect those applications that end-users would find organically searching for methods for managing chronic pain.

(p16.1) We obtained a dataset of 163 applications from Google Play and the App Store. Our final dataset (obtained from merging two datasets from Google Play and App Store) includes "Price", "User score", "Name", and "Description". We manually reviewed the applications' descriptions to find details about the 12 features mentioned in Table 6, as well as two other aspects: whether the application was developed by a medical expert and whether it included in-app purchases. Based on the dataset of 163 applications collected from Google Play and the App Store, the average score rating of the applications is 4.36, and almost all are free. However, after reviewing the applications' descriptions, we noticed that Of the 163 applications, 62 (38%) explicitly mentioned they have in-app purchases in their descriptions, 12 (7%) mentioned that they are free, and 89 (55%) did not mention their pricing in the descriptions. Regarding development, 65 (39%) applications were developed by medical experts, while the remaining 98 (61%) did not mention their development team in the descriptions.

(p16.2) To better understand the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward the mHealth applications for managing CLBP, we analyzed the features and benefits offered by the applications in our dataset. The 12 features we focused on are listed in Table 6. These features were chosen based on their potential relevance to CLBP stakeholders and their availability in the applications included in our dataset.

(p16.3) Overall, our analysis of the mHealth application marketplace landscape indicates that various options are available for managing CLBP. However, the accuracy of the information provided in the descriptions of the applications, particularly regarding pricing, should be carefully considered by potential users. Additionally, the development team behind the applications may be an essential factor for stakeholders when choosing a mHealth application for managing their chronic pain.

(p16.4) In line with [95][96][97][98], we reviewed the descriptions of each application by manually reading each application's description, extracted the features from the descriptions of the applications and investigated whether they contained features that were seen as beneficial by our three stakeholders, as listed in Table 6. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of applications that offer each feature and the benefit score of each feature (the percentage of studies that found those features beneficial in managing CLBP). As shown, 72% of the applications provide "Activity tracking" features, while 64% provide "Personalization and customization" features. In contrast, only 10% of the studies we reviewed found these features beneficial for managing CLBP. Similarly, 69% of the applications offer "Physical activity" features, but only 12% of the studies found these features beneficial.

(p16.5) On the other hand, fewer than 10% of the applications provide features such as "Artificial intelligence" and "Social support", and fewer than 6% of the studies found these features beneficial. In contrast, 23% of the studies found the "Education/advice" feature beneficial for managing CLBP, but only 36% of the applications offer this feature.

(p16.6) The most significant disparity between the percentage of applications that provide a feature and the percentage of studies that found that feature beneficial for managing CLBP was for the "Yoga/meditation" feature. 40% of the applications offered this feature, but only 3% of the studies found it beneficial.

(p16.7) Our analysis found that the least commonly provided feature was "Artificial intelligence", and the least beneficial feature was "Social support". We also detected two other features that some applications provided, such as a "Nutrition guide" (offered by 11.66% of the applications) and a "Set privacy level" (provided by 0.6% of the applications). However, the studies we reviewed did not discuss the benefits of nutrition in managing CLBP. Fig. 3 shows the number of applications that provide different features and that feature's benefit score. The four segments correspond to the over-/under representation of features in the application marketplaces (left-to-right on the x-axis) and whether those features are beneficial for managing CLBP or not (up-and-down on the y-axis). For example, the features in the lower right segment (#4 "Yoga/medication") can be seen as unbeneficial and over-represented. Alternatively, the features in the top-left segment can be seen as under-represented but beneficial. This segmentation or categorisation can spark thought into understanding where application developers should focus on ensuring their applications are more beneficial for end-users.

(p16.8) We review previous research and investigate the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward mHealth applications for managing CLBP. The following results analyse the application marketplace landscape and how it suits the needs of actual CLBP stakeholders at the time of this analysis in November 2022. The applications in our search process reflect those applications that end-users would find organically searching for methods for managing chronic pain.

(p16.9) We obtained a dataset of 163 applications from Google Play and the App Store. Our final dataset (obtained from merging two datasets from Google Play and App Store) includes "Price", "User score", "Name", and "Description". We manually reviewed the applications' descriptions to find details about the 12 features mentioned in Table 6, as well as two other aspects: whether the application was developed by a medical expert and whether it included in-app purchases. Based on the dataset of 163 applications collected from Google Play and the App Store, the average score rating of the applications is 4.36, and almost all are free. However, after reviewing the applications' descriptions, we noticed that Of the 163 applications, 62 (38%) explicitly mentioned they have in-app purchases in their descriptions, 12 (7%) mentioned that they are free, and 89 (55%) did not mention their pricing in the descriptions. Regarding development, 65 (39%) applications were developed by medical experts, while the remaining 98 (61%) did not mention their development team in the descriptions.

(p16.10) To better understand the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward the mHealth applications for managing CLBP, we analyzed the features and benefits offered by the applications in our dataset. The 12 features we focused on are listed in Table 6. These features were chosen based on their potential relevance to CLBP stakeholders and their availability in the applications included in our dataset.

(p16.11) Overall, our analysis of the mHealth application marketplace landscape indicates that various options are available for managing CLBP. However, the accuracy of the information provided in the descriptions of the applications, particularly regarding pricing, should be carefully considered by potential users. Additionally, the development team behind the applications may be an essential factor for stakeholders when choosing a mHealth application for managing their chronic pain.

(p16.12) In line with [95][96][97][98], we reviewed the descriptions of each application by manually reading each application's description, extracted the features from the descriptions of the applications and investigated whether they contained features that were seen as beneficial by our three stakeholders, as listed in Table 6. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of applications that offer each feature and the benefit score of each feature (the percentage of studies that found those features beneficial in managing CLBP). As shown, 72% of the applications provide "Activity tracking" features, while 64% provide "Personalization and customization" features. In contrast, only 10% of the studies we reviewed found these features beneficial for managing CLBP. Similarly, 69% of the applications offer "Physical activity" features, but only 12% of the studies found these features beneficial.

(p16.13) On the other hand, fewer than 10% of the applications provide features such as "Artificial intelligence" and "Social support", and fewer than 6% of the studies found these features beneficial. In contrast, 23% of the studies found the "Education/advice" feature beneficial for managing CLBP, but only 36% of the applications offer this feature.

(p16.14) The most significant disparity between the percentage of applications that provide a feature and the percentage of studies that found that feature beneficial for managing CLBP was for the "Yoga/meditation" feature. 40% of the applications offered this feature, but only 3% of the studies found it beneficial.

(p16.15) Our analysis found that the least commonly provided feature was "Artificial intelligence", and the least beneficial feature was "Social support". We also detected two other features that some applications provided, such as a "Nutrition guide" (offered by 11.66% of the applications) and a "Set privacy level" (provided by 0.6% of the applications). However, the studies we reviewed did not discuss the benefits of nutrition in managing CLBP. Fig. 3 shows the number of applications that provide different features and that feature's benefit score. The four segments correspond to the over-/under representation of features in the application marketplaces (left-to-right on the x-axis) and whether those features are beneficial for managing CLBP or not (up-and-down on the y-axis). For example, the features in the lower right segment (#4 "Yoga/medication") can be seen as unbeneficial and over-represented. Alternatively, the features in the top-left segment can be seen as under-represented but beneficial. This segmentation or categorisation can spark thought into understanding where application developers should focus on ensuring their applications are more beneficial for end-users.
## (s18) Application categorisation using clustering
(p18.0) As a single application often provides multiple features instead of just one feature, the next step in the analysis was better understanding the similarities between different applications. For example, using the previous approach, we could consider yogarelated applications unbeneficial based solely on this one feature, even though, in reality, the same application could include other features, like "Activity tracking" or "Social support." Thus, understanding similar application types offers more details about the overall landscape of current CLBP applications.

(p18.1) As the features are included in our dataset as a boolean value (each application either does or does not have a given feature), we use Hierarchical clustering and the HClust function from the fastcluster 3 R package. We set the minimum number of clusters equal to our feature count (12), iterate in the range of [12,30] clusters and use a combination of the Elbow method, Silhouette method and Gap statistics with each cluster optimisation variable having equal balance in the decision to evaluate the cluster configurations. The optimal cluster configuration was ultimately found with 12 clusters, with all cluster configuration evaluation methods slowly declining for configurations above 12. Table 7 shows the clusters' sizes and the four most common features that the applications in each cluster provide. It is worth noting that the size of clusters C2, C9, and C10 was one and were not included in further analysis. The majority of the applications are found in clusters C1 (N = 45), C3 (N = 66), C4 (N = 12), and C6 (N = 13), totalling 136 applications (83% of all 163). Each cluster was given a descriptive name that makes each cluster identifiable, according to the features most prominent in that cluster. The clusters (effectively application categories) are described in detail in the following:

(p18.2) Physical education (C1): Applications in the Physical education cluster (C1) are primarily focused on providing users with tools for tracking and improving their physical activity levels. Most applications in this cluster (82%) provide the "Physical activity" feature, 60% provide "Education/advice", and 33% provide "Yoga/meditation" and "Activity tracking".

(p18.3) Personalized tracking (C3): Applications in the Personalized tracking cluster (C3) offer a range of features for tracking and monitoring personal health and wellness. Most applications in this cluster (95%) provide the "Personalization and customization" feature, 86% provide "Activity tracking", 63% provide "Physical activity", and 54% provide "Yoga/meditation" features.

(p18.4) Tracking reminders (C4): Applications in the Tracking reminders cluster (C4) are focused on providing users with tools for setting and achieving health goals, as well as reminding users to engage in healthy behaviours. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" and "Activity tracking", and 83% provide "Goal setting" and "Education/advice".

(p18.5) Tracking diary (C6): Applications in the Tracking diary cluster (C6) are focused on providing users with tools for tracking and monitoring their health and wellness. Many applications offer diary or self-assessment tools for recording health-related information, such as symptoms, medication, and daily activities. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Diary/self-assessment", 69% provide "Activity tracking", 38% provide "Goal setting", and 30% provide "Personalization and customization".

(p18.6) The size of the rest of the clusters (C5, C7, C8, C11, C12) is smaller than 7. Clusters C7, C8, and C12 consist of applications that provide all the top three ranked features (100%).

(p18.7) As a single application often provides multiple features instead of just one feature, the next step in the analysis was better understanding the similarities between different applications. For example, using the previous approach, we could consider yogarelated applications unbeneficial based solely on this one feature, even though, in reality, the same application could include other features, like "Activity tracking" or "Social support." Thus, understanding similar application types offers more details about the overall landscape of current CLBP applications.

(p18.8) As the features are included in our dataset as a boolean value (each application either does or does not have a given feature), we use Hierarchical clustering and the HClust function from the fastcluster 3 R package. We set the minimum number of clusters equal to our feature count (12), iterate in the range of [12,30] clusters and use a combination of the Elbow method, Silhouette method and Gap statistics with each cluster optimisation variable having equal balance in the decision to evaluate the cluster configurations. The optimal cluster configuration was ultimately found with 12 clusters, with all cluster configuration evaluation methods slowly declining for configurations above 12. Table 7 shows the clusters' sizes and the four most common features that the applications in each cluster provide. It is worth noting that the size of clusters C2, C9, and C10 was one and were not included in further analysis. The majority of the applications are found in clusters C1 (N = 45), C3 (N = 66), C4 (N = 12), and C6 (N = 13), totalling 136 applications (83% of all 163). Each cluster was given a descriptive name that makes each cluster identifiable, according to the features most prominent in that cluster. The clusters (effectively application categories) are described in detail in the following:

(p18.9) Physical education (C1): Applications in the Physical education cluster (C1) are primarily focused on providing users with tools for tracking and improving their physical activity levels. Most applications in this cluster (82%) provide the "Physical activity" feature, 60% provide "Education/advice", and 33% provide "Yoga/meditation" and "Activity tracking".

(p18.10) Personalized tracking (C3): Applications in the Personalized tracking cluster (C3) offer a range of features for tracking and monitoring personal health and wellness. Most applications in this cluster (95%) provide the "Personalization and customization" feature, 86% provide "Activity tracking", 63% provide "Physical activity", and 54% provide "Yoga/meditation" features.

(p18.11) Tracking reminders (C4): Applications in the Tracking reminders cluster (C4) are focused on providing users with tools for setting and achieving health goals, as well as reminding users to engage in healthy behaviours. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" and "Activity tracking", and 83% provide "Goal setting" and "Education/advice".

(p18.12) Tracking diary (C6): Applications in the Tracking diary cluster (C6) are focused on providing users with tools for tracking and monitoring their health and wellness. Many applications offer diary or self-assessment tools for recording health-related information, such as symptoms, medication, and daily activities. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Diary/self-assessment", 69% provide "Activity tracking", 38% provide "Goal setting", and 30% provide "Personalization and customization".

(p18.13) The size of the rest of the clusters (C5, C7, C8, C11, C12) is smaller than 7. Clusters C7, C8, and C12 consist of applications that provide all the top three ranked features (100%).
## (s20) Discussion
(p20.0) People with disabilities or chronic pains perceive a tremendous advantage of staying at home and using mHealth applications [46]. However, many barriers still do not let different stakeholders take the maximum benefits from mHealth solutions. Barriers to creating the mHealth solutions are usually created by a lack of cross-disciplinary understanding, which can cause difficulties conceptualizing interventions, and unrealistic expectations [99]. The main limitation of using mHealth solutions by patients and health professionals is the lack of user-friendly applications, suitable user interfaces, high-quality designs, aesthetic metrics [69], lack of existing technology, concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concern, compatibility with the workflow, lack of physician support, difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to changing problems [100], insufficient knowledge and information about the mHealth solutions [57], the lack of trustworthy sources of informative applications [56], legal barrier, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and lack of standards [100].

(p20.1) The following discusses the most to least significant features we found using their benefits score and frequency in applications. We also discuss the clustering of the applications. To ensure clarity and eliminate any potential ambiguity, we will provide precise definitions for the terms "benefits score," "least significant," and "most significant" before proceeding to the subsequent section.
## (s21) The most significant features
(p21.0) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p21.1) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p21.2) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.

(p21.3) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p21.4) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p21.5) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.
## (s22) Neutral features
(p22.0) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p22.1) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p22.2) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p22.3) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p22.4) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.

(p22.5) Many applications in our dataset provided the Yoga/meditation feature. Still, few studies have investigated and found yoga applications beneficial in self-managing CLBP (i.e. the benefit score is low) -although it should be noted that yoga and medication alone are commonly seen as beneficial, similar to, e.g. stretching exercises. Further research is needed to understand the impact of Yoga/meditation provided by mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Despite being found beneficial in some articles, many applications did not offer the "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" feature. This may be because developers want to focus on delivering fewer features to save time or lack the required knowledge.

(p22.6) In line with Zečević et al. [109], who analysed reviews of diet-tracking applications on Google Play. They found that, despite positive opinions from users, developers should pay more attention to technical issues and inform users about expected payments, along with refund and cancellation policies, to increase user loyalty. In this study, our data shows that most developers labelled their applications free and did not mention the in-purchase feature in the applications' descriptions. At the same time, the users need to pay for more advanced features. Developers should honestly express the features they provide for their applications and the level of facilities the users are provided based on the amount of money they pay. Users can only then choose the best applications based on their needs and budgets.

(p22.7) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p22.8) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p22.9) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p22.10) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p22.11) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.

(p22.12) Many applications in our dataset provided the Yoga/meditation feature. Still, few studies have investigated and found yoga applications beneficial in self-managing CLBP (i.e. the benefit score is low) -although it should be noted that yoga and medication alone are commonly seen as beneficial, similar to, e.g. stretching exercises. Further research is needed to understand the impact of Yoga/meditation provided by mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Despite being found beneficial in some articles, many applications did not offer the "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" feature. This may be because developers want to focus on delivering fewer features to save time or lack the required knowledge.

(p22.13) In line with Zečević et al. [109], who analysed reviews of diet-tracking applications on Google Play. They found that, despite positive opinions from users, developers should pay more attention to technical issues and inform users about expected payments, along with refund and cancellation policies, to increase user loyalty. In this study, our data shows that most developers labelled their applications free and did not mention the in-purchase feature in the applications' descriptions. At the same time, the users need to pay for more advanced features. Developers should honestly express the features they provide for their applications and the level of facilities the users are provided based on the amount of money they pay. Users can only then choose the best applications based on their needs and budgets.
## (s23) The least significant features
(p23.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
## (s24) Examining clusters of features
(p24.0) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p24.1) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p24.2) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.

(p24.3) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p24.4) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p24.5) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.
## (s44) Methodology
(p44.0) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p44.1) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.

(p44.2) We conducted our literature using a free-form method described in the following using the PRISMA [64] annotation. We did not keep a comprehensive records tally at each stage of the process, only the result.

(p44.3) We used Google Scholar as our records database and conducted manual searches using a combination of keywords in detail in Table 1. Each search included one keyword from each group, resulting in search strings like "medical experts viewpoint mHealth pain management chronic low back pain". We iterated this process systematically (picking keywords from each category) multiple times until saturation, i.e. no new papers surfaced in the search results. A researcher initially screened each result (title, abstract) and chose to be included or excluded. If an article was not available through open access or our university, it was also excluded. The included articles were then retrieved for further analysis. Table 1 Keywords and keyword groups used in our literature search process.
## (s47) Health professionals' viewpoint
(p47.0) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p47.1) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.

(p47.2) This section will provide an overview of the existing literature on health professionals' perceptions of using mHealth solutions to support people with CLBP in self-management. In the following paragraphs, we will summarize the key findings from these studies and discuss their implications for future research. Integrating digital self-management solutions into healthcare demand the involvement of healthcare professionals in adopting and using the solutions as part of the care pathway. Since people with CLBP usually self-manage, health professionals should help by providing them with skills and knowledge. Self-management does not mean that people are alone in managing their health conditions. On the contrary, it empowers people to know when they need advice for diagnostic assessment and symptom relief [81]. Therefore, health professionals are critical in supporting people with CLBP to self-manage their condition.

(p47.3) Heuvel et al. [82] investigated the experiences of 14 physiotherapists in the Netherlands who provided self-management support to people with non-specific LBP. They demonstrated that physiotherapists believe that self-management is beneficial for people with non-specific LBP. Most participants expressed a need to better integrate self-management support in their treatment. They explained that they needed more knowledge (courses, knowledge clips), opportunities to exchange experiences (social support), and tools for patients (mobile application). A qualitative survey by Hutting et al. [83] suggested that physiotherapists and exercise therapists consider self-management support a robust method to manage the non-specific LBP. However, they showed that therapists mainly provide patient education instead of self-management support. Future research should investigate the effects of individualised self- Table 3 Summary of the features and benefits of various mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP from researchers' viewpoint.
## (s53) Application search strategy
(p53.0) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.

(p53.1) According to the reasons that could lead to CLBP, the solutions that could help to manage it, and the initial brainstorming and literature survey, we defined the following keywords to find applications related to CLBP: "back", "back pain", "backache", "back care", "back exercise", "back therapy", "low back pain", "lower back" suggested by [94], "chronic pain", "lumbago", "lumbar", "spinal pain", "spinal", "yoga", "pain management", "pain", "posture", "posture correction", "posture tracking", "physiotherapy", "physical activity", "exercise", "activity", and "tracking". We searched Google Play and App Store in September 2022. We used the Node.js google-play-scraper 1 module to search Google Play and Python itunes-app-scraper 2 for App Store. In total, we got 163 applications from both marketplaces. Both projects were initially designed for earlier versions of the application marketplaces, thus limiting the search results. More recent similar projects were not found that would match our needs or function more efficiently than the used versions. Both marketplaces currently limit the search results of individual searches, thus limiting the total number of applications.
## (s56) Results and analysis
(p56.0) We review previous research and investigate the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward mHealth applications for managing CLBP. The following results analyse the application marketplace landscape and how it suits the needs of actual CLBP stakeholders at the time of this analysis in November 2022. The applications in our search process reflect those applications that end-users would find organically searching for methods for managing chronic pain.

(p56.1) We obtained a dataset of 163 applications from Google Play and the App Store. Our final dataset (obtained from merging two datasets from Google Play and App Store) includes "Price", "User score", "Name", and "Description". We manually reviewed the applications' descriptions to find details about the 12 features mentioned in Table 6, as well as two other aspects: whether the application was developed by a medical expert and whether it included in-app purchases. Based on the dataset of 163 applications collected from Google Play and the App Store, the average score rating of the applications is 4.36, and almost all are free. However, after reviewing the applications' descriptions, we noticed that Of the 163 applications, 62 (38%) explicitly mentioned they have in-app purchases in their descriptions, 12 (7%) mentioned that they are free, and 89 (55%) did not mention their pricing in the descriptions. Regarding development, 65 (39%) applications were developed by medical experts, while the remaining 98 (61%) did not mention their development team in the descriptions.

(p56.2) To better understand the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward the mHealth applications for managing CLBP, we analyzed the features and benefits offered by the applications in our dataset. The 12 features we focused on are listed in Table 6. These features were chosen based on their potential relevance to CLBP stakeholders and their availability in the applications included in our dataset.

(p56.3) Overall, our analysis of the mHealth application marketplace landscape indicates that various options are available for managing CLBP. However, the accuracy of the information provided in the descriptions of the applications, particularly regarding pricing, should be carefully considered by potential users. Additionally, the development team behind the applications may be an essential factor for stakeholders when choosing a mHealth application for managing their chronic pain.

(p56.4) In line with [95][96][97][98], we reviewed the descriptions of each application by manually reading each application's description, extracted the features from the descriptions of the applications and investigated whether they contained features that were seen as beneficial by our three stakeholders, as listed in Table 6. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of applications that offer each feature and the benefit score of each feature (the percentage of studies that found those features beneficial in managing CLBP). As shown, 72% of the applications provide "Activity tracking" features, while 64% provide "Personalization and customization" features. In contrast, only 10% of the studies we reviewed found these features beneficial for managing CLBP. Similarly, 69% of the applications offer "Physical activity" features, but only 12% of the studies found these features beneficial.

(p56.5) On the other hand, fewer than 10% of the applications provide features such as "Artificial intelligence" and "Social support", and fewer than 6% of the studies found these features beneficial. In contrast, 23% of the studies found the "Education/advice" feature beneficial for managing CLBP, but only 36% of the applications offer this feature.

(p56.6) The most significant disparity between the percentage of applications that provide a feature and the percentage of studies that found that feature beneficial for managing CLBP was for the "Yoga/meditation" feature. 40% of the applications offered this feature, but only 3% of the studies found it beneficial.

(p56.7) Our analysis found that the least commonly provided feature was "Artificial intelligence", and the least beneficial feature was "Social support". We also detected two other features that some applications provided, such as a "Nutrition guide" (offered by 11.66% of the applications) and a "Set privacy level" (provided by 0.6% of the applications). However, the studies we reviewed did not discuss the benefits of nutrition in managing CLBP. Fig. 3 shows the number of applications that provide different features and that feature's benefit score. The four segments correspond to the over-/under representation of features in the application marketplaces (left-to-right on the x-axis) and whether those features are beneficial for managing CLBP or not (up-and-down on the y-axis). For example, the features in the lower right segment (#4 "Yoga/medication") can be seen as unbeneficial and over-represented. Alternatively, the features in the top-left segment can be seen as under-represented but beneficial. This segmentation or categorisation can spark thought into understanding where application developers should focus on ensuring their applications are more beneficial for end-users.

(p56.8) We review previous research and investigate the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward mHealth applications for managing CLBP. The following results analyse the application marketplace landscape and how it suits the needs of actual CLBP stakeholders at the time of this analysis in November 2022. The applications in our search process reflect those applications that end-users would find organically searching for methods for managing chronic pain.

(p56.9) We obtained a dataset of 163 applications from Google Play and the App Store. Our final dataset (obtained from merging two datasets from Google Play and App Store) includes "Price", "User score", "Name", and "Description". We manually reviewed the applications' descriptions to find details about the 12 features mentioned in Table 6, as well as two other aspects: whether the application was developed by a medical expert and whether it included in-app purchases. Based on the dataset of 163 applications collected from Google Play and the App Store, the average score rating of the applications is 4.36, and almost all are free. However, after reviewing the applications' descriptions, we noticed that Of the 163 applications, 62 (38%) explicitly mentioned they have in-app purchases in their descriptions, 12 (7%) mentioned that they are free, and 89 (55%) did not mention their pricing in the descriptions. Regarding development, 65 (39%) applications were developed by medical experts, while the remaining 98 (61%) did not mention their development team in the descriptions.

(p56.10) To better understand the viewpoints of different stakeholders toward the mHealth applications for managing CLBP, we analyzed the features and benefits offered by the applications in our dataset. The 12 features we focused on are listed in Table 6. These features were chosen based on their potential relevance to CLBP stakeholders and their availability in the applications included in our dataset.

(p56.11) Overall, our analysis of the mHealth application marketplace landscape indicates that various options are available for managing CLBP. However, the accuracy of the information provided in the descriptions of the applications, particularly regarding pricing, should be carefully considered by potential users. Additionally, the development team behind the applications may be an essential factor for stakeholders when choosing a mHealth application for managing their chronic pain.

(p56.12) In line with [95][96][97][98], we reviewed the descriptions of each application by manually reading each application's description, extracted the features from the descriptions of the applications and investigated whether they contained features that were seen as beneficial by our three stakeholders, as listed in Table 6. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of applications that offer each feature and the benefit score of each feature (the percentage of studies that found those features beneficial in managing CLBP). As shown, 72% of the applications provide "Activity tracking" features, while 64% provide "Personalization and customization" features. In contrast, only 10% of the studies we reviewed found these features beneficial for managing CLBP. Similarly, 69% of the applications offer "Physical activity" features, but only 12% of the studies found these features beneficial.

(p56.13) On the other hand, fewer than 10% of the applications provide features such as "Artificial intelligence" and "Social support", and fewer than 6% of the studies found these features beneficial. In contrast, 23% of the studies found the "Education/advice" feature beneficial for managing CLBP, but only 36% of the applications offer this feature.

(p56.14) The most significant disparity between the percentage of applications that provide a feature and the percentage of studies that found that feature beneficial for managing CLBP was for the "Yoga/meditation" feature. 40% of the applications offered this feature, but only 3% of the studies found it beneficial.

(p56.15) Our analysis found that the least commonly provided feature was "Artificial intelligence", and the least beneficial feature was "Social support". We also detected two other features that some applications provided, such as a "Nutrition guide" (offered by 11.66% of the applications) and a "Set privacy level" (provided by 0.6% of the applications). However, the studies we reviewed did not discuss the benefits of nutrition in managing CLBP. Fig. 3 shows the number of applications that provide different features and that feature's benefit score. The four segments correspond to the over-/under representation of features in the application marketplaces (left-to-right on the x-axis) and whether those features are beneficial for managing CLBP or not (up-and-down on the y-axis). For example, the features in the lower right segment (#4 "Yoga/medication") can be seen as unbeneficial and over-represented. Alternatively, the features in the top-left segment can be seen as under-represented but beneficial. This segmentation or categorisation can spark thought into understanding where application developers should focus on ensuring their applications are more beneficial for end-users.
## (s58) Application categorisation using clustering
(p58.0) As a single application often provides multiple features instead of just one feature, the next step in the analysis was better understanding the similarities between different applications. For example, using the previous approach, we could consider yogarelated applications unbeneficial based solely on this one feature, even though, in reality, the same application could include other features, like "Activity tracking" or "Social support." Thus, understanding similar application types offers more details about the overall landscape of current CLBP applications.

(p58.1) As the features are included in our dataset as a boolean value (each application either does or does not have a given feature), we use Hierarchical clustering and the HClust function from the fastcluster 3 R package. We set the minimum number of clusters equal to our feature count (12), iterate in the range of [12,30] clusters and use a combination of the Elbow method, Silhouette method and Gap statistics with each cluster optimisation variable having equal balance in the decision to evaluate the cluster configurations. The optimal cluster configuration was ultimately found with 12 clusters, with all cluster configuration evaluation methods slowly declining for configurations above 12. Table 7 shows the clusters' sizes and the four most common features that the applications in each cluster provide. It is worth noting that the size of clusters C2, C9, and C10 was one and were not included in further analysis. The majority of the applications are found in clusters C1 (N = 45), C3 (N = 66), C4 (N = 12), and C6 (N = 13), totalling 136 applications (83% of all 163). Each cluster was given a descriptive name that makes each cluster identifiable, according to the features most prominent in that cluster. The clusters (effectively application categories) are described in detail in the following:

(p58.2) Physical education (C1): Applications in the Physical education cluster (C1) are primarily focused on providing users with tools for tracking and improving their physical activity levels. Most applications in this cluster (82%) provide the "Physical activity" feature, 60% provide "Education/advice", and 33% provide "Yoga/meditation" and "Activity tracking".

(p58.3) Personalized tracking (C3): Applications in the Personalized tracking cluster (C3) offer a range of features for tracking and monitoring personal health and wellness. Most applications in this cluster (95%) provide the "Personalization and customization" feature, 86% provide "Activity tracking", 63% provide "Physical activity", and 54% provide "Yoga/meditation" features.

(p58.4) Tracking reminders (C4): Applications in the Tracking reminders cluster (C4) are focused on providing users with tools for setting and achieving health goals, as well as reminding users to engage in healthy behaviours. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" and "Activity tracking", and 83% provide "Goal setting" and "Education/advice".

(p58.5) Tracking diary (C6): Applications in the Tracking diary cluster (C6) are focused on providing users with tools for tracking and monitoring their health and wellness. Many applications offer diary or self-assessment tools for recording health-related information, such as symptoms, medication, and daily activities. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Diary/self-assessment", 69% provide "Activity tracking", 38% provide "Goal setting", and 30% provide "Personalization and customization".

(p58.6) The size of the rest of the clusters (C5, C7, C8, C11, C12) is smaller than 7. Clusters C7, C8, and C12 consist of applications that provide all the top three ranked features (100%).

(p58.7) As a single application often provides multiple features instead of just one feature, the next step in the analysis was better understanding the similarities between different applications. For example, using the previous approach, we could consider yogarelated applications unbeneficial based solely on this one feature, even though, in reality, the same application could include other features, like "Activity tracking" or "Social support." Thus, understanding similar application types offers more details about the overall landscape of current CLBP applications.

(p58.8) As the features are included in our dataset as a boolean value (each application either does or does not have a given feature), we use Hierarchical clustering and the HClust function from the fastcluster 3 R package. We set the minimum number of clusters equal to our feature count (12), iterate in the range of [12,30] clusters and use a combination of the Elbow method, Silhouette method and Gap statistics with each cluster optimisation variable having equal balance in the decision to evaluate the cluster configurations. The optimal cluster configuration was ultimately found with 12 clusters, with all cluster configuration evaluation methods slowly declining for configurations above 12. Table 7 shows the clusters' sizes and the four most common features that the applications in each cluster provide. It is worth noting that the size of clusters C2, C9, and C10 was one and were not included in further analysis. The majority of the applications are found in clusters C1 (N = 45), C3 (N = 66), C4 (N = 12), and C6 (N = 13), totalling 136 applications (83% of all 163). Each cluster was given a descriptive name that makes each cluster identifiable, according to the features most prominent in that cluster. The clusters (effectively application categories) are described in detail in the following:

(p58.9) Physical education (C1): Applications in the Physical education cluster (C1) are primarily focused on providing users with tools for tracking and improving their physical activity levels. Most applications in this cluster (82%) provide the "Physical activity" feature, 60% provide "Education/advice", and 33% provide "Yoga/meditation" and "Activity tracking".

(p58.10) Personalized tracking (C3): Applications in the Personalized tracking cluster (C3) offer a range of features for tracking and monitoring personal health and wellness. Most applications in this cluster (95%) provide the "Personalization and customization" feature, 86% provide "Activity tracking", 63% provide "Physical activity", and 54% provide "Yoga/meditation" features.

(p58.11) Tracking reminders (C4): Applications in the Tracking reminders cluster (C4) are focused on providing users with tools for setting and achieving health goals, as well as reminding users to engage in healthy behaviours. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" and "Activity tracking", and 83% provide "Goal setting" and "Education/advice".

(p58.12) Tracking diary (C6): Applications in the Tracking diary cluster (C6) are focused on providing users with tools for tracking and monitoring their health and wellness. Many applications offer diary or self-assessment tools for recording health-related information, such as symptoms, medication, and daily activities. All of the applications in this cluster provide "Diary/self-assessment", 69% provide "Activity tracking", 38% provide "Goal setting", and 30% provide "Personalization and customization".

(p58.13) The size of the rest of the clusters (C5, C7, C8, C11, C12) is smaller than 7. Clusters C7, C8, and C12 consist of applications that provide all the top three ranked features (100%).
## (s60) Discussion
(p60.0) People with disabilities or chronic pains perceive a tremendous advantage of staying at home and using mHealth applications [46]. However, many barriers still do not let different stakeholders take the maximum benefits from mHealth solutions. Barriers to creating the mHealth solutions are usually created by a lack of cross-disciplinary understanding, which can cause difficulties conceptualizing interventions, and unrealistic expectations [99]. The main limitation of using mHealth solutions by patients and health professionals is the lack of user-friendly applications, suitable user interfaces, high-quality designs, aesthetic metrics [69], lack of existing technology, concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concern, compatibility with the workflow, lack of physician support, difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to changing problems [100], insufficient knowledge and information about the mHealth solutions [57], the lack of trustworthy sources of informative applications [56], legal barrier, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and lack of standards [100].

(p60.1) The following discusses the most to least significant features we found using their benefits score and frequency in applications. We also discuss the clustering of the applications. To ensure clarity and eliminate any potential ambiguity, we will provide precise definitions for the terms "benefits score," "least significant," and "most significant" before proceeding to the subsequent section.
## (s61) The most significant features
(p61.0) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p61.1) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p61.2) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.

(p61.3) Based on the benefit score and multiplicity of the features, "Physical activity" is a crucial feature for managing CLBP. Studies have shown that it is one of the most valuable treatments for improving disability and reducing pain in people with CLBP [101]. Therefore, CLBP application creators could include the "Physical activity" feature and make it more beneficial. Of course, if the feature is towards their aim and the application's purpose.

(p61.4) We also noticed a slogan in the description of one of the applications we reviewed: "TRACK IT BETTER, TREAT IT BETTER." This slogan highlights the importance of tracking one's health and wellness to manage pain. "Activity tracking" is a feature that nearly three-fourths of the applications in our dataset provided. The benefit score is also greater than the average. "Education/advice" is another essential feature, as gaining knowledge about one's pain and health can help individuals manage their condition. Many of the applications in our dataset offered educational resources, such as books, videos, and advice from health professionals, which can help people with CLBP learn more about their condition and how to manage it effectively.

(p61.5) Finally, "Personalization and customization" is a feature that has a good ratio between its frequency in the applications and its benefit score. People with CLBP often have different needs and preferences, and personalized and customizable treatment plans can help them manage their pain. This is why it is beneficial for mHealth applications for CLBP to offer features that allow users to tailor their treatment plans to their individual needs and preferences. Furthermore, mHealth application creators could provide people with CLBP information and advice (information about the nature of CLBP and encouragement to continue normal activities) tailored to their demands and abilities to help them self-manage their pain easier.
## (s62) Neutral features
(p62.0) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p62.1) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p62.2) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p62.3) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p62.4) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.

(p62.5) Many applications in our dataset provided the Yoga/meditation feature. Still, few studies have investigated and found yoga applications beneficial in self-managing CLBP (i.e. the benefit score is low) -although it should be noted that yoga and medication alone are commonly seen as beneficial, similar to, e.g. stretching exercises. Further research is needed to understand the impact of Yoga/meditation provided by mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Despite being found beneficial in some articles, many applications did not offer the "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" feature. This may be because developers want to focus on delivering fewer features to save time or lack the required knowledge.

(p62.6) In line with Zečević et al. [109], who analysed reviews of diet-tracking applications on Google Play. They found that, despite positive opinions from users, developers should pay more attention to technical issues and inform users about expected payments, along with refund and cancellation policies, to increase user loyalty. In this study, our data shows that most developers labelled their applications free and did not mention the in-purchase feature in the applications' descriptions. At the same time, the users need to pay for more advanced features. Developers should honestly express the features they provide for their applications and the level of facilities the users are provided based on the amount of money they pay. Users can only then choose the best applications based on their needs and budgets.

(p62.7) Slade et al. [102] conducted a review to identify and synthesize qualitative empirical studies investigating beliefs about exercise therapy for people with CLBP. They found that participants are likely to prefer and participate in exercise or training programs and activities designed to consider their preferences, circumstances, fitness levels, and exercise experiences. However, they would prefer supervised exercise over advice to exercise. People feel encouraged to exercise when they have regular contact with a healthcare professional and feel understood. In line with [32,102], our analysis also shows that researchers, medical experts, and patients with CLBP expect patients to interact with their physicians using mHealth solutions. At the same time, users do not usually find such interaction available. Other studies have also found that users expect to interact with their physicians using mHealth applications, though few applications offer the "patient-physician partnership" feature [69,72]. The reason could be inadequate knowledge and skills from application creators and a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators.

(p62.8) To make this happen, developers need to work with health professionals and ensure that mHealth applications are integrated into clinical practice. However, many challenges lead to a lack of collaboration between health professionals and application creators and also a lack of interaction between health professionals and patients. The reasons include healthcare professionals' lack of knowledge and confidence in using mHealth solutions [69,103], a lack of existing technology [57], difficulty understanding the technology, health professionals' resistance to switching troubles [100], and lack of interest [46]. There are other reasons beyond the interest and knowledge of health professionals, like concerns about regulation and efficacy of applications, security and privacy concerns, compatibility with the workflow [100], lack of trustworthy sources of informative mHealth applications [56], legal barriers, economic and financial factors, lack of health system policies, and standards [100].

(p62.9) Educating health professionals makes them familiar with mHealth solutions. It assists them in the treatment process, like using patients' data for treatment, prescribing, and having partnerships through applications to help patients to be treated easier by self-managing their pain. It could benefit health professionals' businesses as well. A solution to familiarise health professionals with mHealth technologies, especially more advanced features of mHealth like artificial intelligence [104] is teaching mHealth technologies in medical education [105]. However, including mHealth courses in the medical curriculum might take time to become widespread worldwide.

(p62.10) Regular self-monitoring using mHealth applications can provide physicians with patients' data and leads to a better understanding of patients with chronic pain and improve treatment adherence [74]. Younger physicians at a lower professional rank, who tend to be more open to new technologies, are more likely to recommend mHealth solutions [72]. In countries where mHealth solutions are still in their infancy, it may be more effective to focus on the benefits of mHealth solutions for physicians themselves rather than the benefits for patients to increase adoption [106]. Future research and development of mHealth applications for CLBP should consider a scientific evidence base and engage in a multidisciplinary approach between application developers, healthcare professionals, and patients [16]. The future mHealth should also focus more on prevention and early disease detection rather than on remote assessment and treatment of patients [46].

(p62.11) Privacy concerns are also a significant barrier to the adoption of mHealth solutions, especially among individuals who have not used them before [32,107]. To address this issue, independent authorities should certify applications to assure healthcare professionals of their ethical and data security practices. In addition, technical problems such as interoperability between data collection and medical records need to be addressed to limit the disruption to clinical work [108]. Clinical validation of mHealth solutions on a larger scale, rather than just pilot studies, is also needed to gain acceptance from patients and healthcare professionals.

(p62.12) Many applications in our dataset provided the Yoga/meditation feature. Still, few studies have investigated and found yoga applications beneficial in self-managing CLBP (i.e. the benefit score is low) -although it should be noted that yoga and medication alone are commonly seen as beneficial, similar to, e.g. stretching exercises. Further research is needed to understand the impact of Yoga/meditation provided by mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Despite being found beneficial in some articles, many applications did not offer the "Scheduling and reminders for exercise or behavioural changes" feature. This may be because developers want to focus on delivering fewer features to save time or lack the required knowledge.

(p62.13) In line with Zečević et al. [109], who analysed reviews of diet-tracking applications on Google Play. They found that, despite positive opinions from users, developers should pay more attention to technical issues and inform users about expected payments, along with refund and cancellation policies, to increase user loyalty. In this study, our data shows that most developers labelled their applications free and did not mention the in-purchase feature in the applications' descriptions. At the same time, the users need to pay for more advanced features. Developers should honestly express the features they provide for their applications and the level of facilities the users are provided based on the amount of money they pay. Users can only then choose the best applications based on their needs and budgets.
## (s63) The least significant features
(p63.0) Few applications provide the "Artificial intelligence" feature, and its benefit score is also low. According to Esmaeilzadeh et al. [110], who studied how patients perceive the benefits, risks, and use of AI clinical applications for their healthcare, incompatibility with instrumental, technical, ethical, or regulatory values can be a reason for rejecting AI applications in healthcare. Thus, various risks are still associated with implementing AI applications in diagnostics and treatment recommendations for patients with both acute and chronic illnesses. Before the widespread roll-out of AI, more research is needed to identify the challenges that may raise concerns about implementing and using AI applications. Regulatory agencies should establish normative standards and evaluation guidelines for implementing AI in healthcare in cooperation with healthcare institutions.
## (s64) Examining clusters of features
(p64.0) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p64.1) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p64.2) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.

(p64.3) The results of our analysis indicate that the most significant feature category is the "Personalized diary" cluster, which suggests that recording daily activities such as pain, sleep, and diet is beneficial for the self-management of CLBP. This is supported by the fact that the cluster contains the "Personalization and customization" feature, which shows that developers are aware of the need to customize and personalize the applications to meet the unique needs of individual users.

(p64.4) Another interesting finding is that the "Gamified tracking" cluster is the least significant, indicating a lack of attention from developers and researchers in this area -or that these methods are simply not found to be very beneficial. This is surprising, given that the cluster contains the "Gamification" feature, which has been shown to be effective in encouraging users to continue using the application and increasing adherence to treatment plans [116]. It is possible that the challenges of implementing gamification in mHealth applications for CLBP are too significant or that there is simply not enough interest in this area.

(p64.5) Overall, our analysis suggests that personalized and customized approaches are beneficial for integrating into mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Future research and development in this area could focus on developing and implementing personalized and customized features to improve the effectiveness of mHealth applications for self-managing CLBP. Additionally, further research is needed to understand the challenges and barriers to implementing "Gamification" in mHealth applications for CLBP and to determine how to overcome these challenges to improve their functionality.
