# Review Article Fake News Detection Techniques on Social Media: A Survey

CorpusID: 251754438 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6212e520a606d00d515abf5de71d099ffcabff8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b6212e520a606d00d515abf5de71d099ffcabff8)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing
(p3.0) LDA in a certain situation. The identification of false and true news on social media is carried out successfully by analyzing domain reputation and content comprehension, among other things. The similarity and dissimilarity of the material are only collected for a few key terms in each article, which are then combined. A novel algorithm, called "enhanced graph-based supervised learning algorithm as EGSLA," was proposed by [21], which used accuracy, precision, sensitivity, specificity, and Mathews' sensitivity and specificity. The correlation coefficient and the F-measure are used to compare the EGSLA with other algorithms such as decision tree, SVM, and KNN. The "EGSLA algorithm successfully predicts the fake users and news on Twitter by extracting the important features," which are identified on the weighted graph, and then applying them.
## (s13) Fake News Detection Based on Textual Content
(p13.0) This section will examine the identification of "fake news" using textual content. We examine the most critical features at the content, user, and social levels [26]. Detailed explanations of each level are provided in the following subsections.

(p13.1) 6.1. Content-Level. Fake news and true news may be studied using news content. Essentially, the most valuable elements retrieved from news articles are linguistic and visual. Numerous sorts of linguistic characteristics may develop the following:
