# Nanomaterials-Based Sensors for Respiratory Viral Detection: A Review

CorpusID: 250144980 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33aa9a022e289fc8805e6e76025eedbf00970d4e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s1) A. Nanomaterials-Based Sensors
(p1.0) Rapid viral diagnostics is essential to overcome the current pandemic and prevent future ones. Functionalization of nanomaterials using nucleic acids or proteins like antibodies is the standard method used for viral detection. These detections are carried out using colorimetric assays, thermal photo platforms, and antigen-binding assays, among others. The commonly available testing kits for viral infections operate on enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays or PCRs [41]. These testing kits have been shown to have false-negative results, low sensitivity, and usually take long durations to give results [16]. Nanomaterials, on the contrary, are known to lower these drawbacks. Having a high surface-to-volume ratio allows nanoparticles to have better surface interactions between the sensor and the biomolecule to be analyzed. This makes nanomaterial-based sensors a better candidate for rapid and dependable detection of viral particles [26]. Many nanomaterials with transducing functions have been studied in recent decades, and several matrices for different sensors have been developed [42]. Nanomaterials like graphene, quantum dots, gold and silver nanoparticles have been explored to create sensors to detect viral particles. There have been several nanosensors developed and reported in the literature over the last decade -each of them employing a unique nanomaterial to increase its sensitivity and selectivity to give a rapid response rate during viral detection (Fig. 2).

(p1.1) Apart from these, noble metal nanomaterials have also been explored to detect viral particles using sensors. These nanomaterials have also been shown to increase the specificity and sensitivity of the sensing systems. Hence, the fabrication of sensors with nanomaterials has significantly improved the sensing capabilities of these devices [43]. Nanoscale devices exhibit efficient functionality with unique effects compared to standard devices and play a central role in eliminating errors in viral detection methods. Nano-sensors can be used on a large scale for disease diagnosis and biomolecule detection due to bio-elements and transducer interactions. Various nanomaterials, such as nanorods, nanotubes, nanowires, thin films, and nanoparticles, are being used in biomedical applications because of their mechanical and electrical characteristics [44]. Many recent researches on various nanomaterial-based sensors have been discussed in Table I.
## (s2) B. Electrochemical Sensors
(p2.0) Electrochemical sensors record the changes in uniformity of the charge on the surface of transducers. These changes are recorded depending on the impedimetric [45], [46], potentiometric, or amperometric [47], [48] principles of transducers [49]. According to most published literature present, these sensors are most commonly used for the detection of influenza viruses. Another study to develop a nano-immunosensor to detect MERS-CoV was done by Layqah and coworkers [50]. The biomarker targeted using this sensor was the spike protein S1, most commonly targeted by antibodies [51]. The sensor was based on the relation between the free virus present in the given sample and the spike protein S1. The sensor used carbon electrodes that were functionalized using AuNPs that increased the electrochemical function of the sensor and provided a wider area for the biomarker detection using the sensor. Moreover, the sensor was shown to have a better transfer rate. This immunosensor provided an excellent linear range of detection of 0.001 and 100 ng/mL for the MERS virus and displayed an enhanced sensitivity of 0.4 pg/mL. Based on AuNP particles, this sensor showed a very high sensitivity compared to the conventional ELISA method of virus detection [52]. This sensor stood out by its ability to detect two different viruses simultaneously -the MERS-CoV and HCoV on the same electrode surface and was electrochemically active for long durations.

(p2.1) In another study, Seo and colleagues developed a graphenebased sensor that could detect SARS-CoV-2 viral particles from nasopharyngeal swabs of coronavirus patients. In this FET-based sensor, a graphene sheet was used that was attached to a SiO 2 /Si substrate. This was further functionalized with the SARS-CoV-2 spike antibody. The viral particles could be detected using this sensor even at very low concentrations of 1 fg/mL [53]. The detection limit was found to be 100 fg/mL. Furthermore, this sensor was found to be highly selective to SARS-CoV-2 alone and showed no response to MERS-CoV spike proteins.

(p2.2) Electrochemical sensors that use nucleic acids as their target analyte, allow for easy binding of the DNA or RNA on the sensor's surface. When the specific binding occurs between the two, the electrode's surface experiences a change -which is then recorded using electrochemical methods. These electrochemical signals produced are a consequence of the transfer of electrons between the probe and electrode. Aptamers, hairpin DNA, locked and peptide nucleic acids are the most widely used probes in electrochemical sensors [54]. Of these, aptamers have gained more attention, owing to their high selectivity for the target analytes. They target proteins, DNA or RNA, and other chemical molecules, alike. Hence, electrochemical sensors have shown to be very stable, highly specific, and can be easily miniaturized [55]. Table I illustrates the various options of electrochemical sensors for detection of virus particles.
## (s3) C. Optical Sensors
(p3.0) Optical sensors are also essential tools in detecting multiple analytes simultaneously. Such sensors analyze the changes in optical properties of transducers during the exchange between the target molecule and the recognition element [81], [82]. The application of optical sensors to detect virus particles was seen in the work put forward by Teengam and colleagues [83]. The authors developed a unique optical sensor that could detect MERS particles. The experiment results could be seen by the naked eye and did not use any complex experimental gadgets. It was a paper-based colorimetric sensor that noted the response of aggregation or de-aggregation of silver nanoparticles with viral DNA molecules. This reaction occurred in the presence of pyrrolidinyl peptide nucleic acid. Another good instance of optic sensor for respiratory virus detection was the work carried out by Ostroff and colleagues. They are the only group that put forward a sensor to detect human rhinovirus using optical sensors [84]. They used an optically coated silicon surface functionalized by virus antibodies. The sensor was shown to give the results under 30 minutes and showed a good sensitivity range. Hence, these sensors enhance sensitivity and increased efficiency. Optical-based techniques like Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) [46], Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) [85] are also used to detect virus particles. 
## (s4) D. Piezoelectric Sensors
(p4.0) Piezoelectric sensors function in the presence of an applied alternating electric field. The transducers in such sensors resonate under such conditions. They measure the difference in the resonating frequency, which occurs because of crystal mass and the attached target analyte. When the target analyte binds to the sensor's surface, a change in the mass occurs, which is recorded. These sensors are widely used to detect various target molecules within biological systems [55], [98], [99]. The use of this sensor for the detection of the H5N3 virus is seen in the work done by Erofeev et al. [100]. The duo developed a piezoelectric sensor using a lead zirconate titanate piezoelectric disk and successfully performed a label-free detection of the influenza virus. In another study, it was observed that a piezoelectric sensor coated with aptamer could detect the SCV helicase protein derived from the SARS CoV [101]. The sensor could perform the detection in a minute and showed a LOD of 3.5 ng/mL. Piezoelectric nanosensors also monitor the changes in viscoelasticity by noting the frequency, which affects the quartz crystal resonator [102]. During the sensing activity by such sensors, isolation equipments are used to avoid any hindrance caused by the external environment. Table I 
## (s5) III. PHYSICAL STRUCTURE OF THE SENSORS
(p5.0) AND THE VIRUS DETECTION PRINCIPLES A sensor that can detect virus functions like any other analytical device and possesses three significant parts: a bioreceptor that senses the analyte, a transducer, and the detector that gives the digital result. The interaction between the target biomolecule and the bioreceptor results in either a physical or a chemical reaction between them [106], [107]. The transducer then converts the changes in molecules into a detectable signal that can be quantified or measured with the help of a digital detector [108]. The transduction process can be based on either the following sensors: electrochemical, immuno, thermal, optical, magnetic, piezoelectric. Each of these types determines the principles based on which the sensor functions [109]. The use of nanomaterials increases the overall sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor by enhancing the overall fabrication quality of the sensor. This can be better understood as depicted in Fig. 3, which discusses the attack by a respiratory virus (like the respiratory syncytial virus), its life cycle, physical structure of a nanomaterial-based sensor and its mechanism of sensing.
## (s6) IV. ANTIBODY ORIENTATION AND BONDING APPROACH
(p6.0) The nanomaterial-based immunosensors are used for the detection of viral particles. The function of these sensors is affected by one or more of the following conditions: the affinity of antigens, the orientation and accessibility of the binding sites upon immobilization, and the total number of binding sites available on the surface of the sensor. The strategies based on which the immobilization occurs may differ, giving varying results and efficiencies. These also affect the orientation to which the attached antibodies adapt. For instance, when antibodies take a 'flat-on' orientation then the adsorption method is used for antibody immobilization [111]. This antibody orientation can become an obstacle for the antigens to approach antibody binding sites (Fig. 4). This, therefore, causes a lowering of antigen-binding capacity [112]. However, achieving a 100% specific orientation is not possible. This can be attributed to site-specific changes when antigen binds to the sensor and results in attachment of other reactive groups. Such immobilization strategies are also influenced by the kind of nanomaterial used and should be compatible with the target analytes to avoid the reduction in specific orientations. 
## (s7) V. SENSING AND MEASUREMENT MECHANISMS
(p7.0) Increasing the conductivity of the sensors influences their sensitivity and limit of detection. Nanomaterials contribute towards aiding the sensing and measurement mechanisms of the sensor. There are many different sensing mechanisms on which sensors operate during virus detection. SPR being an optical technique, has significantly contributed to the processing of immunoassays. Such sensors can simultaneously analyze multiple biomolecules and perform realtime monitoring of various analytes having or devoid of labels [113]. Their sensing happens when a thin layer of metal is layered on a dielectric waveguide, and data is used after reflecting p-polarized light. On the contrary, total internal reflection ellipsometry makes use of the reflecting s-polarized light [114], [115].

(p7.1) There exist other sensing mechanisms like the alternating current electrokinetics capacitative sensing method. This method performs rapid sensing within one step and does not need any washing step [116]. The interfacial capacitance between the electrode and the sample is considered to measure the target analyte amount present on the electrode surface. Based on this data, the detection protocol is developed. Such sensors have been explored in recent years for virus detection [117], [118]. However, these studies have been based on bulk capacitance and are highly influenced by the matrix effect.
## (s8) VI. MECHANISM OF SENSING OF NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR
(p8.0) RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION During virus detection using nanomaterial-based sensors, three basic steps occur, each linked with explicitly with the previous step. First, the target molecule is recognized by a fixed set(s) of biorecognition components. Interactions between the two occur by either covalent or non-covalent interactions. Second, any chemical change recorded by the transducer of the sensor is transferred to the detector. Finally, the detector displays the results in digital signals on a digital screen [55]. Many transducers are used during the detection, like carbon or gold electrode systems, screen printed electrodes and others. In nanomaterial-based sensors, the transducers use electrodes embedded with nanoparticles or a nanomaterial that increases the specificity with which the bioreceptor interacts with the target biomolecule during the detection process. Also, they enhance the overall sensitivity and reproducibility of the sensor.

(p8.1) Among the kind of sensors used, nanomaterial-based electrochemical sensors have gained wider attention because of their ability to rapidly carry out the sensing mechanism and recognize the target molecule within a very short duration. Such sensors are based on the direct generation of electrical signals within a short period [119]. Furthermore, most electrochemical sensors can perform label-free detection of analytes that permits the development of point of care devices [120].
## (s9) VII. ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF
(p9.0) NANOMATERIALS-BASED SENSORS FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION As discussed previously, many studies support the superiority of nanomaterial-based sensors over the others due to their unmatched physicochemical properties like the prominent surface to volume ratio, high adsorption, the changes in their quantum aspects and their capacity to react. Hence, a lower quantity of analytes is more than sufficient for their successful analysis. Furthermore, rapid processing of the analyte within a lower budget is possible using such sensors [121]. Even carbon-based nanomaterials like graphene and its derivatives are an excellent choice to develop sensors that can detect respiratory viruses because of their ability to attach to ligands and other nanoparticles [26]. Other nanomaterials like silica nanoparticles are also advantageous in creating sensors to detect viruses because they are biocompatible with other elements in biological conditions. Moreover, nanoporous materials have an even better surface to volume ratio which is gives them an upper hand over the other nanoparticles that are currently available [26].
## (s10) VIII. COMPARISON OF NANOMATERIALS-BASED
(p10.0) SENSORS WITH CONVENTIONAL SENSORS FOR RESPIRATORY VIRAL DETECTION Apart from the recent nanomaterial-based sensors, traditional methods like cell-culture and colony counting techniques, electron microscopy, immunological assays, PCR, ELISA, nucleic acid-based detection, and others have also been popularly used to detect respiratory viral particles. However, detecting the analyte via these methods requires an additional sample processing step. Samples like nasal swabs are collected and put through sample enrichment processes, only after which the detection assays are carried out. This step is crucial because it increases the efficiency of the sensing process and also reduces the time taken to detect the analyte. Besides being time-consuming, these processes are often meticulous and are prone to errors.

(p10.1) On the contrary, nanomaterial-based sensors allow for direct determination of the analyte without the requirement of any processing steps [123]. The use of conventional sensors is limited because they cannot be used under the banner of 'point of care techniques' and fail to produce real-time analyses. An ideal sensor should have: an online sampler that can sample the analyte, a quick system and analyzes the given sample, a completely automatic operation, less processing steps, and elements that enhance the overall sensitivity and specificity of the sensors. This is where nanomaterials play a fundamental role. They can provide high efficiency and improve the overall quality of the sensors. Usage of such nanomaterial-based sensors will reduce the detection time and encourage in realtime analysis.
## (s11) IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
(p11.0) Highly sensitive sensors can be successfully developed using nanomaterials, such that they give rapid results which are highly reproducible. In addition to being highly sensitive, nanomaterial-based FET sensors are also highly selective and can detect the analyte in low concentrations. Nanomaterials like graphene and In2O3 have been incorporated in the open gated areas of FET to detect respiratory viruses [124]. Elements like gold nanoparticles and their nanoislands have also been successfully included in immunosensors to detect viruses like MERS and COVID-19 under pico and femto concentration ranges [95], [125]. Furthermore, using nanomaterials in sensor development allows for their miniaturization and reduces their overall production cost. Affinity sensors can be easily created using multiple nanomaterials within the same sensor. Such sensors usually have many electrodes within the same system, which allows for simultaneous detection.
