# Vaccinating Children against SARS-CoV-2: A Literature Review and Survey of International Experts to Assess Safety, Efficacy and Perceptions of Vaccine Use in Children

CorpusID: 255321062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96864b13e7ae2c616a2d4bf2768e11cfabb40ea5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/96864b13e7ae2c616a2d4bf2768e11cfabb40ea5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s11) Qualitative Data Analysis
(p11.0) An open-ended question was posed to respondents about their perceived major reasons for COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy in their country. The responses were reviewed to extract themes using directed content analysis [21]. The codebook was created after a primary search of the literature of the concepts and causes of vaccine hesitancy. Two coders (HL and DP) were used to establish trustworthiness of the qualitative findings [22]; they met to review and consolidate coding and reconcile any differences. Coding disputes were resolved through discussion with the co-author (PSP). A visual representation of the text that appeared more frequently was generated using Python 3.9.
## (s16) Results of Syntheses
(p16.0) The mRNA vaccines showed an increased risk of injection-site pain after dose 1 (Figure 1a). There was also an increased risk of erythema (dose 1 OR 7.36, 95% CI 5.7 6-9.40; dose 2 OR 10.58, 95% CI 8.27-13.55) and swelling (dose 1 OR 9.59, 95% CI 7.29-12.62; dose 2 OR 13.47, 95% CI 10.23-17.73).
## (s21) Vaccine Effectiveness
(p21.0) Effectiveness was measured against non-critical COVID-19 infection/outpatient encounters, hospitalisation, and severe COVID-19 infection (MIS-C, COVID-19 pneumonia, or ICU admission). VE was described during the Delta-and Omicron-predominant phases of the pandemic for children (5-11 years) and adolescents (12 years and above).

(p21.1) Vaccine effectiveness of the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) primary vaccine series against non-critical SARS-CoV-2 infection was evaluated in 10 papers. In adolescents during the Delta variant circulation, VE ranged from 85% (95% CI 81-89) to 93% (95% CI 76-98). VE was lower during the Omicron variant circulation among this age group, ranging from 20% (95% CI −25-49) to 62% (95% CI 30-79). In the 5-to-11-year age group, VE during the Omicron variant circulation ranged from 47% (95% CI 32-59) to 51% (95% CI . Overall VE during the Delta and Omicron periods combined was described as 46% (95% CI 24-61) in the 5-to 11-year-olds, 83% (95% CI 80-85) in the 12-to 15-year-olds, and 76% (95% CI 71-80) in the 16-to 17-year-olds.

(p21.2) Vaccine effectiveness of the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) primary vaccine series against hospitalisation was evaluated in five studies ( Figure 2D). Vaccine effectiveness against hospitalisation varied among age groups and differed during the Delta-and Omicron-predominant periods. For adolescents, VE against hospitalisation was 92% (95% CI 89-95) during Delta, compared with 40% (95% CI 9-60) during Omicron. VE against hospitalisation was higher among older children compared with younger: 94% in the 16-17 age group (95% CI 87-97) and 92% in the 12-15 age group (95% CI 79-97), compared with 74% in the 5-11 age group (95% CI .

(p21.3) Vaccine effectiveness of the BNT162b2 (Pfizer-BioNTech) vaccine against severe illness requiring non-invasive and invasive mechanical ventilation, vasoactive infusions, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation during hospital stay among adolescents was 96% (95% CI 90-98) during Delta and 79% (95% CI 51-91) during Omicron circulation [41]. VE against MIS-C was 91% (95% CI 78-97) [18]. For the "China-made" COVID-19 vaccines, including inactivated, adenovirus-vectored, and recombinant-subunit vaccines, the odds ratio of COVID-19 pneumonia was 0.42 (95% CI 0.31-0.57) during Delta and 1.44 (95% CI 0.32-6.37) during Omicron circulation.
