# Recent Advances in Text-to-SQL: A Survey of What We Have and What We Expect

CorpusID: 251719280 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a814b76e589ef27e3f4af379d319d02d2110faa1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a814b76e589ef27e3f4af379d319d02d2110faa1)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s6) Encoding
(p6.0) Various methods have been adopted to address the challenges of representing the meaning of questions, representing the structure for DB schema, and linking the DB content to question. We group them into five categories, as shown in Table 2.

(p6.1) Encode Token Types To better encode keywords such as entities and numbers in questions,  assign a type to each word in the question, with a word being an entity from the knowledge graph, a column, or a number. Yu et al. (2018c) concatenate word embeddings and the corresponding type embeddings to feed into their model.
## (s8) Decoding
(p8.0) Various methods have been proposed for decoding to achieve a fine-grained and easier process for SQL generation and bridge the gap between natural language and SQL queries. As shown in Table 3 Table 9 in Appendix D. IR: Intermediate Representation. and other technologies.

(p8.1) Tree-based Seq2Tree (Dong and Lapata, 2016) employs a decoder that generates logical forms in a top-down manner. The components in the sub-tree are generated conditioned on their parents apart from the input question. Note that the syntax of the logical forms is implicitly learned from data for Seq2Tree. Similarly, Seq2AST (Yin and Neubig, 2017) uses an abstract syntax tree (AST) for decoding the target programming language, where the syntax is explicitly integrated with AST. Although both Seq2Tree (Dong and Lapata, 2016) and Seq2AST (Yin and Neubig, 2017) do not study text-to-SQL datasets, their uses of trees inspire tree-based decoding in text-to-SQL. SyntaxSQL-Net (Yu et al., 2018b) employs a tree-based decoding method specific to SQL syntax and recursively calls modules to predict different SQL components.
## (s12) References
(p12.0) B Text-to-SQL Examples B.1 Table and Database There is a big difference in terms of how many tables a database has. For restaurants, there are 3 tables in the database, while there are 32 tables in ATIS (Suhr et al., 2020).
