# REVIEW Open Access Climate-relevant properties of black carbon aerosols revealed by in situ measurements: a review

CorpusID: 257354858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/34d09b81b7a22c12d1fed283409c7e3f338603e6)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s1) Light-absorbing aerosols
(p1.0) Light-absorbing aerosol components exert complex perturbations to the climate system through their shortwave absorption in the atmosphere and snowpack (Stier et al. 2007;Samset et al. 2018). The atmospheric heating by aerosol's shortwave absorption alters the circulation and precipitation from regional-to-global scales (Lau et al. 2006;Samset et al. 2022). Known significant contributors to aerosol's shortwave absorption are light-absorbing constituents of carbonaceous compounds (i.e., black carbon, brown carbon) and iron oxides (i.e., goethite, hematite, magnetite) from both anthropogenic and nonanthropogenic origins (e.g., Moteki et al. 2017).

(p1.1) Carbonaceous aerosol emitted as a byproduct of the combustions of fossil fuels, biofuels, and biomass is a mixture of a large variety of organic molecules and partly graphitized solid carbon (Lighty et al. 2000;Simoneit 2000). In addition, other organic molecules and polymers as secondary constituents of carbonaceous aerosol are produced in the atmosphere through gas-phase photochemical reactions and aqueous reactions in cloud droplets (Kalberer et al. 2004;Kanakidou et al. 2005;Ervens et al. 2011;Shrivastava et al. 2017). Carbonaceous aerosol materials can be categorized on the continuous spectrum of the imaginary part of the refractive index (Andreae and Gelencsér 2006; . One extreme of the spectrum is the group of non-refractory organic molecules with negligible imaginary refractive index, which is referred to as organic carbon (OC). Another spectrum extreme is the group of partly graphitized solidstate refractory material with a high imaginary refractive index, black carbon (BC) (Bond et al. 2013). The middle of the spectrum is a group of yellowish-to-brownish organic compounds with a moderate imaginary refractive index, commonly referred to as brown carbon (BrC) (Laskin et al. 2015). The BrC can also secondarily form through photochemical reactions in the atmosphere from primary and secondary OC materials (Updyke et al. 2012). The imaginary refractive index of BrC material can rapidly change as the BrC particles photochemically age in the atmosphere (Zhao et al. 2015). By contrast, BC is chemically inert in the atmosphere and even persistent after deposition on timescales from centuries to millennia (Coppola et al. 2022).

(p1.2) In this review, the author focused only on BC among all the light-absorbing aerosol components to elaborate on the recent advances in the in situ BC measurements and their contributions to the fundamental understanding of aerosol processes and the developments of the aerosolclimate model.
## (s2) Black carbon
(p2.0) Owing to its high imaginary refractive index and relatively long atmospheric lifetime, BC is the largest contributor to global shortwave absorption in the present atmosphere among all the light-absorbing aerosol compounds Sand et al. 2021). Atmospheric heating by BC reduces the global mean precipitation by compensating for the latent-heat transport from the surface to the atmosphere (Pendergrass and Hartmann 2012). BC deposited on snow-covered surfaces contributes to albedo reduction and accelerates the snowmelt ).
## (s6) Complex amplitude sensor
(p6.0) We briefly review another recent method for optical particle characterization, the complex amplitude sensor, which is useful for in-line BC measurements. The complex scattering amplitude S = ReS + iImS =|S|e i∆ represents the amplitude |S| and phase shift ∆ of the scattered field relative to those of the plane-wave field incident to the scattering particle (van de Hulst 1957). The S is a function of the angle θ between the incident beam and observation direction. The S reflects the physical properties of the scattering particle, such as refractive index, volume, shape, and orientation, and thus plays pivotal roles in optical particle characterizations and remote sensing of aerosols and clouds (Jones 1999;Romanov and Yurkin 2021). Light-scattering sensors, including the optical particle counters, nephelometers, and remote sensing methods for reflected and scattered radiations, are designed to measure the power of the scattered field |S(θ)| 2 at θ ≠ 0°, avoiding the direct optical beam of the incident field. On the other hand, light extinction sensors, including occultation single-particle sensors, cavityringdown extinction spectroscopies, and remote sensing methods for direct radiation, are designed to measure the interference power of the scattered and incident fields in the forward direction ImS(0°) by monitoring the direct beam (Mishchenko 2014). Simultaneous measurement of both ReS and ImS of suspended single particles has not been possible until recently because of its technical difficulties, as reviewed in Moteki (2021).
## (s9) Comparison of single-particle LII with other BC measurements
(p9.0) The thermal-optical and filer-based light absorption methods were two primary techniques used for measuring BC mass concentration in ambient air, snow, and ice samples before the invention of single-particle LII. A notable advantage of thermal-optical and filter-based light absorption methods compared with the singleparticle LII is their applicability to BC samples with any particle-size range. Pileci et al. (2021) reported that ambient-mass concentrations of refractory carbon derived from thermal-optical and single-particle LII methods could differ within a factor of ~ 2. The BC measurement bias in filter-based light absorption methods can be largely suppressed by removing volatile aerosol components using a heated aerosol inlet Irwin et al. 2013;Ohata et al. 2019), as demonstrated in fresh urban pollutions (Kondo et al. 2011b) and Arctic atmosphere (Ohata et al. 2021a).
## (s10) Anthropogenic iron oxide
(p10.0) The in situ aerosol measurements using single-particle LII and laboratory analyses of collected aerosol samples using a transmission electron microscope (TEM) revealed that anthropogenic light-absorbing iron oxides (FeOx) consisting of an aggregate of magnetite nanoparticles are ubiquitous in the urban plumes and the East Asian and Arctic troposphere (Moteki et al. 2017;Yoshida et al. 2018). The mass mixing ratio of anthropogenic FeOx in these regions was ~ 20-60% of BC . The anthropogenic FeOx aerosol is likely ubiquitous in the global troposphere (Lamb et al. 2021) and will be one of the contributors to regionalto-global-scale aerosol's shortwave absorption (Moteki et al. 2017;Matsui et al. 2018;Ito et al. 2018). These new observation data provided further evidence to constrain the magnitude and spatial distribution of anthropogenic Fe emission Liu et al. 2022), which is an essential factor for investigating the effects of Fe-bearing aerosols on ocean fertilization Ito et al. 2021).
## (s13) BC measurement techniques
(p13.0) The most important open issue of the current singleparticle LII technique is the uncertainty or difficulty of measuring BC particles much larger than the visible wavelengths. Current commercial single-particle LII instruments (e.g., SP2 from Droplet Measurement Technologies, Inc.) are designed to detect BC core within ~ 70-500 nm volume-equivalent diameter. The NOAA SP2 instruments used for global-scale aircraft observations were intended to measure ~ 70-550 nm BC core Katich et al. 2018). Aircraft and ground observations using the single-particle LII instrument of The University of Tokyo (a modified version of SP2; Moteki and Kondo 2010), which detects 70-850 nm BC core, indicated a non-negligible contribution of BC with > ~ 500 nm diameter to size-integrated BC mass mixing ratio Yoshida et al. 2020). This implies the significance of extending the upper limit of the BC core size range observable by single-particle LII instruments at least up to ~ 1000 nm. The importance of extending the LII-detectable particle-size range is even more evident for FeOx (Moteki et al. 2017;Lamb et al. 2021). The author therefore suggests fundamental investigations for extending the upper limit of the observable particle-size range in the single-particle LII.
