# Medicine ® Treatment of Alzheimer's disease by combination of acupuncture and Chinese medicine based on pathophysiological mechanism A review

CorpusID: 255226022 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Inheritance
(p3.0) Approximately 0.1% of AD cases are caused by genetics, which affects people who develop symptoms between the ages of 30 and 50 years. This is due to the autosomal dominance of one of the 3 genes encoding presenillins 1 and 2 and the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Mutations in any of these genes result in erroneous cleavage of APP to form Aβ42 instead of Aβ40. [13] The accumulation and aggregation of Aβ42 forms senile plaques, which are one of the main causes of AD. ABCA7 and SORL1 are other autosomal dominant genes responsible for inherited AD. [14] However, only a small proportion of AD cases exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance. Differences in genetic predisposition and environmental factors constitute a risk factor in most cases, with the presence of the ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE ε4) in heterozygotes and homozygotes increasing the risk by 3% and 15%, respectively. TREM2 is another gene involved in increasing the risk of AD when white blood cells do not control the amount of Aβ40 in the brain due to some variation in the allele of this gene. ABCA7, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CELF1, CLU, CR1, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB5, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A, NMES, PICALM, PTK2B, S1C24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1. A total of 19 genes were reported by the Genome Wide Association Study to clearly influence risk. [15] 
## (s4) Cholinergic hypothesis
(p4.0) The most widely accepted hypothesis states that the cause of AD is the lack of the adequate neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACH) in neurons and neuromuscular regions. [16] Biopsy reports from AD cases show that the activity of ACH transferase is decreased and the synthesis, absorption, and release of ACH are reduced. The reason for the deficiency of ACH in the brain is that its synthesis is reduced or the enzymatic activity of acetylcholin esterase is reduced. Four of the 5 main drugs marketed for the treatment of AD --donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and tacrine --are based on this hypothesis. [17] 
## (s6) Tau
(p6.0) Tau is phosphorylated at 3 different positions, threonine, serine, and an amino acid residue adjacent to proline. It attaches to microtubules at these residues. Protein hyperphosphorylation occurs mainly at T231, S235, and S265. Thereafter, proteins lose their ability to attach to microtubules and form neurofibrillary tangles. [21] Neurofibrillary tangles formed by the aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau threads disrupt the microtubule network of nerve cells. This leads to the inhibition of any biochemical communication between the inside and outside of the cell and destruction of the cytoskeleton. Although neurofibrillary tangles constitute one of the main pathophysiological conditions of AD, some studies have shown that inhibition of neurofibrillary tangles alone cannot be a potential target; therefore, any therapeutic approach must be multi-targeted to make a real difference in the treatment of AD, and tau-targeted drugs often target amyloid plaques as well. [22,23] 
## (s7) Excitotoxicity
(p7.0) Glutamate is another neurotransmitter present in the brain, and excessive glutamate levels can cause excitotoxicity, eventually leading to cell death. Minocycline is the only commercialized drug that targets the glutamate system to treat AD. It is a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist that controls glutamate overstimulation. It regulates Ca2 + influx and efflux at the cell membrane via NMDA receptors. Minocycline also acts as an antagonist of the nACh and 5-HT3 receptors. Inhibition of NMDA can inhibit the expression of α-secretase, thereby reducing the production of Aβ. [21,24] 
## (s8) Vitamin B5 deficiency
(p8.0) Some studies have investigated the role of vitamin B5 in AD. [25] Studies have found that the main and acute deficiency of vitamin B5 occurs in AD, and acute deficiency is considered to occur in AD. Areas thought to present with acute brain injury, including the middle temporal gyrus, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus, experience more severe vitamin B5 deficiencies. Vitamin B5 is the precursor of acetyl-CoA and indirectly plays a key role in the metabolism of all organs, including the brain. Acetyl-Coa, the precursor of the neurotransmitter ACH, as well as complex fatty acyl groups that regulate the important insulating function of the myelin sheath, malfunctions in AD. Additionally, the concentration of vitamin B5 in the brain region coexists throughout the white matter. Therefore, researchers speculate that vitamin B5 deficiency may produce AD and ATN, which can be avoided or even reversed in the initial stage by oral administration of appropriate doses of vitamin B5. [26] 
## (s13) The prediction accuracy of pure biological definition is low
(p13.0) A major limitation of the biological definition of Alzheimer's is its low predictive accuracy. Some studies have shown [57] that the presence of tau and amyloid beta positivity is insufficient to unambiguously predict the occurrence of symptoms (MCI or dementia) in individuals without clinical impairment. (Fig. 4) Another challenge in the diagnosis of AD using pure biomarkers is that the presence of biomarkers of AD lesions in the body can be used as a primary indicator for the diagnosis of AD, as such lesions are commonly found in patients with other neurodegenerative diseases, most commonly Lewy body dementia. [58] This comorbid feature of dementia with Lewy bodies in this setting confuses the acceptance of biomarker-based diagnoses. Experienced clinicians determine the pathology of Lewy body dementia based on clinical signs and symptoms (such as hallucinations and parkinsonism) or indirect biomarkers (such as DaTscan innervation) to confirm the diagnosis of Lewy body dementia.
## (s25) Acupuncture treatment
(p25.0) Acupuncture plays a vital role in the treatment of AD, and its importance is even greater than that of TCM. Therefore, in the process of TCM diagnosis and treatment of AD, acupuncture should not be placed at the subsidiary level of syndrome differentiation and treatment of TCM, and the combination of acupuncture and medicine should not be acupuncture combined with TCM; the two should be in the same position, pay equal attention to acupuncture and medicine, and complement each other.

(p25.1) As an important part of TCM, acupuncture and moxibustion play an important role in the treatment of AD. According to basic medical research, the mechanism of action of acupuncture and moxibustion on AD [89] includes the following aspects: regulation of the expression of related proteins, inhibition of central inflammatory response, resistance to oxidative stress injury, regulation of energy metabolism in brain regions, improvement of synaptic plasticity of neurons, regulation of the activity level of autophagy, and inhibition of nerve cell apoptosis. This article discusses the treatment of AD using acupuncture.
## (s27) Conclusion
(p27.0) Although a purely biological definition of AD has been proposed in the past, with the progress of research, an increasing number of studies have pointed out that amyloid P and Tau biomarkers are not enough to predict the progress of AD with confidence, nor are they enough to be applied to the clinical environment and diagnosis of people without cognitive impairment. The relationship between the coexistence of tau and amyloid P pathology on the one hand and the development of cognitive decline and ATN remains uncertain at the individual level.

(p27.1) In the past 20 years, the number of deaths related to AD has increased significantly, but the treatment of Western medicine remains vague. FDA-allowed treatments for AD have not shown any remedial effects and have not been able to reduce the rate of disease progression. Most of the drugs recommended for use are acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and NMDA receptor antagonists. However, none of the potential drugs developed have been successful beyond phase II/III trials, and the challenges remain low bioavailability, prolonged serum half-life, and inability to cross the blood-brain barrier.

(p27.2) TCM therapy AD has unique advantages and is increasingly being widely recognized by the international community, and related studies have emerged endlessly at home and abroad. [100] TCM, acupuncture, and moxibustion, especially the combination of acupuncture and medicine, play vital roles in the treatment of AD. Acupuncture and moxibustion, as ancient treatment methods, can dredge meridians, regulate qi and blood, replenish essence and marrow, dredge the governor vessel, regulate the spirit, and tonify the kidney by needling relevant acupoints. TCM treatment of AD has few side effects and can play a lasting advantage. Based on the theory of visceral manifestation of TCM, syndrome differentiation, and treatment, its mechanism of action is to stimulate the cerebral cortex to synthesize nicotinic ACH, reduce blood lipids, dilate cerebral vessels, increase cerebral blood flow, and improve cerebral inflammatory injury.

(p27.3) The combination of acupuncture and medicine combines the advantages of TCM and acupuncture, exerts a combined therapeutic effect of drugs and acupoint stimulation, and treats both symptoms and root causes. This has been explained in detail before the article and is not repeated here.

(p27.4) TCM therapy for AD mostly involves compound treatment and multi-point acupuncture treatment, and its mechanism of action is not yet clear. Although in recent years, the Chinese medicine community has made more and more gratifying research, it still needs more relevant basic research, animal experiments, and clinical observations to explain and clarify the strategy of TCM therapy for AD.

(p27.5) In addition, the study of AD in TCM is closely followed by modern medicine. After absorbing the frontier achievements of modern medicine, it has been applied to the study of TCM. We really lack research based on the tradition of TCM, based on classical ancient books, mainly on TCM, absorbing the advanced achievements of modern medicine for our use, and the times call for us to regain the characteristics of TCM. 
