# Input-output modelling for household activity-level environmental footprints: a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 257650379 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/938619365e813cbc55cc04390a99881fc35588fe)

Fields: Economics, Environmental Science, Physics

## (s9) Activity classification
(p9.0) There are almost as many ways to distinguish activities as there are papers on the topic. Classifying activities is partly a question of terminology but designing relevant activity categories is essential for ensuring that the activities fulfil a uniform need of the consumers such that interventions have a uniform effect on an activity. Usually, it is relevant to distinguish between production and consumption activities. Often, the term leisure has been used to cover all consumption activities. The term 'committed time' is also used to refer to household production and is opposed to 'personal time' (including sleeping, and eating), 'contracted time' (employment and education), 'free time' , and 'mobility time' . Travel to paid work and self-education do not comply with the third-party criterion but do not seem to be consumption activities either (Ironmonger 1996). While Gershuny (1987b) defined education as consumption, Stahmer (2010) treated education as fixed capital formation, implying that more hours of education increase educational capital.  argued that education is consumed by the producer but indirectly influences society, making it relevant to distinguish education from consumption activities that only benefit the participating individuals. In practice, by-products of consumption activities might also benefit society.
## (s12) Data sources
(p12.0) The studies on household production activities combine national time-use surveys (usually diary-based) with national household budget survey data to create original input-output tables. Many of the models that also cover consumption activities use the same sources for consumption and time use data but take outset in environmental footprints from existing national input-output tables. To obtain environmental footprints of household expenditure categories,  used the Eora multi-region input-output table and  used the World Input-Output Database for other countries than China. The German study developed an original model . , , , and Agbahey et al (2020) took outset in their previous work creating social accounting matrices for Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Pakistan, and Zambia. Finding suitable time-use data was challenging for some of the developing countries and they relied, among other data sources, on labour force and agricultural practice surveys .

(p12.1) Studies usually aggregated the activities in timeuse surveys into broader categories, but the Japanese study maintained the time-use survey's original 85 categories . Studies differ in what share of the day they cover; the Finnish studies covered 18.7, 19.3, and 23.0 h for the three different years , while the Austrian and Japanese studies covered all 24 h .

(p12.2) A few data challenges became evident from the review. The quality of data currently suffers from household consumption and time use data being collected separately, creating problems with input allocation. Data is mainly collected by national statistical agencies. When separately collected, making these time use, household expenditure, and input-output data compatible requires efforts by agencies to characterize households by a multitude of consistent factors. Further, the separately collected data makes causality difficult to establish, because time-use surveys include some income effect (people with more free time most likely work and earn less), and expenditure surveys include a time-use effect (higher expenditures are often a result of long work time) (Antal et al 2020). Collecting longitudinal time use and expenditure data from the same households is a solution (Antal et al 2020).  suggested the implementation of household output surveys, asking respondents for the volume of household production. This has, to our knowledge, not been done. Finally, time use is usually surveyed during a single period of the year, creating problems when accounts are compared to market accounts that usually cover an entire year (Hoekstra 2020).
## (s14) Policy relevance of household activity-level environmental footprints
(p14.0) The reviewed models underline that our behavioural choices affect our total resource use and carbon emission. From a policy perspective, the most important contribution of the reviewed studies is the provision of detailed and complete environmental footprint data at the household activity level to support decisions targeting everyday life. Policies targeting household environmental footprints can either target the structure of activity patterns (reducing the time spent in carbon-intensive activities) or the consumption during the activities . Demand-side solutions to climate change intersect with everyday life and culture and identifying policy instruments that can reduce demand-side footprints is an ongoing effort (Creutzig et al 2018). Policymakers and individuals might be more tractable when the carbon reduction policies go hand in hand with other policy objectives. Studying and sports activities have low carbon emissions and increasing time spent in these activities might be well aligned with lifelong learning  or health policies. Results from the reviewed studies nuance the debate on whether labour policies promoting work time reductions can reduce environmental footprints while enhancing well-being by showing that the footprint depends on household characteristics and which non-paid activities people shift to . Modelling the inequalities in the distribution of time and products between household types is necessary to estimate the relevance of and the responses to policies targeting our activity patterns. Furthermore, people's consumption and activity choices are strongly tied to the surrounding urbanisation and car ownership .

(p14.1) Environmental footprints of household production activities can guide policymakers as to whether to encourage or discourage these activities compared to market production from an environmental perspective, e.g. through the campaigns for catering centres or tax deductions for hiring of a workman or cleaner. Associating travel footprints with each activity can provide an informed basis for governments or local government on how to improve infrastructure to reduce emissions: is local or long-distance public transport most important to improve?
## (s15) Methodical and conceptual issues
(p15.0) Economically valuing outputs of productive activities is relevant to quantify environmental intensities. Environmental intensities can also be expressed per input quantity, e.g. the carbon footprint per unit of time spent in an activity. Maintaining inputs of time in its original unit, both to production and consumption activities, is the clearest way to show what people do, avoiding any value assumptions. Measuring outputs of household production in monetary values equivalent to market products puts household production in line with formal production activities, underlining the economic contribution by households. Consumption activities (which do not have a market-like value) can be valued economically if the value reflects the activity benefit, the experienced well-being (and not a market-like value). None of the reviewed studies included activity benefits in the monetary valuation of household activities.

(p15.1) While most reviewed studies did not allocate public goods provided by the government as inputs to specific household activities, and Gershuny (1987b) even argued that this would be impossible to do, services provided by the government are produced for and consumed by households and contribute to their environmental footprints. E.g. health care is partly supplied by the government but consumed by the households. While there is a household time use associated with receiving health care, this is not true for all government services. If not possible to identify as inputs to specific activities, services provided by the government could be moved to a time-independent activity like the 'household infrastructure' category suggested by . It seems most natural to allow some products to be consumed independently of time (e.g. an insurance or the national Defence). Also, distributing the service flow from the dwelling across activities will not make the lifestyle clearer. To be in line with the output-based method that we advocate, service flows from durable goods should be valued by their rental prices.

(p15.2) The third-party criterion is applied in most studies to distinguish production and consumption activities. More relevant distinctions have not emerged from the review. To avoid the confusion arising from leisure sounding enjoyable and thereby the misunderstanding that well-being is an indicator of whether an activity is consumption or production, we used the terminology 'consumption activities' vs 'production activities' . As an addition to this, experienced freedom in an activity, as suggested by Aall (2011), is a relevant parameter for designing policy recommendations that people will act upon. Most people obtain an activity benefit both from consumption and production (Ironmonger 1996, and production activities are valuable both because of the product provided and the experienced well-being.

(p15.3) Input-output tables have not yet been comprehensively used to establish the relationship between well-being and consumption ). Non-market activities play a major role in wellbeing which could be incorporated into the inputoutput tables ).  met this wish and linked the feeling of flow with carbon footprints from the UK. This can guide environmental policies in considering experienced well-being. It should be mentioned that the feeling of well-being is likely not linearly related to the time spent on an activity.
## (s16) Suggestions for future research
(p16.0) We suggest integrating household activity accounts and time use measurements into traditional inputoutput tables. We propose an embedded approach rather than modelling a separate satellite account as suggested by Eurostat (2003), which would not allow for feedback effects. While this enables the estimation of household activity-level environmental footprints that can provide an informed basis for the pressing request for policies targeting consumer behaviour (Creutzig et al 2018), we, as additional steps, suggest that the model should be:

(p16.1) (1) A comprehensive socioeconomic model, detailing the role of paid labour and the remainder of household time use. Social accounting matrices, based on the SNA, allow for comprehensive environmental, economic, and social policy analysis.

(p16.2) (2) Multiregional, following the general trend for consumption-based footprint accounting (Malik et al 2019). Since consumption in one country affects export from production in another, it also affects the time allocation of foreign employees (Gershuny 1987b). This requires harmonised classifications of activities and allocation methods and enables comparison of the effect of environmental policies or technologies between the same household activities across countries.
