# EDITED BY Clinical utility and future direction of speaking valve: A review

CorpusID: 252114918 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be35391b2025d5e5e8ec23024f4a976662fe59f4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be35391b2025d5e5e8ec23024f4a976662fe59f4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Speaking valve on phonation or speaking
(p2.0) Normal human speech requires a certain amount of pressure in the pharynx, but in patients with tracheotomy the pressure difference between the inside and outside of the glottis disappears due to the rerouting of the airflow in and out, resulting impaired voice. Although it is possible to communicate with patients in other ways, it is still easy to cause communication difficulties and inaccurate information transmission. At the same time, due to the inability to vocalize, patients will develop to a certain degree of anxiety and psychological burden, which affects the treatment effect. Therefore, restoring the patient's voice in a timely manner is conducive to more accurate communication between medical staff and patients, and restores the patient's confidence in treatment. After wearing the speaking valve, the pressure in the pharyngeal cavity is immediately restored, and the patient can quickly resume vocalization, which brings obvious psychological encouragement to the patient, and is more conducive to breathing training.

(p2.1) For patients receiving mechanical ventilation of ventilator, PMV can not only be directly linked with the tracheal cannula, but also with the ventilator tube, so that the patient can speak when using the ventilator, but at this time the medical staff is required to adjust the ventilator parameters The results showed that the early use of the speaking valve allowed the patients in the intervention group to recover vocalization for an average of 7 days, compared with 18 days in the control group. Patients in the intervention recovered vocalization an average of 11 days earlier than in the control group (10). In another study, Sutt included mechanically ventilated patients and analyzed the impact of the speaking valve on the time it took to resume verbal communication from the start of tracheotomy, and found that the average time required for patients using the speaking valve was 9 days, while patients without the speaking valve took an average of 18 days (11). In a prospective study with a small sample size, Manzano et al. also found that PMV can improve patients' verbal communication skills (12).
## (s4) Speaking valve on aspiration and swallowing
(p4.0) In general, tracheostomy is a treatment used when the patient is unable to breathe on his own or when the airway is obstructed by a high volume of sputum. Although tracheotomy can ensure the smooth breathing of patients, it will also bring a series of physiological and functional changes (15), including reduced or even disappearance of airway resistance, failure to form subglottic pressure during swallowing, reduced muscle sensitivity, weakened vocal cord closure and coordination, weakened cough reflex, and weakened laryngeal lift (16). At the same time, after tracheotomy, the lower respiratory tract is directly connected to the outside world, and the gas entering the lower respiratory tract does not have the functions of moistening, humidifying, and screening out micro-particles in the upper respiratory tract, which causes the secretions of the respiratory tract mucosa to thicken, harden and even become thicker on the tracheal wall, and blocks small bronchi, resulting in obstruction of secretions discharge (16). Moreover, studies have found that after tracheotomy, patients have reduced lung compliance and decreased lung function. These factors together make patients vulnerable to aspiration and aspiration pulmonary infection after tracheotomy (17). In addition, Major working principle of speaking valve. When inhaling, the valve opens, air or ventilator gas enters the trachea, and when exhaling, the valve closes, and the airflow forms a certain pressure on the catheter and the upper airway, forcing the gas to be discharged from the upper airway. because of impaired consciousness or brain function and throat function, most patients with tracheotomy have difficulty swallowing and are prone to aspiration, which further increases the risk of aspiration pneumonia (18).

(p4.1) A study by Dettelbach et al. observed the effect of PMV on aspiration of patients while eating, and the results showed that wearing PMV could reduce or even prevent aspiration regardless of whether patients ate liquid, semi-liquid or solid food (19). The study by Lichtman et al. found that the use of the speaking valve can significantly reduce the accumulation of tracheal secretions, but has no significant effect on 24-hour arterial oxygen saturation. The results also showed that the use of the speaking valve can improve the patient's sense of smell (20). Manzano et al. also found in a study that the use of PMV can reduce secretions in the respiratory tract and improve cardiopulmonary function (12). Passy et al. found that patients who used the speaking valve had significantly less oral and nasal secretions and significantly less suctioning by nursing staff (7). The findings of Elpern et al. have similar findings (21). Using a more accurate video-fluoroscopy swallow test, they looked at patients' aspirations while drinking thin liquids, and showed that wearing a PMV can significantly reduce aspiration (21). The study by Sutt et al. also compared the effect of the use of the speaking valve on swallowing function and found that although the use of the speaking valve had no significant effect on the recovery time of fluid or food intake, patients using the speaking valve needed to take thicker fluids, and 42% of patients using the speaking valve were able to consume food while the tracheal tube balloon was deflated, while those who did not all needed to eat while the balloon was inflated (11).
## (s5) Speaking valve on mobility and quality of life
(p5.0) In critically ill patients, early mobilization can prevent ICUrelated muscle wasting and decline in physical function (22, 23). Ceron et al. conducted a cohort study of patients undergoing tracheostomy who were weaning from mechanical ventilation (24). The study ultimately included 18 patients, whose mobility status was assessed using daily measurements of the Perme Intensive Care Unit Mobility Score. The results showed that the patient's Perme score increased rapidly from 11.3 (10.1-12.0) before wearing the speaking valve to 18.2 (16.2-20.1) after wearing the speaking valve for 1 day (P < 0.01). The authors further determined that the speaking valve improved the abilities of "sit to stand," "static standing balance once standing position is established," and "transfer from bed to chair OR chair to bed" (24). There are also studies looking at the impact of the speaking valve on the quality of life of patients with endotracheal ventilator-assisted breathing. The researchers used the visual analog self-esteem scale (VASES) and the EuroQol-5D questionnaire (EQ-5D) to assess the patients' quality of life (10). The results showed that the between-group differences in the seven indicators of VASES suggested that the early use of the speaking valve might be beneficial to improve the quality of life of patients, but there was no statistical difference; similarly, the EQ-5D results also suggested that the early use of the speaking valve might improve the quality of life, but there was also no statistical difference (10). These results may be related to the small sample size included in the final analysis, and subsequent studies should include larger sample sizes for analysis.
