# An Overview of Cefiderocol's Therapeutic Potential and Underlying Resistance Mechanisms

CorpusID: 259242361 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/86b1f5a5691666f36b9eeb955100a894213e1e4f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/86b1f5a5691666f36b9eeb955100a894213e1e4f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The discovery of antibiotics in the 20th century was a milestone in the history of medicine and healthcare. However, bacteria are constantly evolving, and have been developing resistance mechanisms against virtually all available antibiotics [1]. In order to uniformize the definitions associated with multi-resistance, a joint initiative from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defined the resistance profile of bacteria classified as multidrug-resistant (MDR), extensively drug-resistant (XDR), and pandrug-resistant (PDR); the standardized definitions and associated resistance profiles were elaborated for bacteria highly prone to develop resistance and frequently responsible for infections in the healthcare system [2].
## (s2) Cephalosporins
(p2.0) The β-lactam antibiotics are one of the most commonly prescribed antibiotics in many countries. Among these, cephalosporins are used to treat infections such as pneumonia, urinary tract infections, and skin and soft tissue infections. Cephalosporins are classified as β-lactam antibiotics, originally derived from the fungus Cephalosporium sp., known today as Acremonium sp. [19].

(p2.1) They act in bacteria by binding to the penicillin binding proteins (PBPs), enzymes located in the cytoplasmatic membrane that cross-link the peptidoglycan units, inhibiting the building of the cell wall and leading to cell death. Cephalosporins are used for the treatment of various infections caused by both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. They can be administered orally or parenterally, and are used in skin infections, pneumonia, meningitis, and infections caused by bacteria resistant to others antibiotics. So far, they are classified into five generations, according to their antibacterial spectrum of action and their temporal release.
## (s3) Siderophores: Biological Function
(p3.0) Virulence factors are cellular structures, molecules, and regulatory systems that enable bacteria to colonize the host at the cellular level and promote the development of disease. These factors can be secretory, membrane/cell-wall-associated, and cytosolic in nature, and they include adherence and invasive factors, exotoxins, endotoxin in the case of Gramnegative bacteria, capsules, and other surface components. There is a lot of interest in these traits that can be disrupted and used for therapeutic purposes.

(p3.1) Iron is an essential nutrient for both host and microbial cells. Free iron levels are extremely low in the host since this metal is largely bound to proteins, and much more limited during the process of infection, a process known as nutritional immunity [32].

(p3.2) In general, animals have developed ways of retaining iron from body fluids, with the main objectives of preventing bacterial development and maintaining iron homeostasis. The blood therefore transports most of the iron in the form of molecular complexes, not being freely accessible to bacteria, but rather, and mainly, bound to intracellular haemoglobin or extracellular proteins such as transferrin, which has a high affinity to iron under physiological conditions. During infection, organic acids are produced, which reduce the pH, and Fe 3+ is released into the medium. To prevent the obtention of iron by bacteria, neutrophils synthesize lactoferrin that shows a much higher affinity for ferric ions in acidic environment than transferrin [33].

(p3.3) Bacteria require intracellular iron for their metabolism, which they achieve by producing siderophores, molecules with a high affinity for binding iron. Siderophores are usually small organic molecules that are secreted into the environment and effectively compete with host proteins to bind scarce free iron (Fe 3+ ). Bacteria produce different siderophores, depending on the species, such as enterobactin, pioverdin, and salmochelin. Due to the presence of functional groups, these molecules form strong complexes with iron ions. OM receptors recognize these siderophore-iron complexes and transport them to the periplasmic space with the assistance of protein complexes in the cytoplasmic membrane (TonB and ExbB/ExbD family) that generate the necessary energy for active transportation. The iron is then incorporated into the respiratory chain once it is inside the bacteria cytoplasm [34].
## (s10) Mechanisms of Resistance
(p10.0) The emergence of carbapenem-resistant infections has been increasing in the last years, and novel antibiotics are sorely needed. Cefiderocol appears as a promising new antibacterial with an innovative way of entering the cell periplasmic space. Despite its similar structure with ceftazidime and cefepime (third-and fourth-generation cephalosporins, respectively), cefiderocol shows an increased stability to various β-lactamases (Figure 1), including AmpC and ESBL [43].
## (s15) Klebsiella (Enterobacter) aerogenes
(p15.0) The MIC 90 value of cefiderocol against E. aerogenes isolates in was 0.5 µg/mL in both studies with 238 and T. [59,66] In this study, 1158 cefiderocol resistant isolates were identified, of which 20 (1.7%) were K. aerogenes.
