# BioScientific Review (BSR) Title: Molecular Basis of the Structure and Transmission of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS: A Review Report History: Molecular Basis of the Structure and Transmission of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS: A Review Report

CorpusID: 259592928 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8730ba93f8a6958a2554dce33a23c290a33b72cf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8730ba93f8a6958a2554dce33a23c290a33b72cf)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s6) Structure of SARS
(p6.0) Genome of SARS-CoV includes 29,727 nucleotides (in length) having 11 ORFs. These include 1) specified location and number of small open reading frames, 2) having 1 copy of Polypro, and 3) short anchoring of S protein. Figure 2a gives the systematic representation of genome organization of SARS. Spike glycoprotein of this virus is a membranous protein (type 1) and makes a trimer formation. It usually has a transmembranous segment which helps the trimer to anchor the viral membrane. Further, ectodomain plays a role in decorating its virion surface. On the cell surface of the host, it mostly binds to ACE2 enzyme (receptor angiotensin-converting enzyme 2) which is a receptor present on the host's surface resulting in membrane fusion, while undergoing various rearrangements related to the structure [15]. This glycoprotein is reported to be glycosylated heavily with each promotor having glycosylation sites (22N linked) [30]. Various studies regarding the initial analysis of the strain (Wuhan-Hu-1) which outbreaks confirmed to be amino acid residues (1273), with N-terminus signal peptide, binding receptor fragment S1 as well as S2 (fusion fragment) in it. Moreover, S1 is further divided into a huge number of domains, such as NTD, CTD1, CTD2 and RBD (N-terminal domain, Cterminal domains 1 and 2 and receptor binding domain).
## (s8) Structure and Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2)
(p8.0) The fatality rates of pneumonia of SARS-CoV, SARS-CoV-2, and MERS-CoV (2.9, 9.6, and ∼36 percentages, respectively) were reported [31]. OC43, NL63, HKU1, and 229E (HCoV-s) also have the capability to cause diseases, although they are self-limited and show mild symptoms [32]. The general structure of SARS-CoV-2 is shown in Figure 2b. 
## (s9) Genome Organization of SARS-CoV and CoV-2
(p9.0) Genomic organization of severe acute respiratory syndrome corona virus 2 encodes four virally structural proteins named spike (S), envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) proteins 3-5, follow the characteristic gene order [5'replicase (rep gene), (S), (E), (M), (N)-3'] having un-translated short regions at both terminals ( Figure 1). For virus to enter the host cells, the above mentioned proteins along with the spike protein play a fundamental functional role. Non-structural protein is encoded by rep gene and constitutes about 2/3 of genome at 50 ends. Thoroughly, S protein acts as an important therapeutic target as it is in charge of receptor-binding and subsequent viral entry into the host cells [33]. Literature reported the roles of M and E proteins in viral assembly; however, RNA synthesis is carried out by (nucleocapsid) protein. Figure 2c shows the non-structural proteins.  Their absence from other genomes implies that they may play specialized roles in SARS-COV replication, assembly, or virulence. [62,63] 19 Membrane protein ORF7b 44

(p9.1) ORF7b's apoptosis-inducing function in cells. Cytokine levels and host innate immune responses were also studied, including the expression of interferon regulatory transcription factor (IRF)-3, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-1, interferon (IFN)-, tumors necrosis factor (TNF)-, and interleukin (IL)-6. [64,65] 20 Spike protein ORF10 38

(p9.2) ORF10, which has been suggested to play a role in immune evasion. ORF10 overexpression significantly reduced the expression of type I interferon. SARS-CoV-2-infected HeLa cells expressed genes and interferon-stimulated genes in vitro [66] Department of Life Sciences Volume 5 Issue 1, 2023
## (s12) Structure and Transmission of Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS)
(p12.0) Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a respiratory syndrome and dromedary camels are known to be their initial source of origin. As far as its  [75]. During encountering targeted cells or viral biogenesis, the cleavage of MERS coronavirus occurs at junction point found in between subunits (S1 and S2) [76]. Moreover, the 2 nd cleavage site S2 is processed on onseting of fusion of membrane and is found in S2 subunit upstream of fusion peptide. Both of these cleavage sites enhanced chances of viral entry and in modulation of cell tropism and host range [77].
## (s13) Organization of Genome.
(p13.0) Genome size of this virus varies in its nucleotide length of about (30,119), replication gene containing non-structural proteins named NSP1 to NSP16 and poly (A) tail at 50 and 30 end of genome, respectively. A cap structure of about 50 terminal as well as spike, enveloped, nucleocapsid and membrane structural proteins are also seen in their genome organization. Moving inside of its structure, four kinds of accessory proteins can be seen, arranged as ORF4a, ORF4b, ORF3, ORF5 and ORF8, constituting about 10 kilo base at genome 30 end. These viruses genome does not encode for a protein hemagglutinin-esterase unlike other βcoronaviruses [78]. Various kind of accessory proteins found in both viruses (MERS-CoV having 5 proteins and SARS-CoV having 8) proved to be helpful in evading immune system. The major differences might lead the way towards the signaling and induction of IFNs type 1 with greater sensitivity. Schematic representation of the genome organization of MERS is shown in (Figure 3 a). Further, the role of different protein in MERS is shown in Table 3.  1.11.3. Transmission. Due to its stability in environmental conditions, its transmission is reported either through fomite or contact. In addition, transmission through fluid transfusions is also possible. As compared to SARS-CoV2, its transmission from one human being to another is limited. The major source of its transmission is debatable. The transmission chances of virus in humans through improperly cooked meat and milk were proved by RNA detection of MERS-CoV in camel's milk. Bat to human transfer was also proposed recently and it might be possible that this transmission is either through intermediate or direct host.
## (s16) Diagnosis.
(p16.0) After diagnosis with COVID-19, the period of recovery differs depending upon their health condition and severity of symptoms. People with mild condition of this virus have chances to recover within a week. However, severe patients have to experience alveoli damage as well as respiratory failure, which may lead to death. The rate of mortality persists more in elder people having symptoms of serious diseases such as heart failure, Parkinson's disease, and brain tumor [105].
## (s17) Mortality Rate.
(p17.0) Death rates caused by coronaviruses, namely MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV reaches upto 37% and 10% -15%, respectively. COVID-19 patient's death rate varied in between 2% to 4% and reached upto 13%, showing that death rate in case of COVID-19 is lesser than SARS and MERS [106]. Further comparisons are show in Table 4.
