# molecules Biomaterials Based on Chitosan and Its Derivatives and Their Potential in Tissue Engineering and Other Biomedical Applications-A Review

CorpusID: 255246438 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72fcca29261923aac74454e865e0e05eab047b88](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/72fcca29261923aac74454e865e0e05eab047b88)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Chitosan and Its Derivatives in Medicine
(p2.0) Due to its properties, chitosan and its derivatives can be used in the production of dressing materials, in the manufacture of drugs as a controlled-release active substance Chitosan acetate is obtained by reaction with acetic acid in an aqueous-ethanol environment. It is water soluble and its solution is more stable than chitosan dissolved in acetic acid, while retaining the physicochemical and biological properties of chitosan. It exhibits stronger antimicrobial activity against Gram-positive bacteria than against Gramnegative bacteria. It is used as a dressing material (Chitopack C ® ) and a hemostat (Hemcon Bandage ® ) approved by the FDA [27].
## (s3) Chitosan and Its Derivatives in Medicine
(p3.0) Due to its properties, chitosan and its derivatives can be used in the production of dressing materials, in the manufacture of drugs as a controlled-release active substance carrier, or in tissue engineering involving soft tissues, nerves, cartilage, bones, or arteries. Studies on the use of chitosan are summarized in Table 1 and studies on its derivatives are in Table 2.    Good drug delivery, non-cytotoxic to the cornea, good degradability [103] The team of Fangsong Zhang et al. [30] used two chemical agents, glutaraldehyde, genipin, and a physical agent, ultraviolet light, to crosslink nerve extracellular matrix/chitosan scaffolds. Scaffolds cross-linked with genipin were characterized by higher porosity and regular structure in contrast to scaffolds cross-linked with glutaraldehyde and UV. The degree of crosslinking for genipin-crosslinked and glutaraldehyde-crosslinked scaffolds were similar to each other. Genipin-crosslinked scaffolds had the lowest degree of cytotoxicity and the highest histocompatibility, with good mechanical properties.

(p3.1) Another team, Jie Xu et al. [31], prepared a scaffold based on decellularized extracellular matrix, gelatin, and chitosan cross-linked EDC/NHS. The resulting scaffolds were characterized by a high modulus of elasticity and biodegradability. The obtained scaffolds are not cytotoxic and provided a good substrate for cell proliferation. The scaffolds were also characterized by antibacterial properties (E. Coli, S. Aureus). The scaffolds obtained could be used in skin tissue engineering.

(p3.2) A scaffold for use in muscle tissue engineering is a project by the team of Weiguang Zhao et al. [32]. They used genipin as a crosslinking agent and electrospun cellulose acetate nanofibers that were incorporated into a chitosan/fibroin silk cryogel scaffold. The resulting scaffolds were characterized by larger pores and roughness than the cryogel scaffold itself. They are also a good substrate for smooth muscle cell proliferation, which showed a higher potential for the expression of genes related to muscle contraction. They also exhibit good mechanical properties.
