# Citation: Mitrogiannopoulou, A micromachines Review Polymeric and Paper-Based Lab-on-a-Chip Devices in Food Safety: A Review

CorpusID: 258466620 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d32336e8f3f7f6eaa7e36689eed7038952039209](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d32336e8f3f7f6eaa7e36689eed7038952039209)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Polymer and Paper-Based Microfluidic Fabrication Methods
(p1.0) Since the introduction of the µTAS concept in the 1990s, scientists have gradually shifted their interest in polymers due to the demand for cheap and disposable devices. Polymer materials typically used in microfluidic applications can be divided into three categories according to their physical properties: (a) thermosets, (b) thermoplastics, and (c) elastomers [23].

(p1.1) Thermosets are polymers that are irreversibly hardened and come from soft, solid, or viscous liquid prepolymers. Curing results in chemical reactions that create extensive cross-linking between polymer chains to produce an infusible, insoluble, and thermally stable polymer network [24]. Examples of thermosets are polyimide, SU-8 (photoresist), polyurethane, and epoxy resin.
## (s8) Micromachining Techniques
(p8.0) CNC machining is a manufacturing process in which factory tools and machinery are manipulated by computer software. The method's versatility and simplicity have made it also popular for the fabrication of microfluidic chips, but the resolution of the method is determined by the size of the available tools; up to now, microfluidics with channel dimensions greater than 100 µm have been reported [43,53].
## (s9) 3D Printing
(p9.0) 3D printing has also attracted a great deal of attention for the fabrication of microfluidics. 3D printing enables the fabrication of complex flow-regulating components and the integration of detectors and cell culture on chips. It can be carried out through processes such as stereolithography (SL) [61], selective laser melting and sintering (SLS) [62], fused deposition [63], and poly-jet or multi-jet modeling (MJM). For example, Duarte et al. [64] studied the development of 3D-printed microfluidic devices with integrated electrodes for label-free counting of E. coli cells incorporated inside droplets based on capacitively coupled contactless conductivity detection (C4D). The devices were fabricated with the 
## (s10) Micromachining Techniques
(p10.0) CNC machining is a manufacturing process in which factory tools and machinery are manipulated by computer software. The method's versatility and simplicity have made it also popular for the fabrication of microfluidic chips, but the resolution of the method is determined by the size of the available tools; up to now, microfluidics with channel dimensions greater than 100 µm have been reported [43,53].
## (s12) Optical Lithography Techniques
(p12.0) Optical lithography-based methods have been extensively used for the fabrication of microfluidic channels. SU-8 is one of the most popular materials in this method as it has high mechanical rigidity, and chemical stability, as well as a defined shape and size [68]. SU-8 has also been used for the fabrication of masters of in-line micro-valves with different aspect ratios via lithography techniques due to its chemical and thermal stability after polymerization and allows mass production from a single master mold [69]. In another interesting work, polystyrene (PS), which is a commonly used material for biological and biomedical applications due to its high biocompatibility, has been used for the fabrication of microstructures with 20 µm resolution with direct optical lithography [70].
## (s13) Plasma Processing
(p13.0) Plasma processing has been used in microfluidics to selectively modify the wetting properties of microfluidics [71], to promote the adhesion of a bio interface or a coating inside microfluidics [72], as well as for surface treatment to achieve bonding between glass and PDMS or other polymers [73]. However, its application is not limited to the aforementioned applications, and if combined with other methods such as optical lithography, it 
## (s14) Optical Lithography Techniques
(p14.0) Optical lithography-based methods have been extensively used for the fabrication of microfluidic channels. SU-8 is one of the most popular materials in this method as it has high mechanical rigidity, and chemical stability, as well as a defined shape and size [68]. SU-8 has also been used for the fabrication of masters of in-line micro-valves with different aspect ratios via lithography techniques due to its chemical and thermal stability after polymerization and allows mass production from a single master mold [69]. In another interesting work, polystyrene (PS), which is a commonly used material for biological and biomedical applications due to its high biocompatibility, has been used for the fabrication of microstructures with 20 µm resolution with direct optical lithography [70].
## (s15) Plasma Processing
(p15.0) Plasma processing has been used in microfluidics to selectively modify the wetting properties of microfluidics [71], to promote the adhesion of a bio interface or a coating inside microfluidics [72], as well as for surface treatment to achieve bonding between glass and PDMS or other polymers [73]. However, its application is not limited to the aforementioned applications, and if combined with other methods such as optical lithography, it can provide an alternative method for the complete fabrication of a functional polymer-based microfluidic device [74].

(p15.1) For microfluidics relevant to food safety applications, plasma processing has been used to enable antibody binding at a high level, and microfluidic chips for bacteria capturing and lysis have been demonstrated on PMMA substrates. In particular, the proposed devices have been used for the detection of Salmonella with concentrations ranging from 10 2 to 10 8 cells/mL. Except for Salmonella, E. coli, and S. Typhimurium were also successfully captured and detected with a capture efficiency of 80-100% for concentrations of less than 10 6 cells/mL even when using high flow rates [75]. In another example, Geissler et al. [76] fabricated a microfluidic chip for the identification of E. coli after a short analysis time. The device integrated thermal lysis, PCR amplification, and microarray hybridization on the same cartridge [77,78]. The immobilization of the amino-modified DNA probes was completed by exposure of the polymer materials to oxygen plasma, leading to the formation of hydrophilic, oxygen-containing species (including -OH groups) which increase the surface free energy and promote the wetting of the polymer substrate by polar solvents. Table 1 summarizes the most common fabrication methods for polymeric microfluidics, together with their advantages and disadvantages. There is no "perfect" solution when choosing the fabrication method of a polymer-based microfluidic, and the choice is determined by several factors such as accessibility to a clean room, the material selection for the application envisioned, and most importantly, the final intended use of the device. For example, injection molding and roll-to-roll hot embossing are ideal for high-volume production, but the material undergoes wide changes in temperature. On the other hand, technologies such as plasma treatment seem really promising for the functionalization of such devices. The selection of the fabrication method also depends on the complexity of the device, the size and shape of the channels, and the material being used. Each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages. However, soft lithography is considered to be one of the most popular and versatile methods for the fabrication of polymer-based LOC devices for research purposes in food testing, as it is relatively simple, inexpensive, and reproducible. However, thermoplastic polymers are mainly used by companies working with microfluidics for commercial purposes due to the large-scale fabrication methods for thermoplastics (i.e., injection molding) and the properties (i.e., transparency, rigidity) such materials can offer. 
## (s19) Inkjet Printing
(p19.0) Inkjet printing is a simple and useful technology for the accurate and contactless dispensing of picolitre-sized droplets of liquids (inks) onto a user-defined position on a substrate [80]. In microfluidic channels, it has been used to deposit hydrophobic materials as barriers; commonly used materials are polystyrene [85] (Figure 8), hydrophobic sol-gel [94], silicone [95], and alkyl ketene dimer [96]. Inkjet printing is a highly adapted method for material deposition, and several examples of its application exist in the literature [97][98][99][100]. One example in which inkjet printing was used is the work by Hossain et al. [101] for the detection of food-and water-borne bacteria (E. coli O157:H7 and E. coli O104:H4). Snyder et al. [102] reduced the analysis time for the detection of coliforms from 24 h to 6 h with a paper-based device that performs cell lysing on-chip, at an initial E. coli concentration of 1 cfu/mL after incubation. Without any incubation, the device could detect bacterial concentrations as low as∼10 4 cfu/mL. The bacteria E. coli were detected via the presence of the coliform-specific agent, β-galactosidase. Figure 8. ① Using inkjet printing of poly(styrene) with toluene and colored ink, to visualize the paper's structure. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [85] 2008 American Chemical Society. ② Micro-PADs fabricated via printing a pattern on chromatography paper with an ink-jet printer. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [82] PMC Open Access Subset. ③ Hydrophilic channels can be created on paper by printing hydrophobic PDMS, followed by introducing a 10-µL sample into the channels. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [103] © 2023 Copyright American Chemical Society.
## (s20) Optical Lithography
(p20.0) Optical lithography has been used to create high-resolution features for paper-based devices with sizes down to 100 µm and hydrophobic barriers as small as 200 µm in width. The photoresists that are used the most in photolithography are poly (o-nitrobenzyl methacrylate) (PoNBMA) [104], octadecyl trichlorosilane (OTS) [105], and SU-8, with which Whitesides et al. [31] prepared and designed the first µPAD. However, photoresist is the 
## (s21) Inkjet Printing
(p21.0) Inkjet printing is a simple and useful technology for the accurate and contactless dispensing of picolitre-sized droplets of liquids (inks) onto a user-defined position on a substrate [80]. In microfluidic channels, it has been used to deposit hydrophobic materials as barriers; commonly used materials are polystyrene [85] (Figure 8), hydrophobic sol-gel [94], silicone [95], and alkyl ketene dimer [96]. Inkjet printing is a highly adapted method for material deposition, and several examples of its application exist in the literature [97][98][99][100]. One example in which inkjet printing was used is the work by Hossain et al. [101] for the detection of food-and water-borne bacteria (E. coli O157:H7 and E. coli O104:H4). Snyder et al. [102] reduced the analysis time for the detection of coliforms from 24 h to 6 h with a paper-based device that performs cell lysing on-chip, at an initial E. coli concentration of 1 cfu/mL after incubation. Without any incubation, the device could detect bacterial concentrations as low as∼10 4 cfu/mL. The bacteria E. coli were detected via the presence of the coliform-specific agent, β-galactosidase. 
## (s22) Inkjet Printing
(p22.0) Inkjet printing is a simple and useful technology for the accurate and contactl pensing of picolitre-sized droplets of liquids (inks) onto a user-defined position on strate [80]. In microfluidic channels, it has been used to deposit hydrophobic mate barriers; commonly used materials are polystyrene [85] (Figure 8), hydrophobic [94], silicone [95], and alkyl ketene dimer [96]. Inkjet printing is a highly adapted m for material deposition, and several examples of its application exist in the literatu 100]. One example in which inkjet printing was used is the work by Hossain et a for the detection of food-and water-borne bacteria (E. coli O157:H7 and E. coli O1 Snyder et al. [102] reduced the analysis time for the detection of coliforms from 24 h with a paper-based device that performs cell lysing on-chip, at an initial E. coli c tration of 1 cfu/mL after incubation. Without any incubation, the device could dete terial concentrations as low as∼10 4 cfu/mL. The bacteria E. coli were detected via th ence of the coliform-specific agent, β-galactosidase. Figure 8. ① Using inkjet printing of poly(styrene) with toluene and colored ink, to visua paper's structure. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [85] 2008 American Chemical Soc Micro-PADs fabricated via printing a pattern on chromatography paper with an ink-jet prin produced with permission from Ref. [82] PMC Open Access Subset. ③ Hydrophilic chan be created on paper by printing hydrophobic PDMS, followed by introducing a 10-µL sam the channels. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [103] © 2023 Copyright American C Society.
## (s23) Optical Lithography
(p23.0) Optical lithography has been used to create high-resolution features for paper devices with sizes down to 100 µm and hydrophobic barriers as small as 200 µm in The photoresists that are used the most in photolithography are poly (o-nitrobenzy acrylate) (PoNBMA) [104], octadecyl trichlorosilane (OTS) [105], and SU-8, with methacrylate) (PoNBMA) [104], octadecyl trichlorosilane (OTS) [105], and SU-8, with which Whitesides et al. [31] prepared and designed the first µPAD. However, photoresist is the major cost in the photolithography process, with SU-8 being costly enough (e.g., SU-8 costs 1 $/g and PMMA 0.15 $/g [103]), so with that in mind, Whitesides replaced SU-8 with cyclized poly (isoprene) derivative photoresist [106] and propanediol methyl ether acetate (PGMEA).

(p23.1) Several examples of paper-based devices for the detection of foodborne pathogens exist in the literature, mainly due to their simple and cheap fabrication process. Lin et al. [107] designed a paper-based analytical device for the detection of E. coli, in both tap water and seawater samples. For the fabrication of the device, the filter paper was immersed in a mixed solution of water-based PUA (polyurethane acrylate), which is a photosensitive resin, and a photoinitiator (HMPP-2-hydroxy-2-methylpropiophenone). After absorption and baking, UV photolithography was used to pattern the paper-based device. For the detection of E. coli. 10 µL of bacteria lysate was dropped onto the colorimetric substrate, and after 10 min the color intensity was measured with an in-house-made device that includes an integrated cadmium column with a detection limit of 3.7 × 10 3 cfu/mL [108]. Bacteria samples with concentrations ranging from 10 1 to 10 9 cfu/mL were investigated, and the color change from yellow to red/violet was measured when the intracellular enzyme β-galactosidase reacted with a chromogenic substrate, CPRG (chlorophenols). The intensity of the color here depends linearly upon the concentration of E. coli. and corresponds to a range of 10 4 -10 9 cfu/mL. For tap water, the detection range was~10 5 -10 6 cfu/mL as well as for seawater~10 4 -10 6 cfu/mL. Photolithography can be combined with other fabrication techniques in order to produce the desired microfluidic chip. An interesting example of such a combination is the work by Yu et al. [109], who used photolithography with UV photosensitive inks on a piece of Parafilm to pattern the microchannels and wells and then embossed the Parafilm on Whatman #1 filter paper in an oven, to transfer the layout. A typical fabrication process flow is shown in Figure 9.
## (s24) Screen Printing
(p24.0) Screen printing is a traditional printing technique that involves a customized mesh that is used to selectively transfer ink or dye onto a substrate. Although screen printing can be used to produce many devices, it requires a customized screen via photolithography to transfer the pattern onto a substrate. Each screen, even though it is reusable, is usually customized; therefore, screen printing is a time-consuming and costly process. Furthermore, such devices' feature sizes and spatial resolution are high, e.g., in the millimeter-scale range. Rengaraj et al. [110] developed a device consisting of paper-based electrodes for the impedimetric detection of bacteria in water. The sensing probe was fabricated by screen printing three layers of conductive carbon-based ink onto a commercial hydrophobic paper, and the electrode surface was modified with carboxyl groups before prevalent immobilization of the lectin Concanavalin A (Con A), which was used as the biorecognition element. The three-layer printing methodology was selected as the best choice between low resistance (18 Ω/cm) and rapid printing. The final device consisted of a circular working electrode with a 6 mm diameter and a geometric surface area of 0.286 cm 2 , printed on a paper strip with a 4 cm length and 1 cm width to cross-link the cellulose fibers; after screen printing the electrodes, the paper was submerged for 3 h in a solution of 6% w/v glyoxal and then thermally treated. The bacterial detection limit obtained was 1.9 × 10 3 cfu/mL and the dynamic range was 10 3 -10 6 cfu/mL. sponds to a range of 10 4 -10 9 cfu/mL. For tap water, the detection range was ~10 5 -10 6 cfu/mL as well as for seawater ~10 4 -10 6 cfu/mL. Photolithography can be combined with other fabrication techniques in order to produce the desired microfluidic chip. An interesting example of such a combination is the work by Yu et al. [109], who used photolithography with UV photosensitive inks on a piece of Parafilm to pattern the microchannels and wells and then embossed the Parafilm on Whatman #1 filter paper in an oven, to transfer the layout. A typical fabrication process flow is shown in Figure 9. Figure 9. Optical lithography is a high-quality technique with many applications. The basic process of photolithography on paper-based microfluidics involves impregnating an entire sheet of paper with a negative photoresist, then exposing it to UV light through a photomask to crosslink the photoresist in the desired pattern and developing the paper in solvent to remove any unexposed resist. (a) Optical lithography on paper for the fabrication of a paper based device and (b) Plasma processing, cut out of the device and final modification steps on the paper based device. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [31]. Figure 9. Optical lithography is a high-quality technique with many applications. The basic process of photolithography on paper-based microfluidics involves impregnating an entire sheet of paper with a negative photoresist, then exposing it to UV light through a photomask to crosslink the photoresist in the desired pattern and developing the paper in solvent to remove any unexposed resist. (a) Optical lithography on paper for the fabrication of a paper based device and (b) Plasma processing, cut out of the device and final modification steps on the paper based device. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [31].
## (s25) Laser Processing Technology
(p25.0) Among the physical fabrication processes, some are complex, such as inkjet etching, and some offer low fabrication resolution, such as wax patterning. Laser processing is the laser beam irradiation that removes or melts the material and changes the surface properties of the object, by exploiting the laser's high energy. In particular, in µPAD fabrication, the laser is used to remove the hydrophilic areas and create a hydrophobic barrier. Mahmud et al. [111] developed a fabrication technique for patterning compact and microscale features with a laser cutting machine on chromatography paper backed with aluminum foil. In that way, the µPADs that were manufactured can have small sample volumes, small chemical reagent volumes, and a reduced packing cost. They created channel barriers with a width of 39 ± 15 µm that were capable of restricting fluid flow across the barrier, thus generating channels with a width of 128 ± 30 µm. In another study, Bagheri et al. [112] cut a Whatman filter paper No.1 with a CO 2 laser engraver to form a Y-sign design with 600 µm wide channels and, in that way, shape hydrophobic barriers. To prevent defects from burning, the paper was immersed in distilled water for 1 day after the cut. S. aureus was detected in food samples of orange juice and milk with a colorimetric aptamer-based Au/Pt NCs sensor at concentrations of 10 2 -10 8 cfu/mL and with a detection limit of 80 cfu/mL. As the laser-matter interaction is a complex phenomenon, laser processing applications require accurate mathematical models to describe various processes that occurr during the laser interaction with different materials, as with paper [113].
## (s26) Plasma Processing
(p26.0) Plasma treatment is also used in paper-based microfluidics and aims to modify the chemical and physical properties of a surface. Plasma is used to fabricate hydrophilic patterns on paper samples, as in the study of Li et al. [114] that used Whatman filter paper as a substrate and hydrophobized it with the use of an alkyl ketene dimer (AKD) heptane (0.6 g/L) solution. The plasma-treated areas were strongly wettable by water or other aqueous solutions and allowed the transport of liquids along and within the plasma-treated channels through capillary penetration. In order to test the device, they observed a color change reaction for the evaluation of enzyme activity, so they came to the conclusion that this fabrication method can have desirable results in creating a microfluidic chip that can transfer and analyze samples. A usual problem with plasma treatment is the over-etching effect, which has been observed many times. Over-etching happens because the particles generated in vacuum plasma have long mean free paths, and this causes the treated pattern to be slightly bigger than the mask. However, it can be controlled by controlling the process parameters.
