# R E V I E W The Safety and Efficacy of Mesenchymal Stem Cells in the Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes-A Literature Review

CorpusID: 257510910 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/483215db2219384ebfbc56a22a02d8b8e3de5b00](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/483215db2219384ebfbc56a22a02d8b8e3de5b00)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Effect of Therapy on C-Peptide Levels
(p8.0) The fasting C-peptide, obtained after 8-12 hours of patient fasting, is an effective indicator of insulin produced in the body. In three trials, T2, T3, and T5 (Figure 4), the C-peptide levels measured by HOMA-β were higher than 2 ng/mmol. Reduction in the C-peptide level signifies efficient islet cell function as c-peptide levels tend to increase in Type 2 diabetes. This indicates the overproduction of insulin. 23 The results in study T4 were found to display C-peptide levels as a potent indicator of the effectiveness of the treatment. Study T1 showed a reduction in c-peptide levels as well, but not to a significant amount. Most studies noted that C-peptide progressively increased with the peak value achieved at six months and a slight decrease later at 12 months. In one study, T6, the C-peptide levels were reduced to normal in the range of 0.5 to 2 ng/mmol and plateaued at the 12-month follow-up mark. 
## (s9) Effect of Therapy on HbA1c Levels
(p9.0) HbAc1 level is a common and effective indicator of the mean glucose level over a long period (2 to 3 months). It provides a much better understanding of long-term glycaemic control than blood and urinary glucose measures. HbAc1 is directly linked to the proportion of glucose bound to the hemoglobin molecules, which occurs continually over the entire life span of the erythrocyte. 24 Diabetic patients with very high blood glucose concentrations have 2 to 3 times more HbA1c than normal individuals. The levels of HbAc1 act as effective indicators of the success or failure of the treatment. Upon treatment, all trials observed a significant decrease in the levels of HbAc1 during the three-month follow-up period and a further decline during the 12-month follow-up period. In one study, T1 ( Figure 5), the HbAc1 level did not change due to the increased nephropathy in diabetic patients. 25 
## (s11) Discussion
(p11.0) These studies were designed to assess the safety and efficacy of MSCs for the treatment of T2DM. The results from six clinical trials included 262 T2DM patients and demonstrated that MSCs are safe to use and do not display any severe adverse effects; only nausea and vomiting were reported in two clinical trials. The study used mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) because they can easily differentiate into any cell type. They also express low immunogenicity because of low MHC 1 and 2 and do not cause the Figure 3 Insulin requirement before and after MSC treatment. The trials showcased different follow-up times. T1, T3, and T6 showed a decline in insulin requirement for a follow-up period of 3 and 6 months but a steady increase in need at the 12-month follow-up. T5 showed a 45% decrease in insulin requirement when followed up at the 6-month mark, but this study was not followed up further. T4 displayed a 22% lower insulin requirement during the 12-month follow-up period. Insulin requirement for T2 was 30% lower at the ten-month follow-up period, after which the study was not followed up. activation of lymphocytes. 26 MSCs were safer than conventional therapies used for late-stage T2DM treatment. The efficiency of MSC therapy was measured based on HbAc1, C-peptide, and FBG levels. Most studies adopted a follow-up period of 12 months after one MSC dosage. The MSC treatment proved to be a long-term solution for most cases. The C-peptide levels remained normal for 12 months following injection. The FBG and HbAc1 levels varied in the different studies but improved in 70% of the patients.

(p11.1) The route of MSC infusion, intravenously or via the dorsal pancreatic artery, did not make a significant difference in the efficacy of the treatment 3-, 6-, and 12-month follow-up. All studies used autologous MSCs amplified after 3-4 passages. The high number of transplanted cells allows a reduction in the infusion frequency compared to conventional treatment requiring the daily injection of insulin or organ transplantation in more advanced cases. As the cells transplanted were autologous, the number of adverse events remained low compared to allogenic transplants, with the most severe adverse event being hypoglycemia in one study. Recruitment of patients remained low as many needed to fit the inclusion criteria set up by the clinical trials. Conventional treatment of late-stage T2DM generally leads to pancreas transplantation which could cost the patient approximately 110,000 USD. In contrast, MSC transplantation costs 99,000 USD, requiring only a single dose. 27 Further trials are required with a more significant number of participants and more follow-up points. Moreover, selecting participants based on the duration of the disease before treatment with MSCs would give more information on the effect of MSC in long-term T2DM.
