# Sub-millimeter wave nanoantenna-a review

CorpusID: 258701847 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51e0a15a4be26c7dab809bebe7b54371428461c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f51e0a15a4be26c7dab809bebe7b54371428461c)

Fields: Engineering, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Sub-millimeter radiation, often referred to as terahertz radiation, is made up of electromagnetic waves that have frequencies ranging from 0.3 to 3 terahertz (THz), and their corresponding wavelengths vary from 1 mm to 0.1 mm. This kind of radiation is also known as terahertz radiation. Terahertz radiation begins at a wavelength of around one millimeter and continues farther down into shorter wavelengths; hence, this band of radiation is referred to as the sub millimeter band, and the radiation that corresponds to it is referred to as sub millimeter waves. Due to the fact that sub millimeter radiation is totally attenuated within a few meters of its source and is completely absorbed by the surrounding atmospheric gases, this kind of radiation is not appropriate for use in radio transmission. THz beams that get transmitted through materials can be used for material characterization, layer inspection, and as an alternative approach for X- 2 rays in order to produce high resolution images [1]. It has the potential to penetrate through thin layers of materials, and THz beams that get transmitted through materials can be used for this purpose. In this frequency range, it is no longer feasible for typical electronic devices to generate electromagnetic waves or modulate those waves. As a result, it is necessary to build new electronic devices as well as new methodologies. Another disadvantage of systems that were based on sub millimeter waves was that it was impossible to acquire planar detectors that were suitable for use with integrated antennas [2].
## (s6) Antenna for 5G applications
(p6.0) The sector of mobile communication is now experiencing a period of rapid growth as well as a significant uptick in the number of new technologies. Most notably, the mobile communication systems of the fifth generation, also known as 5G, have evolved to the point where they may give a variety of solutions to the problems that are linked with the technology. Recent developments in electronic technology and communication have allowed for the growth and development of machine-to-machine communication, which has led to the emergence of new categories of requirements. In the previous method, the amount of spectrum available in the bands below 6 GHz was restricted. However, the use of newer bands is required in order for 5G systems to support Internet of Things applications [18].
## (s7) Antenna for flexible and smart clothing
(p7.0) Coupling the textile antenna with the smart clothing is emerging in the recent years and it provides interesting solutions particularly where the replacement of batteries in wearable devices is impracticable. For electromagnetic energy harvesting applications, it developed a smart and stable fabric that was covered with a dual band textile antenna. This antenna was designed to operate at both the mobile communication (GSM) 900 and digital cellular system (DCS) 1800 bands. Seven separate prototypes were created by using the following two distinct production processes: thermal adhesive lamination and embroidery. In a vacuum table, the antennas are cemented together using an ironing technique that involves steam [22].

(p7.1) It came up with three distinct configurations of textile antennas. They are referred to as the planar inverted-F antenna, the annular slot antenna, and the rectangular micro strip patch antenna (PIFA). The use of these antennas in smart clothing led to their development at a frequency of 2.45 GHz, which is part of the Wireless Local Area Network (LAN) spectrum. Fabrication of the radiator and the ground both make use of conductive materials like copper-plated polyester fabric. The fabrication of substrate materials involves the use of a non-conductive neoprene fabric that has a thickness of 4 millimeters and a permittivity of 1.5. The planned textile patch antenna achieves a maximum gain of 5.96 dBi and a bandwidth of 4.6%, while the yearly slot antenna has a gain of 2.9 dBi and a bandwidth of 13.1%. In a similar vein, the PIFA antenna achieves a gain of 1.2 dBi and a broad bandwidth of 31%. In order to determine whether or not the suggested antenna designs are viable for use in wearable applications, further research was conducted to investigate how the proposed antennas reacted when bent in a variety of various ways [23].

(p7.2) Inkjet printing technology was used in order to print an ultra-wide band (UWB) flexible antenna onto a substrate made of kotak photo paper that had a thickness of 0.254 millimeters. The printed antenna has a virtually unidirectional emission pattern throughout the entire UWB band, including frequencies from 3.2 to 3 GHz with a fractional bandwidth of 161%. It is recommended that the dimensions of the monopole type antenna developed should be 33.7 mm by 32.7 mm by 0.254 mm, and it should be supplied via CPW (coplanar waveguide) by loading a circular radiator in order to increase the bandwidth. It was determined that an average gain of around 4.87 and an efficiency of approximately 86.61% could be attained [24].
## (s8) Antenna for bio sensing applications
(p8.0) Presented an innovative nano-aperture in the form of a cross loop with a graphene overcoat for use in spectroscopic and biological applications. The structure incorporates a gold layer that has a cross loop aperture, and both of these components are situated atop a SiN layer that has a n value of 1.98. On top of the gold layer is a coating of graphene, which is there to increase the transmittance. After having a thin layer of chromium placed on top of the gold layer using electron beam lithography, multilayer graphene with a thickness of one nanometer is then coated on top of that. This procedure is done so that the bonding between the graphene and gold may be strengthened. The CST microwave studio simulator was used to analyze several configurations, each of which had a varied number of loops and a variable number of graphene layers. The results of this analysis allowed for the identification of the optimal configuration. The final form of the prototype nano antenna consists of a single sheet of graphene, and it has dual band characteristics at 46 and 86 THz. This antenna is being used for biological sensing applications that operate in the mid infrared range. The orthogonal quality of this prototype structure is beneficial for applications involving solar cells and energy harvesting [25].
## (s10) Antenna in Communication
(p10.0) It was discussed an antenna for a dual band focal plane array (FPA) based heterodyne receiver that operates at 210-240 GHz and 500-580 GHz. The antenna is proposed to have fused silica lens with leaky wave waveguide feed based on single-layer frequency selective surface (FSS) having a quasi-optical system with overlapped beams and equal beam widths for operating at 210-240 GHz and 500-580 GHz frequency bands [30]. On a substrate made of 4-cyano-4-pentylbiphenyl [5CB], it was investigated how a sub millimeter wave antenna behaved while operating throughout a frequency range of 0.1 THz to 10 THz, and the results were analyzed and compared. Both the rectangular patch antenna (RPA) and the cylindrical dielectric resonator antenna (CDRA) are taken into consideration when it comes to the physical characteristics of an antenna. These characteristics include the size and shape of the antenna, as well as its gain/directivity, resonant frequency, bandwidth, and efficiency. These well-known millimeter-wave antennas are put to use by the sub millimeter-wave antenna so that its operational behavior may be evaluated. In addition, an investigation of the functionality of a huge sub millimeter wave multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) (8 by 8) RPA and CDRA was carried out [31].

(p10.1) The fundamental need is for light to be controllable at the nano scale dimension; however, this requirement takes on a greater level of significance for applications such as optical sensing, metrology, information processing, communications, and quantum optics. Significant research and development efforts are now being directed toward the creation of optical nano antennas. These nano antennas have the ability to convert light into localized radiating energy and vice versa, making them the focus of current research and development activities. Tang et al. exhibited a directed three-dimensional nano antenna that could function in the visible light domain. They also demonstrated a straightforward bottom-up method for the fabrication of arrays of nano antennas. In addition to this, they investigated the functioning of the operating system via the interaction of quantum dots (QDs) [32].

(p10.2) An analytical computation of the polarizability and non-linear impedance of a nano sphere is shown here. This nano sphere was stimulated by an optical pulse with a high intensity. It makes it possible to develop non-linear devices that are constructed of nano spheres, such as nonlinear Meta surfaces for optical wavelengths. The polarizability of a nano particle is what affects the intensity of the incident light that it scatters and the degree to which the incident field is amplified in the neighborhood of the particle. It should be emphasized that the electric field, when applied to arrays of nano spheres, is the sum of the applied field and the interaction field from other nano spheres in the array [33]. This is because the electric field is a vector quantity.
