# D R A F T Where the Minor Things Are: A Pan-Eukaryotic Survey Suggests Neutral Processes May Dominate Minor Spliceosomal Intron Evolution

CorpusID: 254247979 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/88926803eeb69f68a8cf414bc6b9132503bd5333)

Fields: Biology

## (s3) Identification of spliceosomal snRNAs
(p3.0) Each genome was searched for the presence of the minor snRNAs U11, U12, U4atac and U6atac using INFERNAL v1.3.3 [58] with covariance models retrieved from Rfam (RF00548, RF00007, RF00618, RF00619). The default Evalue cutoff of 0.01 was used to identify positive snRNA matches, and any snRNA with at least one match below the E-value cutoff was considered present.
## (s4) Classification of minor introns
(p4.0) For every genome with annotated introns, intronIC v1.2.3 [56] was used to identify putative minor introns using default settings which includes introns defined by exon features (e.g., introns in UTRs) and excludes any introns shorter than 30 nt. Although our substrate data includes UTR introns -at least some of which appear to be involved in the regulation of gene expression [6,16,84,79,50] -the analyses performed in this study include only introns in protein-coding regions of genes. UTR introns generally are an understudied class of introns, and almost nothing is known about minor introns in UTRs; exploring this in more detail would certainly be an exciting avenue for future research.
## (s6) Intron position within transcripts and intron phase
(p6.0) Included in the output of intronIC [56] is information about the relative position of each intron within its parent transcript, represented as a percentage of the total length of coding sequence, as well as intron phase (for introns defined by CDS features). These were extracted for every species and used in the associated analyses.
## (s8) BUSCO analysis
(p8.0) Translated versions of the transcriptomes of all species were searched for broadly-conserved eukaryotic genes using BUSCO v5.3.2 [82] and the BUSCO lineage eukaryota_o db10. Complete BUSCO scores were then integrated into the overall dataset (e.g., Fig. 1 and Fig. 4).
## (s11) Ancestral intron density reconstruction
(p11.0) Reconstructions of ancestral intron complements in different nodes was performed as described in [69]. Briefly, for a set of three species α, β and γ where γ is an outgroup to α and β (i.e., α and β are sister with respect to γ), introns shared between any pair of species are (under the assumption of negligible parallel intron gain) a priori part of the set of introns in the ancestor of α and β. For all introns shared between a given species pair, for example α and γ (but not necessarily β) N αγ , the probability of an intron from that set being found in β (in other words, the fraction of ancestral introns retained in β) isP

(p11.1) where N αβγ is the number of introns shared between all three species. Deriving these fractions of ancestral introns for each of the aligned species, we then define N Ω as the total number of ancestral introns, and its relationship to the conservation states of introns in the alignments of the three species as
## (s12) Differential gene expression
(p12.0) Single-end RNA-seq reads from previously-published celltype-specific sequencing of Rhizophagus irregularis [38] (four biological replicates per cell type) were pseudoaligned to a decoy-aware version of the transcriptome using Salmon v1.6.0 [62] (with non-default arguments --seqBias --s oftclip). The Salmon output was then formatted with tximport v1.14.2 [83], and differential gene expression (DGE) analysis was performed using DESeq2 v1.26.0 [49] with the following arguments: test="LRT", useT=TRU E, minReplicatesForReplace=Inf, minmu=1e-6, reduced=∼1. For each pairwise combination of cell types, genes with significant DGE values (Wald p-value < 0.05) were retained for further analysis.
## (s13) Rhizophgaus z-score metric
(p13.0) Following the methodology used by Sandberg et al. to assign a proliferation index to cell types [76], z-scores were calculated per feature (whether for gene expression or intron retention/splicing efficiency) across all cell-type replicates (n=20), and then summarized for each cell type by the mean value of the corresponding replicate z-scores (departing from the reference method in this aspect). Prior to conversion to z-scores, the raw gene expression data was normalized by running the output from tximport through the fpkm() function in DESeq2. For group z-score comparisons (e.g., proliferation-index genes, minor introns vs. major introns), the median of the top 50% of z-scores from each group was used. As the z-score calculation requires there to be variation across samples, certain genes/introns were necessarily omitted under this metric.
## (s14) Intron retention and splicing efficiency
(p14.0) For each RNA-seq sample, IRFinder-S v2.0 [53] was used to compute intron retention levels for all annotated introns. Introns with warnings of "LowSplicing" and "Low-Cover" were excluded from downstream analyses. Across replicates within each cell type, a weighted mean retention value was calculated for each intron, with weights derived by combining the average number of reads supporting the two intron-exon junctions and the total number of reads supporting the exon-exon junction.

(p14.1) Intron splicing efficiency was calculated as previously described [41]. Briefly, RNA-seq reads were mapped to splicejunction sequence constructs using Bowtie v1.2.3 [40] (excluding multiply-mapping reads using the non-default argument -m 1). Introns with fewer than five reads supporting either the corresponding exon-exon junction or one of the intron-exon junctions (or both) were excluded. For each intron, the proportion of reads mapped to the intron-exon junction(s) versus the exon-exon junction was used to assign a splicing efficiency value for each sample (see reference for details). Within each cell type, the weighted mean of replicate splicing efficiency values for each intron was calculated in the same manner as for intron retention.
## (s17) Minor intron diversity in thousands of eukaryotic genomes
(p17.0) In order to better assess the landscape of minor intron diversity in eukaryotes, we used the intron classification program intronIC [56] to process ∼270 million intron sequences and uncover minor intron numbers for over 3000 publicly-available eukaryotic genomes, representing to our knowledge the largest and most diverse collection of minor intron data assembled to date (Fig. 1, underlying plain text data available at https://doi.org/10.6084/ m9.figshare.20483655).

(p17.1) Of the 1844 genera represented in our data, 1172 (64%) have well-supported evidence of minor introns in at least one species (see Methods for details), while the remaining 672 appear to lack minor introns in all available constituent species. Consistent with previous studies [11,3,35,80,1,87,44,56,90], minor intron numbers and densities (fractions of introns in a given genome classified as minor type) vary dramatically across the eukaryotic tree; average values are highest in vertebrates and other animals, while variation between species appears to be lowest within land plants. Conservation of minor introns between different pairs of species is largely consistent with previously-published results [1,3,44,56] (Fig. 2). The intriguing pattern of punctuated wholesale loss of minor introns is apparent within many larger clades in our data, along with a number of striking cases of minor intron enrichment in otherwise depauperate groups.
## (s18) Minor intron enrichment
(p18.0) A number of cases of minor-intron-rich lineages are worth highlighting. As shown in Fig. 3, the highest known minor intron density is found within the Amoebozoa; our recentlyreported data in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum [41] dwarfs all other known instances of local minor intron enrichment and appears to be an extremely rare example of significant minor intron gain. In the present study, we also find relatively high numbers of minor introns (compared to other amoebozoan species) in both the flagellar amoeba Pelomyxa schiedti (n=90) and the variosean amoeba Protostelium aurantium (labeled Planoprotostelium fungivorum 1 in Fig. 1) (n=265). Although the numbers of minor introns in these species conserved with minor introns in other lineages (e.g., human) are very low, in all cases we find at least some degree of conservation. For example, in alignments between human and P. aurantium orthologs, 11% of human minor introns are conserved as minor introns in P. aurantium, comparable to proportions shared between human and many plant species [56]; in alignments with P. schiedti the proportion of conserved human minor introns is closer to 2.5%, although this appears to largely be due to massive minor-to-major conversion of ancestral minor introns in P. schiedti, as 69% of the human minor introns in those alignments are paired with major introns in P. schiedti.

(p18.1) As reported by Gentekaki et al. [28], the parasitic microbe Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 within the stramenopiles contains hundreds of minor introns, although our pipeline identifies ∼45% fewer (n=253) than previously described. Interestingly, the Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 minor introns we identify are highly enriched for the AT-AC subtype (77% or 196/253, where AT-AC introns are only ∼26% of all minor introns in human), and the classic minor intron bias away from phase 0 is inverted, with 49% (124/253) of the putative minor introns in Blastocystis being phase 0. Blastocystis also has the shortest average minor intron length in the data we analyzed at just under 42 bp (median 39 bp) (introns shorter than 30 bp were systematically excluded in all species).

(p18.2) Surprisingly, we find unusually high minor intron densities in a number of fungal species, a kindgom which until now was not known to contain significant numbers of minor introns. In particular, the Glomeromycete species Rhizophagus irregularis has a minor intron density comparable to that of humans (0.272%, n=205), and Basidiobolus meristosporus, in the Zoopagomycota, has one of the highest minor intron densities outside of the Amoebozoa (0.554%, n=249) (Fig. 4). We do not find any convincing support for minor introns in either of the two largest fungal groups, Ascomycota and Basidiomycota, which seem to have lost most if not all of the required minor snRNAs in the vast majority of species, as has been previously reported [48,3].
## (s19) Minor intron depletion
(p19.0) Punctuated and dramatic loss of minor introns is a hallmark feature of the minor splicing landscape, and it remains an outstanding question why certain lineages undergo either partial or complete loss of their ancestral minor intron complements [90]. Previous work has delineated many groups that appear to lack either minor introns, minor splicing components or both [3,73,48], but the diversity and scope of more recentlyavailable data motivated us to revisit this topic. In addition to the underlying data presented in Fig. 1, there are a number of cases of severe and/or complete minor intron loss that we highlight here. First, the amoebozoan Acanthamoeba castellanii has been found to contain both minor splicing apparatus as well as a limited number of minor-like intron sequences [73]. While it remains likely that this species contains a small number of minor introns based upon previous evidence, we do not find conservation of any of the twelve Acanthamoeba introns our pipeline classified as minor in either human or the more closely-related amoeobozoan Protostelium aurantium. This may not be particularly surprising, given the low absolute number of minor introns under consideration-between Protostelium aurantium and human, for example, ∼23% of Protostelium minor introns are conserved, and there are only two minor introns from Acanthamoeba in regions of good alignment with human orthologs. Furthermore, we do find a single shared minor intron position between Acanthamoeba and human when we disregard the local alignment quality and simply consider all introns in identical positions within aligned regions, which amounts to 20% of Acanthamoeba minor introns in such alignments.

(p19.1) Among clades with extreme but incomplete loss (a classic case in animals being Diptera), notable examples include the Acari (ticks and mites), bdelloid rotifers, and the springtail (Collembola) subclass of hexapods, We find no evidence at all for minor introns in the following taxa, many of which have not been reported before (those with citations corroborate earlier studies): tardigrades (e.g., Hypsibius exemplaris), Discoba (e.g., Trypanosoma, Leishmania) [48], Orchrophyta (stramenopiles), Alveolata (protists) [3,48]. The Acari, in addition to an overall extreme reduction in minor introns within the clade generally, also contains a number of cases of apparent (by comparative genomic analysis) complete loss in the parasitic mite Tropilaelaps mercedesae (though minor introns are present in sister taxa) and the earth mite Halotydeus destructor. We also report two other novel cases of apparent complete minor intron loss outside of Acari. First, in the Dipteran clade Chironomidae, we find scant evidence of minor introns in Clunio marinus, Polypedilum vanderplanki and Belgica antarctica, all of which also appear to be missing between half and three-quarters of their minor snRNAs. Second, the copepod species of crustaceans Tigriopus californicus and Eurytemora affinis each lack both conserved minor introns and 75% of the minor snRNA set.
## (s20) Minor introns have lower average conservation than major introns
(p20.0) A persistent result in the minor intron literature is that minor introns are more highly conserved than major introns (specifically, between animals and plants and even more specifically, between human and Arabidopsis thaliana) [4], although this assertion has been contradicted by at least one more recent analysis [56]. The claim that minor intron conservation exceeds major intron conservation largely rests upon the numbers of introns of both types found in identical positions within 133 alignments of orthologous human-Arabidopsis sequences, as reported in Table 1 of Basu et al. [4]. For major (U2-type) introns, they report 115 conserved as major in aligned ortholog pairs, and 1391 as either not present in one of the two orthologs or present as a minor intron; for minor (U12-type) introns, they find 20 conserved and 135 missing/converted. For each intron type, taking the number conserved and dividing by the total number of introns of that type present in the alignments results in conservation percentages of 7.6% ( 115 115+1391 ) for major introns and 12.9% ( 20 20+135 ) for minor introns (although the aforementioned values are not explicitly stated in the text), leading to the conclusion that minor introns are more highly conserved between human and Arabidopsis than are major introns. To the extent that we correctly understand their approach, however, we believe there may be a complication with this analysis.

(p20.1) Examining the ortholog pairs the authors provide in the supplementary data, it is evident that many of the same Arabidopsis sequences are present in multiple ortholog pairs, which suggests that a standard reciprocal-best-hit criteria for ortholog identification was not employed and that certain introns will be counted multiple times within the orthologous alignments. As many minor introns occur in larger paralogous gene families, this methodology could lead to artificial inflation of the calculated minor intron conservation, especially given the small absolute number of minor introns involved. To attempt to more thoroughly address the question of minor vs. major conservation, we identified orthologs in many different pairs of species across a range of evolution-ary distances (see Methods), and calculated intron conservation using the same metric as above. Within more than 100 such comparisons between animals and plants (and more than 60 between animals and fungi), we find no cases where minor intron conservation exceeds major intron conservation (Fig. 5a).

(p20.2) Furthermore, we observe only a handful of cases where minor intron conservation marginally exceeds major intron conservation in alignments of more closely-related species (∼3% greater between the starfish Asterias rubens and the stony coral Orbicella faveolata, for example). In the specific case of human-Arabidopsis considered by Basu et al., our data show minor intron conservation to be around half that of major intron conservation (Table 1). Thus, in the final analysis we find no compelling support for the idea that minor introns are in general more conserved than major introns and in fact, the opposite seems to be true in the vast majority of cases.
## (s23) Minor intron loss vs. conversion
(p23.0) When an ancestral minor intron ceases to be a minor intron, it is thought to happen primarily in one of two ways: the entire intron sequence could be lost via, for example, reverse transcriptase-mediated reinsertion of spliced mRNA [44,17,90,33], or the intron could undergo sequence changes sufficient to allow it to be recognized instead by the major spliceosome [11,21,20,26]. From first-principles arguments based on the greater information content of the minor intron motifs [11,10,21] along with empirical analyses [44], it is assumed that intron conversion proceeds almost universally unidirectionally from minor to major. Previous work has also shown that the paradigm of full intron loss (sequence deletion) appears to dominate over conversion in minor introns [44]; we wondered whether any exceptions to this general pattern might exist. First, we assembled a manually-curated sample of species with significant/complete minor intron loss, along with a number of species with much higher minor intron conservation for comparison. For each selected species, we chose an additional species to compare against as well as a species to serve as an outgroup, and then identified orthologs between all members of the group to allow us to identify ancestral major/minor introns (see Methods for details) and estimate fractions of each intron type retained. Considering loss to include both sequence deletion as well as type conversion (which we assume to be unidirectional from minor to major, as discussed above), Fig. 5b shows that minor intron loss is more pronounced than major intron loss in the species we examined (also shown more generally in Fig. 5a).

(p23.1) We can, however, also decompose the phenomena contributing to the higher degree of loss of minor introns and ask whether the contribution of sequence deletion specifically, for example, differs between the two types. Somewhat surprisingly, we find that this form of intron loss is very similar between the two types of introns in species which have lost significant fractions of their minor introns (Fig. 5c). Because the selected species were chosen based upon putative loss of minor introns and the sample size is low, it is difficult to interpret the apparent bias toward minor intron deletion in the vertebrates and plants in Fig. 5c. For the other species, however, this data suggests that there is not a particular selective pressure toward removing minor intron sequences themselves-at least not any more than there is pressure to remove intron sequences generally-in instances of pronounced minor intron upheaval.

(p23.2) We can also look at the other side of the minor intron loss coin, namely conversion from minor to major type. Here, we find that in many instances loss via deletion does indeed outstrip conversion (as reported by [44]), sometimes dramatically so, but there are interesting exceptions. The leech Helobdella robusta (HelRob), for example, which seems to have retained a large fraction of its ancestral major introns, has lost ∼80% of its minor introns primarily through conversion to major-type (Fig. 5d). By contrast, the annelid worm Dimorphilus gyrociliatus (DimGyr), found in a clade (Polychaeta) sister to Helobdella robusta, has undergone a seemingly independent loss of minor introns of similar proportion to Helobdella under a very different modality, with loss (deletion) outweighing conversion (Fig. 5d). It is unclear what forces are responsible for the relative contributions of each mechanism; in Helobdella, the major intron sequences are slightly more degenerate at the 5 ′ SS end than in e.g., human, which might lower the barrier to entry for would-be minorto-major converts. This, however, is mere speculation and more work is needed to better characterize these dynamics. It should be noted that under the current analysis we cannot differentiate between losses, and conversions followed by subsequent loss. Our conversion estimates, therefore, should be taken as lower bounds.
## (s25) Phase biases of minor introns
(p25.0) Spliceosomal introns can occur at one of three positions relative to protein-coding sequence: between codons (phase 0), after the first nucleotide of a codon (phase 1) or after the second (phase 2). In most species, major introns display a bias toward phase 0 2 [59,47] (Fig. 7a), while minor introns are biased away from phase 0 [11,56] (Fig. 7b).

(p25.1) It remains an unsettled issue why minor introns are biased in this way-one theory proposed by Moyer et al. [56] suggests that such bias could arise from preferential conversion of phase 0 minor introns to major type, which would over time lead to the observed pattern. Here, we wanted to make use of the size of our dataset to better characterize the diversity of intron phase more broadly, and identify any exceptions to the general rule. As shown in Fig. 7c, the phase distributions of major introns are fairly tightly grouped. On average, for major introns in minor-intron-containing species, phase 0 makes up 47%, phase 1 30% and phase 2 23%. In addition, the proportions of phase 0 and phase 1 introns are quite highly correlated (see caption of Fig. 7c). Minor introns, on the other hand, are less consistent in their phase distribution and have a lower phase 0 to phase 1 correlation, although the majority cluster relatively tightly around the average value of phase 0, 22% (Fig. 7d).

(p25.2) It is intriguing that a small number of species appear to have much higher fractions of phase 0 minor introns (Figures  7d and 7e). What's more, these species (with the notable exception of Blastocystis sp. subtype 1, addressed below) all have very low absolute numbers of minor introns (Fig. 7e). While these data are not necessarily incompatible with the conversion paradigm mentioned above (which might predict minor introns in species with pronounced loss to show especially strong bias away from phase 0, although with such small numbers of remaining minor introns it may simply be that stochasticity dominates), it at least invites further investigation into the forces underlying the phase biases in minor introns generally.

(p25.3) The species Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 is similar to the other unusual cases mentioned in its reduced minor intron bias away from phase 0, but is remarkable for the number of minor introns involved (n=253). It is also interesting that its minor intron phase distribution is almost identical to the distribution of phases in its major introns (not shown). While this raises the possibility that the minor introns in Blastocystis sp. subtype 1 are false-positives, the fact that we find a) all four minor snRNAs in the genome, b) a (small but non-zero) number of its minor introns conserved in Lingula anatina (not shown) and c) putative minor introns in a closely-related species (Blastocystis hominis) provides evidence that they are likely real. Assuming they are bona fide minor introns, another possible explanation for the phase 0 enrichment could be that they have been more recently gained, and (under the conversion hypothesis) have not yet had time to develop the 3.6 Non-canonical minor intron splice boundaries significant differences between minor and major introns are indicated with asterisks (two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test; * p < 0.05; ** p < 0.001; *** p < 0.0001; ns=not significant). Note that in some cases of significant differences between the two intron types, e.g., within animals, the set with greater 5 ′ bias is the major introns.
## (s27) Minor intron-containing genes are longer and more intron-rich than genes with major introns only
(p27.0) Across the eukaryotic tree, genomes can vary widely in the number of introns contained in an average gene [72]. Some vertebrate genes have dozens or even hundreds of introns (e.g., the gene titin in human), whereas most genes of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae lack introns entirely. Given the fact that minor introns appear to be arranged nonrandomly throughout genomes where they are found [56,43,80,1] a natural question to ask is to what extent and in what ways are minor intron-containing genes (MIGs) different than those without minor introns? As far as we are aware, while various aspects of this question have been addressed by different groups [4,11,35], relatively little attention has been paid to possible differences in a number of basic gene attributes, namely gene length (excluding introns) and number of introns per unit coding sequence or "genic intron density" (a coinage we will use here to distinguish from our more frequent usage in this paper of "intron density" to describe some number of introns in terms of their relative share of the total introns in the genome). Strikingly, when we compare the genic intron density of MIGs to all other genes in species with minor introns, we find that MIGs are universally more intron-dense on average than non-MIGs (Fig. 9a). Furthermore, it appears that average MIG lengths (excluding intron sequences) are longer than other genes in the vast majority of species with minor introns (Fig. 9b)   gene length, none of those differences are statistically significant (Mann-Whitney U test, p ≥ 0.05). An in-depth analysis of this qualitative finding is beyond the scope of the current paper, but it seems an underappreciated difference between the two intron types and would benefit from further investigation.
## (s28) Comparison of minor and major intron lengths
(p28.0) While a number of studies have compared the length distributions of the different intron types in a limited assortment of genomes [43,91,56], without a large set of minor intron containing species to compare within it has been difficult to gauge the extent to which minor intron lengths might differ from major intron lengths. With the comprehensive minor intron data we have collected, we were able to ask a very basic question: what is the general relationship between average major and minor intron lengths? At a high level, the answer appears to be that major and minor intron lengths are roughly linearly correlated (Fig. 9c)-species with longer average major intron length tend to also have longer average minor intron length (Spearman's ρ = 0.625 for median values, p = 5.08 × 10 −16 ). One interesting aspect of the data in Fig. 9c is shown more clearly in the inset plot (which is simply the subset of the data in the main plot with length ≤ 1000 bp): certain species have significant minor intron loss 3.9 Reconstruction of ancestral minor intron densities (small markers) and large differences between average minor and major intron lengths. It should be noted that the set of species in that region is enriched for Drosophila (a taxonomically over-represented genus in the sequence databases), but includes many additional insect species as well.

(p28.1) Although it is not clear what immediate conclusions can be drawn from this data, some additional questions are raised: Were shorter minor introns especially selected against in these lineages, such that the remaining minor introns are disproportionately long? What is driving variation within, for example, Drosophila such that in some species the difference between minor and major is relatively modest (Drosophila busckii, major=65 bp and minor=189 bp) and in others, it's much more stark (Drosophila biarmipes, major=77 bp and minor=677 bp)? It should be noted as well that for Drosophila specifically, almost all of the minor introns are conserved within the genus, so the previous example is made more interesting because 100% of the D. busckii minor introns are shared with D. biarmipes, yet are far longer in the latter than the former. It did occur to us to check whether minor introns in these outlier species happen to be (for whatever reason) in genes with longer-than-average intron size, and although we have not done so systematically we have checked a number of more extreme cases and have found the same pattern recapitulated between minor and major introns of the same genes. For example, in the black soldier fly Hermetia illucens, the median minor intron length is 4019 bp and the median major intron length is only 105 bp. Comparing minor to major within only the minor intron-containing genes changes things, but not qualitatively-the median major intron length becomes 399.5 bp, but the difference between minor and major is still significant (p = 0.0025 by one-tailed Mann-Whitney U test under the alternative hypothesis that minor intron lengths are longer).
## (s29) Reconstruction of ancestral minor intron densities
(p29.0) In an attempt to quantify some of the evolutionary dynamics leading to the variegated pattern of minor intron densities we see in extant lineages, we sought to estimate minor intron densities for certain ancestral nodes throughout the eukaryotic tree (see Methods). For each selected node, we identified pairs of species for which the node is the most recent common ancestor and, in combination with an outgroup species, performed three-way protein-level alignments to allow us to define intron states for each species within the alignments. Then, using the procedure described in [69], we calculated the number of minor and major introns estimated to have been present in the aligned regions in the ancestral genome, and repeated this process using many different combinations of species for each node to derive average values across all such comparisons. Because the absolute number of introns present in the aligned regions in the ancestor is not a particularly easy value to interpret, for reconstructions within a given kingdom we normalized the ancestral density of each intron type by a chosen reference species from that kingdom present in every alignment (see Methods for details). The reference species for animals, fungi and plants were Homo sapiens (minor intron density 0.276%), Rhizophagus irregularis (minor intron density 0.272%) and Lupinus angustifolius (minor intron density 0.273%), respectively. Fig. 10 shows both distributions of minor intron densities in constituent species from each terminal clade (violin plots), as well as estimates of ancestral minor intron densities at various nodes (colored boxes) as fractions of the density of minor introns in the aligned regions of the reference species (i.e., ancestral densities > 1 indicate minor intron enrichment relative to the reference species, and ancestral densities <1 indicate reduction). As shown in Fig. 10, ancestral minor intron densities were, in large part, modestly higher than minor intron densities in the relatively minor-intron-rich reference species, with the exception of a number of episodes of pronounced loss in the ancestors of Diptera, Pancrustacea and Zoopagomycota. The apparent enrichment of minor introns in the ancestor of Chelicerata is interesting, as it suggests there may have been some amount of minor intron gain along that branch from the arthropod ancestor. This result needs to be qualified, however, by noting that in that region of the tree we were constrained by lack of available data to using only Limulus polyphemus for one of the two ingroup species, as well as the fact that in any given reconstruction, the calculated intron density is limited to the genes involved in the reconstruction. With similar caveats, the low inferred ancestral minor intron density of Zoopagomycota is notable as that group contains Basidiobolus meristosporus, which has the highest minor intron density so far discovered in fungi (0.554%). Overall, these results paint a picture of ancestral minor intron complements as generally analogous to those of minor intron rich extant species, and highlight the quixotic nature of minor intron loss dynamics throughout eukaryotic diversity. It would be interesting to have these results expanded upon once phylogenetic uncertainty has been reduced throughout the tree and even more diverse genomes are available for analysis.
## (s31) 3.11
(p31.0) No evidence for increased minor splicing in proliferating cells of R. irregularis spliceosome-specific non-coding RNAs (U11, U12, U4atac, and U6atac) (Fig. 11e,f). As found previously in animals and plants, we found a distinctive distribution of intron phase (position at which introns interrupt the coding codon series, whether between codons (phase 0) or after the first or second nucleotide of a codon (phase 1 and 2, respectively): whereas major introns typically show the pattern (ph0 > ph1 > ph2), minor introns in R. irregularis followed the minor pattern in animals and plants (ph1 > ph2 > ph0; [43,56]) (Fig. 11g). In total, we predict that 199 introns in R. irregularis are minortype (0.275% of 72,285 annotated introns), orders of magnitude higher than for other fungal species previously reported to contain minor introns (∼4 in Rhizopus oryzae and ∼20 in Phycomyces blakesleeanus) [3].
## (s32) No evidence for increased minor splicing in proliferating cells of R. irregularis
(p32.0) We next sought to test whether R. irregularis, like animals and plants, upregulates splicing of minor introns in proliferating cells. We used published transcriptomic data from five cell types (four replicates each), and assessed likely proliferation profiles of the six cell types using the previously published proliferation index (PI) approach. Briefly, we first identified putative orthologs of genes known to be associated with cell proliferation in humans. For each such putative PI ortholog, z-scores were calculated for all 20 samples, and those z-scores were then used for comparison across cell types as well as for comparisons within cell types between putative PI orthologs and other genes. This allowed us to calculate relative proliferation scores for all five cell types. While 4 5 cell types showed similar PI values, one cell type, immature spores, showed substantially and significantly higher values (Fig. 12a), a pattern that also held when we look at the more straightforward metric of adjusted FPKM values (Fig. 13). This overall significance notwithstanding, it should be noted that only a small fraction of genes included in the PI individually showed significant differences in expression between cell types. In addition, we noted that many non-PI genes are also overexpressed in immature spores relative to other cell types; while one interpretation of this result is that it reflects generally more active gene expression in proliferating cells, it does provide a caveat for the overall strength of the observed difference.

(p32.1) We then tested the association between markers of minor spliceosomal activity and these proliferation scores. We first looked for systematic differences in overall gene expression of MIGs between cell types with different proliferation scores, using various approaches. First, using the same zscore based approach as for the proliferation score (though with MIGs instead of putative PI orthologs), we found that MIGs were in fact more highly expressed in cell types with higher proliferation scores (Fig. 12b). On the other hand, we found that very few MIGs reached significant levels of differential expression, and were in fact underrepresented among genes that showed significant differential expression in multiple comparisons between cell types of different proliferation index scores (e.g., 4.2% of minor intron-containing genes compared to 21.9% of other genes in the IS-MS comparison). In total, these results suggest that expression of MIGs shows a detectable but only moderate association with proliferation index in R. irregularis, in contrast to the robust results previously observed in humans.

(p32.2) We next compared the efficiency of minor intron splicing between cell types. Contrary to our hypothesis that minor splicing would be more active in proliferating cells, we found that minor intron retention was in fact significantly (though only modestly) higher in proliferating cells (Fig. 12c). This result held whether we used z-score-based metrics or the intron retention values themselves, and whether we used splicing efficiency or intron retention as our metric. We also assessed expression of the minor splicing machinery itself (i.e., the known components of the minor spliceosome). In comparisons between immature spores and other cell types, no component individually showed higher expression, however collectively the machinery was 3.5x more highly expressed in immature spores than other cell types, reaching significance when considered collectively. However, the major spliceosomal machinery also showed a similar pattern (with 5x higher expression), and as such it seems that lower expression of the minor splicing machinery could be part of a larger pattern of up/regulation of core molecular functions in proliferating/quiescent cells.

(p32.3) The observed association between minor intron splicing and cell proliferation in animals resonates with the longstanding finding that minor introns are overrepresented in genes involved in core cellular processes. Given that minor intron splicing in Rhizophagus does not appear to be associated with cell proliferation, we probed these patterns more deeply.

(p32.4) Gene ontology analysis of Rhizophagus MIGs revealed a curious pattern in which GO results were highly dependent on the control dataset used. Because of the dearth of Rhizophagus functional annotations, GO analyses were necessarily run by identifying human orthologs of Rhizophagus MIGs. When GO analysis was run on these orthologs as a subset of all human genes, a number of overrepresented functional categories were found, in large part mirroring results for humans. However, we realized that there is a potential bias in this analysis: all human genes present in the Rhizophagus MIG ortholog set have Rhizophagus orthologs, thus excluding most human genes (only 14%, 3190/23257, had identified Rhizophagus orthologs), and in particular animalspecific genes. Remarkably, when we limited our GO analysis control group to human genes with Rhizophagus orthologs, we found much less functional overrepresentation (Table 4).

(p32.5) Notably, a similar concern applies to human MIGs in general: because nearly all human minor introns are quite old, human MIGs are commensurately old, which could drive functional correlations given known differences in functional categories between genes of different ages. Indeed, when we performed a GO analysis of human MIGs with Rhizophagus orthologs, limiting the reference set to human genes    with Rhizophagus orthologs (a rough surrogate for gene age given that, unlike baker's yeast, Rhizophagus may not have lost many ancestral genes [75]), we found a much lower degree of functional enrichment (Table 5). These results support the conclusion that the long-standing result that minor introns are functionally overrepresented in core cellular processes may be largely explained by the fact that minor introns fall primarily in evolutionarily older genes, which are overrepresented in core cellular functions. Interestingly, when we compared all human MIGs (given that minor intron presence strongly suggests that a gene is ancient) to human genes with Rhizophagus orthologs, we did see a significant number of overrepresented functional categories (https: //doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.20483841). It is not entirely clear why all MIGs, but not MIGs with Rhizophagus orthologs, show substantial functional differences relative to all genes with Rhizophagus orthologs. Insofar as MIGs are ancient genes, MIGs without Rhizophagus orthologs likely represent losses in fungi; gene losses are likely to be functionally biased, perhaps explaining the observed pattern.
## (s37) Secondary recruitment of ancient machineries for cell cycle regulation
(p37.0) Prior to the current work, we perceived a chicken and egg problem of functional biases among MIGs [11,44] and control of cell proliferation by regulation of minor splicing ( [27,52,2]: that is, how could the regulatory control evolve without the functional bias, by why would the functional bias evolve without the regulatory function? We thus sought to illuminate this question by studying a third minor intron-rich lineage. The current findings that the observed functional biases appear to be largely explained by minor introns' bias towards older genes, and older genes bias towards core cellular functions, suggest an answer. Thus, functional biases could have initially evolved due to these gene age biases, and this functional bias could then have secondarily been recruited to regulate cell proliferation in animals in plants.

(p37.1) While this scenario makes sense schematically, is remains a remarkable contention that decreased minor splicing could evolve a function in cell regulation; insofar as MIGs represent a quasi-random subset of ancient genes, it seems likely that a global reduction in minor splicing would have a wide variety of impacts, many of them likely costly. Thus how failure to process a quasi-randomly chosen set of ancestral genes could evolve as a regulatory mechanism remains puzzling, and will require additional work across diverse minor intron-containing lineages.

(p37.2) Our results do not support the emerging dominant hypothesis for the existence of minor introns, namely that minor introns provide a means for regulation of cell cycle progression. The reported lack of cell cycle-regulated minor intron splicing in fungi suggests that this association is not a general phenomenon, correspondingly weakening the hypothesis that such a function could explain the persistence of minor introns across eukaryotes generally. However, given the possibility that it may be fungi that are atypical, having secondarily lost this function, discovery and study of additional minor intronrich lineages is a priority, as is development and testing of alternative hypotheses for the origins and functional biases of minor intron-containing genes.
