# Citation: International Journal of Molecular Sciences Neural Regulations in Tooth Development and Tooth-Periodontium Complex Homeostasis: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 253667392 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94adfed6a017389a23f3dbe9df69d7c3bb25acff](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/94adfed6a017389a23f3dbe9df69d7c3bb25acff)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Innervation regulates craniofacial development and homeostasis while being reciprocally affected by target tissues. For example, the absence of innervation causes target organ deformation, as in individuals with Moebius syndrome, a disease caused by the absence or underdevelopment of VI and VII cranial nerves, a series of craniofacial deformations is present [1]. Rabbit submandibular glands undergo atrophy upon denervation, which can be reversed by redistribution of autonomic nerves [2].

(p0.1) The tooth-periodontium complex, including teeth, gingiva, periodontal ligament (PDL), and alveolar bone, is one of the densely innervated cranial structures containing trigeminal sensory nerves and autonomic nerves. An array of evidence has demonstrated the mutual regulation of tooth and dental nerves in development [3]. The mutual regulation also exists in tooth and periodontal homeostasis. For instance, innervation orchestrates inflammation [4], promotes periodontal healing [5], and regulates the physiological reparation and regeneration of dental tissue [6]. These interactions in development and diseases are mediated by a variety of nerve-or tooth-derived molecules and will probably inspire advances in tooth regeneration.

(p0.2) Currently, researchers have employed various strategies for tooth regeneration using fetal tissue [7,8] and tooth germ cells [9] or using adult mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) [10]. They imitate tooth development and physiological reparation, respectively. However, the innervation of bio-engineered teeth does not fully replicate the highly asymmetric and organized pattern of the natural tooth-periodontium complex [7]. Better restoring tooth innervation requires deeper understanding of the mutual regulation between tooth and dental nerves in development and homeostasis. Understanding this will also benefit dental tissue engineering, as some neurogenic molecules are effective in promoting dental tissue formation [11]. In recent years, extensive studies have suggested the significance of local sensory and sympathetic nerves in maintaining dental and periodontal health and promoting the recovery of local diseases. This not only is because of their anatomical localization but also is demonstrated through inferior alveolar nerve resection (IANr), which not only reduces incisor dentin/enamel formation and injury repair, but also suppresses alveolar bone remodeling and periodontal defect repair [12][13][14]. In addition, sympathetic innervation also appears to take a regulatory role in osteoclast infiltration in rat periapical lesions [15], and alveolar bone remodeling in oral challenge with P. gingivalis [16]. Reversely, carotid sinus nerve stimulation plays a protective role in rat periodontitis, attenuating alveolar bone loss and inflammation [17]. Altogether, these studies agree that normal sensory and sympathetic innervation are critical for tooth-periodontium complex.
## (s1) The Molecular Guidance Cues for Tooth-Periodontium Innervation
(p1.0) Many molecules, mainly neurotrophins and semaphorins, expressed in and around the developing tooth germ modulate tooth innervation and other aspects of tooth development, such as cytodifferentiation. Many of them are also implied in periodontal innervation. Studies of tooth regeneration do not monitor the expression of these molecules [7,9,10], but their proper spatiotemporal expression is vital for the normal patterning of tooth nerves. Proper application of these molecules may benefit tooth nerve regeneration.
## (s2) Neurotrophins
(p2.0) Neurotrophins are identified as a family of growth factors important for neuronal survival, development, and function, as well as for the immune and reproductive systems. NGF as a prototypic neurotrophin is a significant target-derived promotive factor for peripheral sensory and sympathetic innervation. NGF immunoreactivity is mainly located in the dental mesenchyme in the bud stage, while in the cap and bell stages, it is mainly expressed in the dental epithelium and adjacent odontoblast layer. Its gene expression pattern correlates with pulpal neurite growth in postnatal mouse molars, suggesting that NGF is involved in the local sprouting, guidance, and arrangement of trigeminal axons in developing teeth [26]. This can explain why neonatal exposure to anti-NGF reduces the number of trigeminal neurons projecting to rat molar dental pulp [27].
## (s3) Semaphorins
(p3.0) The semaphorin family is a class of secreted, membrane-bound proteins that regulate many developmental processes [41]. Most semaphorins are chemorepellent against neurites, but some may promote axonal growth, such as semaphorin7A, which is expressed in odontoblasts and promotes dentin-pulp complex terminal innervation.
## (s4) Related Application in Tooth Regeneration
(p4.0) The molecules controlling tooth innervation may be applied for achieving better regeneration of the tooth neural network. In a study of preserving immature teeth with nonvital pulp, the application of amelogenin after root canal treatment successfully induces pulp regeneration with a dense neural network [47]. Amelogenin is a vital component of the enamel matrix. This confirms molecules other than neurotrophins and semaphorins may also regulate tooth innervation and again demonstrates that a developing tooth controls its own innervation.

(p4.1) Similarly, neurotrophins and semaphorins may also be applied in tooth and periodontium regeneration. However, this study, like many other regeneration studies, did not compare the distribution, pattern, and function of the regenerated pulp neural network with those of a natural one, meaning the regeneration may not be fully successful. Therefore, if neurotrophins and semaphorins are really to be applied, their physiological expression pattern during tooth development should be carefully scrutinized to instruct proper application so that the tooth neural network can best mimic a natural one.
## (s8) Related Application in Tooth Regeneration
(p8.0) Some of the neurogenic molecules implicated in tooth development are applicable to tooth regeneration, imitating their developmental roles. For example, serotonin is used to treat murine oral keratinocytes (MOKs), which also arise from embryonic mouse oral epithelium as the enamel organ does. MOKs growing in the presence of serotonin after reprogramming with Tgf-β1 successfully produced amelogenin, and in a 3D culture, they formed enamel-producing organoids. After densification with pressure and vacuum, the enamel formed by MOKs possesses a similar structure and mechanical properties to natural enamel, suggesting the potential application of serotonin in enamel regeneration via tissue engineering methods [11]. Other molecules discussed here may also help regenerate dental tissues, but their efficacy and application methods need to be explored.
## (s10) Morphological Changes in Local Dental Nerves
(p10.0) Myelinated nerves in the apical pulp of human teeth with irreversible pulpitis undergo various kinds of degenerative changes. The sprouting and degeneration of nerves are initial events occurring in carious or pulpitis teeth, and the exact mechanisms are still under investigation. However, the nerves do not just passively wait to be damaged by inflammation. In carious teeth, overexpression of growth-associated protein 43 (GAP43), a protein that promotes extensive sprouting of nerve endings into the reparative dentin matrix, is observed [75]. As shown in Figure 2, caries-induced pulp inflammation activates the complement system resulting in the production of C5a [76]. In addition, all pulp fibroblasts beneath the carious site express the C5a receptor (C5aR), which activates the production of BDNF upon binding to C5a. In turn, BDNF guides the outgrowing neurites towards the carious site [76]. However, C5a/C5aR binding seems to downregulate pulp fibroblasts' production of NGF, another neurite outgrowth inducer that mainly promotes neurite length rather than quantity. Nevertheless, pulp fibroblasts' C5aR activation is still essential for augmented neurite outgrowth in carious conditions [77]. Contrastingly, DPSCs are shown to overexpress both BDNF and NGF in response to C5a [78]. The NGF overexpression is shown to increase nerve density, which will subside once healing occurs but continue if inflammation persists, suggesting neural regulation in dental disease progression [79]. NGF is also shown to elicit the neuronal differentiation of DPSCs, which might also contribute to the regeneration of injured nerve fibers [80]. These simultaneous actions of immune, pulp, and neural cells suggest a coordinated neuroimmune response in host defense and healing. Accordingly, molecules mentioned here may be applied to better regenerate pulp innervation.
## (s11) Molecular Changes in Neural Cells
(p11.0) Molecular changes in dental innervation are also observed in various aspects. Voltagegated sodium channels (NaVs) are transmembrane ion channels on sensory neurons whose expression is altered in caries and pulpitis. In particular, NaV1.7, NaV1.8, and NaV1.9 are associated with aggravated pain or inflammation [81,82]. In contrast, Kv1.4, a voltage-gated potassium channel suppressing the generation of action potential, is downregulated on sensory neurons during pulpitis [83]. In addition, transient receptor potential channels (TRPs), nonselective cation channels on sensory nerves, activated by inflammatory agents or bacterial products are also involved in the generation of pain in pulpitis, as their activation causes the release of CGRP, a pain mediator [84,85]. Interestingly, in spite of local neural changes, distant neurons in the ipsilateral trigeminal ganglion of inflamed pulp also display pathological changes [86]. 
## (s12) Molecular Changes in Neural Cells
(p12.0) Molecular changes in dental innervation are also observed in various aspects. Voltage-gated sodium channels (NaVs) are transmembrane ion channels on sensory neurons whose expression is altered in caries and pulpitis. In particular, NaV1.7, NaV1.8, and NaV1.9 are associated with aggravated pain or inflammation [81,82]. In contrast, Kv1.4, a voltage-gated potassium channel suppressing the generation of action potential, is downregulated on sensory neurons during pulpitis [83]. In addition, transient receptor potential channels (TRPs), nonselective cation channels on sensory nerves, activated by inflammatory agents or bacterial products are also involved in the generation of pain in pulpitis, as their activation causes the release of CGRP, a pain mediator [84,85]. Interestingly, in spite of local neural changes, distant neurons in the ipsilateral trigeminal ganglion of inflamed pulp also display pathological changes [86].

(p12.1) Neurosecretion also changes in pathological conditions. A variety of neuropeptides, including neurokinin A, substance P (SP), NPY, and CGRP, are shown to be upregulated in the pulp in conditions of caries, pulpitis, or occlusal trauma [87][88][89]. These neuropeptides still have other physiological functions contributing to the regulation of tooth and periodontal homeostasis, which reflect the mutual regulation between nerves and target oral tissues ( Figure 2) and will be described in detail in Section 6. Neurosecretion also changes in pathological conditions. A variety of neuropeptides, including neurokinin A, substance P (SP), NPY, and CGRP, are shown to be upregulated in the pulp in conditions of caries, pulpitis, or occlusal trauma [87][88][89]. These neuropeptides still have other physiological functions contributing to the regulation of tooth and periodontal homeostasis, which reflect the mutual regulation between nerves and target oral tissues ( Figure 2) and will be described in detail in Section 6.
## (s13) Related Application in Tooth Regeneration
(p13.0) Molecules inducing neurite outgrowth in dental diseases might be applicable to tooth regeneration for better re-innervation outcomes. One study used rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) incorporated in a poly L-lactic acid scaffold to regenerate dental pulp in pulpotomized rats. The bio-engineered pulp was successfully re-innervated with increasing expression of NGF and GAP43 in the tooth, but at the end of the study, the nerve fiber density was still lower than that in a natural tooth [90]. This implies molecules promoting nerve growth can probably be mixed into the scaffold to achieve improved re-innervation outcomes.
## (s15) SP
(p15.0) SP is an 11 amino acid neuropeptide, a well-known member of the tachykinin family, produced by a variety of cells including sensory neurons, macrophages, dendritic cells, eosinophils, and lymphocytes [91]. The production of SP is upregulated in many pathological conditions and dental treatments. There is evidence in orthodontic movement showing an increase in SP resulting from the NGF/TrkA-PDL-associated sensory neuron body [88,92].

(p15.1) Dental pulp fibroblasts express both SP and its receptor, neurokinin-1 receptor (NK-1), and SP expression is significantly upregulated in carious teeth and irreversible pulpitis [87,93], suggesting its regulation in pulpal neurogenic inflammation, and it acts at least in part in an autocrine fashion [93]. Mechanistically, SP induces IL-8 and MIP-1 production in dental pulp [94,95] and TNF-a, IL-1b, IL-2, and IL-6 production in rat cutaneous wounds [95] and therefore is involved in the orchestration of pulpal inflammatory response. SP/NK-1 signaling is also significant in pulpal pain generation [96], as SP is a pain mediator, and NK-1 expression in inflamed dental pulp is tightly correlated with the degree of pain. Furthermore, SP is a vasodilator in pulp, activating NO synthase for NO production from vascular endothelial cells [97]. It also increases blood flow via the release of histamine [98]. This partially accounts for the hyperemia observed in inflamed pulp.

(p15.2) In the periodontium, SP is conducive to gingival inflammation and periodontal bone destruction. SP in gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) is reduced as the periodontal inflammation is relieved [99], meaning SP may be used as a predictor for disease progression. SP also promotes osteoclast differentiation by upregulating the RANKL/OPG ratio in gingival fibroblasts, and it upregulates hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α) in macrophages and gingival fibroblasts, leading to inflammation and angiogenesis [100]. These findings together reveal SP's action in periodontitis.

(p15.3) SP seems to promote pulpal and periodontal inflammation and related tissue destruction. Interception of local SP signals with a drug will probably benefit the outcome of tooth and periodontal regeneration in inflammatory diseases.
## (s16) VIP
(p16.0) VIP is a potent anti-inflammatory parasympathetic neuropeptide distributed throughout the central and peripheral nervous systems (PNSs). The biological actions of VIP are mediated by two high-affinity receptor subtypes, VPAC1 and VPAC2, on target cell membranes. VIP and VPAC1 expressions are elevated in moderately carious teeth to protect the pulp [101]. In periapical granulomas, VIP is a therapeutic target whose expression is associated positively with immunoregulatory factors and inversely with proinflammatory mediators [102]. The similar functions of VIP are also shown to alleviate inflammation and bone loss in periodontitis through regulating immune responses via monocyte differentiation, Treg migration, or TNF-α production and in osteoclastogenic response via the RANKL/OPG ratio [102][103][104][105]. These data suggest VIP may help eliminate local inflammation to create better conditions for tooth and periodontium regeneration.
## (s17) ACh and Cholinergic System
(p17.0) The cholinergic system, including ACh, choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), acetylcholinesterase (AChE), and nicotinic or muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (AChRs), is involved in periodontal disease. Ach, an important neurotransmitter, is mainly expressed by the vagus nerve. Although little evidence shows that the vagus nerve directly affects the periodontium, the components of a functional non-neuronal cholinergic system have been found in oral mucosa [106]. ACh can modulate innate immune responses within the oral mucosa in both an autocrine and a paracrine manner and subsequently participate in the pathological process of periodontal disease [107]. A clinical study showed that the Ach level increases significantly in saliva and GCF with higher levels of IL-17A and IL-17F, which are correlated positively with the severity of periodontal diseases [108], meaning the nonneuronal cholinergic system may influence the etiopathogenesis of periodontal disease.

(p17.1) Nicotine also plays an important role in periodontal diseases. The use of tobacco products is closely associated with an increased incidence of periodontal disease and unsatisfactory periodontal treatment. It is well established that a variety of alpha 7 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are expressed in human periodontal ligament cells (hPDLCs) and rat periodontal tissues. Nicotine activation of nAChRs induces IL-8 release as the gingival epithelial innate immune response [109]. Recently, nicotine/α7 nAChR signaling has been shown to regulate autophagy of hPDLCs, and subsequently promote the release of inflammatory factors including IL-1β and IL-8 [110]. These findings, therefore, suggest a direct proinflammatory action of nicotine/nAChR on the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. Intercepting nicotine/nAChR signals with topical drug delivery may improve the periodontal regeneration outcome of conventional periodontal treatment.
## (s19) NPY
(p19.0) NPY is a sympathetic neurotransmitter with important functions in various physiological processes and diseases. Its receptors include neuropeptide Y Y1-6 receptors (NPY Y1-6R) [113]. In human teeth and periodontium, NPY Y1R is the most studied.

(p19.1) NPY and NPY Y1R, distributed around small blood vessels in dental pulp, regulate caries-induced pulpal inflammation by modulating blood flow and inflammatory agent production. In pulpitis, NPY Y1R is also found in infiltrating inflammatory cells, nerve fibers, and dental pulp fibroblasts, implicating its regulation of neurogenic inflammation [114]. NPY Y1R on dental pulp fibroblasts is upregulated in response to inflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, Tgf-β1) and neuropeptides (SP, NPY), thus modulating the inflammation in turn [115]. On trigeminal ganglion (TG) neurons, NPY Y1R co-localizes with transient receptor potential channel vallinoid1 (TRPV1), which controls the release of CGRP. NPY binding to it inhibits the release of CGRP in the dental pulp to modulate neurogenic inflammation [116].

(p19.2) NPY also plays an important role in periodontal homeostasis. Inflamed human periodontal ligament stem cells become more sensitive to NPY, which enhances their osteogenic capacity in vitro [117]. Moreover, a genome-wide association study found suggestive evidence of the association of NPY loci with severe chronic periodontitis [118]. This is consistent with another genome-wide study, which also shows that single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) upstream NPY have strong interaction with sex, explaining the risk predilection of severe periodontitis in men [119]. These findings recently have been verified in a Brazilian population [120]. Therefore, NPY is significant in both the regulation and the initiation of periodontitis. However, direct experimental evidence will be required to discuss whether NPY supplementation helps periodontal regeneration, as current basic studies only revealed the correlation but not the nature of this correlation.
## (s20) CGRP
(p20.0) CGRP is a neuropeptide associated with neurogenic inflammation and painful orofacial conditions. During pulpitis, the expression levels of CGRP and CGRP receptors are upregulated, relating to dental pain and other histopathological phenomena [121]. CGRP receptors are expressed on a large portion of M2 macrophages in irreversible pulpitis or healthy pulp, indicating the immunomodulatory function of CGRP [122]. Consistently, LPS from Porphyromonas gingivalis (Pg), a pathogen commonly associated with symptomatic pulpitis, can directly excite trigeminal ganglion neurons via transient receptor potentials (TRPs) sensitized by toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), resulting in CGRP production [123]. Axonal CGRP is commonly elevated in peripheral nerve injury and is involved in the regeneration of local nerve fibers by promoting Schwann cell proliferation, meaning the increased CGRP production might also promote pulpal nerve regeneration in pulpitis, where pulpal nerves are damaged by inflammation and bacterial products [124]. In addition, in vitro studies reveal it antagonistically but coordinately regulates the formation of reparative dentin with Shh, as they are secreted from sensory afferents in combination upon stimuli [125]. However, CGRP regulation is variable across individuals, explaining the variable levels of pain and disease severity among patients with caries or pulpitis [89]. In apical periodontitis, capsaicin-sensitive nerve fibers exert a protective effect against the progression of periodontal lesions, possibly relating to the release of CGRP and other neuropeptides [126]. Overall, CGRP holds the potential for tooth regeneration, but its efficacy may depend on individuals.

(p20.1) CGRP protects against the progression of periodontitis. Most neurons in TG that innervate the rat gingival mucosa contain CGRP and SP. CGRP inhibits the apoptosis of osteoblasts induced by LPS [127] and inhibits osteoclastogenesis in vitro, both contributing to the alleviation of bone loss [128]. However, CGRP content is significantly reduced in GCF in the inflamed periodontium, where the defense and regenerative capacity is debilitated [129]. Supplementing CGRP may help recover this regenerative capacity. CGRP regulation is also implicated in other periodontal conditions, such as in occlusal trauma combined with moderate orthodontic forces [88], and the mutual interaction of CGRP and Shh promotes socket healing after tooth extraction [130]. In summary, CGRP has a substantial influence on various periodontal conditions that may be helpful in regenerative therapy.
## (s21) CNS-Released Neurohormones
(p21.0) Aside from the above-listed neuropeptides from peripheral nerve fibers, some CNSreleased neurohormones also regulate tooth and periodontal homeostasis via body fluid circulation. The related studies mainly focus on melatonin, serotonin, and oxytocin ( Figure 2).

(p21.1) Melatonin is a tryptophan derivative that regulates circadian rhythm and sleep and has more diverse physiological functions. In experimental periodontitis, melatonin alleviates rats' periodontal destruction with its anti-oxidative and anti-inflammatory properties [131]. In pulpitis, at physiological concentration, melatonin promotes osteogenic differentiation of dental pulp cells (DPCs) but inhibits their proliferation. It also promotes the apoptosis of DPCs [132,133]. In addition, melatonin, mediated by the MT1 receptor but not MT2, antagonizes the inflammatory response of dental pulp fibroblasts to LPS infection [134].
## (s25) Neural Regulations and Incisor Stem Cells
(p25.0) The incisors of rodents continuously grow throughout their whole lives, which is attributed to the maintenance of epithelial stem cells (ESCs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), and thus rodent incisors are widely recognized as a useful model for studying stem cells (Table 3).

(p25.1) It has been revealed that the continuous turnover of MSCs in mouse incisors is supported by a neurovascular bundle (NVB) niche, and the innervation is potentially associated with incisor homeostasis and injury repair via MSCs [149]. IANr leads to a significant reduction in incisor eruption rate [13,149], probably due to the decreased MSC count and proliferation [13,149]. The interruption of Wnt signaling resulting from denervation most likely causes a reduction in MSC proliferation. Meanwhile, microarray analysis shows that denervation hinders various signaling pathways, particularly Shh signals, which are secreted from the sensory nerves and modulate the expression of Gli1 in the stem cells near the cervical loop region. Finally, the odontogenic commitment and hard tissue formation are defective, leading to the destruction of incisor homeostasis [149].

(p25.2) In addition, denervation can increase the number of glial cells [149], and abundant Schwann-cell-derived cells located at the incisor damage area contribute to matrix mineralization [150]. This indicates that the innervation regulates incisor MSCs not only through Shh signaling but also via other components. Schwann cell precursors (SCPs) and Schwann cells (SCs) are the major types of glial cells in the peripheral nerves. Lineage tracing reveals incisor SCPs and SCs directly give rise to dental MSCs producing odontoblasts and pulp cells during the process of the development, growth, and regeneration of mouse incisors [150]. Worth mentioning is the glia-derived odontoblasts' independence of pericytes [150], despite other studies reporting the pericytes as odontoblast-producing MSCs in injury in vivo [163]. This suggests multiple origins for MSCs in rodent incisors and potentially human teeth.

(p25.3) IANr also disrupts incisor ESCs possibly through mesenchymal-epithelial interaction, but to a far minor extent [13]. Nevertheless, ESC niches and differentiation are still directly regulated by Ptch1/2-mediated Shh signaling derived from non-neural sources including transient amplifying cells (TACs) and differentiating ameloblasts [164,165].

(p25.4) The sympathetic nerves appear to have a minor impact on tooth homeostasis. They do not provide Shh for the MSC niches surrounding NVB [149]. Superior cervical ganglionectomy (SCGx) can only cause a slight reduction in dentin thickness [12]. However, it is an important regulator for bone homeostasis. Sympathetic innervation rectifies rat incisor eruption rate and accelerates it when the incisor is injured to avoid occlusion [166].

(p25.5) Human teeth differ biologically from rodent incisors. However, Shh signaling is also shown to regulate the differentiation of human DPSCs. Activation of molar sensory nerves due to injury-induced inflammation causes Shh and CGRP release to elicit these effects, which ultimately promotes reparative dentin formation [125]. Therefore, the Shh signaling pathway is a potential therapeutic target for tooth regeneration involving MSCs.
## (s26) PNS-Derived Neuropeptides on Dental Stem Cells
(p26.0) DPSCs and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) are regarded as important players in dental and periodontal homeostasis owing to their self-renewal and multipotency in tissue healing and regeneration and their regulation of inflammation. Local PNSs, particularly sensory fibers, exert their regulation on dental stem cells via various PNSderived neuropeptides mentioned before (Table 3).

(p26.1) CGRP is reported to inhibit DPSC proliferation and consequently reduce DPSC quantity but has no noticeable effect on DPSC differentiation [167]. Contradictorily, in another study, CGRP promoted molar pulp cell expansion but inhibited odontoblastic differentiation [125]. Further studies are needed to reconcile these contradicting clues. Nevertheless, CGRP and Shh together orchestrate DPSCs' response to injury in vitro, as Shh promotes odontoblastic differentiation which offsets CGRP's inhibitory effect, while CGRP promotes proliferation [125]. Therefore, if CGRP is to be applied in tooth regeneration, combined use with Shh or other molecules should be considered, especially when coupled with DPSCs. Reversely, proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines from DPSCs sensitize trigeminal neurons by binding to their CXCR2 receptor and agonizing CGRP release in human pulp explants [168]. This is consistent with the previous observation that DPSC proliferation and immunomodulation are altered in inflammatory environments, meaning caution should be taken when treating dental tissue defects caused by inflammatory diseases with biomaterials involving DPSCs.

(p26.2) SP, a potent proinflammatory neuropeptide, modulates PDLSCs directly and indirectly. It is reported that PDLSCs incubated with SP produce CCL20/MIP-3α by triggering p38 and ERK/MAPK signaling. CCL20 and its receptor CCR6 show marked upregulation in diseased periodontal tissue and promote the selective recruitment of T cells [157]. In bone remodeling, SP is usually regarded as an osteoclastogenic inducer via regulating PDLSCs. However, it is also reported to protect osteogenesis. At a concentration similar to that in GCF in periodontitis patients, SP activates HO-1 and Nrf-2, subsequently upregulates the osteogenic differentiation of human PDLSCs [158]. Therefore, further studies are still needed to clarify its global role in periodontitis progression. Nevertheless, these data demonstrate that modulation of SP may be important for periodontal regenerative therapy with MSCs.

(p26.3) Components from sympathetic innervation also regulate PDLSC differentiation. Treatment of PDLSCs with NPY but not SP has a moderate osteogenic effect. In reverse, PDLSCs stimulated by IL-1b and TNF-α upregulated the NPY Y1 receptor and downregulated the SP receptor [117], which implicates a protective response in periodontal inflammation. Therefore, pretreatment of PDLSCs should be considered when regenerating inflammationcompromised periodontium with them.
