# Influence Maximization in Social Networks: A Survey

CorpusID: 261682643 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3e44da9a4615702857f23e329e12595c238ae137)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Our Contributions
(p1.0) In this survey, we present a comprehensive analysis of the IM problem; from definitions of related concepts, IM techniques, to various realistic extensions to the classical IM problem. Through the survey, readers can quickly understand and get into the area of influence maximization. Specifically, our contributions include the following. First, we introduce the IM problem formally along with the information diffusion models that underpin it. We present a taxonomy to organize existing solutions and illustrate the development pathway along the key solution categories. Second, we conduct an exhaustive study over key existing techniques for the classical IM problem, where we not only reveal the development trends of existing work but also highlight the strengths and weaknesses of each effort. Third, we discuss how the classical IM problem is extended to incorporate real world requirements. We also provide a systematic insights over adaptive IM, a recent derivative of the classical IM problem. Lastly, we articulate the challenges and open issues, and identify new trends and future directions in this arena.

(p1.1) There exist some experimental studies [3,111] and surveys [7,92,103] on the IM problem. In particular, [3,111] present an experimental analysis over a number of representative IM efforts, focusing on experimental comparison between different solutions w.r.t seeds quality, time efficiency and memory consumption. It is, however, not a survey and hence does not provide any in-depth theoretical insight of the IM problem or techniques. On the other hand, some shallow surveys like [103] and [7] categorize works only at the highest level, namely approximation and heuristic but no other detailed study inside the sub-levels within both categories. Besides, they only take into account the progressive diffusion models (IC, LT, and CT) but not non-progressive models. In addition, neither or them has provided any discussion on extended IM issues.

(p1.2) More germane to our work is the recent survey in [92]. Our work differs in the following key ways. Firstly, we classify existing IM efforts into approximate and heuristic ones. In contrast, the criteria used for classification in [92] is based on the assumption that IM techniques have good theoretical result guarantee (i.e., approximation ratio). Consequently, it classifies the IM techniques into simulation-based and sampling-based approaches. However, both these approaches share the same building block, hill-climbing strategy, and only differentiates themselves during the estimation of influence for the candidate seeds. Furthermore, they are in fact two sides of the same coin. That is, both are under the category of approximation algorithms. Consequently, they ignore solutions that have no theoretical guarantee but good practical solutions. As more new heuristic IM techniques emerge, they cannot be accurately classified into any of the categories in [92]. In addition, the claim that simulation-based approaches generally support many information diffusion models compared to sampling-based ones does not hold. Examples that contradict this claim, in fact, can be found in Table 1 of [92] (3 out of the 6 simulation-based approaches contradict this claim e.g., UBLF [153], CGA [140], SA [69]). Secondly, we present a different categorization for the information diffusion models by classifying them into progressive and non-progressive ones. This is consistent with a recent study on information diffusion models [54].

(p1.3) However, such clear categorization is missing in [92]. Thirdly, we survey adaptive im techniques that have received increasing attention recently. Discussions on this important variant of IM problem are missing in [92].
## (s8) DIFFUSION MODELS
(p8.0) In the information spread process defined by Kemp et al. [72], each node in a social network can be active (i.e., an adopter of the information) or inactive (i.e., not yet an adopter). An inactive node may change to active status indicating that it has adopted the information. However, some models do not allow an active node to become inactive again.

(p8.1) Depending on whether it is disallowed or allowed, existing diffusion models can be categorized into two types, namely progressive and non-progressive ones. In this section, we discuss them in turn.
## (s12) Non-Progressive Model
(p12.0) In contrast to progressive models (IC, LT, and CT) where active nodes cannot become inactive, in non-progressive models, an active node can be de-activated during the whole information spread process. The representative models in this category includes SIR/SIS [135] and Voter [32,65].
## (s13) Voter Model.
(p13.0) In the original Voter model [32,65], every node in a social network has two states, active and inactive, denoted as 0 and 1, respectively. Given an undirected social network = ( , ), which may contain self-loops, for a node ∈ , we denote by N ( ) the set of neighbors of in (which includes itself since has loops). Starting from an arbitrary 0/1 assignment to the nodes of , at each step ≥ 1, each node picks its neighbor uniformly at random and adopts its opinion. Formally, starting form any initial node assignment X 0 = , we inductively define

(p13.1) The Voter model is a random process whose behavior depends on the initial assignment X 0 . For the IM problem under the Voter model, ∈ X indicates that the node has adopted the information we wish to advertise. An example of influence propagation under the Voter model is shown in Fig. 2c. At = 0:   [135]. In the SIR model, a node has three states, namely susceptible, infected, and recovered, and only infected individuals can infect susceptible individuals, while recovered individuals can neither infect nor be infected by others. That is, an individual is never infected by a disease multiple times. In the SIS model [54,64,83], once a node has been activated as susceptible at time , it will remain susceptible or become infected at + 1. One infected node could become susceptible from infected status. Fig. 2d is an example of information propagation under the SIS model. Here, at = 0:
## (s14) Heat Diffusion Model.
(p14.0) In social networks, early users (seed nodes) of products act as heat sources. Early users spread the influence to others as if a heat source continuously radiates heat, and the affected people will adopt the product. Ma et al. [102] proposed the Heat Diffusion Model (HDM), which models the process of information diffusion as a physical phenomenon, heat diffusion. The HDM-based IM problem is defined as selecting a seed set and setting the initial heat for each node at the beginning of the thermal diffusion process. [27,102] proposed heuristic algorithms to solve IM problem under HDM.
## (s15) SOLUTIONS FOR CLASSICAL IM
(p15.0) Based on the different diffusion models introduced in the preceding section, various research efforts have been proposed in the literature to address the classical IM problem as defined in Definition 2.3. In this section, we shall conduct a thorough study of these efforts from three key dimensions: the diffusion model, the estimation method of the expected influence, and the selection of seed users. In this context, we shall also highlight their outstanding points and weaknesses, if any.

(p15.1) Since [72], many works have emerged to accelerate the process for selecting seeds. Recall our discussion in Section 3. Depending on whether the result quality can be guaranteed theoretically, these methods can be divided into two categories, namely approximate and heuristic algorithms. Based on the specific methods used to estimate the expected influence, approximate algorithms can be further classified into simulation-based and sampling-based. The key differences between these types of approaches can be summarized as follows.
## (s17) Approximate Algorithms
(p17.0) Kempe et al. [72] presented the first approximate algorithm based on hill-climbing strategy. Since then most of the existing IM algorithms follow the hill-climbing framework, which is illustrated in Algorithm 1. The algorithm is initialized with an empty seed set . It iteratively selects a node into if provides the maximum marginal gain to the influence function ( ) w.r.t. the partial solution . The algorithm terminates when there are distinct nodes in . The theoretical guarantee of this greedy framework depends on whether ( ) is a non-negative, monotone, submodular function. In particular, [72] proved that (·) is indeed so under some classical diffusion models such as IC and LT.
## (s18) Sampling-based Methods.
(p18.0) Different from the simulation-based algorithms, the key idea of sampling-based algorithms is to sample influence instances from to estimate the influence scope of a node (set). Intuitively, given that the influence propagation is viewed as a stochastic process within the target graph, all possible influence instances construct a possible world. Samples from this possible world can be utilized to estimate the expected influence of a node set. As mentioned earlier, there are two types of samples that are widely adopted in IM research, namely snapshots and RR sets. Both strategies share a common first step, flipping a coin on each edge with (sampling-based approaches mainly work under the IC model). The difference between them is manifested in the second step. The snapshot strategy typically estimates the influence spread of a node from the perspective of "influencers" whereas the RR sets-based strategy "reverses" to consider the perspective of "influencees" in order to estimate the influence of nodes.

(p18.1) Snapshots-based Sampling. Chen et al. [22] introduced the sampling approach in estimating the influence of a node (set). It is motivated by the following fact under IC: whether can activate depends only on , , which can be considered as flipping a coin of bias , . They proposed the NewGreedy algorithm. It randomly generates a sample from the possible world of all influence instances given a network , where each sample is referred to as a snapshot defined as follows.
## (s19) Heuristic Algorithms
(p19.0) Kempe et al. [72] also proposed a seed selection process guided by heuristics. Specifically, node degree and Pagerank score are utilized to guide the selection. Compared to approximate algorithms, such heuristic algorithms often exhibit excellent efficiency and scalability, but the quality of the results cannot be guaranteed. Since then many heuristic algorithms have been developed to address the IM problem. These algorithms can be generally classified into two categories, local and global, depending on how much knowledge the heuristics have to take into account.
## (s27) Dynamic IM
(p27.0) The majority of research in IM assume that the target network is static. However, in reality, social networks evolve with time. As new interactions emerge and old edges become obsolete, the topology of a network changes rapidly. In addition, the intensity of influence is constantly changing. Therefore, it is necessary to select the seed set in real-time by considering the evolution of the network structure. We refer to this as dynamic IM problem.

(p27.1) Aggarwal et al. [1] are the first to introduce the dynamic model for information flow in social networks. They combined the greedy approach and forward temporal analysis to determine the most influential points in a network.

(p27.2) Specifically, this approach finds a seed set at time under the condition that the network evolves within a given interval [ , + ℎ]. It aims to maximize the influence at + ℎ. Zhuang et al. [158] proposed Maximum Gap Probing (MaxG), which attempts to observe the network changes by periodically detecting the connection of a small number of nodes to minimize the information diffusion gap between the observed and the actual network. However, these methods do not consider the maximization of influence under diffusion models such as IC/LT. Additionally, all are heuristic algorithms without any performance guarantee.

(p27.3) Chen et al. [25] consider modeling dynamic social networks as a series of snapshot graphs. They extended IM to the Influential Node Tracking (INT) problem, which focused on tracking a set of influencing nodes that maximize the influence as a network evolve. They proposed the Upper Bound Interchange Greedy (UBI) algorithm, which uses the smoothness of evolution of the network structure to track the seed set found in the preceding snapshot and changes the nodes in the preceding seed set one by one to discover more influential nodes incrementally. The algorithm can achieve a 1/2 approximation ratio over the result quality. However, UBI is sensitive to the size of the seed set. As the size increases, its performance and solution quality decrease. Unlike UBI, the method proposed by Ohsaka et al. [113] can incorporate updates, including addition and removal of vertices and edges, and updates of propagation probabilities.

(p27.4) They achieved that by maintaining a real-time dynamic index of a series of graph sketches following RIS strategy. By presenting a specific updating scheme for the index, they achieve a (1 − 1/ − ) approximation ratio. However, this method can only handle updates to hundreds of nodes/edges per second due to the high maintenance cost. Yang et al. [148] proposed a method to track the top influential users by controlling the relative error of the results. It maintains a proper number of RR sets for approximating users' influence spreads.
## (s31) Miscellaneous IM works
(p31.0) There are other works that do not fall into any of the above categories. Although there is currently only a small amount of work on each problem, they are still acknowledged.

(p31.1) Tang et al. [125] proposed diversified social influence maximization, while considering the degree of influence and the diversity of the infected population. They constructed a class of diversity measures to quantify the diversity of the infected population. Antonio et al. [14,15] proposed Diversity-sensitive Targeted Influence Maximization. Different from [125], this problem does not assume prior knowledge about user attributes. [15] associates the users of the social network with the classification data set, where each tuple expresses the classification attributes of the user. By designing non-decreasing monotone and submodular functions for categorical diversity, the concept of seed diversity is integrated into the objective function of IM problem. [14] only considers using topological information in social networks to model user diversity. They use the definition of local diversity and global diversity to propose two greedy algorithms, which search for the shortest path in the diffusion graph in a backward manner from the selected target set. Yang et al. [147] proposed Continuous Influence Maximization, and solved this problem through a coordinate descent framework.

(p31.2) This problem assumes that every user in the social network knows the discount-related purchase probability curve, which is the seed probability function, and the goal is to select a group of users to provide corresponding discounts to maximize product purchases under a predetermined budget. Gao et al. [46] proposed the interaction-aware influence maximization problem, which takes into account both the number of active users and the interaction between users.
## (s32) THE ROAD AHEAD
(p32.0) Since the elegant seminal work by Kempe et al. [72], the IM problem has been extensively studied. In the preceding sections, we have discussed in detail key research efforts in this arena. The IM research began with the classical IM problem and since the turn of the last decade it diversified to several extensions that incorporate various real-world issues associated with information propagation in a social network. In this section, we delineate key future research directions in this area.

(p32.1) Realistic information diffusion models. The dynamics of spread of information in a social network is guided by an information diffusion model. Hence, information diffusion models play a pivotal role in the IM problem. Inaccurate or overly simplistic diffusion models may adversely impact the result quality of the influence spread of a seed set. As discussed in this survey, majority of IM research have focused on utilizing the simplistic IC and LT models. Some of the research have also extended these models to cater for specific real-world issues such as location, conformity, and time. However, to ensure that the diffusion models closely capture real-world behaviors of social users and information propagation, it is paramount to explore holistic models that incorporate various real-world properties such as topics, social psychology theories, network dynamics. Currently, there is no diffusion model that takes into account all of these features. Furthermore, IC and LT models consider influence propagation in discrete time steps whereas influence propagation occurs in continuous time in reality. Hence, diffusion models need to be augmented to capture this reality.
