# Transcriptome survey reveals increased complexity of the alternative splicing landscape in Arabidopsis

CorpusID: 26875402 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f2b10d22644d273020bbf8960a3b982af8fa632d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Alternative splicing landscape in Arabidopsis
(p2.0) High level of detection of novel splice junctions in Arabidopsis For splice junction detection, we used TopHat ). To reduce the number of false positives, the minimum intron size was set to 60 nt, which is close to that established experimentally (Goodall and Filipowicz 1990) This is in contrast to other studies (Filichkin et al. 2010;Zhang et al. 2010) which used smaller intron sizes of 20 nt and 1 nt, respectively. We filtered the splice junctions originally detected (using alignment with two mismatches) (see Methods) by two criteria: quality of the alignment and coverage of the splice junction (Supplemental Fig. S1). Splice junctions that were obtained from the alignment with two mismatches (see Methods) were removed if the splice junction in question was within 10 nt of another splice junction with better support and if it was not supported by the alignment of perfectly aligned reads (alignment with no mismatches) (Supplemental Fig. S1; see Methods). For the remaining junctions, we have only included those supported by at least three reads (two mismatches). Our results showed that the majority of the splice junctions reside in annotated genes (131,523 of 149,925) (Table 1) and that, in protein-coding genes, they are located mainly in the coding sequence (CDS) ( Fig. 2A), highlighting the potential of splice junctions to affect the final protein sequence. From the total of predicted splice junctions, 46,955 (31%) were novel and not annotated in the TAIR9 Database (Table 1). This is most likely due to the use of a normalized library together with longer reads which have considerably improved splice junction detection (Supplemental Table S2).
## (s3) The majority of splice junctions define typical plant introns
(p3.0) In plants, several features that impact splicing efficiency have been described. These include a minimum intron size, sequences in the 59 and 39 splice sites, the branch point, and a minimum percentage of AU-richness (Goodall and Filipowicz 1990;Brown and Simpson 1998;Lorkovic et al. 2000). Although the presence of these signals will define an intron, it is the combination and strength of each signal which determines the splicing efficiency of intron removal (Brown and Simpson 1998).

(p3.1) Inspection of the intron sizes produced by all of the predicted splice junctions had a mean of 298 nt (median = 114 nt) and showed that the majority (;70%) of them were smaller than 200 nt (Fig. 2B). However, the sizes of introns generated by the new splice junctions were bigger than those from the junctions annotated in TAIR (mean = 588.7 nt versus mean = 166.5 nt, respectively, Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon test, P-value < 0.00001). This was also highlighted by only ;47% of them being smaller than 200 nt (Fig. 2B). This is probably due to many of the novel splice junctions defining new AS events and that introns with AS tend to be larger than introns with no evidence of AS (see Fig. 5A, below).

(p3.2) Examination of the dinucleotides at the intron borders exhibited an increase in the number of GC-AG and AT-AC splice sites in comparison to TAIR9 annotations (5.2% and 4.8% vs. 1% and 0.6%, respectively) (Fig. 3A). In order to demonstrate that the introns predicted by these splice junctions were bona fide introns, we looked for sequence signatures of plant introns using position weight matrices (PWMs) (Sheth et al. 2006). Using PWMs of the 59 and 39 splice sites of U2 and U12 annotated introns in Arabidopsis, together with their respective branch point signatures ( Fig. 3B; see Methods), we were able to classify ;93% of the introns. As expected, most of them were classified as U2 introns, but we also identified 2069 potential U12 introns in genic regions ( Fig. 3A;   Alioto 2007). Functional classification (GO annotation) of the genes possessing U12 introns shows that they are 2.7-fold enriched in DNA and RNA metabolism class (P-value = 1.039 3 10 À10 ; data not shown).
## (s10) Read alignment to the reference A. thaliana genome
(p10.0) A total of 115,883,414 paired-end reads were obtained from five lanes of Illumina sequencing. Read mapping to the Arabidopsis reference genome TAIR9 (The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative 2000), and splice junction detection was done using TopHat ) with a maximum of two mismatches. Minimum and maximum intron lengths were fixed at 60 and 6000 nt, respectively. The rest of the parameters were left as default. A Pearson correlation coefficient between the sequencing lanes was calculated using the coverage values obtained by TopHat ). As a good correlation between the replicates was obtained (R 2 > 0.98), the pool of sequences from the five lanes was used in further analyses.

(p10.1) To examine the influence of read-length and normalization on the read mapping, we used publicly available Arabidopsis Illumina data of 36-nt read length (Filichkin et al. 2010). Two libraries were analyzed: an oligo-dT cDNA library from 3-wk-old wild-type plants and one random primed (RP) cDNA library from 12d-old seedlings (SRA files: SRX006704, SRX006692, SRX006192, SRX006191). To generate 36-nt reads for our data, we extracted the first 36 nt from the 75-nt original reads using homemade Perl scripts. For the single-end reads sets, we used only the left-side reads coming from the original pair-end set. All the sets were aligned with TopHat using the same intron size parameters as described above.

(p10.2) Read coverage along transcription units was obtained using annotated gene models in TAIR 9 (The Arabidopsis Genome Initiative 2000). If more than two gene models were annotated for a particular gene, then we chose the longest model as a representative of the gene. The start and the end of each transcription unit were normalized from 1% to 100%, respectively.
## (s11) Splice junction detection
(p11.0) We used TopHat software ) to predict splice junctions. To diminish the number of potential false positives, we performed a prediction of splice junctions without mismatches in addition to the original alignment of two mismatches (Supplemental Fig. S1). The above approach allowed us to discard splice junctions that are predicted by erroneous alignment, especially in regions where several dinucleotides resembling splice sites are found in tandem. We have filtered out those splice junctions that were not predicted in the alignment of no mismatches and that are in proximity with another better supported junction by <10 nt. The remaining splice junctions were used for further analysis if they were supported by at least three alignments in the original list (alignment with two mismatches).

(p11.1) We have defined as genic splice junctions those junctions that are inside the coordinates of annotated genes in TAIR9 and have the same strand as the gene in question. Those splice junctions that are inside gene coordinates but are in the opposite strand were named antisense. Finally, those junctions that are not inside any gene coordinates were called intergenic.

(p11.2) For the genic splice junctions, we took those coming from protein-coding genes and have examined whether the predicted splice junctions are inside the coding sequence, 59 UTR or 39 UTR. If one extreme of the junction was in the coding sequence and the other in the UTR, they were classified as 59UTR-CDS or CDS-39UTR.

(p11.3) To determine the signatures of U2 or U12 introns, we used 10 intronic and three exonic bases for the 59 splice site and 14 intronic bases and three exonic bases for the 39 splice site. We have evaluated the splice sites using the procedure and PWMs described by Sheth et al. (2006). A strong signal of U2 or U12 intron was considered if the splice site in question (59 or 39) score was $65 in the respective PWM. For the U12 branch point, a PWM was built using the branch point sequences deposited in the U12 database (Alioto 2007). The procedure of building the PWM was the same as in Sheth et al. (2006). To identify the branch point, we scanned the first 30 bases upstream of the 39 splice site and evaluated this stretch of sequence with the U12 PWMs. The higher score was retained, and, if this score was $65, then it was considered to be a strong signal for a U12 branch point. To define U2 branch points, we have looked for the motif YURAY in the stretch of 30 nt. As U12 introns have more highly conserved 59 splice site and branch point sequences than U2 introns, they were classified as U12 when they possessed both 59 splice site and branch point with scores $ 65 in the respective U12 PWMs. An intron was considered as U2 if it had a good U2 signal in the 59 splice site (score $ 65 in the respective U2 PWMs) and a good signature in the 39 splice site (score $ 65 in the respective U2 PWMs) or the YURAY U2 branch point.
## (s14) Intron retention analysis
(p14.0) The intron retention events were obtained from our set of PATs. Thus, the retained introns in our analyses are completely covered by RNA-seq reads and have passed the expression filtering by Cufflinks. The intron retention ratio was calculated using the median of reads that aligned inside the intron divided by the number of reads supporting the splice junction. The median was used as the parameter of intron coverage because reads along the introns are not uniformly distributed and this measure is less sensitive to extreme values. Additionally, we have calculated the IRR by counting the reads containing the splice site and adjacent sequence of the retained intron divided by the reads supporting the splice junction. Both methods of IRR calculation gave a Pearson correlation of ;0.9 (data not shown). The further analyses were performed using the first method (median of reads along the intron). The differences between groups of intron features (intron size, GC content, splice site score, and number of stop codons) were evaluated using Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon tests in groups of introns with the same sample size (Fig. 5).

(p14.1) We analyzed the coding potential of retained introns, which are located inside annotated coding sequences. Translation was performed using the frame of the 59 neighboring exon annotated in TAIR. For those introns that are inside annotated exons, we have used the frame of the exon in which they are contained. As a negative control, we have used the same number of randomly selected introns inside coding sequences that have no evidence of retention in our sample, and the frame for their translation was obtained as for the retained introns. Furthermore, introns inside UTRs translated in the three frames were also used as a negative control. The resulting translated sequences (exon+intron+exon) were used to search Pfam protein domains employing hidden Markov models (HMMs) with HMMER (Pfam HMM database release 25.0). Hits were only regarded as significant if they had an E-value # 0.01. An intron was considered to be part of a protein domain if it contributes at least to 20% of the total domain.

(p14.2) The expected frequency of stop codons in introns was calculated by f(T) 3 f(A) 3 f(A) + f(T) 3 f(G) 3 f(A) + f(T) 3 f(A) 3 f(G), where f(A) represents the frequency of the nucleotide A. We obtained the codon usage of the exons and introns as described by Galante et al. (2004). We performed 100 pairwise comparisons between random distributions of 435,283 codons present in the retained introns along the 61 possible codons to obtain the average x 2 and the standard deviations (Supplemental Table S6).

(p14.3) For testing of the cryptic introns by RT-PCR, we designed primer pairs for 10 randomly selected introns with an IRR > 1 (Supplemental Table S10). The cDNA employed for the experiment was synthesized from a 1:1 mix of total RNA from wild-type flowers and 10-d-old seedlings using the Reverse Transcription System kit (Promega). PCR was performed under the following conditions: denaturation 98°C for 3 min, followed by 30 cycles of denaturation 98°C for 10 sec, annealing 58°C for 10 sec, and extension 72°C for 30 sec, and final extension at 72°C for 5 min. The amplified products were visualized in a 2% agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide (Supplemental Fig. S8).
