# Nasoenteric Tube Placement in Patients with Esophageal Varices: A Review of the Current Evidence and Society Guidelines

CorpusID: 265515860 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce3687fe9430572f63fbfc96a06284fbded60e4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0ce3687fe9430572f63fbfc96a06284fbded60e4)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Esophageal varices (EV) are a common complication of portal hypertension (PHT) and can be present in 30 to 60% of patients with cirrhosis. 1,2][4][5] Patients hospitalized with decompensated cirrhosis may require nasoenteric tube (NET) placement to maintain adequate nutritional support and medication administration.[8][9][10] Previous studies that examined this topic were limited due to sample size, absence of control group, or inclusion of patients with an unknown history of EVs.

(p0.1) In this article, the term NET will be used to refer to any feeding tube placed nasally and terminating either in the stomach or the small intestines.Scenarios when NET placement is needed in a patient with liver cirrhosis are numerous (►Table 1).However, two scenarios that need further explanation are the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy and the management of malnutrition.
## (s1) Management of Malnutrition in Patients with Cirrhosis
(p1.0) Malnutrition and sarcopenia can be seen in 20% of patients with compensated cirrhosis and 60% of patients with decompensated cirrhosis. 11The etiology of malnutrition in patients with cirrhosis is multifactorial and is related to decreased oral intake, early satiety, anorexia, malabsorption, maldigestion,
## (s4) Current Society Guidelines and Experts' Recommendations
(p4.0) AASLD 2014 guidelines for the management of HE allow the placement of a nasogastric (NG) tube to administer oral medications if patients are unable to swallow or at risk for aspiration (►Table 2). 14The risk of causing variceal bleeding in the presence of EVs was not discussed in these guidelines.
## (s6) Clinical Studies and Quality of Evidence
(p6.0) Most studies that supported or warned against NET insertion in patients with known EVs were limited by a small sample size, a lack of a comparison group, or a lack of randomization (►Table 3).

(p6.1) Al Obaid et al's study is one of the largest and most recent studies to date to assess the risk of variceal bleeding after NET insertion in patients with known EVs. 20 In this retrospective study, 11 out of 75 patients had gastrointestinal bleeding (GIB) within 48 hours of NET placement.It was also noted that a higher Model for End-Stage Liver Disease-Sodium score and lower EV location were associated with a higher risk of GIB after NET placement.This study raises the concern that this risk of GIB after NET placement does actually exist although the risk is low.However, this is a noncontrolled study and these findings could be incidental.In addition, the type and cause of GIB were not specified, raising the question of whether the GIB was actually due to variceal bleeding versus other causes of upper or lower GIB.

(p6.2) Another study by Ritter et al assessed the risk of GIB in 75 patients with cirrhosis who underwent liver transplantation. 21None of the patients had GIB, including 61 patients with documented EVs and despite using 18F standard Salem Sump NG tube.This study also had no comparison group.
## (s7) Special Considerations Recent Endoscopic Variceal Banding or Sclerotherapy
(p7.0) A 1997 study was the first to describe the risk of variceal rebleeding due to NET insertion after a recent EV banding or sclerotherapy. 23In this randomized controlled study, 22 patients who had sclerotherapy or banding ligation for variceal bleeding were assigned to either receive ETF through a NG tube or to remain nil per os for 3 days.Four out of 12 patients (33%) in the ETF group had rebleeding episodes on days 3, 4, and 5 compared with only one patient out of 10 in the comparison group (10%) but this was not statistically significant.The study was criticized because the groups were unbalanced given 11 patients (92%) in the ETF group were treated with sclerotherapy compared with 7 (70%) in the comparison group.This difference might explain the higher rebleeding rate in the ETF group, as sclerotherapy is associated with a higher risk of rebleeding when compared with banding.
## (s8) Type of NET
(p8.0) NETs can be either NG when they terminate in the stomach or nasoduodenal (ND) or nasojejunal (NJ) when they terminate in the duodenum or the jejunum, respectively.Both NG and ND/NJ tubes are available in different lengths and sizes, but NG tubes are generally stiffer and have larger diameters.Both can be used for ETF and medication delivery, but only NG tubes can be used for gastric decompression and lavage (►Table 1).Some clinicians prefer small-bore NET in patients with a history of EVs assuming they are associated with less risk of GIB when compared with large bore ones. 28However, there is no evidence to support this practice.In fact, there is some evidence that the risk of GIB is not different between NG and ND/NJ tubes when there is a history of EVs.Al Obaid et al's study found there was no significant difference in the incidence of GIB between NJ/ND tubes and NG tubes. 20A similar finding was noted by a smaller study by Charlton et al. 29 Lastly, Ritter et al found no episodes of GIB in 75 patients with known EVs and all had 16Fr NG tubes. 21herefore, the choice of the tube type should be based on the clinical indication, availability, need for gastric emptying, risk of aspiration, and patient comfort.
## (s9) Conclusion
(p9.0) Based on the evidence outlined above, we cannot make a strong statement that NET placement in patients with EVs is completely safe, nor we can state that there is a significant risk of inducing GIB after placement.However, we believe that whenever there is a strong indication for NET placement and there is no alternative option that is equally effective, clinicians should proceed with NET placement without hesitancy.Possible complications and the level of supporting of evidence should be discussed with the patient or their family whenever possible.

(p9.1) Delaying NET placement for 24 to 48 hours after a recent variceal bleeding or a recent endoscopic intervention is advised whenever possible. 25,26The type of NET does not seem to affect the risk of variceal bleeding and clinicians should use whatever is more appropriate for the specific clinical scenario.
