# Volume 6 Number 2 Paratuberculosis Cases in the Livestock Industry in Nigeria: A Review

CorpusID: 261158664 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d9cf6d5bd4b3c4ccaff4a8ce488527903c30f28](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8d9cf6d5bd4b3c4ccaff4a8ce488527903c30f28)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Report of Paratuberculosis in Nigeria
(p3.0) Lack of adequate public awareness: Despite the knowledge about the disease in developed and some developing countries, there needs to be more public awareness about paraTB in Nigeria. Livestock farmers need to be informed by critical stakeholders about the disease and its economic/public health implications.

(p3.1) Poor livestock disease surveillance: With the disease being reported in Nigeria in 2013 and neighboring Cameroon, there is a need for a proper disease surveillance plan in Nigeria, especially in border states and the livestock market, which needs to be improved.

(p3.2) Lack of adequate diagnostic facilities: In Nigeria, there are limited veterinary diagnostic laboratories, while the few equipped laboratory might be miles away from a farm or grazing reserve, which could affect the laboratory outcome.

(p3.3) Poverty: Most livestock farmers in Nigeria are lowincome earners; some cannot afford the consultation fee to invite a veterinarian for a proper diagnosis of sick animals. This often leads to animals being attended to by quacks.

(p3.4) Research Gap: Studies on the effect or prevalence of paraTB in Nigeria received little or no attention; this may be because the disease is not considered a disease of public health or socio-economic importance (Whittington et al., 2019).

(p3.5) With an estimated cattle population of about 25.7 million heads by 2050 (FAO, 2019) and due to the open grazing system of pastoralists, MAP survival for extended periods in soil or water and the effect of severe rain and flood, which could lead to the circulation of the infectious agent in the environment (Grant, 2005;Okuni et al., 2020), there is a need for studies to be conducted on paraTB in Nigeria. Studies should concentrate on herd-level prevalence, within-herd prevalence, molecular epidemiology of different strains, dynamics of transmission, host factors that could lead to susceptibility or tolerance among breeds in Nigeria, factors that contribute to the survival of MAP in the environment, and public health and economic impact of the disease. Study objectives should also include farmers' attitudes and knowledge about Johne's disease, evaluating different control and prevention programs, and assessing different diagnostic tests.
