# CubeSat Communication Subsystems: A Review of On-Board Transceiver Architectures, Protocols, and Performance

CorpusID: 261011472 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f93f1ae82e4e34ffd09510c6948d3546eeb9f97](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0f93f1ae82e4e34ffd09510c6948d3546eeb9f97)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Physics

## (s2) III. BASEBAND ARCHITECTURES IN THE LITERATURE
(p2.0) There are various approaches for designing a CubeSat communication subsystem. One of the most common and trending approaches is to utilize the concept of SDR to custom-design a reconfigurable transceiver that meets the specific requirements of the CubeSat mission [32]. Such designs are categorized as custom designed SDRs. In this approach, the developer typically customizes the architecture of the system and the algorithms used for the different functions. Another design approach is to base the communication system on some already existing SDR platform that is commercially available. Therefore, the required components and resources are already existing, and the design is more concerned with utilizing the available resources to optimally implement the desired application. This is categorized as commercial SDR. The more conventional design approach is to use hardware components to implement the transceiver. As is the case with SDR, there are also custom hardware designs and commercial hardware designs, where in the later the hardware components used are commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) components rather than custom designed hardware components. The review is thus divided into four Subsections based on the design approach category. In each Subsection, the relevant works falling under that category are reviewed in terms of the transceiver design and implementation with a particular focus on the baseband architecture. Before proceeding with the baseband architectures review, it is critical to briefly discuss some commonly used communication protocols in CubeSat missions.
## (s5) B. COMMERCIAL SDRs
(p5.0) Several CubeSat transceivers are based on commercially available SDR platforms. Such platforms combine all the necessary hardware components (baseband and RF) to implement a completely functional SDR system that can be programmed and optimized to be used for a specific application [68], [69]. Examples of some widely used commercial SDRs are USRP E310, LimeSDR, SODA, and Iris. A comprehensive review of commercial SDR platforms can be found in [70] and [71]. While [70] focuses on the SDRs' architectures and features of each type of SDR platform, [71] is a practical guide for utilizing these platforms and their supporting software packages.

(p5.1) 3CAT-2 is a 6U CubeSat that aims to demonstrate global navigation satellite system reflectometry (GNSS-R) by generating an observable called delay-Doppler maps [72]. 3CAT-2 was launched in 2016 [73] but is currently inactive since its lifetime has ended and because newer satellites (3CAT-3 and 3CAT-4) are currently in development for launch [74], [75], [76], [77]. Although the satellites have different missions, their underlying architecture, which was first developed for 3CAT-2, is almost identical [75], [76], [77]. USRP B210 SDR platform is employed in the CubeSat system. USRP B210 features a Xilinx FPGA, two transmitters and two receivers, fully coherent 2×2 MIMO (Multiple-Input Multiple-Output), and ADC/ DAC [72], [78]. In order to enable two simultaneous receiving channels, which is required for the scientific payload, the SDR is used in dual-receiver mode. Downlink is carried over the S-band at 2100 MHz and the VHF band at 145.995 MHz while uplink is carried over the UHF band at 437.940 MHz [72]. Other frequencies are used for collecting the data in integration with the scientific payload structure which has its own antennas. Different modulation schemes and data rates are implemented in each of the used communication bands. The UHF band (uplink) employs AFSK modulation and has a data rate of 1.2 kbps [74]. Both the VHF and S-band (downlink) are modulated using BPSK with a data rate of 9.6 kbps over the VHF band and 115.2 kbps over the S-band [74].

(p5.2) The VHF and UHF links work together as a full-duplex system for telemetry and command upload while the S-band downlink is used for downloading data from the CubeSat without any uplink commands. LDPC-Staircase is employed for error detection and correction. Data compression is also performed using FAPEC software which can perform lossless compression at a ratio of 1.5 and lossy compression up to a ratio of 40 [73]. Based on the detailed link budget and power consumption data, the estimated power consumption of the CubeSat transceiver is around 1.35 W. It is worth noting that 3CAT-3 transceiver, which has different RF and antenna structure, has a much higher power consumption of 11 W for a slightly improved data rate of 0.5 Mbps [75].
## (s7) D. COMMERCIAL HARDWARE DESIGNS
(p7.0) Planet is an Earth imaging company that developed several CubeSat and small satellite constellations to image the whole Earth daily and identify environmental changes and trends. Planet operates the world's largest fleet of commercial remote sensing satellites [92]. In total, there are more than 24 Flocks, with more than 350 satellites, that have been launched by the company [93], [94]. The average mass of the 3U Dove CubeSat is 4.7 kg [95]. Dove CubeSat is purely designed using COTS components that are integrated by the Planet team using their own circuit boards [96]. Dove has a simple power conservative operation scheme; it starts by imaging the intended region and locally saving the images. Then, when the CubeSat is above the ground station, it automatically turns on its transmitter and downlinks the images to the ground station. After the transmission process is completed, the transmitter is turned off again [97]. The operation of Dove is inclined towards using on-board fully automated systems for commissioning and operating the satellites rather than waiting for periodical commands from the ground station. Manual commands are only used in case of anomalies or need of making system updates or corrections.
## (s9) B. PERFORMANCE OF CUSTOM SDR SYSTEMS
(p9.0) Although the PULSAR SDR has the lowest power consumption among all reviewed systems and the highest data rate among all custom SDR systems, it did not go through extensive testing stages to demonstrate its BER performance in the orbit environment. The FPGA-based design demonstrated very low power consumption of 1 W for a data rate of 10 Mbps but its performance in terms of BER has not been tested. However, given that the SDR utilizes various types of error correction schemes and NEN compatible packetization, it is expected that the system has acceptable communication quality. On the other hand, Maheshwarapp SDR has undergone extensive simulation, laboratory, and practical CubeSat communication testing stages. The system was tested as a ground transceiver using two different practical testbeds with both FUNcube-1 Cube-Sat and ESEO microsatellite and it successfully demonstrated reliable multi-CubeSat communication at a data rate of 19.2 kbps. Although the demonstrated data rate is very low with respect to the system's power consumption of 2.7 W, the SDR is not meant to provide high speed CubeSat downlink but to provide simultaneous multi-CubeSat signal reception capability. Consequently, the system has two separate communication chains working simultaneously over the S-band for inter-satellite link and over the VHF/UHF band for uplink/downlink. This justifies the high power consumption to the low data rate of this system.

(p9.1) Cai SDR has the highest power consumption among all custom SDR systems. Moreover, its demonstration was only limited to in-lab testing and did not undergo actual space testing. The most notable feature of this design is the improved algorithm of LDPC that was developed and implemented for the channel coding of this system resulting in very efficient utilization of the FPGA resources. Moreover, with this improved LDPC algorithm the achieved BER (10 −6 ) was much lower than other systems for the same number of decoding iterations (20) and for the same SNR (4.9 dB). Thus, Cai SDR has superior BER performance compared to most other systems. Although it is claimed that the SDR can achieve a data rate of up to 28 Mbps, this data rate has not been demonstrated in practical testing. Although UOW SDR was tested in-lab, the testing lacked several important criteria. Firstly, the SDR was tested either as a transmitter or as a receiver at a given time. Therefore, there was no complete communication chain testing of the developed SDR. As a result, the actual data rate that the system is capable of was not determined. Instead, only the maximum possible data rate limit (60 Mbps) allowed by the system's components is known. Although the actual data rate of this SDR was not determined, it is expected to be above 100 kbps based on the system's specifications and results from similar systems. Secondly, the testing was merely limited to verifying the functionality of the individual blocks, the overall functionality of the SDR, and the power consumption, rather than to test the practical performance of the system under realistic conditions. Thirdly, the testing was completely performed in-lab and no testing was performed using either existing CubeSats or UOW CubeSat itself.In contrast, AeroCube SDR, which had nearly the same power consumption as UOW SDR, was able to successfully implement FEC codes and even utilize ACM to change the modulation and channel coding schemes based on the channel conditions and in-orbit position. Moreover, AeroCube SDR demonstrated a data rate of around 1 Mbps based on in-orbit results. Although the exact BER performance of the system is not described, it is expected to have acceptable BER based on the successful results of the CubeSat.
## (s18) 3) HIGH-GAIN ANTENNAS AND MIMO
(p18.0) Dipole antennas and patch antennas were employed in almost 70% of the deployed CubeSats. The design of more efficient and high-gain antennas is a critical method for improving CubeSat communications. For example, [112] described the design and successful implementation of a high gain S-band slot antenna that significantly increased the gain from 2.52 dBi to 8.8 dBi. Improvements on the antenna design are not just limited to increasing the gain but can extend to decreasing the antenna size, increasing its power efficiency, and use of beam steering techniques if required [112]. Moreover, the use of multiple antennas, which is still not common in CubeSats, to exploit the features of MIMO and beamforming techniques is an important development to increase the data rate and serviceability, especially if we consider mobile ground stations. Such development faces many challenges including power, size, complexity, and need for more powerful energy-efficient processors to execute the various MIMO/beamforming algorithms. Consequently, employing beamforming requires considerable improvements on both the RF and baseband sides.
## (s21) 6) ENERGY RESERVE BUDGETING
(p21.0) Of all the challenges facing CubeSat transceivers, the strict limitation on the power consumption is the most severe challenge. The small size of the CubeSat restricts the size of its solar panels and batteries and thus limits the available power and energy resources. There are two approaches to overcome this limitation: maximizing the harnessed solar power and minimizing the systems' power consumption. There are several proposals for increasing the harnessed solar power such as the use of more efficient solar panels, use of deployable panels, and choice of optimum orbit that maximizes the harnessed solar power. When it comes to reducing the consumed power, this decrease should not come at the expense of lower performance. In contrast, the decrease in power should stem from using more efficient components that achieve the same performance at lower power consumption. One of the major aspects for realizing this is the use of FPGAs due to their unique energy-efficient features described previously. Although FPGAs can provide high data processing performance at a reduced power consumption, FPGAs' power demand can still easily exceed CubeSats' power budget. For instance, the radiation tolerant Virtex4QV FPGA family's average power consumption can range from 1.25 W to 12.5 W, while a typical 1U CubeSat power budget ranges from 2 W to 8 W [117]. Even more, the average obtained power using body mounted solar panels on 3U CubeSats is typically less than 10 W [118]. Consequently, it is necessary to develop and employ energy reserve budgets and power-saving operation modes. Reference [117] proposes two energy reserve budgeting scenarios for FPGA-based CubeSats based on the orbital pattern to determine the percentage of orbital time available for FPGA processes that require high power.
## (s23) 8) INTEGRATED ANTENNA SYSTEMS
(p23.0) One of the main challenges in increasing the efficiency of harnessing solar power in CubeSats is optimizing the utilization of CubeSat sides. CubeSats have limited surface area, which is typically allocated for solar panels. However, there is potential for integrating antenna systems with the solar panels or other payloads to improve overall mission efficiency [123], [124]. By integrating antennas into the surface area of the CubeSat, it becomes possible to simultaneously utilize the limited space for both communication and power generation purposes [125]. This integration eliminates the need for separate dedicated antenna structures, saving valuable space and reducing the overall size and weight of the CubeSat [16]. Integrated antenna systems offer several advantages. Firstly, they enable efficient use of the CubeSat's surface area, maximizing the available space for solar panels while also providing the necessary antenna functionality [123]. This can be particularly valuable for missions that require extensive communication capabilities or have strict power requirements. Moreover, integrating antennas with solar panels or payloads can enhance the pointing accuracy and coverage of the antenna system [126]. By aligning the antenna with the solar panels, it becomes possible to optimize the CubeSat's orientation towards the desired communication target or increase the field of view for better signal reception [126]. Furthermore, this approach can contribute to improved system-level integration and reduced interference between components. By combining the antenna, solar panels, and other payloads into a single integrated structure, potential interference issues and complexity associated with separate components can be minimized [127]. Nonetheless, the integration of antennas with solar panels or other payloads presents new design challenges. These include managing potential electrical and electromagnetic interference, ensuring proper thermal management to avoid overheating, and maintaining the structural integrity of the system [17]. Extensive research and development efforts in the literature explore the feasibility, performance, and practical implementation of integrated antenna systems in CubeSats [16], [128], [129]. This approach has the potential for enhancing the efficiency of CubeSats, enabling improved communication and power generation within the limited available space.

(p23.1) Concrete real-world examples of integrated antenna systems for CubeSats remain relatively limited due to the concept's emerging stage [16], [125], [126]. For instance, within the QB50 project, which aims to establish a constellation of CubeSats for atmospheric research, the CubeSat ''EnduroSat One'' employed integrated patch antennas to enhance its communication capabilities. The CubeSat had embedded patch antennas on its sides and top panels, effectively utilizing its surface for communication and power generation [17]. This dual-purpose integration emphasizes the potential to merge functionalities within the limited spatial borders of CubeSats [128]. Another practical case is TDSat, which incorporates an integrated deployable Yagi-Uda antenna, showcasing the practical integration of an antenna system into the CubeSat's structural framework [16], [129]. While the integration of antenna systems into CubeSats is still evolving, these cases as well as the ongoing research efforts demonstrate the potential of this approach in enhancing CubeSat communication, power, and payload capabilities. As CubeSats continue to advance, it is expected that more comprehensive case studies of integrated antenna systems will emerge, further solidifying this approach's viability and utility.
