# EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable Information Systems Comments Analysis on Social Media: A Review

CorpusID: 261603584 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55a8bd7db99e91a292ff156a48f4116f02e930f4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/55a8bd7db99e91a292ff156a48f4116f02e930f4)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) MATERIALS AND METHODS
(p1.0) This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the PRISMA principles, which provide a structured approach for synthesizing existing evidence and providing transparent and thorough reports that can assist decision making based on evidence (Page et al., 2021). The Scopus database and Scopus-indexed publishers such as Taylor & Francis, Springer, Science Direct, and Emerald were utilized to obtain publications relevant to our study. In addition, a snowball search step was used to identify further publications that were published between the period 2010 until 2022, this process followed the pattern that was established by Macke & Genari (2019) and Tandon et al. (2020). Furthermore, we included in academic publications studies on comment analysis of social media platforms that were published in English (e.g. books, book chapters, and peer-reviewed articles) and exclude studies that were primarily concerned with developing analytical tools or analyzing the effect of comments on other factors.

(p1.1) We began our search with the predefined keywords 'social media', 'comment', and 'analysis', as well as 'social media OR 'comment' OR 'analysis' This preliminary search produced over 1,965 results. The authors limited the number of papers included in the review by restricting the search to the title, abstract, and keywords generated by an algorithm from the citations or bibliographies of the records. After deleting duplicates and articles that did not meet the requirements, our initial search revealed 340 references, which served as the basis for our research. After reviewing the titles and abstracts of these papers, the authors discarded 11 that did not retrieved, leaving 329 to be retrieved.

(p1.2) We eliminated 214 papers as unrelated or accepted in our inclusion area to our examination because they focused insufficiently on the study of comments analysis, for example, by examining the effect of other variables or focusing on the comment distribution pattern. Based on this reason, we reserve 115 for evaluation. By analyzing platforms, and then provide recommendations for future study based on this data and utilizing the remaining 115 references, we construct a mapping of approaches, methods, contexts, and. The procedure depicted in Figure 1.
## (s4) Number of Paper's Citation
(p4.0) To evaluate the influence and interest of previous studies, using a reliable bibliometric tool, specifically Google Scholar (Harzing & Alakangas, 2016), we track how many times each paper has been cited. The ten articles that received most citations are listed in Table 1. As shown in the table below, the most influential paper is address incivility in news website comments , which received 845 citations, followed by paper that discuss similar topic (Santana, 2014) which has 530 citations. However, this paper analyzed the user-comment sections of newspapers that allow anonymity and those that do not; then, compares the two in terms of civility. And the third most cited paper is identify which aspects of a dining experience are most important from customers' point of view (Pantelidis, 2010), which has 497 citations. 
## (s6) Distribution of Regions
(p6.0) In the context of region distribution, we mapped two types of papers, namely first, papers that focus on comments in general, in the sense that they do not focus on specific regions, for example papers written by Siersdorfer et al. (2010) and Thelwall (2011). The second is the type of papers that limits the object of their research in a particular region, for instance papers written by Rowe (2015a) and Ziegele et al. (2014). To illustrate our collected data, we give figure 3 shown below:
## (s9) Difference of Analyzing Tools
(p9.0) In addition to the two categories of research regarding comment analysis, there are also a variety of methods used by researchers to analyze user comments. According to Teh et al. (2018), tools are used by researchers to identify meaning as well as patterns in comments. We found that researchers was divided into three type when using tools to analyze comment analysis, namely human-coder, software-coder and mix between them and shown in Appendix 1.
