# Acrylamide toxicity in aquatic animals and its mitigation approaches: an updated overview

CorpusID: 264425072 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9894d0ceb20eb380b9398838f491bfb6a13f7e87](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9894d0ceb20eb380b9398838f491bfb6a13f7e87)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Acrylamide (ACR), a monomer with a vinyl group, has neurotoxic effects on the nervous system in both humans and animals such as overall weakness, numbness, tingling in the limbs, or ataxia (Kopańska et al. 2022;Lakshmi et al. 2012).ACR and its components are mostly used as flocculants, and the main areas of application include extraction of inorganic minerals, purifying waste water, and food-processing manufacturing industries (Aras et al. 2017).ACR is effective in purification irrigation and drinking water (Becalski et al. 2003).The ACR applied in the purification treatments and flocculation process can pollute the ambient ecosystem by releasing its residual (Ciesarova et al. 2006).ACR does not have the ability to be adsorbed with the soil and can easily degrade into ground-water via seepage, which might lead to a high risk to public health and welfare (Croll et al. 1974).Therefore, ACR contamination in water is a threat to aquatic wildlife (Tanekhy and Mehana 2022).

(p0.1) The main problem with ACR pollution is the lack of a filtration procedure before its release into water streams or Responsible Editor: Lotfi Aleya Highlights • Acrylamide (ACR) is extensively applied in a broad range of industrial and water treatment applications.
## (s2) Acrylamide structure and resources
(p2.0) ACR (CH 2 = CHC(O)NH 2 ) is a type of organic molecule (Fig. 2).It is a white, odorless solid that is soluble in water and a variety of organic solvents (alcohol and acetone) and insoluble in benzene and heptane (Stadler and Scholz 2004).In chemistry, acrylamide is a primary amide that has been substituted with vinyl group (CONH 2 ) (Sharma et al. 2013).Acrylamide is found to be stable at ambient temperature but may polymerize aggressively near its melting point (84.5 °C) or when exposed to ultraviolet (UV) radiation (Faroon et al. 2009).
## (s9) Salts
(p9.0) Acrylamide is a carcinogenic and neurotoxic compound produced in heat-processed starchy foods.ACR is produced during the heating process of dietary components as a byproduct of the Maillard reaction induced between decreasing sugars and amino acids (Chen et al. 2016).Generally, heat-processed commercial protein-rich foods, for instance fish, meat, and chicken, often contain less ACR levels than carbohydrate-rich meals, such as French fries, potato or tortilla chips, grains, and baked products (Açar et al. 2012).The initial reaction step is thought to involve the creation of a primary base.The reaction begins with the binding of nucleophilic asparagine to the di-carbonyl molecules partly positive carbonyl carbon, which is followed by the loss of a proton from nitrogen and the binding of a free proton to oxygen (Mottram et al. 2002).Furthermore, Becalski et al. (2003) examined whether ACR might be produced via the rearrangement of nitrogen-based compounds found in cooked meals.As a result, finding an efficient method to eliminate ACR production in heat-processed foods is an important concern in the food manufacturing industries.

(p9.1) It is important to note that anions as well as cations have a significant impact on ACR synthesis during food manufacturing.For instance, sodium chloride inhibits ACR production via a variety of methods.It has the ability to form complex compounds by binding amine groups with certain intermediates created from the Maillard reaction (Lindsay and Jang 2005).Recently, it was proven that positive charge ions alter the pathway of the Maillard reaction by boosting the removal of water from glucose (Ciesarova et al. 2006).Besides, Na + ion has been discovered to binding with asparagine to prevent ACR production (Omotosho 2015).Finally, the addition of sodium chloride salt may diminish water activity, resulting in less oil absorption and therefore promoting acrolein production (Omini et al. 2019).

(p9.2) In recent years, many methods for decreasing acrylamide production in heated meals have been suggested, including divalent cations, such as calcium salts.Chen et al. (2016) suggested that enriched shrimp fried chips with 0.1% calcium lactate resulted in the highest reduction of ACR formation level.According to Kukurová (2015) results, calcium chloride was attained to be the most effective via removing almost 90% of the ACR content.Also, sodium acid, sodium pyro-phosphate, and potassium di-hydrogen phosphate were highly efficient in removing nearly 75% from the total acrylamide level, followed by calcium lactate, sodium chloride, and potassium chloride, which resulted in a reduction of ACR content to 40-45%, and finally sodium and potassium hydrogen carbonates were found to be effective in removing nearly 30% from ACR content.The quantity and type of calcium substitutes applied had a strong impact on the formation of ACR in fish processed chips.As previously reported by Gökmen et al. (2007a) and Gökmen et al. (2007b), the inclusion of organic acid in cookie fish recipes may increase the formation of ACR as a result of sucrose hydrolysis to decreasing sugars level.Thus, the decreasing level of sugar in shrimp chips enriched with calcium citrate was higher than that recorded in shrimp chips supplemented with other calcium salts (Chen et al. 2016).The calcium carbonate and chloride salt were found to be effective in reducing ACR production, while adding up to 0.2% calcium propionate salt for food preservation resulted in an increase in ACR production of 90%.Therefore, enhanced fish-heat processed products containing cationic or anionic salts should not be the fish processing sector's first option for eliminating ACR generation, while avoiding high processing heat or overcooking is a more effective and safe method of preventing ACR formation.
