# Radionuclide monitoring in foodstuff: overview of the current implementation in the EU countries

CorpusID: 2697963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43cbaa5909920a47e32c4703d7f9da7e984e9dea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/43cbaa5909920a47e32c4703d7f9da7e984e9dea)

Fields: Environmental Science, Political Science, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Nowadays increasing numbers of citizens around the world are concerned about the levels of radioactive and other contamination in the environment arising from human activities. After the Chernobyl and Fukushima nuclear accidents it became obvious, that precise and rapid methods are necessary for routine determination of artificial radionuclide content in foodstuff [1]. On the other hand, the amount of naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) utilised and produced by the non-nuclear industries is increasing. This creates the implicit need to deal with the waste from these activities and shows the importance of intensifying natural isotope monitoring in the food chain [2].
## (s4) Implementation of international regulations
(p4.0) The implementation of international regulations to the national legislation is not fully harmonized. For example in the technical documents 20 different terms are used to designate activity limits (detection, standard, temporary, pre-set, alarm, exposure, threshold, permissible, maximum, quantification, release, derived release, operational release, operational, discharge, emission, regulatory, regulatory discharge, authorised and decision limit) and 28 different terms are used to designate activity levels (alarm, pre-set alarm, alert, emergency, action, recommended action, intervention, warning, fixed (radiation alarm), permissible, maximum permitted, threshold, maximum, accepted, decision, authorised, production, exemption, optimization, release (accepted), clearance, guidance, reference, diagnostic reference, monitoring, controlling, screening and reporting level). This could be partly originating from the interpretation of the secondary legislation [9]. Listed remarks in connection to the secondary legislation in EU are the following:

(p4.1) • No restrictions can be found for normal conditions, only for emergency situations, • No authority is dedicated, which could immediately react in the case of non-compliance or emergency, • Guidelines and restrictions are established for processed food and agricultural products not for raw material or concentrated or dried food, • Important details of sample preparation are not precisely determined (as washed, skinned, peeled).
## (s5) Definition of the sample
(p5.0) Sample types can be divided into four groups: drinking water, milk and milk products, mixed diet and other foodstuff samples. The definition of the sample is not precisely given, however it is obvious that the sample representativeness is one of the most important issues in any kind of environmental monitoring [10]. The most significant difference between the MS monitoring programmes is the definition of the mixed diet sample. It can be defined by the national authority as a typical daily diet (complete meals) or the separate ingredients of the meals, representing the consumption of the whole population of the MS. It can be also even not in the monitoring programme as mixed diet, but only as separated elements listed in other foodstuff category. The typical daily diet can contain a complete meal consisting of one dish or of all food produced in a canteen/hospital within 24 h. In some cases even the solid and liquid foodstuff originating from one 24-h sampling are analysed separately.

(p5.1) In connection to the other foodstuff samples several MS collect it randomly from local markets, which means that they collect available vegetables, fruits and meat samples without any predefined schedule based only on availability. However in other cases not only the collecting place, but also the species and the amount of samples are strictly regulated; for example 10 kg carrots, 5 kg cabbages, 6 kg potatoes and so on have to be collected annually.
## (s7) Measurands and measurement methods applied
(p7.0) In the MS radioactivity is measured by national dedicated monitoring laboratories in different environmental and food samples. In most of the cases the laboratories are accredited and/or certified for methods they use. But still Europe-wide different measurement methods are applied to determine the same nuclides, sometimes without wellestablished quality control tools.

(p7.1) Determination of 90 Sr and gamma-ray emitting radionuclides ( 137 Cs, 40 K) are carried out almost in every type of samples. In the case of drinking water 3 H and gross alpha/ beta are measured additionally. The radionuclides measured in the food samples are collected in Table 3.

(p7.2) The measurements of the caesium and potassium isotopes are one of the simplest via gamma-ray spectrometry method; most of the laboratories can determine those radioisotopes without any problems. Difficulties could occur when complex chemical separation ( 90 Sr) [11] or complicated calculation method should be applied [12].

(p7.3) The gross methods are in many cases not as simple as they are described. Very significant discrepancies were obtained between the results of national monitoring laboratories measurement performance. It can be partly explained by the lack of knowledge of the real radionuclide composition. According to Jobbagy et al. [13] the method should be applied only in cases where in the radiochemical composition of the sample no temporary change is expected, no complex decay chains can be found in the sample and a true standardized method is applied with fixed measurement parameters. Total or gross activity measurements are of limited value for determining actual radioactivity content however they are still among the most frequently used ones. On the other hand it is important to mention that these methods under controlled conditions provide important information in trend analysis and are sensitive to detecting changes in such trends.

(p7.4) Only some countries are monitoring both the artificial radionuclides and the natural occurring radioisotopes radionuclide-specifically. Mostly 226 Ra and in some cases also U and 210 Po isotopes are examined.
## (s8) Conclusion
(p8.0) As it was shown, numerous secondary legislations can be found across the EU which state the restrictions, guidelines and maximum permitted levels of radionuclides in foodstuff. But, there are no commonly used integrated measurement methods with well-defined measurands and calculation methods. Several laboratories still use in-house developed, but not accredited and/or well controlled methods for the measurements.

(p8.1) One possibility to improve the monitoring activities of the MS is the development of the performance of laboratories in radioactivity measurement. That means the improvement of the measurement conditions and the level of expertise. This can be carried out via inter-laboratory comparisons, where the underperforming laboratories can be identified [14]. With a validated and well controlled measurement method, advice can be given to them on how to improve or modify their methods. On the other hand providing certified food reference material helps to improve the comparativeness of the measured results.

(p8.2) JRC-IRMM has the responsibility to organise the EC inter-laboratory comparisons since 2003. Foodstuff samples as milk powder, drinking water and bilberry powder were already used. The bilberry material is one of the newest certified reference materials (IRMM-426), which can be used for the validation of radionuclide measurement methods at the monitoring laboratories [15]. The aim of the inter-laboratory comparisons is not only to evaluate the results obtained from the laboratories, but also to help them to improve their measurements and methods via workshops and meetings.

(p8.3) Our plan for the future is to establish an inventory of food measurement methods. Since important information dealing with the radionuclide monitoring in foodstuff cannot be found in the technical documents, a questionnaire is prepared and will be sent soon to the national EU MS (total) 28 28 28 28 a n.i. no information b n.a. not applicable representatives of the MS. It contains thematic questions concerning the monitored foodstuff and details of monitoring programmes and the measurement methods of radionuclides in foodstuff. A question is also included about the current and future needs of the laboratories of food reference materials.

(p8.4) Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
