# A Review on the Coalescence of Confined Drops with a Focus on Scaling Laws for the Growth of the Liquid Bridge

CorpusID: 264901429 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03aa8321824a42ce619c204aa471bc8df1143dad](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/03aa8321824a42ce619c204aa471bc8df1143dad)

Fields: Medicine, Physics

## (s2) Wetting Cases (θ < 90 • )
(p2.0) Ristenpart et al. studied the early-time coalescence dynamics of silicone oil drops on a polystyrene surface in air [24].The tested silicone oils had similar surface tension coefficient values of σ ≈ 20 mN/m in the air, despite different kinematic viscosities (ν d = 10 −4 , 3.5 × 10 −4 , and 10 −3 m 2 /s).Here, the subscript d stands for drop.The density of the oils was ρ d = 970 kg/m 3 [18].When two drops in approximate volume of 20 µL were placed on the surface, they spread radially because θ ≈ 0 • , and eventually the initial heights of the drop (H) became much smaller than their radii R (i.e., H << R).Here, R is the radius of the drop measured in the top-view image.Upon the contact of the drops, the liquid bridge was formed, and it grew laterally while the drops were coalescing (Figure 3a).

(p2.1) The coalescence process was found to be viscously dominated because, in general, less viscous drops coalesced more rapidly.The process was dependent on the geometry of the drops because the found characteristic time scale included H and R (t c = µ d R 4 /σH 3 ).Although there was a significant variance in d(t), even with the same liquid, the results collapsed well when the dimensionless width of the bridge (d/R) was plotted against t/t c (Figure 3b).When plotted in the log-log scale, the results followed a scaling law of d/R~(t/t c ) 0.53 (the inset of Figure 3b).The found power-law exponent was confirmed based on the mass conservation on the growing liquid bridge as the analysis yielded d~(t/t c ) 1/2 .The scaling law of Ristenpart et al. [d~(σH 3 t/µ d R 2 ) 1/2 ] sets a lower bound (i.e., a limiting case of θ→0 • ) for the coalescence dynamics of drops on a solid surface.The scaling law of Ristenpart et al. [d~(σH 3 t/µdR 2 ) 1/2 ] sets a lower bound (i.e., a limiting case of θ→0°) for the coalescence dynamics of drops on a solid surface.4a).They also confirmed the hypothesis of Ristenpart et al.-that the coalescence of sessile drops on a single solid surface is "governed by liquid flux from the drop into the bridge".Also, they revealed that the rate of the vertical growth of the liquid bridge scaled with θ 4 (i.e., dh/dt~θ 4 ).Also, Hernández-Sánchez et al. investigated coalescence of asymmetric drops in terms of θ.When θL ≠ θR, where θL (= 46°) and θR (= 13°) are the contact angle of the leftand right-hand side drop, the minimum height point of the liquid bridge moved towards the drop with lower θ.As shown in Figure 4b, despite the asymmetry in θ, h increased linearly with t, similarly to the symmetric case.4a).They also confirmed the hypothesis of Ristenpart et al.-that the coalescence of sessile drops on a single solid surface is "governed by liquid flux from the drop into the bridge".Also, they revealed that the rate of the vertical growth of the liquid bridge scaled with θ 4 (i.e., dh/dt~θ 4 ).4a).They also confirmed the hypothesis of Ristenpart et al.-that the coalescence of sessile drops on a single solid surface is "governed by liquid flux from the drop into the bridge".Also, they revealed that the rate of the vertical growth of the liquid bridge scaled with θ 4 (i.e., dh/dt~θ 4 ).Also, Hernández-Sánchez et al. investigated coalescence of asymmetric drops in terms of θ.When θL ≠ θR, where θL (= 46°) and θR (= 13°) are the contact angle of the leftand right-hand side drop, the minimum height point of the liquid bridge moved towards the drop with lower θ.As shown in Figure 4b, despite the asymmetry in θ, h increased linearly with t, similarly to the symmetric case.4b, despite the asymmetry in θ, h increased linearly with t, similarly to the symmetric case.

(p2.2) Narhe et al. derived the following scaling laws based on balance between the Laplace pressure and viscous stress in the bridge: h/h ∞ ~t/t c and d/2R~θ(t/t c ) 1/2 , where h ∞ is the h value at the end of the coalescing process and t c = µ d R/σ.They tested their scaling laws by examining the coalescence of diethylene glycol (DEG) drops (µ d = 0.161 Pa•s, ρ d = 1130 kg/m 3 , and σ = 47 mN/m) on silicon surface (Figure 5a) [26].The θ of the drop was determined to be 30 • by averaging the advancing angle (θ a = 35 • ) and the receding angle (θ r = 25 • ).As Figure 5b,c show, the early time growth of d and h somewhat followed the found scaling laws, but the quality of agreement is slightly questionable because of the lack of data points near the initiation of the coalescence (t/t c ≤ 1) and large error bars.The later times of the coalescence could be well-represented by exponential growth.Later, Lee et al. compared studies of Ristenpart et al. [24] and Narhe et al. [26]  Narhe et al. derived the following scaling laws based on balance between the Laplace pressure and viscous stress in the bridge: h/h∞~t/tc and d/2R~θ(t/tc) 1/2 , where h∞ is the h value at the end of the coalescing process and tc = µdR/σ.They tested their scaling laws by examining the coalescence of diethylene glycol (DEG) drops (µd = 0.161 Pa•s, ρd = 1130 kg/m 3 , and σ = 47 mN/m) on silicon surface (Figure 5a) [26].The θ of the drop was determined to be 30° by averaging the advancing angle (θa = 35°) and the receding angle (θr = 25°).As Figure 5b,c show, the early time growth of d and h somewhat followed the found scaling laws, but the quality of agreement is slightly questionable because of the lack of data points near the initiation of the coalescence (t/tc ≤ 1) and large error bars.The later times of the coalescence could be well-represented by exponential growth.Later, Lee et al. compared studies of Ristenpart et al. [24] and Narhe et al. [26] and found that the scaling law of Narhe et al. did not agree with that of Ristenpart et al. because the former became d~(σH 2 t/µdR) 1/2 as θ approached 0° [18].[18].The volume of drops ranged 0.524-7.24µL, and the initial radius seen from the top was R = 110.5-240µm.The Reynolds number, defined as ρdRσ/µd 2 , ranged from 3.6-7.8,which was comparable to that of Ristenpart et al. [24].

(p2.3) Using the lubrication approximation, Lee et al. found the characteristic time scale for the early-time growth of the bridge to be tc = 3µdR/4σtan 4 θ and the scaling law of the halfwidth of the bridge to be r~(σho 3 /µd) 1/4 t 1/4 , where ho is the initial bridge height.The found time scale was better than µdR/σ because data sets of h(t) approached closer to each other when t was normalized with tc = 3µdR/4σtan 4 θ than with tc = µdR/σ.However, it should be noted that the data sets still showed significant disagreement despite normalization with tc = 3µdR/4σtan 4 θ.For their scaling law derivation, Lee et al. assumed that flow developing in the bridge did not affect the domain near the contact line, and thus θ was preserved.

(p2.4) For the bridge height, Lee et al. found that the scaling exponent of h/R~(t/tc) n was 0.51, 0.64, 0.67, and 0.86 for θ = 10°, 24°, 27°, and 56°, respectively.The sizes of these drops were R = 240 µm, 225 µm, 199 µm, and 110.5 µm, respectively.This result shows that the n value of h(t) increased with θ, which shows that the coalescence dynamics were affected by the wettability of the substrate.

(p2.5) Lee et al. also conducted simultaneous imaging of the side-and top-views of DEG drops with θ = 56° and R = 240 µm (Figure 6) and found scaling laws of h/R~(t/tc) 0.79 and r/R~(t/tc) 0.29 .Regarding r(t), their measured n value (0.29) was close to that of their derived scaling law (0.25).Regarding h(t), the found n values differed slightly (0.86 and 0.79) for the same θ of 56°, which suggests variance in n for an identical condition., and 56 • ) [18].The volume of drops ranged 0.524-7.24µL, and the initial radius seen from the top was R = 110.5-240µm.The Reynolds number, defined as ρ d Rσ/µ d 2 , ranged from 3.6 to 7.8, which was comparable to that of Ristenpart et al. [24].Using the lubrication approximation, Lee et al. found the characteristic time scale for the early-time growth of the bridge to be t c = 3µ d R/4σtan 4 θ and the scaling law of the halfwidth of the bridge to be r~(σh o 3 /µ d ) 1/4 t 1/4 , where h o is the initial bridge height.The found time scale was better than µ d R/σ because data sets of h(t) approached closer to each other when t was normalized with t c = 3µ d R/4σtan 4 θ than with t c = µ d R/σ.However, it should be noted that the data sets still showed significant disagreement despite normalization with t c = 3µ d R/4σtan 4 θ.For their scaling law derivation, Lee et al. assumed that flow developing in the bridge did not affect the domain near the contact line, and thus θ was preserved.

(p2.6) For the bridge height, Lee et al. found that the scaling exponent of h/R~(t/t c ) n was 0.51, 0.64, 0.67, and 0.86 for θ = 10 • , 24 • , 27 • , and 56 • , respectively.The sizes of these drops were R = 240 µm, 225 µm, 199 µm, and 110.5 µm, respectively.This result shows that the n value of h(t) increased with θ, which shows that the coalescence dynamics were affected by the wettability of the substrate.

(p2.7) Lee et al. also conducted simultaneous imaging of the side-and top-views of DEG drops with θ = 56 • and R = 240 µm (Figure 6) and found scaling laws of h/R~(t/t c ) 0.79 and r/R~(t/t c ) 0.29 .Regarding r(t), their measured n value (0.29) was close to that of their derived scaling law (0.25).Regarding h(t), the found n values differed slightly (0.86 and 0.79) for the same θ of 56 • , which suggests variance in n for an identical condition.
## (s4) Non-Wetting Cases (θ > 90 • )
(p4.0) In contrast to the coalescence of wetting drops on a single solid surface, the coalescence of non-wetting drops has been less studied.Recently, McCraney et al. examined the coalescence of water drops on Teflon substrates (θ = 115 • -143 • ) in microgravity conditions (Figure 9a) [30].Although coalescing water drops were different in size and shape, d was found to increase following d~t 0.4 regardless of θ, as shown in Figure 9b.
## (s6) Coalescence of Drops on a Deformable Surface
(p6.0) Drops can behave differently on a deformable or soft substrate.For instance, when a drop is placed on a soft, deformable substrate, the surface tension along the contact line deforms the substrate [32].Similarly, when drops merge on a deformable substrate, which is usually a liquid, the deformation and energy dissipation of the substrate influence the coalescence.Thus, drop coalescence on a deformable surface can be regarded as a special case of the three-phase drop coalescence on one confining surface.This section summarizes the coalescence of two types of drops on a liquid substrate: flat disks and liquid lenses.
## (s7) Flat Disk Cases
(p7.0) Delabre and Cazabat investigated the two-dimensional (2D) coalescence of thin liquid crystal drops (6CB member of the cyanobiphenyl series) that were formed on water and exposed to air (Figure 12a) [33].This coalescence was driven by the line tension of the drops (γ = 69-158 pN).Since the thickness of the drops (H < 0.5 µm) was significantly smaller than the radius of the drops (R > 60 µm), the drops were essentially 2D.Additionally, inertia effects were negligible.

(p7.1) onto one another regardless of R, γ, and H (Figure 12b).Here, µd and µo are the surface viscosity of the drop (µd ≈ 10 −8 Pa•s•m) and the bulk viscosity of the water substrate (µo ≈ 10 −3 Pa•s), respectively.Delabre and Cazabat observed that the bridge growth dynamics transitioned from an early 2D surface viscous dissipation to a later three-dimensional (3D) substrate viscous dissipation (Figure 12b).

(p7.2) In the former 2D viscous dissipation regime (r < rc), drop coalescence was governed by the balance between the driving force, which was the film pressure gradient due to line tension and the viscous dissipation of the drop.The scaling law for this regime was found to be r~−(γ/µd)tln(γt/µdR) with the logarithmic correction of Hopper [34] (Figure 12b).In this regime, the coalescing drops did not feel the viscous resistance of the underlying water, and thus they were similar to coalescing infinite liquid cylinders.

(p7.3) In the latter 3D viscous dissipation regime (rc < r << R), the growth dynamics of the bridge was governed by the balance between the driving force and the viscous dissipation caused by the water substrate.For this regime, Delabre and Cazabat found r/R~(γ/µoR 2 ) 1/3 t 1/3 (Figure 12b).The scaling exponent of the second regime was smaller than that of the first regime, which shows that the bridge growth became slower, seemingly due to higher viscous dissipation of the water substrate.12b).

(p7.4) In the former 2D viscous dissipation regime (r < r c ), drop coalescence was governed by the balance between the driving force, which was the film pressure gradient due to line tension and the viscous dissipation of the drop.The scaling law for this regime was found to be r~−(γ/µ d )tln(γt/µ d R) with the logarithmic correction of Hopper [34] (Figure 12b).In this regime, the coalescing drops did not feel the viscous resistance of the underlying water, and thus they were similar to coalescing infinite liquid cylinders.

(p7.5) In the latter 3D viscous dissipation regime (r c < r << R), the growth dynamics of the bridge were governed by the balance between the driving force and the viscous dissipation caused by the water substrate.For this regime, Delabre and Cazabat found r/R~(γ/µ o R 2 ) 1/3 t 1/3 (Figure 12b).The scaling exponent of the second regime was smaller than that of the first regime, which shows that the bridge growth became slower, seemingly due to higher viscous dissipation of the water substrate.
## (s11) Computational Studies
(p11.0) Although in the current review we mainly focus on experimental studies on the coalescence of confined or sessile drops, we briefly summarize computational studies on the topic because experimental studies can be complemented by computational simulations that enable the easy modulation of fluid properties pertaining to the phenomenon [43][44][45][46][47].

(p11.1) Sui et al. simulated coalescence between two identical drops resting on a partially wetting surface, employing a diffuse-interface method and a volume-of-fluid method [43].For inertial coalescence (Oh = d d R μ ρ σ ~10 −3 ) with a wide range of θ (θ < 90°), Sui et al.

(p11.2) found h/Rsinθ~(t/tc) 2/3 and r/Rsinθ~(t/tc) 1/2 .Here, R is the radius of curvature of the initial drop, and tc = (ρdR 3 sin 3 θ/σ) 1/2 .The scaling exponent of r (n = 1/2) agrees with the experimental result of Kapur and Gaskell [27].Also, Sui et al. found that the n value of h(t) changed from 2/3 to 1/2 at a certain critical time and that the critical time decreased to 0 as θ approached 90°.This means that h~t 1/2 for θ = 90°.This change in n for h agrees with Eddi et al. [28].For Oh = 0.1, where viscous effects are no longer negligible, Sui et al. found h~t 0.88 for θ = 70°.This result agrees with the result of Lee et al. [18] of which the Oh range was 0.5-0.9.Ahmadlouydarab et al. simulated coalescence of sessile drops on a solid surface with a linear gradient of θ using a many-body dissipative particle dynamics method [44].For two identical drops that experienced θ changing from 82° to 90°, they found r~t 0.55 and
## (s12) Computational Studies
(p12.0) Although in the current review we mainly focus on experimental studies on the coalescence of confined drops, we briefly summarize computational studies on the topic because experimental studies can be complemented by computational simulations that enable the easy modulation of fluid properties pertaining to the phenomenon [43][44][45][46][47].

(p12.1) Sui et al. simulated coalescence between two identical drops resting on a partially wetting surface, employing a diffuse-interface method and a volume-of-fluid method [43].For inertial coalescence (Oh = µ d / ρ d σR~10 −3 ) with a wide range of θ (θ < 90 • ), Sui et al. found h/Rsinθ~(t/t c ) 2/3 and r/Rsinθ~(t/t c ) 1/2 .Here, R is the radius of curvature of the initial drop, and t c = (ρ d R 3 sin 3 θ/σ) 1/2 .The scaling exponent of r (n = 1/2) agrees with the experimental result of Kapur and Gaskell [27].Also, Sui et al. found that the n value of h(t) changed from 2/3 to 1/2 at a certain critical time and that the critical time decreased to 0 as θ approached 90 • .This means that h~t 1/2 for θ = 90 • .This change in n for h agrees with Eddi et al. [28].For Oh = 0.1, where viscous effects are no longer negligible, Sui et al. found h~t 0.88 for θ = 70 • .This result agrees with the result of Lee et al. [18] of which the Oh range was 0.5-0.9.Ahmadlouydarab et al. simulated coalescence of sessile drops on a solid surface with a linear gradient of θ using a many-body dissipative particle dynamics method [44].For two identical drops that experienced θ changing from 82 • to 90 • , they found r~t 0.55 and h~t 0.54 (Oh ≈ 0.5).Also, Ahmadlouydarab et al. found that r grew faster than h on a wettable surface (θ < 90 • ) and h grew faster than r on a non-wettable surface (θ > 90 • ).In their simulation on coalescence between drops of different sizes, the smaller drop was merged into the bigger drop.That was because the greater capillary driving force of the smaller drop due to the larger curvature caused faster flow inside the smaller drop.For the coalescence between unequal-sized drops, they found that the n values of r(t) and h(t) were around 0.5 while varying depending on the drop sizes.

(p12.2) Pawar et al. employed the lattice Boltzmann method to simulate inertial coalescence between two sessile drops for three cases (Oh ≈ 0.04): equal-sized drops on a surface with homogeneous wettability (θ = 48 • , 62 • , 77 • , and 90 • ), unequal-sized drops on a surface with homogeneous wettability (θ = 48 • , 62 • , and 90 • ), and drops having different θ (θ = 90 • for one drop, and θ < 90 • for the other drop) [45].For the first case, they found that h grew faster with θ.For this result, Pawar et al. provided the following explanation.For a fixed volume of drops, as θ increases, the drop radius decreases, which increases the internal pressure of the drop, and the radius of curvature of the bridge simultaneously decreases, which results in higher capillary pressure difference.As a result, the drop liquid flows faster toward the bridge.Similar to Eddi et al. [28], Pawar et al. also found that for h(t), n = 2/3 for θ < 90 • and n = 1/2 for θ = 90 • .For the second case, they observed that the smaller drop was absorbed into the bigger drop, which agrees with the simulation result of Ahmadlouydarab et al. [44], because of faster liquid flow from the smaller drop toward the bridge compared to the bigger drop.It is noticeable that the scaling law for equal-sized drops is valid for unequal-sized drops.For the last case, Pawar et al. found that the growth dynamics of the bridge depended on the lower θ because they obtained n = 2/3 for all cases.This result of Pawar et al. does not agree with the finding of Hernández-Sánchez et al. [25], because the latter found n = 1 for asymmetric drops of θ L = 46 • and θ R = 13 • .The significant difference in θ needs to be considered when comparing the two studies.
## (s13) Summary, Challenges, and Outlook
(p13.0) Tables 1-3 summarize the scaling laws for the bridge growth of confined drop coalescence for three different categories: three-phase coalescence on a solid surface, three-phase coalescence on a deformable surface, and two-phase coalescence in a Hele-Shaw cell (Figure 2).The tables clearly demonstrate that the scaling laws differ depending on the type of the confinement and that the dynamics of coalescence is influenced by the shape or geometry of the drops.In particular, on a solid surface, the shape of sessile drops is governed by the surface wettability of the underlying rigid surface.As such, the coalescence dynamics of drops change as the contact angle of the drop (θ) changes.

(p13.1) In the case of wetting drops (θ < 90 • ), they are in the shape of spherical caps with a small polar angle, and their liquid bridge between the drops is always in contact with the surface, even from its birth.As such, the three-phase coalescence of wetting drops on a solid surface differs from the two-phase coalescence of unconfined drops as follows.First, the growth dynamics of the bridge appear to be influenced by the no-slip boundary condition of the surface, which imposes more viscous resistance throughout the coalescence process.Second, contact lines exist between the bridge and the solid surface, and the bridge growth seems to involve the pinning and depinning of the contact line.Lastly, the radii of curvature of the drops and bridge change depending on θ, which in turn changes the capillary pressure difference between the drop and the bridge [45].

(p13.2) Eddi et al. [28] 73  As a result of interactions between the bridge and the surface, the liquid bridge grows differently in the horizontal direction (i.e., parallel to the solid surface) and the normal direction (i.e., perpendicular to the surface).Table 1 shows that the n values for r(t) were found to be around 1/2 regardless of θ, whereas various n values were found for h(t) depending on θ.Also, n values are different between r(t) and h(t) for θ ≤ 56 • [18,[24][25][26] but similar for 56 • < θ < 90 • [27,28].These differences in n illustrate different growth dynamics between r and h.

(p13.3) Here, it needs to be noted that discrepancies exist between studies for similar θ values.For instance, Hernández-Sánchez et al. found h~t 1 for θ = 22 • [25], whereas Lee et al. found h~t 0.64 for θ = 22 • [18].For θ = 56 • , Lee et al. found r~t 1/4 and h~t 0.86 [18] while Kapur and Gaskell found r~t 0.5 and h~t 0.5 for a dynamic contact angle range including 56 • [27].These disagreements may indicate a possibility that the examined regime of coalescence could be different.In the case of Lee et al. and Kapur and Gaskell, their Oh (= µ d / ρ d σR) values are quite different: 0.4-0.5 for the former and 10 −3 -10 −2 for the latter.Clearly, the coalescence that Kapur and Gaskell examined was inertia-dominated because Oh << 1.In contrast, the coalescence that Lee et al. examined was not free of viscous effects because Oh > 0.1.For a similar Oh (=0.1),Sui et al. found h~t 0.88 [43], which is very close to the result of Lee et al. [18].These comparisons suggest that Oh and any relevant dimensionless numbers should be considered when investigating the coalescence of sessile drops on a wettable solid surface.

(p13.4) Another possible reason for the discrepancy can be different ways of determining the initial moment of drop coalescence (i.e., t = 0 for r = 0 and h = 0).Only a few studies among the reviewed literature clearly indicated how the initial moment was determined.For instance, Lee et al. assumed that the moment of the deposition of the second drop to be the initial moment and admitted that it was very hard to pinpoint the initial moment [18].Hack et al. defined the initial moment as the first frame where the liquid bridge became visible [37], which means that the true initial moment was before the identified first frame due to their imaging resolution.Eri and Okumura defined the initial moment as the instant when the oil film began to burst and admitted that the initial moment could be shifted at most 1/2000 s [39].We found that n values changed depending on how the initial moment was determined, especially for the early time of drop coalescence (personal communication with Okumura).The initial moment is usually determined indirectly using captured highspeed images of the liquid bridge, which is limited by the temporal and image resolution of the videography setting.It would be more reliable to determine the initial moment using more direct ways, such as the electrical method of Case [48,49].
