# R E V I E W A R T I C L E Open Forum Infectious Diseases Coronavirus Disease 2019 Treatment: A Review of Early and Emerging Options

CorpusID: 261234016 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s0) Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine
(p0.0) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p0.1) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p0.2) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].

(p0.3) To inform optimal dosing of hydroxychloroquine, the investigators then performed PBPK modeling. In this analysis, the investigators utilized human population pharmacokinetic and rat lung penetration data for each compound to estimate free trough concentrations in the lung to EC 50 ratios (R LTEC ) [18]. Because 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily has been reported to demonstrate efficacy against SARS-CoV-2, the target R LTEC for hydroxychloroquine regimens was set to ≥2.38 (day 1), 5.92 (day 3), and 18.9 (day 5), which were the R LTEC values predicted with the "efficacious" 500 mg by mouth twicedaily dosing of chloroquine [16]. Various dosing regimens were simulated, but 2 are particularly notable. The first was an oral loading dose of 1200 mg (divided 800 mg then 400 mg) on day 1, followed by 400 mg daily. This regimen led to significantly higher R LTEC on day 1 (33.3), day 3 (55.1), and day 5 (103) than those values demonstrated with chloroquine. The second regimen was a loading dose of 800 mg (400 mg × 2) on day 1 followed by 200 mg twice daily. This was also associated with higher R LTEC values than chloroquine on day 1, 3, and 5 (corresponding to 21.0, 38.9, and 85.4, respectively) [18]. The authors concluded that these data support the lower dose regimen because R LTEC values were significantly higher than those with the "proven efficacious" regimen of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily. Clinicians should note that both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have half-lives of ~40 days [19], and therefore short durations would likely provide prolonged courses of therapy. This was exemplified in the PBPK modeling in which R LTEC values with hydroxychloroquine were predicted to still be above the targeted efficacy threshold on day 10, even with a 5-day course of therapy.

(p0.4) Although these data are encouraging for the potential role of hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-2, we caution against solely relying on these data to support dosing regimens for patients. The use of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily as the reference for efficacy is rational given initial reports from China [16], but it is important to note that this dosing still requires validation, and the improved R LTEC values reported are largely driven by the finding that hydroxychloroquine was 7.6 times more potent than chloroquine in vitro. Although this enhanced potency may very well prove true as more data become available, this report is counter to the relative potency demonstrated with the structurally similar SARS-CoV-1 strain in 2006 in which chloroquine was approximately 5 times more potent than hydroxychloroquine. In addition, a recently published study has demonstrated that the EC 50 value for chloroquine is 1.13 µM [3], similar to the value reported for hydroxychloroquine in the analysis by Yao et al [18].

(p0.5) Because there are currently no efficacy data available for hydroxychloroquine in COVID-19, additional consideration should be given to the optimal dosing strategy. We use the following example to illustrate this point. If one were to consider these 2 compounds to be equally potent (identical EC 50 values) and utilize the PBPK data from Yao et al [18], the 800 mg load, 400 mg daily regimen for hydroxychloroquine would yield R LTEC values of 2.76, 5.11, and 11.2 on day 1, 3, and 5, respectively. These R LTEC values would be slightly lower than those achieved with 500 mg by mouth twice daily of chloroquine on day 3 and significantly lower than those on day 5, suggesting the potential need for a higher dose to have similar activity. Although the 400 mg daily regimen is the most common regimen currently being assessed in clinical trials, the rationale for that dose is currently unclear, and at least 1 clinical trial in China is using a higher dose of 800 mg by mouth daily.

(p0.6) To this point, Gautret et al [20] recently published their initial experience on the impact of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine by mouth every 8 hours on viral eradication in patients with COVID-19. The authors reported on 36 patients (20 hydroxychloroquine and 16 control) who were COVID-19 positive and able to have nasopharyngeal sampling for the first 6 days of therapy (in the treated arm). The investigators demonstrated that hydroxychloroquine (14 of 20, 70%) was superior to standard of care (2 of 16, 12.5%; P = .001) in eradicating SARS-CoV-2 from the nasopharynx. It is interesting to note that 6 patients were prescribed azithromycin "to prevent bacterial super-infection" and the investigators found that viral eradication was numerically superior in this subgroup (6 of 6, 100%) compared with those who received hydroxychloroquine alone (8 of 14, 57%). The authors concluded that azithromycin "reinforced" the SARS-CoV-2 viral load achieved by hydroxychloroquine. Although these data are intriguing, certain limitations to this data set must be acknowledged. First, although viral eradication is an important endpoint, the authors did not report clinical outcomes in these patients. Second, the cohort initially contained 26 hydroxychloroquine patients, but 6 of them were removed from the analysis due to early cessation of hydroxychloroquine therapy including 3 PCR-positive patients who were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), 1 PCR-negative patient who passed away, and 1 PCR-positive patient who discontinued hydroxychloroquine due to nausea. Finally, the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy arm included patients with significantly higher viral loads, represented by lower cycle threshold (C T ) values than those who received combination therapy. If the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy patients with C T values <23 are separated from those with C T values ≥23, there is a notable discordance in viral eradication rates (1 of 5, 20% vs 7 of 9, 78%), with this latter number approaching the 6 of 6 demonstrated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin combination therapy in which all patients had C T values ≥23. Given this finding, the small numbers in this study, the lack of clinical outcomes presented, the potential for additive toxicity with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and the desperate need to practice good antimicrobial stewardship during the COVID-19 pandemic, we would caution clinicians against using these data to support combination therapy.

(p0.7) Despite all of the unknowns, the initial experience in China is encouraging for the potential role of chloroquine, or alternatively hydroxychloroquine, for the management of COVID-19. Clinicians are encouraged to closely follow subsequent peer-reviewed publications from the ongoing chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine trials, because others have raised concerns regarding the apparent in vitro and/or in vivo discordance witnessed with chloroquine in other viral infections [21]. Furthermore, if hydroxychloroquine is utilized, careful consideration for dose selection should be given in accordance with the aforementioned data, as well as considerations for when to initiate during the course of illness.

(p0.8) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p0.9) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p0.10) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].

(p0.11) To inform optimal dosing of hydroxychloroquine, the investigators then performed PBPK modeling. In this analysis, the investigators utilized human population pharmacokinetic and rat lung penetration data for each compound to estimate free trough concentrations in the lung to EC 50 ratios (R LTEC ) [18]. Because 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily has been reported to demonstrate efficacy against SARS-CoV-2, the target R LTEC for hydroxychloroquine regimens was set to ≥2.38 (day 1), 5.92 (day 3), and 18.9 (day 5), which were the R LTEC values predicted with the "efficacious" 500 mg by mouth twicedaily dosing of chloroquine [16]. Various dosing regimens were simulated, but 2 are particularly notable. The first was an oral loading dose of 1200 mg (divided 800 mg then 400 mg) on day 1, followed by 400 mg daily. This regimen led to significantly higher R LTEC on day 1 (33.3), day 3 (55.1), and day 5 (103) than those values demonstrated with chloroquine. The second regimen was a loading dose of 800 mg (400 mg × 2) on day 1 followed by 200 mg twice daily. This was also associated with higher R LTEC values than chloroquine on day 1, 3, and 5 (corresponding to 21.0, 38.9, and 85.4, respectively) [18]. The authors concluded that these data support the lower dose regimen because R LTEC values were significantly higher than those with the "proven efficacious" regimen of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily. Clinicians should note that both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have half-lives of ~40 days [19], and therefore short durations would likely provide prolonged courses of therapy. This was exemplified in the PBPK modeling in which R LTEC values with hydroxychloroquine were predicted to still be above the targeted efficacy threshold on day 10, even with a 5-day course of therapy.

(p0.12) Although these data are encouraging for the potential role of hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-2, we caution against solely relying on these data to support dosing regimens for patients. The use of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily as the reference for efficacy is rational given initial reports from China [16], but it is important to note that this dosing still requires validation, and the improved R LTEC values reported are largely driven by the finding that hydroxychloroquine was 7.6 times more potent than chloroquine in vitro. Although this enhanced potency may very well prove true as more data become available, this report is counter to the relative potency demonstrated with the structurally similar SARS-CoV-1 strain in 2006 in which chloroquine was approximately 5 times more potent than hydroxychloroquine. In addition, a recently published study has demonstrated that the EC 50 value for chloroquine is 1.13 µM [3], similar to the value reported for hydroxychloroquine in the analysis by Yao et al [18].

(p0.13) Because there are currently no efficacy data available for hydroxychloroquine in COVID-19, additional consideration should be given to the optimal dosing strategy. We use the following example to illustrate this point. If one were to consider these 2 compounds to be equally potent (identical EC 50 values) and utilize the PBPK data from Yao et al [18], the 800 mg load, 400 mg daily regimen for hydroxychloroquine would yield R LTEC values of 2.76, 5.11, and 11.2 on day 1, 3, and 5, respectively. These R LTEC values would be slightly lower than those achieved with 500 mg by mouth twice daily of chloroquine on day 3 and significantly lower than those on day 5, suggesting the potential need for a higher dose to have similar activity. Although the 400 mg daily regimen is the most common regimen currently being assessed in clinical trials, the rationale for that dose is currently unclear, and at least 1 clinical trial in China is using a higher dose of 800 mg by mouth daily.

(p0.14) To this point, Gautret et al [20] recently published their initial experience on the impact of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine by mouth every 8 hours on viral eradication in patients with COVID-19. The authors reported on 36 patients (20 hydroxychloroquine and 16 control) who were COVID-19 positive and able to have nasopharyngeal sampling for the first 6 days of therapy (in the treated arm). The investigators demonstrated that hydroxychloroquine (14 of 20, 70%) was superior to standard of care (2 of 16, 12.5%; P = .001) in eradicating SARS-CoV-2 from the nasopharynx. It is interesting to note that 6 patients were prescribed azithromycin "to prevent bacterial super-infection" and the investigators found that viral eradication was numerically superior in this subgroup (6 of 6, 100%) compared with those who received hydroxychloroquine alone (8 of 14, 57%). The authors concluded that azithromycin "reinforced" the SARS-CoV-2 viral load achieved by hydroxychloroquine. Although these data are intriguing, certain limitations to this data set must be acknowledged. First, although viral eradication is an important endpoint, the authors did not report clinical outcomes in these patients. Second, the cohort initially contained 26 hydroxychloroquine patients, but 6 of them were removed from the analysis due to early cessation of hydroxychloroquine therapy including 3 PCR-positive patients who were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), 1 PCR-negative patient who passed away, and 1 PCR-positive patient who discontinued hydroxychloroquine due to nausea. Finally, the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy arm included patients with significantly higher viral loads, represented by lower cycle threshold (C T ) values than those who received combination therapy. If the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy patients with C T values <23 are separated from those with C T values ≥23, there is a notable discordance in viral eradication rates (1 of 5, 20% vs 7 of 9, 78%), with this latter number approaching the 6 of 6 demonstrated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin combination therapy in which all patients had C T values ≥23. Given this finding, the small numbers in this study, the lack of clinical outcomes presented, the potential for additive toxicity with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and the desperate need to practice good antimicrobial stewardship during the COVID-19 pandemic, we would caution clinicians against using these data to support combination therapy.

(p0.15) Despite all of the unknowns, the initial experience in China is encouraging for the potential role of chloroquine, or alternatively hydroxychloroquine, for the management of COVID-19. Clinicians are encouraged to closely follow subsequent peer-reviewed publications from the ongoing chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine trials, because others have raised concerns regarding the apparent in vitro and/or in vivo discordance witnessed with chloroquine in other viral infections [21]. Furthermore, if hydroxychloroquine is utilized, careful consideration for dose selection should be given in accordance with the aforementioned data, as well as considerations for when to initiate during the course of illness.
## (s1) Lopinavir/Ritonavir
(p1.0) Lopinavir is a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 protease inhibitor administered in fixed-dose combination with ritonavir (LPV/r), a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor that "boosts" lopinavir concentrations. Lopinavir seems to block the main protease of SARS-CoV-1, inhibiting viral replication [22]. In 2003, Chu et al [23] evaluated a series of antivirals for in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-1. They reported lopinavir at 4 µg/mL and ribavirin at 50 µg/mL inhibited SARS-CoV-1 after 48 hours of incubation and that the agents were synergistic when used together [23]. de Wilde et al [24] later described the antiviral activity of lopinavir against SARS-CoV-1 and demonstrated an EC 50 17.1 ± 1 in Vero E6 cells, which is near the upper range of LPV plasma concentrations previously measured in patients with HIV [25]. Sheahan et al [5] evaluated the in vitro efficacy of LPV/r in combination with interferon beta (INFb) against MERS-CoV and found the addition of LPV/r did not significantly enhance antiviral activity of INFb alone (EC 50 = 160 vs 175 IU/mL, respectively). They also described the EC 50 of LPV/r (8.5 µM) and LPV alone (11.6 µM), suggesting similar activity to that described for SARS CoV-1. Despite in vitro activity against MERS-CoV, therapeutic doses of LPV/r + INFb in mice models failed to reduce virus titer and exacerbated lung disease [5]. This is notable because this was the same study in which remdesivir demonstrated both more potent in vitro activity as well as in vivo efficacy. However, the in vivo animal data for MERS-CoV appears equivocal given that a nonhuman primate model demonstrated improved clinical and pathological features after LPV/r treatment [26]. A randomized controlled trial of LPV/r and recombinant interferon-β1b versus placebo is currently enrolling for patients with MERS-CoV, which might help clarify the apparent discrepancy between in vitro and animal models [27].

(p1.1) Based on in vitro findings, Chu et al [23] utilized combination therapy with LPV/r, ribavirin, and corticosteroids for any newly diagnosed patient with SARS-CoV-1 without acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) starting in April 2003. Patients receiving LPV/r combination therapy (N = 41) were matched to historical patients receiving ribavirin plus corticosteroids (N = 111), and a significant reduction in the development of ARDS or death at 21 days was observed (2.4% vs 28.8%, P < .001). This was corroborated by an expanded case-control matched study of 75 LPV/r-treated patients from the same center that demonstrated a significant reduction in pulse steroid use (27.3% vs 55.4%), intubation (0% vs 11%), and mortality (2.3% vs 15.6%) among patients who received LPV/r combination versus no LPV/r, respectively, as initial therapy [28]. More important, the benefits of LPV/r were only demonstrated in patients who received initial treatment with LPV/r (defined as initiation of drug at time of SARS-CoV-1 diagnosis). There was no observed benefit when LPV/r was added as rescue or salvage therapy (death rate 12.9% vs 14%).
## (s2) Nitazoxanide
(p2.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p2.1) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.

(p2.2) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p2.3) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.
## (s4) Tocilizumab
(p4.0) Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits both membrane-bound and soluble interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptors. Interleukin-6, which is secreted by monocytes and macrophages, is one of the main drivers of immunologic response and symptoms in patients with cytokine-release syndrome (CRS). Although tocilizumab was first approved by the FDA in 2010 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, it has gained traction in recent years for treatment of patients with CRS following chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR T) therapy as a corticosteroid-sparing agent [42]. Indeed, it received FDA approval for severe or life-threatening CAR T-associated CRS in 2017 due to its efficacy and safety profile. Although criteria for grading CRS severity varies by cancer center, it has been proposed to administer tocilizumab to CRS patients with any of the following: oxygen requirement <40%, hypotension responsive to fluids or a low dose of a single vasoactive agent, or Grade 2 organ toxicity as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [43]. Interleukin-6 antagonism may make a patient more susceptible to bacterial infection and has been associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chronic therapy with tocilizumab for giant cell arteritis or rheumatoid arthritis. In a case series of 53 adult patients with relapsed or refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Grade 3 CRS or higher was associated with increased risk of subsequent infection, but it was unclear whether tocilizumab or corticosteroid use promoted this risk [44]. There were no reported adverse events in the 60 tocilizumab-treated patients submitted to the FDA for the CRS indication, which recommends a maximum of 4 doses for treatment [45].

(p4.1) Hyperinflammatory states and cytokine storming, including elevated IL-6, has been reported in severe COVID-19 and were associated with increased mortality in patients in China [36]. A preprint (nonpeer reviewed) case series of 21 patients treated with tocilizumab between February 5 and 14, 2020 in China reported marked success, including rapid resolution of fever and C-reactive protein, decreased oxygen requirements, and resolution of lung opacities on computerized tomography imaging [46]. The authors state the patients all had "routine treatment for a week" before tocilizumab, which was described as "standard care according to national treatment guidelines" including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and other supportive care. All patients had IL-6 analyzed before tocilizumab administration with a mean value of 132.38 ± 278.54 pg/mL (normal <7 pg/mL). It should be noted that in the United States, IL-6 monitoring is a send-out laboratory for most institutions with a turnaround time of 3-7 days. No adverse events were described in the Chinese cohort; however, long-term assessment was not done.
## (s7) Ribavirin With or Without Interferon
(p7.0) Ribavirin, a guanosine analog that terminates RNA synthesis, was first approved in the 1980s and has been used clinically for respiratory syncytial virus, viral hemorrhagic fever, and in combination with interferon for hepatitis C. As mentioned previously (see LPV/r section), it was evaluated against SARS-CoV-1 in 2003 and used clinically in combination with corticosteroids and/or interferon in the absence of other treatment options; however, outcomes were either poor or ill-defined [54,55]. The doses required for antiviral activity against SARS range from 1.2 to 2.4 grams by mouth every 8 hours, which are associated with excessive toxicity to patients [56]. Wang et al [3] evaluated the in vitro activity of ribavirin against SARS-CoV-2 and found an EC 50 of 109.5 µM, which was over 100 times less potent than remdesivir. The risk of hematologic toxicity at high doses likely outweighs potential clinical benefit, and therefore ribavirin was not considered a viable candidate for further investigation by the WHO research and development plan for SARS-CoV-2 given its lack of in vitro efficacy, toxicity profile, and poor outcomes.

(p7.1) Interferons (α, β) may stimulate innate antiviral responses and are expected to have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2, given the previously described activity demonstrated against MERS-CoV (EC 50 175 IU/mL). However, toxicities are substantial including severe cytopenias, hepatotoxicity (including fatality), neuropsychiatric events, and risk of developing fatal or life-threatening ischemia or infection, particularly when combined with ribavirin. This combination was not associated with improved mortality or enhanced viral clearance in a retrospective analysis of patients infected with MERS-CoV who were initiated on combination therapy within 1-3 days of ICU admission [57]. Despite the limited to poor data, Chinese guidelines recommend ribavirin 500 mg IV 2-3 times daily in combination with LPV/r or inhaled interferon-α (5 million units nebulized twice daily) as one of the "standard treatment" options for COVID-19. Various combinations of ribavirin, interferon, and other antiviral agents are currently being studied in several clinical trials.

(p7.2) Based on the poor in vitro activity, an absence of animal or human data supporting its use, and a significant toxicity profile, we recommend avoiding use of ribavirin in patients with COVID-19 at this time. Although interferons may be useful as adjunctive care, they pose a significant risk to critically ill patients, and in the absence of supportive data they also cannot be currently recommended.

(p7.3) Ribavirin, a guanosine analog that terminates RNA synthesis, was first approved in the 1980s and has been used clinically for respiratory syncytial virus, viral hemorrhagic fever, and in combination with interferon for hepatitis C. As mentioned previously (see LPV/r section), it was evaluated against SARS-CoV-1 in 2003 and used clinically in combination with corticosteroids and/or interferon in the absence of other treatment options; however, outcomes were either poor or ill-defined [54,55]. The doses required for antiviral activity against SARS range from 1.2 to 2.4 grams by mouth every 8 hours, which are associated with excessive toxicity to patients [56]. Wang et al [3] evaluated the in vitro activity of ribavirin against SARS-CoV-2 and found an EC 50 of 109.5 µM, which was over 100 times less potent than remdesivir. The risk of hematologic toxicity at high doses likely outweighs potential clinical benefit, and therefore ribavirin was not considered a viable candidate for further investigation by the WHO research and development plan for SARS-CoV-2 given its lack of in vitro efficacy, toxicity profile, and poor outcomes.

(p7.4) Interferons (α, β) may stimulate innate antiviral responses and are expected to have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2, given the previously described activity demonstrated against MERS-CoV (EC 50 175 IU/mL). However, toxicities are substantial including severe cytopenias, hepatotoxicity (including fatality), neuropsychiatric events, and risk of developing fatal or life-threatening ischemia or infection, particularly when combined with ribavirin. This combination was not associated with improved mortality or enhanced viral clearance in a retrospective analysis of patients infected with MERS-CoV who were initiated on combination therapy within 1-3 days of ICU admission [57]. Despite the limited to poor data, Chinese guidelines recommend ribavirin 500 mg IV 2-3 times daily in combination with LPV/r or inhaled interferon-α (5 million units nebulized twice daily) as one of the "standard treatment" options for COVID-19. Various combinations of ribavirin, interferon, and other antiviral agents are currently being studied in several clinical trials.

(p7.5) Based on the poor in vitro activity, an absence of animal or human data supporting its use, and a significant toxicity profile, we recommend avoiding use of ribavirin in patients with COVID-19 at this time. Although interferons may be useful as adjunctive care, they pose a significant risk to critically ill patients, and in the absence of supportive data they also cannot be currently recommended.
## (s8) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p8.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p8.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s10) CONCLUSIONS
(p10.0) Appropriate management strategies for patients with COVID-19 are a rapidly evolving therapeutic challenge, and the optimal agents (if any) to treat infection or prevent progression to critical illness remain ill-defined. Although certain agents listed in this review are encouraging, and the potential benefit of therapy likely outweighs the relatively minor risk of adverse events from short-course therapy, the evidence remains inconclusive and changes almost daily.

(p10.1) Patient populations who warrant therapy and the timing of initiation of therapy need to be defined. Given that disease progression can occur rapidly in stable patients and that viral loads are highest early in the infection course, the authors of this review opine that rapid initiation of therapy in high-risk populations (patients who are hospitalized or outpatients who are at high risk of complications) is rational and should be considered, ideally in the context of a well-controlled, adequately powered trial. More important, however, this strategy is not without risk and needs to be weighed against potential adverse events (that remain poorly defined) and impending drug shortages with increases in use of these agents. To help address these concerns, careful consideration should be given to duration of therapy with many clinical trials and institutional protocols recommending 5-7 days for uncomplicated disease. Duration of therapy should be individualized to the patient and the progression of disease.

(p10.2) Clinicians must continually monitor and adapt as new literature becomes available. Caution should be applied because the bulk of the available clinical data are uncontrolled, not peer reviewed, or even unpublished. Given these  [59]. The safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma transfusion in SARS-CoV-2-infected patients has not been established, and no protocols exist currently in the United States. Protocols are reportedly being developed at The Johns Hopkins University Hospital.
## (s11) Disulfiram
(p11.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p11.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s12) Eculizumab
(p12.0) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p12.1) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p12.2) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.

(p12.3) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p12.4) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p12.5) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.
## (s15) Niclosamide
(p15.0) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].

(p15.1) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].
## (s18) XueBiJing
(p18.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p18.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
## (s21) Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine
(p21.0) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p21.1) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p21.2) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].

(p21.3) To inform optimal dosing of hydroxychloroquine, the investigators then performed PBPK modeling. In this analysis, the investigators utilized human population pharmacokinetic and rat lung penetration data for each compound to estimate free trough concentrations in the lung to EC 50 ratios (R LTEC ) [18]. Because 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily has been reported to demonstrate efficacy against SARS-CoV-2, the target R LTEC for hydroxychloroquine regimens was set to ≥2.38 (day 1), 5.92 (day 3), and 18.9 (day 5), which were the R LTEC values predicted with the "efficacious" 500 mg by mouth twicedaily dosing of chloroquine [16]. Various dosing regimens were simulated, but 2 are particularly notable. The first was an oral loading dose of 1200 mg (divided 800 mg then 400 mg) on day 1, followed by 400 mg daily. This regimen led to significantly higher R LTEC on day 1 (33.3), day 3 (55.1), and day 5 (103) than those values demonstrated with chloroquine. The second regimen was a loading dose of 800 mg (400 mg × 2) on day 1 followed by 200 mg twice daily. This was also associated with higher R LTEC values than chloroquine on day 1, 3, and 5 (corresponding to 21.0, 38.9, and 85.4, respectively) [18]. The authors concluded that these data support the lower dose regimen because R LTEC values were significantly higher than those with the "proven efficacious" regimen of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily. Clinicians should note that both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have half-lives of ~40 days [19], and therefore short durations would likely provide prolonged courses of therapy. This was exemplified in the PBPK modeling in which R LTEC values with hydroxychloroquine were predicted to still be above the targeted efficacy threshold on day 10, even with a 5-day course of therapy.

(p21.4) Although these data are encouraging for the potential role of hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-2, we caution against solely relying on these data to support dosing regimens for patients. The use of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily as the reference for efficacy is rational given initial reports from China [16], but it is important to note that this dosing still requires validation, and the improved R LTEC values reported are largely driven by the finding that hydroxychloroquine was 7.6 times more potent than chloroquine in vitro. Although this enhanced potency may very well prove true as more data become available, this report is counter to the relative potency demonstrated with the structurally similar SARS-CoV-1 strain in 2006 in which chloroquine was approximately 5 times more potent than hydroxychloroquine. In addition, a recently published study has demonstrated that the EC 50 value for chloroquine is 1.13 µM [3], similar to the value reported for hydroxychloroquine in the analysis by Yao et al [18].

(p21.5) Because there are currently no efficacy data available for hydroxychloroquine in COVID-19, additional consideration should be given to the optimal dosing strategy. We use the following example to illustrate this point. If one were to consider these 2 compounds to be equally potent (identical EC 50 values) and utilize the PBPK data from Yao et al [18], the 800 mg load, 400 mg daily regimen for hydroxychloroquine would yield R LTEC values of 2.76, 5.11, and 11.2 on day 1, 3, and 5, respectively. These R LTEC values would be slightly lower than those achieved with 500 mg by mouth twice daily of chloroquine on day 3 and significantly lower than those on day 5, suggesting the potential need for a higher dose to have similar activity. Although the 400 mg daily regimen is the most common regimen currently being assessed in clinical trials, the rationale for that dose is currently unclear, and at least 1 clinical trial in China is using a higher dose of 800 mg by mouth daily.

(p21.6) To this point, Gautret et al [20] recently published their initial experience on the impact of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine by mouth every 8 hours on viral eradication in patients with COVID-19. The authors reported on 36 patients (20 hydroxychloroquine and 16 control) who were COVID-19 positive and able to have nasopharyngeal sampling for the first 6 days of therapy (in the treated arm). The investigators demonstrated that hydroxychloroquine (14 of 20, 70%) was superior to standard of care (2 of 16, 12.5%; P = .001) in eradicating SARS-CoV-2 from the nasopharynx. It is interesting to note that 6 patients were prescribed azithromycin "to prevent bacterial super-infection" and the investigators found that viral eradication was numerically superior in this subgroup (6 of 6, 100%) compared with those who received hydroxychloroquine alone (8 of 14, 57%). The authors concluded that azithromycin "reinforced" the SARS-CoV-2 viral load achieved by hydroxychloroquine. Although these data are intriguing, certain limitations to this data set must be acknowledged. First, although viral eradication is an important endpoint, the authors did not report clinical outcomes in these patients. Second, the cohort initially contained 26 hydroxychloroquine patients, but 6 of them were removed from the analysis due to early cessation of hydroxychloroquine therapy including 3 PCR-positive patients who were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), 1 PCR-negative patient who passed away, and 1 PCR-positive patient who discontinued hydroxychloroquine due to nausea. Finally, the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy arm included patients with significantly higher viral loads, represented by lower cycle threshold (C T ) values than those who received combination therapy. If the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy patients with C T values <23 are separated from those with C T values ≥23, there is a notable discordance in viral eradication rates (1 of 5, 20% vs 7 of 9, 78%), with this latter number approaching the 6 of 6 demonstrated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin combination therapy in which all patients had C T values ≥23. Given this finding, the small numbers in this study, the lack of clinical outcomes presented, the potential for additive toxicity with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and the desperate need to practice good antimicrobial stewardship during the COVID-19 pandemic, we would caution clinicians against using these data to support combination therapy.

(p21.7) Despite all of the unknowns, the initial experience in China is encouraging for the potential role of chloroquine, or alternatively hydroxychloroquine, for the management of COVID-19. Clinicians are encouraged to closely follow subsequent peer-reviewed publications from the ongoing chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine trials, because others have raised concerns regarding the apparent in vitro and/or in vivo discordance witnessed with chloroquine in other viral infections [21]. Furthermore, if hydroxychloroquine is utilized, careful consideration for dose selection should be given in accordance with the aforementioned data, as well as considerations for when to initiate during the course of illness.

(p21.8) Chloroquine, an antimalarial agent with anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory activities, has gained significant interest as a potential therapeutic option for the management of COVID-19. In early February, Wang et al [3] demonstrated potent in vitro activity of chloroquine against SARS-CoV-2 with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 1.13 µM in Vero E6 cells. These data were consistent with previous data for chloroquine's inhibitory activity against SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV in various cell lines, where EC 50 values of 1-8.8 and 3.0 µM were demonstrated, respectively [15]. These findings have supported the clinical use of chloroquine, at a dose of 500 mg by mouth twice daily, in numerous clinical trials in China during this outbreak. Although the rationale for this dosing regimen remains unclear, and peer reviewed data from the trials are currently unavailable, it was announced in mid-February that promising early results have been demonstrated. Per Gao et al [16], "thus far, results from more than 100 patients have demonstrated that chloroquine phosphate is superior to the control treatment in inhibiting the exacerbation of pneumonia, improving lung imaging findings, promoting a virus-negative conversion, and shortening the disease course according to the news briefing. Severe adverse reactions to chloroquine phosphate were not noted in the aforementioned patients. "

(p21.9) Although this development has been encouraging, supply issues in the United States and cardiovascular toxicity concerns limit the use of chloroquine. As an alternative, hydroxychloroquine, a compound that differs from chloroquine only by a single hydroxyl group, has garnered interest. Hydroxychloroquine is perceived as having better tolerability than chloroquine, which has led to long-term usage in rheumatological disorders. Historically, very limited data were published assessing the activity of hydroxychloroquine against coronaviruses. In 2006, Biot et al [17] assessed the comparative inhibitory activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-1 in Vero cells. The authors demonstrated that chloroquine had an approximately 5-fold increased potency (EC 50 of 6.5 ± 3.2 µM) compared with that of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 34 ± 5 µM).

(p21.10) Against SARS-CoV-2, Yao et al [18] performed a 2-part study assessing the comparative in vitro activity of chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine and performed pharmacology-based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling to assess comparative exposure and predicted activity of these 2 compounds in the lung. In vitro analyses in Vero cells demonstrated that the potency of hydroxychloroquine (EC 50 of 0.72 µM) was greater than that of chloroquine (EC 50 of 5.47 µM) against SARS-CoV-2 [18].

(p21.11) To inform optimal dosing of hydroxychloroquine, the investigators then performed PBPK modeling. In this analysis, the investigators utilized human population pharmacokinetic and rat lung penetration data for each compound to estimate free trough concentrations in the lung to EC 50 ratios (R LTEC ) [18]. Because 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily has been reported to demonstrate efficacy against SARS-CoV-2, the target R LTEC for hydroxychloroquine regimens was set to ≥2.38 (day 1), 5.92 (day 3), and 18.9 (day 5), which were the R LTEC values predicted with the "efficacious" 500 mg by mouth twicedaily dosing of chloroquine [16]. Various dosing regimens were simulated, but 2 are particularly notable. The first was an oral loading dose of 1200 mg (divided 800 mg then 400 mg) on day 1, followed by 400 mg daily. This regimen led to significantly higher R LTEC on day 1 (33.3), day 3 (55.1), and day 5 (103) than those values demonstrated with chloroquine. The second regimen was a loading dose of 800 mg (400 mg × 2) on day 1 followed by 200 mg twice daily. This was also associated with higher R LTEC values than chloroquine on day 1, 3, and 5 (corresponding to 21.0, 38.9, and 85.4, respectively) [18]. The authors concluded that these data support the lower dose regimen because R LTEC values were significantly higher than those with the "proven efficacious" regimen of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily. Clinicians should note that both chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine have half-lives of ~40 days [19], and therefore short durations would likely provide prolonged courses of therapy. This was exemplified in the PBPK modeling in which R LTEC values with hydroxychloroquine were predicted to still be above the targeted efficacy threshold on day 10, even with a 5-day course of therapy.

(p21.12) Although these data are encouraging for the potential role of hydroxychloroquine against SARS-CoV-2, we caution against solely relying on these data to support dosing regimens for patients. The use of 500 mg of chloroquine by mouth twice daily as the reference for efficacy is rational given initial reports from China [16], but it is important to note that this dosing still requires validation, and the improved R LTEC values reported are largely driven by the finding that hydroxychloroquine was 7.6 times more potent than chloroquine in vitro. Although this enhanced potency may very well prove true as more data become available, this report is counter to the relative potency demonstrated with the structurally similar SARS-CoV-1 strain in 2006 in which chloroquine was approximately 5 times more potent than hydroxychloroquine. In addition, a recently published study has demonstrated that the EC 50 value for chloroquine is 1.13 µM [3], similar to the value reported for hydroxychloroquine in the analysis by Yao et al [18].

(p21.13) Because there are currently no efficacy data available for hydroxychloroquine in COVID-19, additional consideration should be given to the optimal dosing strategy. We use the following example to illustrate this point. If one were to consider these 2 compounds to be equally potent (identical EC 50 values) and utilize the PBPK data from Yao et al [18], the 800 mg load, 400 mg daily regimen for hydroxychloroquine would yield R LTEC values of 2.76, 5.11, and 11.2 on day 1, 3, and 5, respectively. These R LTEC values would be slightly lower than those achieved with 500 mg by mouth twice daily of chloroquine on day 3 and significantly lower than those on day 5, suggesting the potential need for a higher dose to have similar activity. Although the 400 mg daily regimen is the most common regimen currently being assessed in clinical trials, the rationale for that dose is currently unclear, and at least 1 clinical trial in China is using a higher dose of 800 mg by mouth daily.

(p21.14) To this point, Gautret et al [20] recently published their initial experience on the impact of 200 mg of hydroxychloroquine by mouth every 8 hours on viral eradication in patients with COVID-19. The authors reported on 36 patients (20 hydroxychloroquine and 16 control) who were COVID-19 positive and able to have nasopharyngeal sampling for the first 6 days of therapy (in the treated arm). The investigators demonstrated that hydroxychloroquine (14 of 20, 70%) was superior to standard of care (2 of 16, 12.5%; P = .001) in eradicating SARS-CoV-2 from the nasopharynx. It is interesting to note that 6 patients were prescribed azithromycin "to prevent bacterial super-infection" and the investigators found that viral eradication was numerically superior in this subgroup (6 of 6, 100%) compared with those who received hydroxychloroquine alone (8 of 14, 57%). The authors concluded that azithromycin "reinforced" the SARS-CoV-2 viral load achieved by hydroxychloroquine. Although these data are intriguing, certain limitations to this data set must be acknowledged. First, although viral eradication is an important endpoint, the authors did not report clinical outcomes in these patients. Second, the cohort initially contained 26 hydroxychloroquine patients, but 6 of them were removed from the analysis due to early cessation of hydroxychloroquine therapy including 3 PCR-positive patients who were transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), 1 PCR-negative patient who passed away, and 1 PCR-positive patient who discontinued hydroxychloroquine due to nausea. Finally, the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy arm included patients with significantly higher viral loads, represented by lower cycle threshold (C T ) values than those who received combination therapy. If the hydroxychloroquine monotherapy patients with C T values <23 are separated from those with C T values ≥23, there is a notable discordance in viral eradication rates (1 of 5, 20% vs 7 of 9, 78%), with this latter number approaching the 6 of 6 demonstrated with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin combination therapy in which all patients had C T values ≥23. Given this finding, the small numbers in this study, the lack of clinical outcomes presented, the potential for additive toxicity with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin, and the desperate need to practice good antimicrobial stewardship during the COVID-19 pandemic, we would caution clinicians against using these data to support combination therapy.

(p21.15) Despite all of the unknowns, the initial experience in China is encouraging for the potential role of chloroquine, or alternatively hydroxychloroquine, for the management of COVID-19. Clinicians are encouraged to closely follow subsequent peer-reviewed publications from the ongoing chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine trials, because others have raised concerns regarding the apparent in vitro and/or in vivo discordance witnessed with chloroquine in other viral infections [21]. Furthermore, if hydroxychloroquine is utilized, careful consideration for dose selection should be given in accordance with the aforementioned data, as well as considerations for when to initiate during the course of illness.
## (s22) Lopinavir/Ritonavir
(p22.0) Lopinavir is a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 protease inhibitor administered in fixed-dose combination with ritonavir (LPV/r), a potent CYP3A4 inhibitor that "boosts" lopinavir concentrations. Lopinavir seems to block the main protease of SARS-CoV-1, inhibiting viral replication [22]. In 2003, Chu et al [23] evaluated a series of antivirals for in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-1. They reported lopinavir at 4 µg/mL and ribavirin at 50 µg/mL inhibited SARS-CoV-1 after 48 hours of incubation and that the agents were synergistic when used together [23]. de Wilde et al [24] later described the antiviral activity of lopinavir against SARS-CoV-1 and demonstrated an EC 50 17.1 ± 1 in Vero E6 cells, which is near the upper range of LPV plasma concentrations previously measured in patients with HIV [25]. Sheahan et al [5] evaluated the in vitro efficacy of LPV/r in combination with interferon beta (INFb) against MERS-CoV and found the addition of LPV/r did not significantly enhance antiviral activity of INFb alone (EC 50 = 160 vs 175 IU/mL, respectively). They also described the EC 50 of LPV/r (8.5 µM) and LPV alone (11.6 µM), suggesting similar activity to that described for SARS CoV-1. Despite in vitro activity against MERS-CoV, therapeutic doses of LPV/r + INFb in mice models failed to reduce virus titer and exacerbated lung disease [5]. This is notable because this was the same study in which remdesivir demonstrated both more potent in vitro activity as well as in vivo efficacy. However, the in vivo animal data for MERS-CoV appears equivocal given that a nonhuman primate model demonstrated improved clinical and pathological features after LPV/r treatment [26]. A randomized controlled trial of LPV/r and recombinant interferon-β1b versus placebo is currently enrolling for patients with MERS-CoV, which might help clarify the apparent discrepancy between in vitro and animal models [27].

(p22.1) Based on in vitro findings, Chu et al [23] utilized combination therapy with LPV/r, ribavirin, and corticosteroids for any newly diagnosed patient with SARS-CoV-1 without acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) starting in April 2003. Patients receiving LPV/r combination therapy (N = 41) were matched to historical patients receiving ribavirin plus corticosteroids (N = 111), and a significant reduction in the development of ARDS or death at 21 days was observed (2.4% vs 28.8%, P < .001). This was corroborated by an expanded case-control matched study of 75 LPV/r-treated patients from the same center that demonstrated a significant reduction in pulse steroid use (27.3% vs 55.4%), intubation (0% vs 11%), and mortality (2.3% vs 15.6%) among patients who received LPV/r combination versus no LPV/r, respectively, as initial therapy [28]. More important, the benefits of LPV/r were only demonstrated in patients who received initial treatment with LPV/r (defined as initiation of drug at time of SARS-CoV-1 diagnosis). There was no observed benefit when LPV/r was added as rescue or salvage therapy (death rate 12.9% vs 14%).
## (s23) Nitazoxanide
(p23.0) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p23.1) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.

(p23.2) Nitazoxanide has demonstrated potent in vitro activity against SARS CoV-2, with an EC 50 at 48 hours of 2.12 µM in Vero E6 cells [3]. This potent activity is consistent with EC 50 values for nitazoxanide and its active metabolite, tizoxanide, against MERS-CoV in LLC-MK2 cells in which EC 50 values of 0.92 and 0.83 µM, respectively, have been demonstrated [39]. Nitazoxanide displays broad-spectrum in vitro antiviral activity against influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, parainfluenza, rotavirus, and norovirus among others in addition to coronaviruses [39]. This broad-spectrum antiviral activity is believed to be due to the fact that the mechanism of action is based on interference with host-regulated pathways involved in viral replication rather than virus-specific pathways [39].

(p23.3) Due to its broad-spectrum antiviral activity, nitazoxanide is being investigated for the management of influenza and other acute respiratory infections. Positive results were demonstrated in a phase 2b/3 study for the outpatient management of influenza, in which a dose of 600 mg by mouth BID of nitazoxanide was associated with a ~1-day improvement in time to resolution of symptoms when compared with placebo (P = .008) [40]. Three phase 3 randomized controlled trials in uncomplicated influenza have since been completed (ClinicalTrials. gov Identifier NCT01610245 [March 2018], NCT02612922 [April 2018], and NCT03336619 [September 2019]), although results are unavailable. Nitazoxanide failed to reduce the duration of hospitalization or the time to symptom alleviation in a phase 2 randomized controlled trial in patients with severe acute respiratory illnesses requiring hospitalization, predominantly caused by respiratory viruses [41]. Although the in vitro activity of nitazoxanide against SARS-CoV-2 is encouraging, more data are clearly needed to determine its role in the management of COVID-19.
## (s25) Tocilizumab
(p25.0) Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that inhibits both membrane-bound and soluble interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptors. Interleukin-6, which is secreted by monocytes and macrophages, is one of the main drivers of immunologic response and symptoms in patients with cytokine-release syndrome (CRS). Although tocilizumab was first approved by the FDA in 2010 for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, it has gained traction in recent years for treatment of patients with CRS following chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR T) therapy as a corticosteroid-sparing agent [42]. Indeed, it received FDA approval for severe or life-threatening CAR T-associated CRS in 2017 due to its efficacy and safety profile. Although criteria for grading CRS severity varies by cancer center, it has been proposed to administer tocilizumab to CRS patients with any of the following: oxygen requirement <40%, hypotension responsive to fluids or a low dose of a single vasoactive agent, or Grade 2 organ toxicity as defined by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events [43]. Interleukin-6 antagonism may make a patient more susceptible to bacterial infection and has been associated with neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in patients receiving chronic therapy with tocilizumab for giant cell arteritis or rheumatoid arthritis. In a case series of 53 adult patients with relapsed or refractory B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Grade 3 CRS or higher was associated with increased risk of subsequent infection, but it was unclear whether tocilizumab or corticosteroid use promoted this risk [44]. There were no reported adverse events in the 60 tocilizumab-treated patients submitted to the FDA for the CRS indication, which recommends a maximum of 4 doses for treatment [45].

(p25.1) Hyperinflammatory states and cytokine storming, including elevated IL-6, has been reported in severe COVID-19 and were associated with increased mortality in patients in China [36]. A preprint (nonpeer reviewed) case series of 21 patients treated with tocilizumab between February 5 and 14, 2020 in China reported marked success, including rapid resolution of fever and C-reactive protein, decreased oxygen requirements, and resolution of lung opacities on computerized tomography imaging [46]. The authors state the patients all had "routine treatment for a week" before tocilizumab, which was described as "standard care according to national treatment guidelines" including lopinavir, methylprednisolone, and other supportive care. All patients had IL-6 analyzed before tocilizumab administration with a mean value of 132.38 ± 278.54 pg/mL (normal <7 pg/mL). It should be noted that in the United States, IL-6 monitoring is a send-out laboratory for most institutions with a turnaround time of 3-7 days. No adverse events were described in the Chinese cohort; however, long-term assessment was not done.
## (s28) Ribavirin With or Without Interferon
(p28.0) Ribavirin, a guanosine analog that terminates RNA synthesis, was first approved in the 1980s and has been used clinically for respiratory syncytial virus, viral hemorrhagic fever, and in combination with interferon for hepatitis C. As mentioned previously (see LPV/r section), it was evaluated against SARS-CoV-1 in 2003 and used clinically in combination with corticosteroids and/or interferon in the absence of other treatment options; however, outcomes were either poor or ill-defined [54,55]. The doses required for antiviral activity against SARS range from 1.2 to 2.4 grams by mouth every 8 hours, which are associated with excessive toxicity to patients [56]. Wang et al [3] evaluated the in vitro activity of ribavirin against SARS-CoV-2 and found an EC 50 of 109.5 µM, which was over 100 times less potent than remdesivir. The risk of hematologic toxicity at high doses likely outweighs potential clinical benefit, and therefore ribavirin was not considered a viable candidate for further investigation by the WHO research and development plan for SARS-CoV-2 given its lack of in vitro efficacy, toxicity profile, and poor outcomes.

(p28.1) Interferons (α, β) may stimulate innate antiviral responses and are expected to have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2, given the previously described activity demonstrated against MERS-CoV (EC 50 175 IU/mL). However, toxicities are substantial including severe cytopenias, hepatotoxicity (including fatality), neuropsychiatric events, and risk of developing fatal or life-threatening ischemia or infection, particularly when combined with ribavirin. This combination was not associated with improved mortality or enhanced viral clearance in a retrospective analysis of patients infected with MERS-CoV who were initiated on combination therapy within 1-3 days of ICU admission [57]. Despite the limited to poor data, Chinese guidelines recommend ribavirin 500 mg IV 2-3 times daily in combination with LPV/r or inhaled interferon-α (5 million units nebulized twice daily) as one of the "standard treatment" options for COVID-19. Various combinations of ribavirin, interferon, and other antiviral agents are currently being studied in several clinical trials.

(p28.2) Based on the poor in vitro activity, an absence of animal or human data supporting its use, and a significant toxicity profile, we recommend avoiding use of ribavirin in patients with COVID-19 at this time. Although interferons may be useful as adjunctive care, they pose a significant risk to critically ill patients, and in the absence of supportive data they also cannot be currently recommended.

(p28.3) Ribavirin, a guanosine analog that terminates RNA synthesis, was first approved in the 1980s and has been used clinically for respiratory syncytial virus, viral hemorrhagic fever, and in combination with interferon for hepatitis C. As mentioned previously (see LPV/r section), it was evaluated against SARS-CoV-1 in 2003 and used clinically in combination with corticosteroids and/or interferon in the absence of other treatment options; however, outcomes were either poor or ill-defined [54,55]. The doses required for antiviral activity against SARS range from 1.2 to 2.4 grams by mouth every 8 hours, which are associated with excessive toxicity to patients [56]. Wang et al [3] evaluated the in vitro activity of ribavirin against SARS-CoV-2 and found an EC 50 of 109.5 µM, which was over 100 times less potent than remdesivir. The risk of hematologic toxicity at high doses likely outweighs potential clinical benefit, and therefore ribavirin was not considered a viable candidate for further investigation by the WHO research and development plan for SARS-CoV-2 given its lack of in vitro efficacy, toxicity profile, and poor outcomes.

(p28.4) Interferons (α, β) may stimulate innate antiviral responses and are expected to have in vitro activity against SARS-CoV-2, given the previously described activity demonstrated against MERS-CoV (EC 50 175 IU/mL). However, toxicities are substantial including severe cytopenias, hepatotoxicity (including fatality), neuropsychiatric events, and risk of developing fatal or life-threatening ischemia or infection, particularly when combined with ribavirin. This combination was not associated with improved mortality or enhanced viral clearance in a retrospective analysis of patients infected with MERS-CoV who were initiated on combination therapy within 1-3 days of ICU admission [57]. Despite the limited to poor data, Chinese guidelines recommend ribavirin 500 mg IV 2-3 times daily in combination with LPV/r or inhaled interferon-α (5 million units nebulized twice daily) as one of the "standard treatment" options for COVID-19. Various combinations of ribavirin, interferon, and other antiviral agents are currently being studied in several clinical trials.

(p28.5) Based on the poor in vitro activity, an absence of animal or human data supporting its use, and a significant toxicity profile, we recommend avoiding use of ribavirin in patients with COVID-19 at this time. Although interferons may be useful as adjunctive care, they pose a significant risk to critically ill patients, and in the absence of supportive data they also cannot be currently recommended.
## (s29) Oseltamivir and Baloxavir
(p29.0) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.

(p29.1) Given their antiviral activity against influenza, considerable attention has been paid to oseltamivir, and to a lesser degree baloxavir, as potential treatment options for COVID-19. This was exacerbated by the initial report from Huang et al [1] in Wuhan where patients managed with COVID-19 received oseltamivir in addition to broad-spectrum antimicrobials. It is important to note that use of oseltamivir was not as targeted therapy of SARS-CoV-2 but rather driven by the lack of a knowledge of the causative pathogen at the time of treatment and the desire to empirically treat influenza. The authors do not suggest the use of oseltamivir for COVID-19 in that publication, and there are no data that suggest in vitro activity of oseltamivir against SARS-CoV-2. In fact, the only data assessing oseltamivir activity against coronaviruses demonstrated it to be ineffective at inhibiting SARS-CoV-1, even at a concentration of 10 000 µM/L [56]. Coronaviruses do not utilize neuraminidase, and thus there is no enzyme to be inhibited by oseltamivir. This would hold true for zanamivir, peramivir, or any other neuraminidase inhibitor agents. Similarly, neither a defined mechanism nor in vitro data have suggested that baloxavir would demonstrate activity against SARS-CoV-2 or other coronaviruses. Therefore, given the critical need for these agents in the management of influenza and concern for drug shortages with oseltamivir, these agents should be avoided in patients with COVID-19 once influenza has been ruled out. Table 2 lists agents that are being investigated and/or theoretically considered for the management of SARS-CoV-2-infected patients. At this time, no recommendation can be made for any of these agents. In general, they should be avoided without additional supporting evidence.
## (s31) CONCLUSIONS
(p31.0) Appropriate management strategies for patients with COVID-19 are a rapidly evolving therapeutic challenge, and the optimal agents (if any) to treat infection or prevent progression to critical illness remain ill-defined. Although certain agents listed in this review are encouraging, and the potential benefit of therapy likely outweighs the relatively minor risk of adverse events from short-course therapy, the evidence remains inconclusive and changes almost daily.

(p31.1) Patient populations who warrant therapy and the timing of initiation of therapy need to be defined. Given that disease progression can occur rapidly in stable patients and that viral loads are highest early in the infection course, the authors of this review opine that rapid initiation of therapy in high-risk populations (patients who are hospitalized or outpatients who are at high risk of complications) is rational and should be considered, ideally in the context of a well-controlled, adequately powered trial. More important, however, this strategy is not without risk and needs to be weighed against potential adverse events (that remain poorly defined) and impending drug shortages with increases in use of these agents. To help address these concerns, careful consideration should be given to duration of therapy with many clinical trials and institutional protocols recommending 5-7 days for uncomplicated disease. Duration of therapy should be individualized to the patient and the progression of disease.

(p31.2) Clinicians must continually monitor and adapt as new literature becomes available. Caution should be applied because the bulk of the available clinical data are uncontrolled, not peer reviewed, or even unpublished. Given these  [59]. The safety and efficacy of convalescent plasma transfusion in SARS-CoV-2-infected patients has not been established, and no protocols exist currently in the United States. Protocols are reportedly being developed at The Johns Hopkins University Hospital.
## (s32) Disulfiram
(p32.0) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.

(p32.1) Thiuram derivative that blocks alcohol oxidation. Demonstrated ability to competitively inhibit the papain-like proteases of SARS; however, no clinical data exist [60]. No in vitro or clinical data exist for COVID-19.
## (s33) Eculizumab
(p33.0) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p33.1) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p33.2) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.

(p33.3) Humanized, monoclonal IgG antibody that binds to complement protein C5 and prevents formation of membrane attack complex (MAC). Being evaluated in a clinical trial (NCT04288713) for COVID-19 to quell immune response, no data exist at this time to support use.

(p33.4) Favipiravir RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor with broad-spectrum antiviral activity; however, demonstrated high EC 50 (decreased potency) against SARS-CoV-2 but was effective in protecting mice against Ebola virus despite similarly high EC 50 values [3]. Currently being evaluated in Clinical Trial NCT04273763 for patients with COVID-19. This agent is not FDA approved or available in the United States.

(p33.5) Galidesivir (BCX4430) Nucleoside RNA polymerase inhibitor with reported wide spectrum of antiviral activity, currently in pipeline of Biocryst Pharma and previously evaluated for Ebola and other hemorrhagic fever virus infections.
## (s36) Niclosamide
(p36.0) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].

(p36.1) Anthelminthic drug with in vitro efficacy against SARS-CoV-1; however, low absorption and oral bioavailability resulting in a wide range of serum concentrations in healthy volunteers after a single dose may limit utility as antiviral treatment [63].
## (s39) XueBiJing
(p39.0) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.

(p39.1) Chinese herbal medicine extract infusion formulation given at 100 mL IV twice daily, suggested as a "may consider" treatment for severe and critical cases in the National Health Commission of the People's Republic of China: the COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Guide, 7th Edition. This previously demonstrated improved mortality in patients with severe community acquired pneumonia in China [65]. limitations, it is critical that institutions and clinicians report their experiences with the management and treatment of COVID-19 to the medical community so that we may further modify and optimize treatment recommendations and pathways.
