# Child maltreatment and pediatric asthma: a review of the literature

CorpusID: 269564 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/26f84d08b11e7fd4ddfcd96e28b7c276c62a8c50](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/26f84d08b11e7fd4ddfcd96e28b7c276c62a8c50)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) The physical home environment
(p2.0) The physical home environment children grow up in contributes to pediatric asthma in important ways. Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, indoor air pollution, and allergen exposure inside the family home are all strongly connected to pediatric asthma outcomes [7,21,[26][27][28][29]. Convincing cross-sectional associations between common allergens, such as cockroach or mouse allergen, and asthma diagnosis as well as asthma symptoms and asthma-related hospitalizations and physician visits have been shown [7,30]. These findings are further strengthened by reports of interventions designed to reduce allergen burdens inside the homes of youth with asthma resulting in improved clinical outcomes among these youth [31].
## (s3) Health behaviors and asthma management
(p3.0) Adherence to a variety of health behaviors is an integral part of successful long-term asthma management, which frequently requires adherence to daily medication. Nonetheless, adherence rates to asthma medications are often found to be very poor [40]. Depending on children's ages, asthma management can involve considerable involvement on the part of other family members, who help oversee daily behaviors such as proper medication adherence. In addition, certain health behaviors youth may engage in, for example smoking, can have especially detrimental consequences among youth with asthma [41,42] who are frequently found to be more likely to smoke compared to their healthy peers [43,44].

(p3.1) Again, maltreated youth may lack caregivers who can support successful disease management. They may reside in single-parent households where caregivers are overburdened, juggling multiple responsibilities, and financially stretched [45,46], and as a result, unable to seek appropriate medical care, pay for prescribed treatments, and facilitate children's medication adherence [38]. Parents of children with maltreatment histories are also more likely to be struggling with mental health and substance abuse problems themselves [47][48][49], both of which may further signal an inability on the part of parents to be actively involved in their children's disease management process.

(p3.2) Youth's own behaviors may also contribute to worse asthma outcomes. Several studies have linked experiences of child maltreatment to greater smoking rates and more persistent smoking [19,50]. This has the potential to negatively affect both the onset of asthma as well as exaggerate existing asthma [51]. A history of child maltreatment has also been associated with increased obesity rates among children and adolescents [17]. This is of interest as obesity is increasingly being identified as a risk factor for pediatric asthma, especially nonatopic asthma, even though the underlying causes are not yet clearly understood [22,52]. Consequently, obesity following child maltreatment may represent another pathway to increased asthma risk. So might other health practices, including drug use, sleep habits, or dietary intake, but these pathways require further investigation.
## (s4) Psychological sequelae of child maltreatment
(p4.0) Exposure to child maltreatment may further increase individuals' risk for asthma through negatively impacting their psychological well-being. Several small scale studies have established preliminary connections between emotional states such as depression or anxiety and asthmarelated outcomes [53,54] and documented higher rates of behavioral problems and anxiety disorders among youth with asthma [55]. One longitudinal study, for example, linked greater rates of behavior problems to increased rates of asthma morbidity in the form of more days of wheeze and poorer functional asthma status over the course of a 9 month follow-up period [56].
## (s5) Physiological pathways
(p5.0) Exposure to stressors may exacerbate existing inflammatory responses mounted following exposure to environmental pathogens, e.g., traffic-related air pollution or allergens. Asthma is typically thought to be marked by a shift towards Th2-dependent processes, both an earlyphase response involving IL-4 and IL-13 and a latephase response involving IL-5. Specifically, the release of IL-4 and IL-13 sets off an inflammatory cascade involving the proliferation and differentiation of B cells, which in turn synthesize and release IgE antibodies. These bind to mast cells in the airways and, by causing them to degranulate and release histamines and leukotrienes, bring about typical asthma symptoms including smooth muscle constriction, mucus production, and edema. Similarly, IL-5 aids the production, maturation, and activation of eosinophils which contribute to airway inflammation and obstruction and are involved in longer-term asthma-related inflammatory processes.

(p5.1) Multiple studies have shown that stimulated production of these cytokines increases in response to experiences of stress, e.g., university examinations [67] and for children with asthma this amplified cytokine production is especially pronounced with family-related stressors, such as conflict in the parent-child relationship or chaos in the household [68]. In addition, recent studies have found that child maltreatment is associated with increased expression of IL-6, CRP [69,70], and other nonspecific markers of low-grade inflammation, whose role in asthma is increasingly appreciated. Furthermore, a small number of studies have linked other social stressors to cytokine activity of particular relevance to asthma. For example, among youth with asthma, more chronic family and household stress is associated with increased production of the Th2 cytokines IL-5 and IL-13, and higher eosinophil counts [71]. Similarly, exposure to acute stressful life events in the context of chronic family stress has been linked to greater Th2 cytokine production, including levels of IL-4, IL-5, and IFNgamma, among youth with asthma [72]. Although these papers do not specifically address the consequences of child maltreatment, they suggest that normative variations in family climate may shift youth's lymphocytes towards a more aggressive Th2 phenotype, an effect that would presumably be even stronger with the more severe exposure of maltreatment.

(p5.2) Experiences of child maltreatment also have welldocumented consequences with respect to functioning of children's and adolescents' hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal (HPA) axis [20]. Importantly, HPA axis dysregulation following maltreatment has been shown to vary substantially among children, based on the type of maltreatment, age at exposure, and subsequent internalizing and externalizing symptoms, ranging from relative hypercortisolism in some to relative hypocortisolism in other cases. Glucocorticoids are important physiologic regulators of many asthma-related immune functions, and the basis of front-line asthma-control therapies for many patients. If maltreatment reduces the availability of glucocorticoids in the airways, or decreases cellular sensitivity to these molecules, there could be implications for asthma expression and/or management [73,74]. Consistent with this possibility, one study found that among youth with asthma, experiencing both acute and chronic stress was associated with lower expression of glucocorticoid receptor mRNA in leukocytes [75], which could plausibly reduce cortisol-mediated signaling in these cells. Another study found that among youth with asthma, lower parental support was associated with higher glucocorticoid resistance, as reflected in ex vivo lymphocyte Th2 cytokine production, following co-incubation with a mitogen and hydrocortisone [76]. These patterns have not been studied in the context of maltreatment, but if present they could function as a pathway for increasing risk of asthma development or exacerbations.
## (s10) Recommendations for future research
(p10.0) Based on existing research on the impact of child maltreatment on pediatric asthma, there are several recommendations for future research. First, most data to date come from large, cross-sectional studies. However, to truly understand the connections between child maltreatment and pediatric asthma, more longitudinal data are needed.

(p10.1) Second, use of more in-depth study designs will be needed to understand whether particular aspects of maltreatment are influential in shaping pediatric asthma outcomes. This includes measurement of aspects of child maltreatment applicable to exposure to any subtype, such as the timing and duration of exposure. Some research suggests that the early childhood and adolescent years are times of particular vulnerability [96][97][98]. Other aspects worth investigating will vary as a function of the exposure studied. When focusing on child abuse, specific data such as whether or not the perpetrator was known and perceived sense of threat or sense of safety following exposure may be of interest. When focusing on child physical neglect, details on the physical home environment may provide information on how neglect comes to influence pediatric asthma. In short, a more detailed examination of potential moderators and mediators of the association between child maltreatment and asthma is needed. This may also provide insights into potential protective factors which could inform future research and prevention work.

(p10.2) Third, more work is needed to understand the biological pathways that might connect child maltreatment with asthma outcomes. Even though these mechanisms are understood well conceptually, more research is needed to verify them in humans. To date, no study in this area has assessed candidate physiological mediators. Hence, nothing is known on direct effects of child maltreatment on lung functioning measures among children and adolescents, or about relevant airway or allergic inflammatory processes typically associated with asthma exacerbations.

(p10.3) Finally, most studies to date do not report on gender effects but it is not clear that they were always examined in detail. Future research should continue to include both boys and girls and examine whether boys and girls are impacted differently by experiences of varying types of child maltreatment. At least one study has reported boys to be more likely to report general health and mental health symptoms in response to child abuse than girls [80], suggesting that there may be sex-based differences with respect to pediatric asthma as well.
