# Emotional intelligence, leadership, and work teams: A hybrid literature review

CorpusID: 262137717 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57e748c25cdcd51516752517599eff42e4c7193f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/57e748c25cdcd51516752517599eff42e4c7193f)

Fields: Business, Psychology, Medicine

## (s6) Current research trends
(p6.0) Ongoing business challenges are affecting workers for a variety of reasons, including changing organizational structures, adoption of new technologies, and working remotely.These changes are leading to major transformations in how organizations work as well as the actual space at the workplace, both of which are influenced by external factors and new trends.

(p6.1) One of these trends has arisen from the global crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which made it especially important to know how to manage fear and stress.This situation did not promote emotional or physical well-being in people and this imbalance was transferred to both the personal and the professional levels for all workers within an organization.The changes that have occurred in managing the workforce remain in the post-pandemic era and, therefore, must continue to be assessed, especially considering that the markets are still volatile, uncertain, complex, and ambiguous (VUCA).Likewise, the same goes for the changes brought about by the war in Ukraine, not only on an economic level, but on a personal one too [90].In wartime conditions, ensuring economic and financial security at all social and economic levels must be considered a priority.For post-war recovery of companies with critical infrastructures in global BANI conditions, developing a new prototype of strategic management for financial and economic security will make it possible to expand the limits for applying effective security-oriented management tools.All the uncertainty caused by the uncertain future itself has a negative impact on levels of productivity, loyalty and the manifestation of leadership qualities [91].
## (s7) Methodology
(p7.0) This review would be considered semi-systematic according to Snyder [17].Two bibliometric analysis techniques were used: a quantitative technique (performance analysis) and a qualitative technique (co-word analysis), making it a hybrid review [16].Ordanini et al. [104] suggested choosing research with a significant impact in the field such as Web of Science, and Scopus databases as these databases includes peer review scholar journals.

(p7.1) The search strategy used to select articles employs the advanced search TOPIC option with the words 'emotional intelligence,' 'leader*' and 'team', that is, TS = (leader* AND emotional intelligence AND team).Based on the WoS core collection database, we applied the following filters: document type (articles, review articles), up to the year 2022, and language (English).The search in Scopus included the article title, abstract, and keywords with the same terms (TITLE-ABS-KEY (emotional intelligence AND leader* AND team).We then exported the complete records to Excel and merged both files, eliminating duplicates.Early access documents were not considered although they are involved in trends and other sections such as the conclusions.It is important to clarify that there may be articles of leadership in any category, not restricted only business.
## (s12) RQ5. Who are the most cited authors?
(p12.0) The most frequently cited authors in both WoS and Scopus are: Schutte et al. [32], with 1796 citations, and Judge et al. [60], with 1396 citations.Carmeli [15] is also worthy of mention, with 407 citations in Scopus, although he is not mentioned in WoS (Table 2).
## (s18) Leadership types: transformational, emergence, virtual, effective, healthy, resonant, and dissonant
(p18.0) Dulewicz and Higgs [118] establish a positive relationship between emotional intelligence and leadership.Judge and Bono [119] conclude that relationships exist between traits of the Big Five personality model (neuroticism, extraversion, openness to experience, and agreeableness) and transformational leadership behavior.However, Shao and Webber [120] point out that the Big Five model does not appear to be as effective a predictor of transformational leadership behaviors in China as compared to samples from Judge and Bono's [119] previous studies conducted in the United States.Later, Mandell and Pherwani [116] studied managers in different industries and concluded that there is a significant relationship between EI and transformational leadership style.Scott-Halsell et al. [121] found that transformational leaders use their EI skills to employ effective leadership skills, such as good interpersonal communication and team collaboration.

(p18.1) Ahmed et al. [107], Polychroniou [122], Prochazka et al. [123], and Schlechter and Strauss [111] support the idea that transformational leadership mediates the relationship between EI, effectiveness, performance, and team commitment.In other results, Hur et al. [109] and Mandell and Pherwani [116] found no significant gender differences in this relationship.
## (s19) Leadership and emotion
(p19.0) In regard to the topic of leadership and emotions, Kelly and Barsade's [141] literature review shows that group emotion is the result of the combination of the affective composition of the individuals in a group and the affective context of the group itself.The authors proposed an organizational model to understand these affective influences and their impacts on group life.Pirola-Merlo et al. [142] analyzed how leaders influence the impact of affective events on team climate and performance.The findings show that potential obstacles within the organization have a negative impact on the team's work climate, although said effects can be neutralized by leaders adopting more facilitating and transforming styles.

(p19.1) That same year, Kellet et al. [143] established two behavioral pathways related to how an individual perceives leadership.One pathway is based on mental skills, such as task accomplishment, while the other pathway is based on emotional skills, such as empathy.Likewise, Rubin et al. [87] analyzed how leaders' ability to recognize emotions and personality characteristics influences transformational leadership behavior performance.
## (s21) I. Coronado-Maldonado and M.-D. Benítez-Márquez
(p21.0) Regarding subversive leaders, Pradhan and Jena [147] found no positive relationship in the moderating role of EI between abusive supervision (an interpersonal stressor) and employees' intention to quit.In contrast, Li et al. [148] concluded that leaders who are always supportive of employees before any pressure occurs have higher EI levels than leaders who prefer to provide support after pressure occurs.

(p21.1) In the case of luxury hotels, Jung and Yoon [149] analyzed emotional contagion among burned-out employees and collective commitment.These authors concluded that more emotionally contaminated employees have higher levels of burnout, and the higher the burnout, the lower the commitment to the group.
## (s24) Other objectives
(p24.0) Carmeli [15] corroborates the importance of EI within the context of senior management in the public sector, as it increases positive work attitudes and task performance.A year later, Law et al. [86] analyzed several evaluations including supervisors' assessments of their employees' task performance, and the employees' assessments of their supervisors' EI and job performance, as well as the performance of their peers.The results showed that peer ratings were significant predictors of job performance ratings as provided by supervisors after controlling for the Big Five personality dimensions.Law et al. [86] argue that the concept of EI differs from the concept of personality.

(p24.1) On another note, Espinosa et al. [160] studied project success, which was determined by evaluating the impact of emotional leadership competencies, intellectual intelligence, and management intelligence on project success according to varying degrees of complexity.They found that trust complexity moderates the relationship between EQ and project success.They investigated the moderating effect of project complexity on the relationship between project managers' leadership competencies and their project success.The results show that EQ and MQ are correlated with project success but are moderated differently depending on the complexity.
