# The Health Effects of Low Glycemic Index and Low Glycemic Load Interventions on Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Literature Review of RCTs

CorpusID: 266241515 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fca31f1f2f739babe5c396afcbcd568754d755e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fca31f1f2f739babe5c396afcbcd568754d755e9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Search Results and Study Selection
(p5.0) As shown in Figure 1, 261 records were identified from searches in PubMed and ScienceDirect, in addition to 25 other records obtained from the reference list of relevant papers.After excluding duplicates (n = 36), 250 records were screened for title and abstract, 190 of which were excluded for various reasons.The remaining 60 full-text manuscripts were assessed for eligibility.A total of 46 papers were excluded due to the reasons described in Figure 1, while 14 studies were deemed eligible.Three studies were excluded because their study outcomes (satiety [28], cognitive function [29] and episodic memory [30], respectively) were outside of the scope of this review.
## (s12) Blood Pressure
(p12.0) Office blood pressure was measured in five studies [32,33,41,43,44] (Table 3).Argiana and colleagues [32] observed a tendency for decreasing systolic and diastolic blood pressure in both groups.In the study by Li et al. [43], systolic, diastolic and mean arterial pressure all increased (p < 0.05) in the control group, but the effect of the intervention was not significant (p > 0.05).On the contrary, Mateo-Gallego et al. [44] found a trend for decreased systolic blood pressure in controls (p < 0.05) compared with the intervention group (p > 0.05).Jenkins [41] and Pavithran et al. [33] did not find significant effects of their interventions on systolic or diastolic blood pressure.However, heart rate increased in the control group in the study by Jenkins et al. [41], with the effect of the control diet (high fiber) being significantly different from that of the low-GI diet.
## (s13) CVD Risk
(p13.0) As shown in Table 3, vessel wall volume had increased in both groups by the end of the intervention conducted by Jenkins et al. [41].However, the increase was significant only in the control group and difference between groups was not significant.There was also no significant changes in Framingham risk score in this study.

(p13.1) Ha et al. [40] quantified the serum concentrations of high sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) and galectin-3, which are biomarkers of subclinical cardiac injury and fibrosis.While the authors do not present the p value within each group, the effect of the intervention and control diets was comparable for both markers (p > 0.05 between groups).
## (s14) Inflammatory Markers
(p14.0) Significant improvements in biomarkers of inflammation were found in four RCTs [32,33,38,41], specifically in C-reactive protein (CRP) [41], high-sensitivity CRP (hs-CRP) [32,33,38] and interleukins (IL) 6 [38] (Table 3) and 1β [38] (not shown).Gomes et al. [39] detected an increase in tumor necrosis factor α (TNF-α) in the control group and no change in the intervention group.The intervention implemented by Mateo-Gallego and colleagues [44] was the only one that did not lead to reduced inflammatory biomarkers, although only CRP was assessed.Other authors also did not see changes between the intervention and control groups on CRP [39], IL-6 [32] and fibrinogen [39].

(p14.1) Reductions in these inflammatory markers were always associated with improvements in other outcomes, including glycemic control [33,38], reductions in body weight [33], hip circumference [32] and fat mass [39], blood lipids [32,33,39], renal function [41] and intestinal microbiota [38].
## (s15) Hormones
(p15.0) Argiana et al. [32] and Gomes et al. [39] assessed serum adiponectin concentration, while Argiana et al. [32] also measured serum leptin.These low-GI/GL interventions did not have a significant effect on these parameters compared with controls (Table 3).
## (s16) Hepatic and Renal Function
(p16.0) Markers of liver function were assessed in three studies, all of which were interventions with low-GI/GL foods [32,44] or meals [43].Significant differences between study groups were not identified in any parameter of liver function in any study (Table 3).However, Argiana et al. [32] did find significant reductions in blood aspartate aminotransferase (AST) in the control group and in gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) in the intervention group.In the study by Li et al. [43], there was a significant increase in total plasma protein only in the intervention group.

(p16.1) Jenkins et al. [41] measured parameters of renal function.Serum urea increased significantly in the intervention and control groups (p < 0.05), but no differences were found between groups (p > 0.05).Significant differences (p < 0.05) between study groups were detected for serum creatinine and glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), due to an increase and a reduction in the control group, respectively.
## (s17) Intestinal Microbiota
(p17.0) The low-GI diet implemented by Cai et al. [38] led to favorable changes in the intestinal microbiota (p < 0.05), when intervention and control groups were compared.It included a decrease in the number of Enterococcus and Escherichia coli and an increase in Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus (Table 3).
## (s18) Quality of Life
(p18.0) Alalwan and colleagues [31] applied the 36-Item Short Form Survey (SF-36) to their participants to measure quality of life (Table 3).Both the total score and the specific mental health score significantly increased in the intervention group, suggesting an increased quality of life in the participants from the intervention group.Moreover, significant differences were observed between groups (intervention vs. control, p < 0.05).
## (s20) Discussion
(p20.0) This paper aimed to review the experimental evidence published in the last decade regarding the effects of diets with low GI and low GL on several aspects of health in individuals with prediabetes and T2DM.The selected RCTs included outcomes related to glycemic control, which have been the focus of most of the research on GI and diabetes.However, we included additional, less explored, outcomes including several aspects of cardiometabolic health, nutritional status and quality of life.

(p20.1) Diet and lifestyle are fundamental aspects of T2DM management that should be optimized to improve glycemic control and treatment outcomes in T2DM.Our results suggest that diets low in GI and GL are a good option for patients with prediabetes and T2DM, with overall benefits in terms of glycemic control and anthropometry.Effects on lipid profile were inconsistent.The effects on other aspects of cardiometabolic health were mostly positive, although few studies documented such parameters.

(p20.2) The interventions with low-GI and/or low-GL foods, meals and diets described in this review exerted overall positive effects on glycemic control-particularly HbA1c, HOMA-IR and fasting plasma insulin.Two systematic reviews and meta-analyses of RCTs conducted on T1DM and T2DM patients [26,27] also found clinically significant improvements in HbA1c.Unlike our results, they found reductions in fasting blood glucose, but not in fasting blood insulin [26,27] or HOMA-IR [26].The study by Sipe and colleagues [35] observed that a low-GI diet reduced postprandial glucose and insulin secretion in individuals with prediabetes and obesity, but no changes were seen in measures of β-cell function after a 4-week intervention.On the contrary, the authors of a previous study conducted in a similar population over 12 weeks found that a high-GI diet impaired β-cell function, whereas a low-GI diet reduced hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia [45].This suggests that a longer intervention is likely necessary in order to see improvements in pancreatic β-cell function and to prevent or slow progression to T2DM.
