# How to characterize a nonlinear elastic material? A review on nonlinear constitutive parameters in isotropic finite elasticity

CorpusID: 26517640 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d848d1a33533270b37a2f9593c19b1385a04b631](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d848d1a33533270b37a2f9593c19b1385a04b631)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s12) Experiment no. 2: simple shear superposed on axial tension
(p12.0) In isotropic linear elasticity, the Poisson's ratio and Young's modulus fully characterize a material. In particular, the response of a material under shear is given by its shear modulusμ =Ē/ (2(1 +ν)). Yet, in nonlinear deformation the shear response cannot be simply obtained from the nonlinear Poisson's ratio and the nonlinear stretch modulus. Therefore, we introduce the nonlinear shear modulus to study the nonlinear elastic response of an isotropic hyperelastic material subject to the following simple shear superposed on axial stretch [89] (figure 3),
## (s13) (b) Poynting modulus in shear
(p13.0) We recall that the (positive or negative) Poynting effect is a large strain effect observed when an elastic cube is sheared between two plates and stress is developed in the direction normal to the sheared faces, or when a cylinder is subjected to torsion and the axial length changes [28,32,[91][92][93][94][95][96][97]. This effect naturally captures the coupling between normal and shear deformations when an elastic cube is sheared, and between axial and torsion deformations when a cylinder is twisted.
## (s15) Experiment no. 3: simple torsion superposed on axial tension
(p15.0) In this section, nonlinear elastic moduli are obtained under certain non-homogeneous finite deformations, which are controllable for all incompressible elastic solids in the absence of body forces. Generalizations of these deformations are also possible for specific isotropic compressible materials [98].   
## (s24) (b) Soft tissues
(p24.0) Experimental observations on several soft tissues with large lipid content, such as brain, liver and adipose tissues indicate that, under large strains, the nonlinear shear modulus increases strongly and almost linearly as axial compression increases, while increasing only moderately as axial tension increases, regardless of the stress-strain response under simple shear [26,36,55,122] (figure 6 and tables 7-8). Although biological tissues have a viscoelastic mechanical behaviour, hyperelastic modelling is useful as a starting point for the development of more complex models. A hyperelastic constitutive model has a unique stress-strain relationship, which is independent of the strain rate, whereas for viscoelastic materials, the stress-strain response changes with the strain rate. Nevertheless, for some soft tissues where the shape of the stress-strain curve is almost invariant with respect to strain rate, at fixed strain rate, the shear modulus may be captured by a nonlinear hyperelastic model. For human brain tissue, in [55], Ogden-type constitutive models were calibrated, for the first time, to the nonlinear shear modulus μ(a, k) given by (4.9) identified from experimental data collected under multiaxial loading up to 20% shear strain superposed on up to 25% of axial tension or compression. Similarly, for mouse brain and adipose tissues, in [36], hyperelastic models were calibrated to experimental data measuring the nonlinear shear modulus μ(a) given by (4.14) under small shear superposed on up to 45% axial tension or compression. Currently, experimental data on soft tissues under multiaxial loading are rare, maybe also because they are harder to analyse. The nonlinear shear modulus can be a useful in quantifying results from such experiments.
