# Text feature extraction based on deep learning: a review

CorpusID: 26131992 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18c287e1eec0598528372d23627447a938f4e5ba](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18c287e1eec0598528372d23627447a938f4e5ba)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) Fusion method
(p5.0) Fusion needs integration of specific classifiers, and the search needs to be conducted within an exponential increase interval. The time complexity is high [27,28]. So, it is inappropriate to be used for feature extraction of large-scale texts [27,28]. Weighting method is a special class of fusion. It gives each feature a weight within (0, 1) to train while making adjustments. Weighting method integrated by linear classifiers is highly efficient. K nearest neighbors (KNN) algorithm is a kind of learning method based on the instance [29].
## (s6) Weighted KNN (K nearest neighbors)
(p6.0) Han [30] put forward a kind of combination of KNN classifier weighted feature extraction problem. The method is for each classification of continuous cumulative values, and it has a good classification effect. KNN method as a kind of no parameters of a simple and effective method of text categorization based on the statistical pattern recognition performance outstanding; it can achieve higher classification accuracy rate and recall rate [29][30][31].
## (s9) Least squares mapping method
(p9.0) Jeno [33] did a research on high-dimensional data reduction from the perspective of center vector and least squares. He believed dimensionality reduction has its predominance over SVD, because clustered center vectors reflect the structures of raw data, while SVD takes no account of these structures.
