# A Literature Review of Nurses Challenges and Barriers in Assisting Patients and Families Facing Breaking Bad News

CorpusID: 261502087 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4738902082e01e726ecdc91916102c054b3b0413](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4738902082e01e726ecdc91916102c054b3b0413)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Before BBN
(p6.0) [16] Therefore, the nurse must be able to establish a trusting and meaningful relationship with the patient and find out the patient's wishes. [17,18]In addition, the nurse also has a role in anticipating the patient's and family's reactions to the bad news that will be delivered. [19]ring the BBN The role of the nurse during the BBN is to be present during the breaking of bad news. [15,16,19]During the BBN process, the nurse must recognise and pay attention to the special emotional needs of patients and caregivers. [17,20]Studies report that nurses also break bad news directly to patients and families. [15,21]
## (s7) After the BBN
(p7.0) ][21] Nurses also play a role in helping patients and families to plan for logical treatment and make treatment decisions. [14,22]Nurses continuously provide emotional support [15][16][17][18][19][20] and help patients to have a quality life. [19,23]
## (s9) Nurse challenges
(p9.0) The challenges felt by nurses in BBN are the unpreparedness of nurses to face reactions from patients or families and how to build and maintain a supporting relationship with patients so that they do not despair. [16,23]Nurses also reported a lack of time in the BBN process due to busy work. [11]
## (s10) Barriers
(p10.0) The most reported barriers by nurses were a lack of communication skills. [16,18,21,24,25]Nurses also had concerns about the patient's emotional reactions and how to manage them. [16,17,21,24,25]In addition, nurses also had barriers in building trusting relationships with patients due to lack of time, lack of knowledge about the patient's illness, and lack of experience. [15,16,18,21,25]Nurses also did not always feel prepared when asked by patients or patients' families. [20,22]
## (s11) DISCUSSION
(p11.0) The role of nurses BBN is one of the most challenging duties healthcare providers face. [16]The role of nurses in BBN can be divided into three parts: Before, during and after BBN.Before BBN, the nurse's role is to prepare the patient, family and environment, establish a trusting relationship with the patient and anticipate reactions to the bad news.During BBN, the nurse's role is to be present and pay attention to the emotional needs of patients and caregivers.After BBN, the nurse's role is to help the family understand the bad news, plan treatment, provide emotional support and help patients to have a quality life.However, nurses may face difficulties during the BBN process due to unclear roles in the BBN process. [26]According to the literature, the doctor is responsible for delivering bad news and nurses have a role in assisting the doctor. [4,15]Literature identifies numerous duties for nurses during the BBN process, including providing information and assisting patients. [27,28]
## (s12) Barriers in delivering BBN
(p12.0) Ineffective communication skills pose the greatest barrier for nurses in imparting bad news.Weak communication can lead to high levels of stress. [14,29]Carers may carry the added burden of feeling because they conceal information from patients to protect them from further distress. [30,31]Many factors influence the delivery of bad news such as complex communication and managing negative patient reactions, [32] tailoring delivery to meet individual patient preferences and cultural needs, [33,34] managing their own emotional reactions [35] and working within the time and resource demands of their workplace. [16][38][39] Hence, the nurse is often the first point of contact when the patient is transitioning to death. [40]The nurse's method is to deliver bad news when the patient is alone or with a partner. [25,41]The provision of effective BBN can also be prepared since patients receive early palliative care, [42] not only improving their quality of life but also preparing them to face the worst conditions.However, it is important to note that this is the finding of a single study and further research is needed to draw more definitive conclusions.
## (s13) Challenges faced by nurses while delivering BBN
(p13.0) Nurses face several challenges while delivering BBN.These include unclear roles in the BBN process, ineffective communication skills, managing negative patient reactions, tailoring delivery to meet individual patient preferences and cultural needs, managing their own emotional reactions and working within the time and resource demands of their workplace.The difficulties experienced by nurses and healthcare staff when engaging in the process of BBN are  influenced by multiple, complex and interrelated factors. [19]eing involved in difficult situations and events associated with BBN has negative consequences for patients, relatives and healthcare staff. [43]Nurses also can experience a high rate of burnout and compassion fatigue from BBN, which may have distressing effects on professional performance and general health. [9]
