# International patterns of practice in radiotherapy for bone metastases: A review of the literature-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 2853517 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35a629130a889f2ee1f8823123c305dd2cf0d4a5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/35a629130a889f2ee1f8823123c305dd2cf0d4a5)

Fields: Medicine, Physics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Bone metastases are a common event in metastatic cancer and are a significant cause of morbidity that can lead to pain, hypercalcaemia, pathologic fracture, spinal cord compression, and reduction in quality of life (QOL) [1]. The prevalence in metastatic breast and prostate cancer patients is as high as 70-90% at autopsy [1,2]. In patients with bone metastases, goals of care often surround pain management and maintenance or improvement of QOL [3]. A variety of treatment modalities are utilized in a multidisciplinary fashion in order to achieve this goal. This includes analgesia, bone modifying agents such as bisphosphonates, and radiation therapy (RT) [3,4]. Where analgesic medications frequently result in side effects like constipation and dry mouth, radiation therapy is well tolerated with fewer side effects and provides significant pain relief in approximately 70% of patients [5]. Furthermore, RT has been shown to help prevent subsequent skeletal related events associated with bone metastases and improve overall QOL [6].

(p0.1) Many dose fractionation options exist in the palliation of symptomatic bone metastases, with the most common fractionation schedules being a single 8 Gy in one fraction, 20 Gy in five fractions, and 30 Gy in ten fractions [7]. Numerous randomized control trials (RCTs) have concluded that both single fraction radiation therapy (SFRT) and multiple fraction radiation therapy (MFRT) are efficacious in providing pain relief caused by uncomplicated bone metastases [4,7]. MFRT may be indicated in the treatment of complicated bone metastases, such as those causing neuropathic pain, pathologic fractures, or spinal cord compression [8,9]. As such, guidelines from the American Society for Radiation Oncology (ASTRO) and the American College of Radiology (ACR) recommend SFRT as the preferred treatment for uncomplicated bone metastases [10,11].

(p0.2) Despite these evidence based guidelines, studies have shown that there is a reluctance to implement them into current practice [7,12]. Many of these studies are survey-based asking physicians about fractionation schedules of choice regarding hypothetical scenarios [12,13]. Conclusions from these studies may overestimate the prevalence of SFRT due to their survey based methodologies. Our review focussed on studies that have investigated actual patient databases with the goal being to present a more accurate assessment of international patterns of practice over the past twenty years, particularly with respect to the use of SFRT.
## (s3) Canada
(p3.0) Eleven Canadian studies that reported on dose fractionation in the treatment of bone metastases were published between 1994 and 2014, with data ranging from 1984 to 2011. The study with the earliest cohort included 44,223 irradiated bone metastases treated between 1984 and 2001 [14]. Thirty four percent of the RT courses were SFRT. The authors also reported a general increase in the prescription of SFRT over time, with 27.2% of patients treated with SFRT in 1984-1986 increasing to 35.4% of patients treated with SFRT from 1999 to 2001 [14]. A Canadian study published by Sutton et al. [15] investigated a similar cohort of irradiated bone metastases , but rather looked at RT schedules prescribed within the last two years of life. Of the 236,078 bone metastases irradiated, 30% were treated with SFRT. The authors did not report on specific changes in SFRT, but did mention that it was more frequently prescribed in the latter half of the time period [15]. Another recent abstract was published by Ashworth et al. [24], which updated the previous cohorts to include 97,150 patients who received 186,694 palliative RT courses to bone from 1984 to 2012. Over the total study period, SFRT was prescribed for 41.3% of RT courses. The prevalence of SFRT was found to increase from 39% in 1999-2003 to 58% in 2006, then decrease to 42% in 2009-2012.

(p3.1) Danjoux et al. [16] investigated a cohort of patients treated between 1996 and 2003. Of a total 2989 RT courses to bone, 45% were treated with SFRT. These authors did not comment on any change in prescription over time. Similar cohorts were investigated by Haddad et al. [17] and Bradley et al. [18], who investigated RT courses to bone delivered from 1998 to 2002 and 1999 to 2005, respectively. Haddad et al. [17] reported that an average 32% of 882 RT courses to bone were prescribed SFRT over the study period. The authors also reported a general decrease in the prescription of SFRT over time, from 37% in 1998 to 28% in 2002. A much higher rate was prescribed to patients included in the study by Bradley et al. [18], with 65% of 965 RT courses to bone treated with SFRT. Contrary to Haddad et al., Bradley et al. [18] found an increase in the prescription of SFRT, from 51% in 1999 to 66% in 2005. Of note, these authors specified that the cohort only included uncomplicated bone metastases, whereas Haddad et al. [17] did not specify the type of bone metastases treated. Wu et al. [20] investigated 1354 bone metastases irradiated between 2003 and 2005. Single fraction radiation therapy was prescribed in 57% and 33% of patients who were treated in rapid access clinics and regular clinics, respectively. These authors did not report on a change in SFRT prescription over time.

(p3.2) Naidoo et al. [19] investigated a group of 7426 patients referred for RT to bone metastases from 2000 to 2010. Of these patients, 35% were prescribed SFRT. Again, these authors did not specify whether there was any change in the prescription over time.

(p3.3) Potter et al. [22] conducted a study with 422 RT to bone metastases treated from 2007 to 2008. The authors differentiated intent to treat and reported that, of 137 patients with uncomplicated bone pain, 48.9% were treated with SFRT.

(p3.4) The most recent cohorts investigated were those by Thavarajah et al. [21] and Olson et al. [23], from 2005 to 2012 and 2007 to 2011, respectively. Thavarajah et al. [21] included 2549 RT to bone metastases, of which 65% were prescribed SFRT. These authors stated that there was no significant change in the prescription of  
## (s5) United States
(p5.0) SFRT was the least commonly used in the United States. An American study with a small cohort of patients (n¼ 194) with a lung primary and treated to bone metastases from 2003 to 2005 reported that 6% of patients received SFRT [33]. These authors did not specify whether or not a change in the prescription of SFRT was observed. A much larger cohort of patients with over 7000 bone metastases irradiated between 2003 and 2010 was investigated by Beriwal et al. [34]. The prevalence of SFRT in this population was 3.9% and 13.5% at community and academic centers, respectively. Although the authors did not include specific numerical values, they stated that the total number of delivered fractions decreased gradually over the study period.

(p5.1) Bekelman et al. [36] investigated prostate cancer patients who were treated with palliative RT to bone metastases between January 2006 and December 2009. A total of 3050 patients were included, of which 3.3% were prescribed SFRT and 50.3% were prescribed greater than 10 fractions. When adjusted to exclude patients with previously complicating events (i.e., pathologic fractures, spinal cord compression, etc.), the prevalence of SFRT increased slightly to 3.8% [36]. Bekelman et al. [38] also published an abstract in 2014 that expanded on the previous study and included patients with breast, prostate, lung, kidney, colon and bladder cancer who were treated with palliative RT to bone from 2006 to 2012. A similar prevalence of SFRT was prescribed for this cohort of patients, at 4.0%. Again, when restricted to patients who experienced no prior complicating event, the prevalence increased by only 0.1% [38]. A study conducted by Hess et al. [35] investigated patients with breast and prostate cancer primaries, who were treated to bone metastases in the United States between July 2008 and December 2009. Similar to the previous American studies, these authors reported that the majority of patients received at least 10 fractions. Contrastingly, Ellsworth et al. [37] studied 339 patients who received RT for bone metastases between April 2007 and July 2012, of which the majority of patients received equal to or less than 10 fractions. The prevalence of SFRT was also approximately double that which has been reported in previous US studies (8%) [37].
## (s6) Australia
(p6.0) Holt et al. [39] published the only Australian study investigating patterns of practice in the delivery of RT to bone metastases. These authors examined RT courses delivered to bone metastases between May and October 2005 at a rapid response clinic and regular care center. They reported the greatest prevalence of SFRT among all studies; 75% and 58% of patients treated were prescribed SFRT in the rapid response clinic (n¼ 77) and regular care center (n¼ 207), respectively [39].
## (s7) Factors associated with SFRT
(p7.0) Sixteen of the 26 included studies reported on predictive factors for the use of SFRT [14,17,18,[21][22][23][24]26,27,29,33,34,[36][37][38][39]. The most common significant predictive factors were increased age [14,17,18,21,24,27], poor patient prognosis [14,17,18,23,24,27,36,38], irradiation to non-spine locations [14,18,23,24,26,34], and patients with primary prostate cancer [18,21,23,27]. SFRT was also more likely to be prescribed to those living a greater distance from the treatment center [14,18,24,27], those with a lung primary [26,27,29], when the prescribing physicians had greater experience [18,21,23], and when the treatment center was an academic as opposed to community practice [20,34]. The significance of some factors, such as the age of patients, treatment site, and physician experience, was contradictory as they were reported in two studies to not be significant [29,34,37]. Table 2 provides a detailed summary of the predictive factors of SFRT found in each article.
## (s8) Discussion
(p8.0) The majority of advanced cancer patients will develop bone metastases at some point in their illness [1,2]. As such, optimal management of bone metastases is central to patient care. Optimal management involves considering all risks and costs of treatment with appropriate goals of care in mind. In advanced cancer patients, these goals of care are palliative in intent and should be centered on improving pain and QOL [3].
