# BMC Proceedings A review of COFRADIC techniques targeting protein N-terminal acetylation

CorpusID: 2805155 - [None](None)

Fields: 

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Earlier proteome analyses aiming at characterizing the protein N-acetylation status primarily used two-dimensional protein gels to compare maps of acetylated and non-acetylated proteins. For instance, studies comparing the proteomes of wild-type yeast with mutant strains deficient for a specific N-acetyltransferase (NAT) complex revealed charge shifts due to the absence or the presence of positively charged α-amino groups [1]. Data generated from such studies added a lot to our understanding of the biology of protein N α -terminal acetylation however, it was also realized that intrinsic drawbacks of 2D polyacry-lamide gel electrophoresis techniques could result in sketchy proteome maps in which mainly well-soluble and highly abundant proteins were detected.
## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) Full technical details on the isolation of N-terminal peptides using the COFRADIC technology are documented elsewhere [11] and we here only describe additional chemistries that lead to quantification of the degree of protein acetylation, segregation of the in vivo blocked and free variants of protein N-terminal peptides and enrichment of methionine-containing N-terminal peptides.
## (s2) Synthesis of N-hydroxysuccinimide esters
(p2.0) N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) esters of D 3 -acetate (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and propionate (Sigma-Aldrich) were synthesized according to [14]. An NHS ester of 13 C 2 D 3 -acetate was synthesized as follows. 1.06 g Nhydroxysuccinimide (Sigma-Aldrich) was dissolved in 10 ml ethyl acetate. Then, 2.68 g diphenylchlorophosphate (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 ml ethyl acetate was added, followed by drop-wise addition of 2.11 g triethylamine (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 ml ethyl acetate (temperature was at 40°C). A thick white suspension formed to which 0.5 g 13 C 2 D 4 acetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 ml ethyl acetate was added and which was then heated to 50°C. After stirring for 16 hours, the solid precipitate was filtered and washed twice with 3 ml ethyl acetate. The combined ethyl acetate filtrates were dried in vacuo. The resulting residue was dissolved in 20 ml ethanol at 50°C. After cooling to -18°C for two hours, the precipitate was filtered and washed twice with 2 ml of isopropanol. After drying in vacuo, 1.1 g of NHS-13 C 2 D 3 -acetate was obtained.
## (s6) Trideutero-acetylation of free protein N α -termini: analysis of the degree of protein N α -terminal acetylation
(p6.0) The group of Fred Regnier previously reported on the use of trideutero-acetylation of so-called signature peptide Ntermini for quantitative proteomics [14]. However, when this reaction is performed at the protein level rather than the peptide level (Figure 1), one can distinguish between in vivo acetylated and their chemically trideuteroacetylated N-terminal counterparts (in vivo free protein Ntermini) [11]. Both types of peptides behave extremely similarly during all enrichments steps and only segregate during mass spectrometric analysis. Thus, in MS-spectra very often these two types of N-terminal peptides are easily distinguished (Figure 2A) and the relative amount of each of these can be weighed, which finally provides information on the degree of protein N α -terminal acetylation [13].

(p6.1) Different groups previously pointed to small hydrophobicity differences existing between deuterated and naturally hydrogenated isotopomers, causing the deuterated ones to elute somewhat sooner from reverse-phase columns compared to their hydrogenated counterparts (e.g. [16]). However, we found only minor, if any differences in the elution patterns of acetylated or trideuteroacetylated N-terminal peptides, thus complying with further quantification. In general, a difference in the N αacetylation level of about 5% can be accurately quantified. Nevertheless, since mass spacing between acetylated and trideutero-acetylated N-terminal peptides is only 3 atomic mass units for lysine-free N-terminal peptides, overlapping isotopic envelopes are expected for peptides of more than 1000 Da, and generally this makes quantification of the degree of in vivo acetylation for peptides of about 3000 Da (i.e. peptides of which the intensity of the fourth isotopic peak from the theoretical isotopic envelope, equals or supersedes the intensity of the mono-isotopic peak) difficult and even impossible when using low-resolution mass spectrometry (see Figure 2B). This caveat however, can be overcome by using an N-hydroxysuccinimide ester General work-flow of the N-terminal COFRADIC procedure The MS-spectrum from the N-terminal peptide (doubly charged precursor) of the DnaJ homolog subfamily C member 2 ( 1 MLLLPSAADGR 11 , 44% acetylated) reveals two distinguishable isotopic envelopes of the two isotopomers (i.e. the acetylated (Ac) and trideutero-acetylated forms (AcD 3 )) (A). Panels B & C show MS-spectra of the N-terminal peptide (triply charged precursor) of the signal recognition particle 68 kDa protein ( 2 AAEKQVPGGGGGGGSGGGGGSGGGGSGGGR 31 ) when trideutero-acetylated (B) or 13 C 2 D 3 -acetylated (C) (53% acetylated). Panel B illustrates the need for increased mass spacing by heavier isotopomers. D: Comparison of protein N-trideuteroacetylation and N-propionylation. A protein that is partially in vivo α-N-acetylated can be modified in vitro by N-trideutero-acetylation or N-propionylation. When trideuteroacetylation is used, the RP-HPLC elution profiles of the α-N-acetylated and α-N-trideutero-acetylated variants are indistinguishable and the peptide variants only segregate upon MS analysis by their 3 Da mass difference. In contrast, when N-propionylation is used the α-N-acetylated and α-N-propionylated variants segregate upon RP-HPLC, with the propionylated variant eluting at a later time because of increased hydrophobicity. E.: The use of methionine oxidation to segregate methionine-containing from non-methionine-containing N-terminal peptides. Methionine oxidation, when applied in between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separations and after TNBS modification, causes methionine-sulfoxide containing N-terminal peptides to shift to earlier elution times on RP-HPLC. As a result the N-terminal peptides of NatB (Met-Asn, Met-Asp and Met-Glu) and NatC (Met-Ile, Met-Leu and Met-Phe) substrates, as well as of substrates of yet unidentified NATs (e.g. Met-Lys) migrate out of the primary collection intervals and are in this way enriched from the non-methionine-containing NatA substrates. of deuterated and carbon-13 acetic acid, which will evoke a mass difference of 5 atomic mass units per primary amine, which is generally sufficiently large to allow quantification ( Figure 2C).
## (s7) Segregating blocked and free protein N α -termini peptides by propionylation
(p7.0) An alternative to 13 C 2 D 3 -acetylation is propionylation of primary amino groups. Propionylated peptides are however somewhat more hydrophobic than their acetylated counterparts and thus segregate on RP-HPLC columns from their acetylated forms ( Figure 2D), as such leading to less complex MS-spectra of partially in vivo α-N-acetylated N-termini. Hence, in this way in vivo free and blocked protein N-termini can be identified and substrates of NATs can be qualitatively characterized. However, within one analyzed N-terminal proteome, the actual determination of the degree of acetylation is not straightforward. First of all, one may well expect (small) differences in the net efficiency of ionization of acetylated or propionylated peptides, implying that the intensities of the isotopic envelopes of both types of peptides may not be directly compared. Secondly, because of the imposed segregation of both types of peptides as well as the high complexity of the analyte mixture, acetylated and propionylated peptides co-elute with different "neighbouring" peptides that affect each others' ionization efficiency (i.e. by ionization suppression effects), again not allowing direct weighing of the degree of protein N α -terminal acetylation.

(p7.1) Inter-experimentally (e.g. when comparing two proteomes in one experiment), propionylation of free protein N α -termini could however be used to determine changes of the degree of protein acetylation; for example when comparing metabolically arginine-labeled peptides [17] from two different proteomes (e.g., control versus perturbation of a particular NAT activity). In this case, argininelabeling ensures that isolated N-terminal peptides can be quantified [18]. If no further changes in total protein concentration are expected (e.g. by blocking protein synthesis and/or degradation), isotopic envelopes of in vivo acetylated and/or in vitro propionylated (in vivo free) peptides may be compared and point to possible fluxes of protein acetylation.
## (s8) Enrichment of Met-containing N-terminal peptides
(p8.0) Methionine is very susceptible to oxidation: its sulfur atom readily oxidizes to a sulfoxide derivative when exposed to air. We previously suggested oxidizing all methionyl peptides to methionine-sulfoxide peptides before starting the primary COFRADIC separation thereby creating uniform and oxidation-stable peptide mixtures [11]. However, this oxidation step can also be introduced between the primary and secondary RP-HPLC separation, thereby causing all methionine-containing N-terminal peptides to shift to earlier elution times ( Figure 2E). As a result, the N-terminal peptides of NatB (Met-Asn, Met-Asp and Met-Glu) and NatC (Met-Ile, Met-Leu and Met-Phe) substrates, as well as of substrates of yet unidentified NATs (e.g. Met-Lys) migrate out of the primary collection intervals and are in this way enriched. Clearly, N-terminal peptides containing an internal methionine will also elute earlier, but such N-termini typically only represent 20% of the total of NatA-type substrate N-termini identified. Moreover, the increased separation of peptides typically leads to increased overall proteome coverage (e.g. [19]).
