# Active Aging for Individuals with Parkinson's Disease: Definitions, Literature Review, and Models

CorpusID: 2925549 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c02ac0b14e4ec659e025b96f32ebe0a53616cadd)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Results and Discussion
(p4.0) After an inclusive review on the literature published until July 2014, we decided to create the concept of active aging in individuals with PD based on the most comprehensive and the highly accepted definitions per se. Since the unidimensional restriction of active ageing to a mere economic or physical framework has been shown to be problematic [14], we developed an "Active Aging Model for Parkinson's Disease" consisting of different aspects. Figure 1 illustrates a summary of the framework including different symptoms of PD, corresponding aspect of active aging that is affected, and some possible modifying factors to adopt the model for individuals with PD. As it is shown, the main domains of active aging including physical activity, social communication, and mental well-being are affected by motor impairment, nonmotor symptoms, and cognitive decline, respectively. As a result, early retirement and/or unemployment could happen as a consequence of both motor and nonmotor disabilities, as for lifelong learning that is influenced by both motor and cognitive impairments. Finally, quality of life and security, as two main targets of the active aging concept, are affected by all problems of PD. In this framework, new caring approaches are depicted as supporting modifiers which could result in the adaptation of the "active aging" concept for individuals with PD.

(p4.1) Based on the WHO definition of active aging [13] and the literature review on recently proposed approaches for PD care, the "Active Aging Model for Parkinson's Disease" consists of the following: This model is proposed with regard to the nature of PD, the symptoms and problems that the patients are dealing with, and the newest caring approaches fitted in the concept of active aging. As shown in Figure 1, symptoms of PD could directly affect all three main components of WHO's definition of active aging. As a progressive movement disorder, PD associates with restricted physical activity and the nonmotor symptoms such as depression, stigma, and anxiety could affect social communication of the patients. Later in the advanced stages of PD, cognitive impairment occurs which itself worsens mental well-being.  level of physical activity [15], which is not in line with the recommendations for active aging [13]. Obviously, increasing physical activity is an important health goal for individuals with PD in order to promote an active lifestyle [16]. However, gait disturbances, impaired balance, falls, and tremors make it difficult for PD patients to be physically active. The beneficial effects of several physiotherapeutic interventions on physical functioning, balance, and gait of the PD patients have been repeatedly shown [17,18]; yet, these programs are not sufficient to achieve an active lifestyle especially during the advanced stages of PD when cognitive impairment also superimposes the activity barriers and leads to the sedentary condition [15,19].
## (s5) Components
(p5.0) According to the concept of active aging, it is important to provide adequate protection, security, and care for PD patients when they need. Therefore, healthcare systems should have a plan creating a protective and secure evidencebased care for individuals with PD in order to help them improve their potentiality for physical activity. Recent evidences suggest that an individually tailored training program that has been adapted to patients' specific capacities and PD severity could potentially improve their physical activity towards active aging [20].
## (s6) Social Communication.
(p6.0) Recent efforts have emphasized that active aging is not only the ability to be physically active but also continuing participation in spiritual and civic affairs in which social communication plays an important role. Individuals with PD might have difficulties in social communication through different perspectives. The PD-related spectrum of communication barriers contains somatic problems such as masking face, speech disturbances, and movement problems to spiritual issues as disease stigma and depression. Some PD patients have difficulties in their facial expressions that could lead to a profound impact on social interactions especially among the individuals with atypical forms of the disease such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) [21]. On the other hand, the stigma attitudes and feelings of shame towards PD are other determinant factors to prohibit patients from socializing activities [22]. In addition to having an efficient management approach for the symptoms such as speech problems, masking face, and depression, it is of utmost importance to improve the attitudes of both patients and their surrounding persons towards PD. Educational meetings and programs for families, caregivers, and even the employers of the individuals with PD could help in avoiding stigmatizing behaviors and facilitating patients' involvement in social activities as an important part of active aging.

(p6.1) Recently, many patients with chronic conditions including the elderly with PD have shown a lot of motivations in communication with their peers and other individuals with similar condition. Through the aids of information technology, many patients are now socializing via the websites such as "Patients Like Me" (http://www.patientslikeme.com) sharing their experiences, emotions, and management plans with other patients. This could be a feasible and efficient initiative to motivate elderly individuals with PD having social communication through the process of active aging. Furthermore, volunteering activities could be another adapted way for social communication of these patients. Some patients are interested in events related to their chronic condition. One good example is the World Parkinson Congress (http://www.worldpdcongress.org/) where PD patients were actively involved as the members of the volunteers' team helping others in administrative affairs and informing them about the congress. They have the opportunity to communicate with other elderly with similar condition to improve their knowledge and insight, all of which could be in line with the concept of active aging.
## (s9) Employment.
(p9.0) Evidences show higher rate of unemployment and earlier retirement in individuals with PD compared to healthy elderly in various societies [30,31]. In one study the median age of retirement in individuals with PD was shown to be 58 yr and 61 yr for males and females, respectively, which was 4 to 5.5 yr lower than the corresponding ages in other elderly [9]. Another study showed that less than 16% of the PD patients had worked for more than five years after diagnosis [32]. Sometimes, this loss of ability to work is in parallel with the loss of independency in living among the patients due to the progression of disease severity in the older age [33]. Nevertheless, in some other occasions, this early retirement could be a sign of the so-called "disablism" or disability discrimination in addition to the "agism" itself. In a vicious cycle, loss of employment could potentially induce social and economic burden for the individuals with PD, which distract them from their social networks, occupational skills, and spiritual involvements. It has been shown that severity of PD symptoms, lack of support in the workplace, and opportunities for early retirement were the factors affecting withdrawal from the labor market among the PD population.
## (s10) Quality of Life.
(p10.0) One ultimate purpose of the call for active aging is to improve the quality of life for the elderly. As a result, it seems necessary to pay attention to the factors affecting QoL in elderly suffering from chronic diseases like PD. Higher severity of motor disability; longer duration of disease [34]; nonmotor symptoms, such as depression, sleep disorders, and fatigue [35]; mood, gastrointestinal, and urinary disorders [36]; and nutritional status [37] were all demonstrated to associate with poorer QoL in individuals with PD. Knowing these determinant factors, comprehensive interventions are needed to improve the QoL in elderly with PD. Evidences have shown that multidisciplinary interventions could be beneficial to enhance QoL in PD patients such as adding cognitive-behavioral strategies and physiotherapeutic plans [38] to their routine medications.
## (s12) Self-Care.
(p12.0) Considering the visions of the active aging concept, it is clear that visiting patients with chronic diseases only every several months could not be helpful, especially when it comes to PD with a highly stochastic clinical presentation. As a result, there is an extreme need to develop a new model of caring approach for PD that copes with the concepts of active aging. Recently, the middle-range theory of self-care for chronic illnesses has been introduced, which contains three main domains: self-care maintenance, self-care monitoring, and self-care management [39]. In the context of PD, self-care maintenance reflects in patients' behaviors to maintain physical and emotional stability, which is promotable through patients' education and enhances their insight into the motor and nonmotor parts of PD. Self-care monitoring refers to the process of observing and preferably recording oneself for the fluctuations in signs and symptoms of PD. Nowadays, there is an increasing intention among the PD community towards self-measurement of the symptoms and tracking of the changes in the severity of motor problems such as tremor. A growing number of gadgets and tools are being developed to help PD patients in self-monitoring of their symptoms such as mobile apps, computer-based software, charts, and diaries [40]. After self-measurement, gathered information is used in self-care management with appropriate timely responses to the fluctuations in signs and symptoms. The ultimate vision of this self-care approach is to dynamically manage PD that has certain benefits for the elderly suffering from this disease. Nonetheless, it must be noted that such a pragmatic approach still needs to be supported by research-based evidences for the healthcare decision makers on one side and increased health literacy in the patients' side as well. Self-care can optimize opportunities for health in elderly with chronic illnesses, which is in line with the concept of active aging.
## (s13) Multidisciplinary and Interdisciplinary
(p13.0) Care. As the definition of active aging itself addresses multiple disciplines of human health, multidisciplinary approach of care is an undeniable part of modern management for the elderly with chronic diseases. Multidimensional approaches help to raise alertness regarding the various domains of PD consisting of motor and nonmotor symptoms through which patients can age actively. PD is a very tangible example of a multidimensional chronic disease, where both somatic and psychotic aspects of the elderly health are involved. The combination of motor and nonmotor symptoms together with some general aspects of daily life (i.e., fatigue, pain, and malnutrition) necessitates a multidisciplinary approach to manage the care for individuals with PD.

(p13.1) Interdisciplinary collaboration has been proposed as an important strategy to boost coordination of healthcare system [41], by integration of multiple disciplines to move towards interdisciplinary approach to patients' care especially in case of chronic diseases such as PD. Elderly people with PD could benefit from interdisciplinary caring approach since numerous evidences have shown the advantages of multidisciplinary interventions such as cognitive behavioral therapy [42].
## (s14) Palliative Care.
(p14.0) In line with the multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary approaches to provide better care services for PD patients, palliative care has emerged. Palliative care for elderly with PD should include a multidisciplinary team of physicians, nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapist, speech therapists, dieticians, psychologists, social workers, caregivers, and even family members with an interdisciplinary approach to treat, care, and help patients maintain their dignity throughout the disease course [43]. According to the new management models for PD, palliative care is not restricted to the end-of-life care [44][45][46] and patients could benefit earlier from palliative care during the mild stages as well [43]. Early installation of palliative care improves QoL in elderly with PD which makes it a needed strategy towards the adaptation of the concept of active aging for individuals with PD.
## (s15) Patient-Centered
(p15.0) Care. The modern definition of active aging has a prominent focus on the role of individuals to whom the concept is applying. Each elderly individual is encouraged to realize his/her potential for physical, social, and mental well-being throughout the life course [13]. Consequently, elderly patients should also have a central determining role in their caring approaches in order to have an active aging in parallel with their chronic condition. In other words, patient-centered care is a key concept to implement active aging for individuals with chronic illnesses including PD. Nonetheless, a transformative shift in the understanding of healthcare providers is required to believe what patients are capable of in order to implement the patient-centered approach and improve the quality of healthcare for PD patients [47]. For an efficient model, PD patients, their family, and caregivers should receive necessary education and information for being actively involved in their caring approach and not just passively put aside. Giving PD patients and their caregivers a central position as health coaches can play a considerable role in meeting their needs [47], which could ultimately improve their QoL through an active aging process.
## (s16) Personalized
(p16.0) Care. As a chain of concepts, self-care, interdisciplinary, and patient-centered approaches are accordingly completed with the new idea of personalized care. PD is a debilitating lifelong condition with lots of fluctuations and variations in the trend, response to medication, prominent symptoms, and course of the disease. As said by Wicks et al. no two patients are alike in different aspects of the disease which makes PD an inappropriate entity to have a "one size fits all" caring approach [40]. Nowadays, an innovative approach is growing to adjust the treatment algorithm and caring approach based on the specific characteristics and needs of each patient, which is called "personalized approach. " In line with the concept of active aging, personalized care could help elderly with PD to cover more of their needs, receive more efficient treatments for different aspects of their disease, and implement a specific interdisciplinary caring protocol to improve their QoL and cope with their capacities.
