# Protecting DNA from errors and damage: an overview of DNA repair mechanisms in plants compared to mammals

CorpusID: 31229576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33cf05fe5608bbc171dcc28cd919acb29e3398](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad33cf05fe5608bbc171dcc28cd919acb29e3398)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s2) Photoreactivation in plants
(p2.0) Arabidopsis thaliana contains two specific class II CPD photolyases [PHR1, also named UVR2 (At1g12370) and PHR2 (At2g47590)] and one 6-4 photolyase [UVR3 (At3g15620)]. The FAD-binding domains of plant PHR2 proteins are smaller and less conserved than in the other subfamilies [15]. Several articles provide a summary of the molecular cloning, the tissue-specific and light-dependent regulation and the characterization of mutants of CPD photolyase and 6-4 photolyase genes from various plant species (e.g., A. thaliana, Oriza sativa, Sinapis alba) [22][23][24]. Recent evidence suggests that AtPHR1 expression induced by UV-B is primarily regulated by the UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS8)-dependent pathway but is also mediated by a UVR8-independent pathway [25]. The latter one was found to be correlated with UV-B-induced CPD levels [25].

(p2.1) The crystal structure of a UVR2 homolog has recently been determined in rice and compared with prokaryotic class I CPD photolyases [26]. Results indicate that both enzymes recognize CPD damage in similar active sites but create a different conformational distortion in the DNA duplex [26]. The crystallographic structure and molecular mechanism of A. thaliana 6-4 photolyase have also been determined [27,28]. After light excitation, there is initially a forward electron transfer followed by a cyclic proton transfer involving an active-site histidine residue [28]. This proton transfer is the determinant step in the repair and determines the overall quantum yield (A = number of dimers repaired per number of photons absorbed) [28]. For comparison, the reported A for CPD and 6-4PP repair are 0.82 and 0.1, respectively, and the whole catalysis reaction takes less than a nanosecond for CPD repair or tens of nanoseconds for 6-4PP repair [29]. The complete photocycle in real-time from the initial 6-4 PP to several intermediates and subsequent conversion to two thymine bases catalyzed by the A. thaliana (6-4) photolyase has been recently well reviewed [21,29].

(p2.2) Arabidopsis thaliana contains two specific class II CPD photolyases [PHR1, also named UVR2 (At1g12370) and PHR2 (At2g47590)] and one 6-4 photolyase [UVR3 (At3g15620)]. The FAD-binding domains of plant PHR2 proteins are smaller and less conserved than in the other subfamilies [15]. Several articles provide a summary of the molecular cloning, the tissue-specific and light-dependent regulation and the characterization of mutants of CPD photolyase and 6-4 photolyase genes from various plant species (e.g., A. thaliana, Oriza sativa, Sinapis alba) [22][23][24]. Recent evidence suggests that AtPHR1 expression induced by UV-B is primarily regulated by the UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS8)-dependent pathway but is also mediated by a UVR8-independent pathway [25]. The latter one was found to be correlated with UV-B-induced CPD levels [25].

(p2.3) The crystal structure of a UVR2 homolog has recently been determined in rice and compared with prokaryotic class I CPD photolyases [26]. Results indicate that both enzymes recognize CPD damage in similar active sites but create a different conformational distortion in the DNA duplex [26]. The crystallographic structure and molecular mechanism of A. thaliana 6-4 photolyase have also been determined [27,28]. After light excitation, there is initially a forward electron transfer followed by a cyclic proton transfer involving an active-site histidine residue [28]. This proton transfer is the determinant step in the repair and determines the overall quantum yield (A = number of dimers repaired per number of photons absorbed) [28]. For comparison, the reported A for CPD and 6-4PP repair are 0.82 and 0.1, respectively, and the whole catalysis reaction takes less than a nanosecond for CPD repair or tens of nanoseconds for 6-4PP repair [29]. The complete photocycle in real-time from the initial 6-4 PP to several intermediates and subsequent conversion to two thymine bases catalyzed by the A. thaliana (6-4) photolyase has been recently well reviewed [21,29].
## (s3) Base excision repair
(p3.0) Base excision repair (BER) recognizes and repairs lesions such as deaminated, oxidized and alkylated bases, abasic (apurinic and/or apyrimidinic, AP) sites and single-strand breaks (SSBs). BER occurs in several steps (Table 1A; see references [30][31][32] for recent reviews in mammalian BER).

(p3.1) (1) Lesion recognition and removal by DNA glycosylases. DNA glycosylases hydrolyze the N-glycosidic bond of the damaged base, leaving an AP site. Different DNA glycosylases exist, each one with broad or narrow substrate specificities. Enzymes can be classified as monofunctional or bifunctional. Monofunctional glycosylases perform base excision only, whereas bifunctional glycosylases also have lyase activity. Biochemical mechanisms of DNA glycosylases have been the subject of recent reviews [33,34]. (2) Cleavage of the sugar-phosphate backbone at the AP site. Cleavage is catalyzed either by an AP endonuclease or by the intrinsic AP lyase activity of a bifunctional DNA glycosylase. AP endonucleases and lyases generate different types of DNA termini. AP endonucleases release a 3 0 OH and a 5 0 deoxyribose-phosphate moiety (5 0 dRP), while AP lyases release a 3 0 phospho a,b-unsaturated aldehyde (3 0 PUA) or 3 0 phosphate by bor bd-elimination reactions, respectively, and a 5 0 phosphate. (3) Processing of unconventional ends to conventional 3 0 OH and 5 0 phosphate moieties. This step involves different enzymes depending on whether the modified terminus is processed from the 5 0 or 3 0 end. The intrinsic dRP lyase activity of DNA polymerase b removes the 5 0 dRP; the 3 0 phosphodiesterase activity of the AP endonuclease eliminates the 3 0 PUA, whereas polynucleotide kinase 3 0 phosphatase (PNKP) processes the 3 0 phosphate moiety. Additional SSB end cleaning enzymes are aprataxin and tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterases (TDP) that process abortive ligation or topoisomerase reactions, respectively [35].  Step Schematic representation Gene a AGI locus code b,c

(p3.2) Base excision repair (BER) recognizes and repairs lesions such as deaminated, oxidized and alkylated bases, abasic (apurinic and/or apyrimidinic, AP) sites and single-strand breaks (SSBs). BER occurs in several steps (Table 1A; see references [30][31][32] for recent reviews in mammalian BER).

(p3.3) (1) Lesion recognition and removal by DNA glycosylases. DNA glycosylases hydrolyze the N-glycosidic bond of the damaged base, leaving an AP site. Different DNA glycosylases exist, each one with broad or narrow substrate specificities. Enzymes can be classified as monofunctional or bifunctional. Monofunctional glycosylases perform base excision only, whereas bifunctional glycosylases also have lyase activity. Biochemical mechanisms of DNA glycosylases have been the subject of recent reviews [33,34]. (2) Cleavage of the sugar-phosphate backbone at the AP site. Cleavage is catalyzed either by an AP endonuclease or by the intrinsic AP lyase activity of a bifunctional DNA glycosylase. AP endonucleases and lyases generate different types of DNA termini. AP endonucleases release a 3 0 OH and a 5 0 deoxyribose-phosphate moiety (5 0 dRP), while AP lyases release a 3 0 phospho a,b-unsaturated aldehyde (3 0 PUA) or 3 0 phosphate by bor bd-elimination reactions, respectively, and a 5 0 phosphate. (3) Processing of unconventional ends to conventional 3 0 OH and 5 0 phosphate moieties. This step involves different enzymes depending on whether the modified terminus is processed from the 5 0 or 3 0 end. The intrinsic dRP lyase activity of DNA polymerase b removes the 5 0 dRP; the 3 0 phosphodiesterase activity of the AP endonuclease eliminates the 3 0 PUA, whereas polynucleotide kinase 3 0 phosphatase (PNKP) processes the 3 0 phosphate moiety. Additional SSB end cleaning enzymes are aprataxin and tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterases (TDP) that process abortive ligation or topoisomerase reactions, respectively [35].  Step Schematic representation Gene a AGI locus code b,c
## (s6) BER in plants
(p6.0) Most of the BER proteins found in animal cells have been described in plants [38,39]. Tables 1B and 2 show an overview of described factors involved in BER mechanism in A. thaliana. Plants contain several DNA glycosylases: 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (FPG), NTH, and uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) [38][39][40][41][42][43][44]. The enzymes OGG1 and FPG recognize oxidized purines; NTH, oxidized pyrimidines and UNG, U:G mismatches. Both NTH homologs (NTH1 and NTH2) were co-localized to nucleoids within Arabidopsis chloroplasts, thus indicating the existence of a BER pathway in these organelles to deal with photo-oxidative stress [44]. Plant genomes, in contrast to mammals, also encode specific 5-methyl-cytosine (5-meC) glycosylases that are involved in DNA demethylation [DEMETER (DME) and Repressor of Silencing 1 (ROS1)] [45][46][47][48]. These proteins show preference for 5-meC as substrate but can also process T:G mispairs. It has been reported that ROS1 has a very low turnover [46], with the recognition of pyrimidine modifications being the rate-limiting step [49]. An additional activity against T:G mispairs is displayed by MBD4L (methyl binding 4 DNA glycosylase-like) [50]. This enzyme was demonstrated to act on both U:G and T:G mispairs and to excise both U and T more efficiently at a CpG context. Roles of OGG1, ROS1 and MBDL4 in Arabidopsis tolerance to oxidative DNA damage have also been described using mutant or overexpression plants [51][52][53]. Other downstream proteins of the BER pathway have been characterized in plants. The Arabidopsis genome contains three genes encoding AP endonuclease-like proteins: APE1L (abasic endonuclease-1-like), APE2 (abasic endonuclease 2) and ARP (abasic endonuclease-redox protein) [54]. All three enzymes were found to exhibit AP endonuclease activity in vitro [55], with ARP representing the major activity in Arabidopsis cell extracts [56]. Based on the available DNA sequence data, a wheat homolog of AtAPE1L has been cloned and characterized [57]. Orthologues of human PNKP (named AtZDP), TDP1, XRCC1 and DNA ligase I were also functionally characterized in Arabidopsis [42,55,56,[58][59][60][61]. Finally, it has been demonstrated that AP sites may be processed in plants through both SN-and LP-BER [41] and that DNA ligase I restores the continuity of the repaired DNA strand during both SN-and LP-BER [56]. Recent studies identified and characterized a gene named SAV6 (shade avoidance mutant), a homolog of human FEN1 [62]. Compared to the animal FEN1, SAV6 shows both flap and gap endonuclease activities, but lacks exonuclease activity.

(p6.1) Most of the BER proteins found in animal cells have been described in plants [38,39]. Tables 1B and 2 show an overview of described factors involved in BER mechanism in A. thaliana. Plants contain several DNA glycosylases: 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (FPG), NTH, and uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) [38][39][40][41][42][43][44]. The enzymes OGG1 and FPG recognize oxidized purines; NTH, oxidized pyrimidines and UNG, U:G mismatches. Both NTH homologs (NTH1 and NTH2) were co-localized to nucleoids within Arabidopsis chloroplasts, thus indicating the existence of a BER pathway in these organelles to deal with photo-oxidative stress [44]. Plant genomes, in contrast to mammals, also encode specific 5-methyl-cytosine (5-meC) glycosylases that are involved in DNA demethylation [DEMETER (DME) and Repressor of Silencing 1 (ROS1)] [45][46][47][48]. These proteins show preference for 5-meC as substrate but can also process T:G mispairs. It has been reported that ROS1 has a very low turnover [46], with the recognition of pyrimidine modifications being the rate-limiting step [49]. An additional activity against T:G mispairs is displayed by MBD4L (methyl binding 4 DNA glycosylase-like) [50]. This enzyme was demonstrated to act on both U:G and T:G mispairs and to excise both U and T more efficiently at a CpG context. Roles of OGG1, ROS1 and MBDL4 in Arabidopsis tolerance to oxidative DNA damage have also been described using mutant or overexpression plants [51][52][53]. Other downstream proteins of the BER pathway have been characterized in plants. The Arabidopsis genome contains three genes encoding AP endonuclease-like proteins: APE1L (abasic endonuclease-1-like), APE2 (abasic endonuclease 2) and ARP (abasic endonuclease-redox protein) [54]. All three enzymes were found to exhibit AP endonuclease activity in vitro [55], with ARP representing the major activity in Arabidopsis cell extracts [56]. Based on the available DNA sequence data, a wheat homolog of AtAPE1L has been cloned and characterized [57]. Orthologues of human PNKP (named AtZDP), TDP1, XRCC1 and DNA ligase I were also functionally characterized in Arabidopsis [42,55,56,[58][59][60][61]. Finally, it has been demonstrated that AP sites may be processed in plants through both SN-and LP-BER [41] and that DNA ligase I restores the continuity of the repaired DNA strand during both SN-and LP-BER [56]. Recent studies identified and characterized a gene named SAV6 (shade avoidance mutant), a homolog of human FEN1 [62]. Compared to the animal FEN1, SAV6 shows both flap and gap endonuclease activities, but lacks exonuclease activity.
## (s7) Nucleotide excision repair
(p7.0) Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is responsible for the processing of bulky helix-distorting damage, such as CPDs and 6-4PPs induced by UV irradiation. Deficiencies in NER are associated with several human autosomal recessive disorders, namely xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodistrophy (TTD) among others. XP, CS and TTD have provided the names of some of the genes involved in the pathway (XPA through XPG, XPV, CSA, CSB and TTDA). NER is a multistep process which comprises four steps (Table 3A).

(p7.1) (1) Damage recognition. Two different modes of damage recognition coexist: global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). GG-NER detects damage occurring throughout the genome and is specifically initiated by a heterotrimeric XPC-HR23B-CEN2 complex (XPC and HR23A/HR23B are the human homologs of yeast and plant RAD4 and RAD23 proteins, respectively), with the assistance in some cases of DDB (damaged DNA-binding) protein complex. DDB, a heterodimeric complex comprising DDB1 and DDB2 subunits, specifically binds CPDs and 6-4PPs with moderate or high affinity, respectively, and stimulates significantly XPC binding to UV-damaged lesions. GG- NER in mammalian cells has been covered in recent reviews [63,64]. TC-NER is responsible for the recognition of lesions in the transcribed strand of active genes and is initiated by RNA polymerase stalled at a lesion, with the help of specific factors CSA, CSB, and XPA binding protein 2 (XAB2) whose function is not clear. Many aspects of mammalian TC-NER can be found in some recent reviews [64][65][66].

(p7.2) (2) Formation of a stable preincision complex around the damage site. After DNA recognition, GG-NER and TC-NER converge into the same pathway. The transcription factor II H (TFIIH) is recruited to the lesion. TFIIH is a multiprotein complex composed of ten subunits arranged in two functional subcomplexes: the core subcomplex containing the DNA helicase XPB, p62, p52, p44, p34 and p8 (TTDA) and the CAK [cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-activating kinase] subcomplex containing CDK7, cyclin H (CYCH) and the assembly factor ménage-à-trois-1 (MAT1); both subcomplexes are bridged by the DNA helicase XPD [67,68]. The result of the TFIIH activity is the partial unwinding of the DNA duplex that leads to the recruitment of XPA, RPA (replication protein A), and the endonuclease XPG. Then, XPA interacts and recruits the second endonuclease, ERCC1 (excision repair cross complementing 1)-XPF. (3) Excision of the damaged nucleotide. The damaged nucleotide is removed by dual incisions 5 0 and 3 0 to the lesion by endonucleases XPF and XPG, respectively, generating a 24-32 oligonucleotide single-strand fragment containing the damaged site. There Table 3 Overview of steps (A) and A. thaliana required factors (B) involved in NER

(p7.3) Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is responsible for the processing of bulky helix-distorting damage, such as CPDs and 6-4PPs induced by UV irradiation. Deficiencies in NER are associated with several human autosomal recessive disorders, namely xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodistrophy (TTD) among others. XP, CS and TTD have provided the names of some of the genes involved in the pathway (XPA through XPG, XPV, CSA, CSB and TTDA). NER is a multistep process which comprises four steps (Table 3A).

(p7.4) (1) Damage recognition. Two different modes of damage recognition coexist: global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). GG-NER detects damage occurring throughout the genome and is specifically initiated by a heterotrimeric XPC-HR23B-CEN2 complex (XPC and HR23A/HR23B are the human homologs of yeast and plant RAD4 and RAD23 proteins, respectively), with the assistance in some cases of DDB (damaged DNA-binding) protein complex. DDB, a heterodimeric complex comprising DDB1 and DDB2 subunits, specifically binds CPDs and 6-4PPs with moderate or high affinity, respectively, and stimulates significantly XPC binding to UV-damaged lesions. GG- NER in mammalian cells has been covered in recent reviews [63,64]. TC-NER is responsible for the recognition of lesions in the transcribed strand of active genes and is initiated by RNA polymerase stalled at a lesion, with the help of specific factors CSA, CSB, and XPA binding protein 2 (XAB2) whose function is not clear. Many aspects of mammalian TC-NER can be found in some recent reviews [64][65][66].

(p7.5) (2) Formation of a stable preincision complex around the damage site. After DNA recognition, GG-NER and TC-NER converge into the same pathway. The transcription factor II H (TFIIH) is recruited to the lesion. TFIIH is a multiprotein complex composed of ten subunits arranged in two functional subcomplexes: the core subcomplex containing the DNA helicase XPB, p62, p52, p44, p34 and p8 (TTDA) and the CAK [cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-activating kinase] subcomplex containing CDK7, cyclin H (CYCH) and the assembly factor ménage-à-trois-1 (MAT1); both subcomplexes are bridged by the DNA helicase XPD [67,68]. The result of the TFIIH activity is the partial unwinding of the DNA duplex that leads to the recruitment of XPA, RPA (replication protein A), and the endonuclease XPG. Then, XPA interacts and recruits the second endonuclease, ERCC1 (excision repair cross complementing 1)-XPF. (3) Excision of the damaged nucleotide. The damaged nucleotide is removed by dual incisions 5 0 and 3 0 to the lesion by endonucleases XPF and XPG, respectively, generating a 24-32 oligonucleotide single-strand fragment containing the damaged site. There Table 3 Overview of steps (A) and A. thaliana required factors (B) involved in NER
## (s8) A B
(p8.0) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.

(p8.1) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.
## (s11) MMR in plants
(p11.0) Arabidopsis and other plants encode homologs of MutS and MutL proteins found in other eukaryotic organisms, but also contain a unique MSH polypeptide (MSH7) [114,115] (Table 5B). MSH7 forms a heterodimer with MSH2 and the protein complex is designated MutSc. Quantitative analysis of transcript levels of representative genes (MSH2 and PMS1) of the pathway indicated that these genes show a higher expression in calli than in seedlings from A. thaliana, thus confirming the essential genome maintenance function performed by MMR system in rapidly dividing tissues [116,117]. Further knowledge of   Table 2 iv) Resolution of the D-loop
## (s12) RMI1 At5g63540
(p12.0) a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Table 2 the role of a given plant MMR protein came from in vivo studies. Using a yeast system, we have found that AtMutSc is able to specifically recognize G/T, A/C, T/C, G/A, T/T, or A/A mismatches and/or neighboring sequences containing T [118] and that the expression of AtMutLa affected the repair of IDLs in microsatellite sequences [119]. The functionality of plant MutS and MutL homologs was also assessed using A. thaliana (reviewed in [114]), tomato [120], rice [121] and Nicotiana [122] mutant plants.

(p12.1) Suppression of MSH2, PMS1 or MLH1 was associated with microsatellite instability, an increase in homeologous recombination relative to wild-type plants and a broad spectrum of mutant phenotypes in their progenies. Inactivation of MSH7 led a modest increase in the frequency of recombination between Solanum lycopersicum and a distantly related species (Solanum lycopersicoides) [120], while in A. thaliana, the inactivation of MSH7 did not affect the rates of somatic homologous or homeologous recombination, but influenced the rates of meiotic recombination [123]. Finally, somewhat comparable to mammalian proteins, we demonstrated that msh2 mutant plants showed an altered expression pattern of cell cycle marker genes after induced DNA damage in comparison to wild-type plants and we experimentally validated MSH6 as an E2F target gene [124].

(p12.2) a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Table 2 the role of a given plant MMR protein came from in vivo studies. Using a yeast system, we have found that AtMutSc is able to specifically recognize G/T, A/C, T/C, G/A, T/T, or A/A mismatches and/or neighboring sequences containing T [118] and that the expression of AtMutLa affected the repair of IDLs in microsatellite sequences [119]. The functionality of plant MutS and MutL homologs was also assessed using A. thaliana (reviewed in [114]), tomato [120], rice [121] and Nicotiana [122] mutant plants.

(p12.3) Suppression of MSH2, PMS1 or MLH1 was associated with microsatellite instability, an increase in homeologous recombination relative to wild-type plants and a broad spectrum of mutant phenotypes in their progenies. Inactivation of MSH7 led a modest increase in the frequency of recombination between Solanum lycopersicum and a distantly related species (Solanum lycopersicoides) [120], while in A. thaliana, the inactivation of MSH7 did not affect the rates of somatic homologous or homeologous recombination, but influenced the rates of meiotic recombination [123]. Finally, somewhat comparable to mammalian proteins, we demonstrated that msh2 mutant plants showed an altered expression pattern of cell cycle marker genes after induced DNA damage in comparison to wild-type plants and we experimentally validated MSH6 as an E2F target gene [124].
## (s13) Double-strand break repair
(p13.0) Double-strand break (DSB) repair uses two main strategies: a homology-dependent, error-free homologous recombination repair (HR); a potentially error-prone, classical, Kudependent non-homologous end-joining (C-NHEJ) and a recently identified error-prone repair pathway, named alternative non-homologous end-joining pathway (A-NHEJ). The choice between these pathways depends on the phase of the cell cycle and the initiation of DNA end resection [125][126][127].

(p13.1) Double-strand break (DSB) repair uses two main strategies: a homology-dependent, error-free homologous recombination repair (HR); a potentially error-prone, classical, Kudependent non-homologous end-joining (C-NHEJ) and a recently identified error-prone repair pathway, named alternative non-homologous end-joining pathway (A-NHEJ). The choice between these pathways depends on the phase of the cell cycle and the initiation of DNA end resection [125][126][127].
## (s14) Homologous recombination
(p14.0) HR is favored during the S/G2 phase of the cell cycle, when sister chromatids are available as homologous templates [128,129]. This mechanism was the subject of several recent reviews [130][131][132]. In this pathway, four steps are required (Table 6A). (1) DNA end resection and nucleoprotein filament formation. Initial processing of the ends involves the trimeric complex MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) and the CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) interacting protein (CtIP) [133,134]. Further resection involves the 5 0 -3 0 exonuclease EXO1 or the combined helicase/ nuclease activities of the BLM/DNA2 (Bloom Syndrome RecQ Like Helicase/DNA replication helicase/nuclease2) [135]. The 3 0 single-strand DNA (ssDNA) tails generated are initially bound by ssDNA-binding protein RPA [136]. Subsequently, RPA is replaced by another ssDNA-binding protein, RAD51, which forms a nucleoprotein filament on the DNA. The replacement of RPA by RAD51 requires several mediator proteins, such as BRCA2 (protein encoded by the breast cancer-associated gene 2) and RAD54 [137][138][139]. Human cells have two RAD54 homologs, RAD54 and RAD54B, which display similar biochemical activities [140]. Evidence also suggests that RAD51 paralogs, such as XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B, RAD51C, and RAD51D, function in promoting and/or stabilizing RAD51 nucleofilaments [131,141]. However, unlike RAD51 that self-assembles, RAD51 paralogs form at least four different heterodimeric and heterotetrameric complexes. (2) DNA homology search and strand invasion. The RAD51 nucleoprotein filament begins searching for a homologous DNA sequence and then invades the intact double-stranded DNA molecule to form a heteroduplex DNA structure termed the displacement loop (D-loop). D-loop formation is stimulated by RAD54 [131,132]. Besides ssDNA binding, RAD51 also interacts with dsDNA and associates with the newly formed heteroduplex DNA. (3) DNA heteroduplex extension. The invading strand in the D-loop structure is then extended by several components of the replication machinery, namely DNA polymerase d, PCNA and RFC [142]. (4) Processing of the D-loop. HR can take several different steps: synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA), Holliday junction (HJ) resolution (the DSBR model) and HJ dissolution [130,132]. SDSA involves the displacement of the newly synthesized strand by DNA helicase(s), followed by strand annealing, DNA synthesis and ligation. DSBR is characterized by the capture of the second end of the DSB, formation of a double HJ (dHJ) structure and resolution by specialized resolvases (e.g., GEN1, MUS81-EME1, SLX1-SLX4). Alternatively, the dHJ can be dissolved by the BTB complex consisting of BLM helicase, DNA topoisomerase IIIa and BLAP75. Regulation of HJ processing enzymes has been covered in recent reviews [143,144]. Depending on the pathway employed for HJ processing, different recombination outcomes are generated. SDSA and HJ dissolution lead to the formation of non-crossover while HJ resolution contributes to the formation of non-crossover or crossover. The formation of non-crossover recombinants is promoted in mitotic cells, in contrast with that occurring in meiotic cells.

(p14.1) An alternative process that involves recombination between regions of homology at both sides of the break can also occur. This process, known as single-strand annealing (SSA), requires HR proteins involved in DNA end resection and annealing and also RPA, but is independent of RAD51 [130][131][132]145]. After DNA end resection, the 3 0 ssDNA tails generated can reveal complementary sequences on both sides of the break. These sequences anneal forming a branched structure. The 3 0 tails are then removed and the nicks are ligated. This process inevitably results in a deletion at the repair junction.
## (s16) DSB repair in plants
(p16.0) Knowledge of recombination mechanisms in plants has significantly advanced in recent years, especially because DSB repair emerged as an important tool to achieve controlled modifications of plant genomes (for recent reviews see [177][178][179][180][181][182][183]). Most of the HR proteins have been identified and characterized in A. thaliana (Table 6B). Plants with decreased transcript levels of genes involved in the initial processing of the ends, namely MRE11 [22], RAD50 [22], NBS1 [184] and COM1 (a homolog of the human CtIP, [185]) displayed hypersensitivity (measured as a reduction in root growth, fresh weight or development of true leaves) to some genotoxic compounds [mitomycin (MMC) or methylmethanesulfonate (MMS), agents that produce inter-strand DNA crosslinks or that methylates DNA, respectively]. Interaction between NBS1 and MRE11 has been reported for A. thaliana, maize and rice [184,186]. The NBS1 region involved in the interaction was further characterized in A. thaliana and defined towards the C-terminus [184]. Homologs of BLM, DNA2 and RPA are also conserved in plants. The loss of RECQ4A (a homolog of mammalian BLM helicase, [187][188][189], JHS1 (a homolog of human DNA2, [190] or RPA1C and RPA1E

(p16.1) [89] led to hypersensitivity (measured as a reduction in fresh weight or root growth) in response to a particular DNA damaging agent [MMS; cisplatin (CPT, an agent that mainly induces intra-strand DNA crosslinks); hydroxyurea (an agent that inhibits the ribonucleotide reductase and consequently reduces the dNTP pool and stalls replication forks); zeocin (an agent that induces DSBs) or ionizing radiation]. The recq4A mutant also exhibited an increased frequency of HR [187,189] suggesting a role for the RECQ4A protein in HR regulation. Suppression of HR is dependent on both the N-terminal region and the helicase activity of the protein [189]. A hyper-recombination phenotype was also observed for the jhs1 mutant, probably due to an increased expression of genes involved in DNA damage repair [190].

(p16.2) Several studies have also addressed the functions of RAD51 and RAD51 paralogues in plants [191][192][193][194]. The rad51, rad51c or xrcc3 A. thaliana mutants showed a deficiency in SDSA [192]. Mutants impaired for the other three RAD51 paralogues (RAD51B, RAD51D, XRCC2) were also defective for spontaneous HR [191,193,195], although to differing extents [191,193]. The xrcc2 mutant was the most affected. A further reduction in the recombination rate has been observed in rad51b/xrcc2 double mutant and rad51b/rad51d/xrcc2 triple mutant line [193]. The triple mutant also exhibited a greater sensitivity to the DSB-inducing agent bleomycin (BLE) than the single and double mutants, suggesting a partial functional redundancy [194]. The redundancy of the two AtBRCA2 genes has been also investigated [196][197][198]. Both Atbrca2a and Atbrca2b mutants showed hypersensitivity against CPT and ionizing irradiation, further stimulated in the Atbrca2a/Atbrca2b double-mutant line [196]. Another report indicated that the double mutant also showed hypersensitivity to MMC and a defect in somatic HR frequency [197].

(p16.3) The role of other factors involved in the process of strand exchange or in the stabilization of recombination intermediates has been elucidated using mutant plants. Loss of RAD54 reduced SDSA and loss of FANCM reduced both SDSA and SSA [192]. Proteins involved in the resolution of the D-loop were characterized in vitro or in vivo. Recombinantly expressed SRS2 protein showed a functional 3 0 to 5 0 DNA helicase activity that was able to unwind nicked and partial HJ [199]. Biochemical properties of MUS81-EME1 complexes and GEN1 were also determined after cloning, heterologous expression and purification [200,201]. Two functional EME1 (EME1A and EME1B) and two functional GEN1 [GEN1 (XPG-like endonuclease) and SEND1 (single-strand DNA endonu-clease1)] homologs have been identified in A. thaliana. Both complexes, MUS81-EME1A and MUS81-EME1B, were able to cleave nicked HJs and, with a reduced efficiency, intact HJs [201]. Both GEN1 paralogs preferentially cleaved HJs near the junction point; slight differences in sequence preferences have been detected [200]. The role of MUS81 was also defined in vivo. The mus81 mutant line showed a strong reduction in dry weight to MMC, CPT or MMS treatment [188]. Also, altered sensitivity (measured as a reduction in fresh weight) to MMC and CPT was observed in recq4A, top3A and rmi1 single mutant lines [202]. These three lines also showed an enhanced frequency of uninduced somatic HR [202].
## (s27) Photoreactivation in plants
(p27.0) Arabidopsis thaliana contains two specific class II CPD photolyases [PHR1, also named UVR2 (At1g12370) and PHR2 (At2g47590)] and one 6-4 photolyase [UVR3 (At3g15620)]. The FAD-binding domains of plant PHR2 proteins are smaller and less conserved than in the other subfamilies [15]. Several articles provide a summary of the molecular cloning, the tissue-specific and light-dependent regulation and the characterization of mutants of CPD photolyase and 6-4 photolyase genes from various plant species (e.g., A. thaliana, Oriza sativa, Sinapis alba) [22][23][24]. Recent evidence suggests that AtPHR1 expression induced by UV-B is primarily regulated by the UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS8)-dependent pathway but is also mediated by a UVR8-independent pathway [25]. The latter one was found to be correlated with UV-B-induced CPD levels [25].

(p27.1) The crystal structure of a UVR2 homolog has recently been determined in rice and compared with prokaryotic class I CPD photolyases [26]. Results indicate that both enzymes recognize CPD damage in similar active sites but create a different conformational distortion in the DNA duplex [26]. The crystallographic structure and molecular mechanism of A. thaliana 6-4 photolyase have also been determined [27,28]. After light excitation, there is initially a forward electron transfer followed by a cyclic proton transfer involving an active-site histidine residue [28]. This proton transfer is the determinant step in the repair and determines the overall quantum yield (A = number of dimers repaired per number of photons absorbed) [28]. For comparison, the reported A for CPD and 6-4PP repair are 0.82 and 0.1, respectively, and the whole catalysis reaction takes less than a nanosecond for CPD repair or tens of nanoseconds for 6-4PP repair [29]. The complete photocycle in real-time from the initial 6-4 PP to several intermediates and subsequent conversion to two thymine bases catalyzed by the A. thaliana (6-4) photolyase has been recently well reviewed [21,29].

(p27.2) Arabidopsis thaliana contains two specific class II CPD photolyases [PHR1, also named UVR2 (At1g12370) and PHR2 (At2g47590)] and one 6-4 photolyase [UVR3 (At3g15620)]. The FAD-binding domains of plant PHR2 proteins are smaller and less conserved than in the other subfamilies [15]. Several articles provide a summary of the molecular cloning, the tissue-specific and light-dependent regulation and the characterization of mutants of CPD photolyase and 6-4 photolyase genes from various plant species (e.g., A. thaliana, Oriza sativa, Sinapis alba) [22][23][24]. Recent evidence suggests that AtPHR1 expression induced by UV-B is primarily regulated by the UVR8 (UV RESISTANCE LOCUS8)-dependent pathway but is also mediated by a UVR8-independent pathway [25]. The latter one was found to be correlated with UV-B-induced CPD levels [25].

(p27.3) The crystal structure of a UVR2 homolog has recently been determined in rice and compared with prokaryotic class I CPD photolyases [26]. Results indicate that both enzymes recognize CPD damage in similar active sites but create a different conformational distortion in the DNA duplex [26]. The crystallographic structure and molecular mechanism of A. thaliana 6-4 photolyase have also been determined [27,28]. After light excitation, there is initially a forward electron transfer followed by a cyclic proton transfer involving an active-site histidine residue [28]. This proton transfer is the determinant step in the repair and determines the overall quantum yield (A = number of dimers repaired per number of photons absorbed) [28]. For comparison, the reported A for CPD and 6-4PP repair are 0.82 and 0.1, respectively, and the whole catalysis reaction takes less than a nanosecond for CPD repair or tens of nanoseconds for 6-4PP repair [29]. The complete photocycle in real-time from the initial 6-4 PP to several intermediates and subsequent conversion to two thymine bases catalyzed by the A. thaliana (6-4) photolyase has been recently well reviewed [21,29].
## (s28) Base excision repair
(p28.0) Base excision repair (BER) recognizes and repairs lesions such as deaminated, oxidized and alkylated bases, abasic (apurinic and/or apyrimidinic, AP) sites and single-strand breaks (SSBs). BER occurs in several steps (Table 1A; see references [30][31][32] for recent reviews in mammalian BER).

(p28.1) (1) Lesion recognition and removal by DNA glycosylases. DNA glycosylases hydrolyze the N-glycosidic bond of the damaged base, leaving an AP site. Different DNA glycosylases exist, each one with broad or narrow substrate specificities. Enzymes can be classified as monofunctional or bifunctional. Monofunctional glycosylases perform base excision only, whereas bifunctional glycosylases also have lyase activity. Biochemical mechanisms of DNA glycosylases have been the subject of recent reviews [33,34]. (2) Cleavage of the sugar-phosphate backbone at the AP site. Cleavage is catalyzed either by an AP endonuclease or by the intrinsic AP lyase activity of a bifunctional DNA glycosylase. AP endonucleases and lyases generate different types of DNA termini. AP endonucleases release a 3 0 OH and a 5 0 deoxyribose-phosphate moiety (5 0 dRP), while AP lyases release a 3 0 phospho a,b-unsaturated aldehyde (3 0 PUA) or 3 0 phosphate by bor bd-elimination reactions, respectively, and a 5 0 phosphate. (3) Processing of unconventional ends to conventional 3 0 OH and 5 0 phosphate moieties. This step involves different enzymes depending on whether the modified terminus is processed from the 5 0 or 3 0 end. The intrinsic dRP lyase activity of DNA polymerase b removes the 5 0 dRP; the 3 0 phosphodiesterase activity of the AP endonuclease eliminates the 3 0 PUA, whereas polynucleotide kinase 3 0 phosphatase (PNKP) processes the 3 0 phosphate moiety. Additional SSB end cleaning enzymes are aprataxin and tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterases (TDP) that process abortive ligation or topoisomerase reactions, respectively [35].  Step Schematic representation Gene a AGI locus code b,c

(p28.2) Base excision repair (BER) recognizes and repairs lesions such as deaminated, oxidized and alkylated bases, abasic (apurinic and/or apyrimidinic, AP) sites and single-strand breaks (SSBs). BER occurs in several steps (Table 1A; see references [30][31][32] for recent reviews in mammalian BER).

(p28.3) (1) Lesion recognition and removal by DNA glycosylases. DNA glycosylases hydrolyze the N-glycosidic bond of the damaged base, leaving an AP site. Different DNA glycosylases exist, each one with broad or narrow substrate specificities. Enzymes can be classified as monofunctional or bifunctional. Monofunctional glycosylases perform base excision only, whereas bifunctional glycosylases also have lyase activity. Biochemical mechanisms of DNA glycosylases have been the subject of recent reviews [33,34]. (2) Cleavage of the sugar-phosphate backbone at the AP site. Cleavage is catalyzed either by an AP endonuclease or by the intrinsic AP lyase activity of a bifunctional DNA glycosylase. AP endonucleases and lyases generate different types of DNA termini. AP endonucleases release a 3 0 OH and a 5 0 deoxyribose-phosphate moiety (5 0 dRP), while AP lyases release a 3 0 phospho a,b-unsaturated aldehyde (3 0 PUA) or 3 0 phosphate by bor bd-elimination reactions, respectively, and a 5 0 phosphate. (3) Processing of unconventional ends to conventional 3 0 OH and 5 0 phosphate moieties. This step involves different enzymes depending on whether the modified terminus is processed from the 5 0 or 3 0 end. The intrinsic dRP lyase activity of DNA polymerase b removes the 5 0 dRP; the 3 0 phosphodiesterase activity of the AP endonuclease eliminates the 3 0 PUA, whereas polynucleotide kinase 3 0 phosphatase (PNKP) processes the 3 0 phosphate moiety. Additional SSB end cleaning enzymes are aprataxin and tyrosyl DNA phosphodiesterases (TDP) that process abortive ligation or topoisomerase reactions, respectively [35].  Step Schematic representation Gene a AGI locus code b,c
## (s31) BER in plants
(p31.0) Most of the BER proteins found in animal cells have been described in plants [38,39]. Tables 1B and 2 show an overview of described factors involved in BER mechanism in A. thaliana. Plants contain several DNA glycosylases: 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (FPG), NTH, and uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) [38][39][40][41][42][43][44]. The enzymes OGG1 and FPG recognize oxidized purines; NTH, oxidized pyrimidines and UNG, U:G mismatches. Both NTH homologs (NTH1 and NTH2) were co-localized to nucleoids within Arabidopsis chloroplasts, thus indicating the existence of a BER pathway in these organelles to deal with photo-oxidative stress [44]. Plant genomes, in contrast to mammals, also encode specific 5-methyl-cytosine (5-meC) glycosylases that are involved in DNA demethylation [DEMETER (DME) and Repressor of Silencing 1 (ROS1)] [45][46][47][48]. These proteins show preference for 5-meC as substrate but can also process T:G mispairs. It has been reported that ROS1 has a very low turnover [46], with the recognition of pyrimidine modifications being the rate-limiting step [49]. An additional activity against T:G mispairs is displayed by MBD4L (methyl binding 4 DNA glycosylase-like) [50]. This enzyme was demonstrated to act on both U:G and T:G mispairs and to excise both U and T more efficiently at a CpG context. Roles of OGG1, ROS1 and MBDL4 in Arabidopsis tolerance to oxidative DNA damage have also been described using mutant or overexpression plants [51][52][53]. Other downstream proteins of the BER pathway have been characterized in plants. The Arabidopsis genome contains three genes encoding AP endonuclease-like proteins: APE1L (abasic endonuclease-1-like), APE2 (abasic endonuclease 2) and ARP (abasic endonuclease-redox protein) [54]. All three enzymes were found to exhibit AP endonuclease activity in vitro [55], with ARP representing the major activity in Arabidopsis cell extracts [56]. Based on the available DNA sequence data, a wheat homolog of AtAPE1L has been cloned and characterized [57]. Orthologues of human PNKP (named AtZDP), TDP1, XRCC1 and DNA ligase I were also functionally characterized in Arabidopsis [42,55,56,[58][59][60][61]. Finally, it has been demonstrated that AP sites may be processed in plants through both SN-and LP-BER [41] and that DNA ligase I restores the continuity of the repaired DNA strand during both SN-and LP-BER [56]. Recent studies identified and characterized a gene named SAV6 (shade avoidance mutant), a homolog of human FEN1 [62]. Compared to the animal FEN1, SAV6 shows both flap and gap endonuclease activities, but lacks exonuclease activity.

(p31.1) Most of the BER proteins found in animal cells have been described in plants [38,39]. Tables 1B and 2 show an overview of described factors involved in BER mechanism in A. thaliana. Plants contain several DNA glycosylases: 8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1), formamidopyrimidine DNA glycosylase (FPG), NTH, and uracil DNA glycosylase (UNG) [38][39][40][41][42][43][44]. The enzymes OGG1 and FPG recognize oxidized purines; NTH, oxidized pyrimidines and UNG, U:G mismatches. Both NTH homologs (NTH1 and NTH2) were co-localized to nucleoids within Arabidopsis chloroplasts, thus indicating the existence of a BER pathway in these organelles to deal with photo-oxidative stress [44]. Plant genomes, in contrast to mammals, also encode specific 5-methyl-cytosine (5-meC) glycosylases that are involved in DNA demethylation [DEMETER (DME) and Repressor of Silencing 1 (ROS1)] [45][46][47][48]. These proteins show preference for 5-meC as substrate but can also process T:G mispairs. It has been reported that ROS1 has a very low turnover [46], with the recognition of pyrimidine modifications being the rate-limiting step [49]. An additional activity against T:G mispairs is displayed by MBD4L (methyl binding 4 DNA glycosylase-like) [50]. This enzyme was demonstrated to act on both U:G and T:G mispairs and to excise both U and T more efficiently at a CpG context. Roles of OGG1, ROS1 and MBDL4 in Arabidopsis tolerance to oxidative DNA damage have also been described using mutant or overexpression plants [51][52][53]. Other downstream proteins of the BER pathway have been characterized in plants. The Arabidopsis genome contains three genes encoding AP endonuclease-like proteins: APE1L (abasic endonuclease-1-like), APE2 (abasic endonuclease 2) and ARP (abasic endonuclease-redox protein) [54]. All three enzymes were found to exhibit AP endonuclease activity in vitro [55], with ARP representing the major activity in Arabidopsis cell extracts [56]. Based on the available DNA sequence data, a wheat homolog of AtAPE1L has been cloned and characterized [57]. Orthologues of human PNKP (named AtZDP), TDP1, XRCC1 and DNA ligase I were also functionally characterized in Arabidopsis [42,55,56,[58][59][60][61]. Finally, it has been demonstrated that AP sites may be processed in plants through both SN-and LP-BER [41] and that DNA ligase I restores the continuity of the repaired DNA strand during both SN-and LP-BER [56]. Recent studies identified and characterized a gene named SAV6 (shade avoidance mutant), a homolog of human FEN1 [62]. Compared to the animal FEN1, SAV6 shows both flap and gap endonuclease activities, but lacks exonuclease activity.
## (s32) Nucleotide excision repair
(p32.0) Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is responsible for the processing of bulky helix-distorting damage, such as CPDs and 6-4PPs induced by UV irradiation. Deficiencies in NER are associated with several human autosomal recessive disorders, namely xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodistrophy (TTD) among others. XP, CS and TTD have provided the names of some of the genes involved in the pathway (XPA through XPG, XPV, CSA, CSB and TTDA). NER is a multistep process which comprises four steps (Table 3A).

(p32.1) (1) Damage recognition. Two different modes of damage recognition coexist: global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). GG-NER detects damage occurring throughout the genome and is specifically initiated by a heterotrimeric XPC-HR23B-CEN2 complex (XPC and HR23A/HR23B are the human homologs of yeast and plant RAD4 and RAD23 proteins, respectively), with the assistance in some cases of DDB (damaged DNA-binding) protein complex. DDB, a heterodimeric complex comprising DDB1 and DDB2 subunits, specifically binds CPDs and 6-4PPs with moderate or high affinity, respectively, and stimulates significantly XPC binding to UV-damaged lesions. GG- NER in mammalian cells has been covered in recent reviews [63,64]. TC-NER is responsible for the recognition of lesions in the transcribed strand of active genes and is initiated by RNA polymerase stalled at a lesion, with the help of specific factors CSA, CSB, and XPA binding protein 2 (XAB2) whose function is not clear. Many aspects of mammalian TC-NER can be found in some recent reviews [64][65][66].

(p32.2) (2) Formation of a stable preincision complex around the damage site. After DNA recognition, GG-NER and TC-NER converge into the same pathway. The transcription factor II H (TFIIH) is recruited to the lesion. TFIIH is a multiprotein complex composed of ten subunits arranged in two functional subcomplexes: the core subcomplex containing the DNA helicase XPB, p62, p52, p44, p34 and p8 (TTDA) and the CAK [cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-activating kinase] subcomplex containing CDK7, cyclin H (CYCH) and the assembly factor ménage-à-trois-1 (MAT1); both subcomplexes are bridged by the DNA helicase XPD [67,68]. The result of the TFIIH activity is the partial unwinding of the DNA duplex that leads to the recruitment of XPA, RPA (replication protein A), and the endonuclease XPG. Then, XPA interacts and recruits the second endonuclease, ERCC1 (excision repair cross complementing 1)-XPF. (3) Excision of the damaged nucleotide. The damaged nucleotide is removed by dual incisions 5 0 and 3 0 to the lesion by endonucleases XPF and XPG, respectively, generating a 24-32 oligonucleotide single-strand fragment containing the damaged site. There Table 3 Overview of steps (A) and A. thaliana required factors (B) involved in NER

(p32.3) Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is responsible for the processing of bulky helix-distorting damage, such as CPDs and 6-4PPs induced by UV irradiation. Deficiencies in NER are associated with several human autosomal recessive disorders, namely xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), cockayne syndrome (CS) and trichothiodistrophy (TTD) among others. XP, CS and TTD have provided the names of some of the genes involved in the pathway (XPA through XPG, XPV, CSA, CSB and TTDA). NER is a multistep process which comprises four steps (Table 3A).

(p32.4) (1) Damage recognition. Two different modes of damage recognition coexist: global genome NER (GG-NER) and transcription-coupled NER (TC-NER). GG-NER detects damage occurring throughout the genome and is specifically initiated by a heterotrimeric XPC-HR23B-CEN2 complex (XPC and HR23A/HR23B are the human homologs of yeast and plant RAD4 and RAD23 proteins, respectively), with the assistance in some cases of DDB (damaged DNA-binding) protein complex. DDB, a heterodimeric complex comprising DDB1 and DDB2 subunits, specifically binds CPDs and 6-4PPs with moderate or high affinity, respectively, and stimulates significantly XPC binding to UV-damaged lesions. GG- NER in mammalian cells has been covered in recent reviews [63,64]. TC-NER is responsible for the recognition of lesions in the transcribed strand of active genes and is initiated by RNA polymerase stalled at a lesion, with the help of specific factors CSA, CSB, and XPA binding protein 2 (XAB2) whose function is not clear. Many aspects of mammalian TC-NER can be found in some recent reviews [64][65][66].

(p32.5) (2) Formation of a stable preincision complex around the damage site. After DNA recognition, GG-NER and TC-NER converge into the same pathway. The transcription factor II H (TFIIH) is recruited to the lesion. TFIIH is a multiprotein complex composed of ten subunits arranged in two functional subcomplexes: the core subcomplex containing the DNA helicase XPB, p62, p52, p44, p34 and p8 (TTDA) and the CAK [cyclin dependent kinase (CDK)-activating kinase] subcomplex containing CDK7, cyclin H (CYCH) and the assembly factor ménage-à-trois-1 (MAT1); both subcomplexes are bridged by the DNA helicase XPD [67,68]. The result of the TFIIH activity is the partial unwinding of the DNA duplex that leads to the recruitment of XPA, RPA (replication protein A), and the endonuclease XPG. Then, XPA interacts and recruits the second endonuclease, ERCC1 (excision repair cross complementing 1)-XPF. (3) Excision of the damaged nucleotide. The damaged nucleotide is removed by dual incisions 5 0 and 3 0 to the lesion by endonucleases XPF and XPG, respectively, generating a 24-32 oligonucleotide single-strand fragment containing the damaged site. There Table 3 Overview of steps (A) and A. thaliana required factors (B) involved in NER
## (s33) A B
(p33.0) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.

(p33.1) Step Schematic representation Gene AGI locus See Table 2 a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Tables 2 and 4 Protecting DNA from errors and damage 1697 is a defined order of the two incisions. The 5 0 incision by the heterodimer ERCC1-XPF is performed first; repair synthesis is initiated followed by the 3 0 incision by XPG [69]. (4) Completion of DNA synthesis followed by ligation. The repair synthesis is carried out by DNA polymerases d, e, or j depending on chromatin accessibility of the damaged site [70]. NER is completed by nick sealing by DNA ligase I or IIIa.
## (s36) MMR in plants
(p36.0) Arabidopsis and other plants encode homologs of MutS and MutL proteins found in other eukaryotic organisms, but also contain a unique MSH polypeptide (MSH7) [114,115] (Table 5B). MSH7 forms a heterodimer with MSH2 and the protein complex is designated MutSc. Quantitative analysis of transcript levels of representative genes (MSH2 and PMS1) of the pathway indicated that these genes show a higher expression in calli than in seedlings from A. thaliana, thus confirming the essential genome maintenance function performed by MMR system in rapidly dividing tissues [116,117]. Further knowledge of   Table 2 iv) Resolution of the D-loop
## (s37) RMI1 At5g63540
(p37.0) a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Table 2 the role of a given plant MMR protein came from in vivo studies. Using a yeast system, we have found that AtMutSc is able to specifically recognize G/T, A/C, T/C, G/A, T/T, or A/A mismatches and/or neighboring sequences containing T [118] and that the expression of AtMutLa affected the repair of IDLs in microsatellite sequences [119]. The functionality of plant MutS and MutL homologs was also assessed using A. thaliana (reviewed in [114]), tomato [120], rice [121] and Nicotiana [122] mutant plants.

(p37.1) Suppression of MSH2, PMS1 or MLH1 was associated with microsatellite instability, an increase in homeologous recombination relative to wild-type plants and a broad spectrum of mutant phenotypes in their progenies. Inactivation of MSH7 led a modest increase in the frequency of recombination between Solanum lycopersicum and a distantly related species (Solanum lycopersicoides) [120], while in A. thaliana, the inactivation of MSH7 did not affect the rates of somatic homologous or homeologous recombination, but influenced the rates of meiotic recombination [123]. Finally, somewhat comparable to mammalian proteins, we demonstrated that msh2 mutant plants showed an altered expression pattern of cell cycle marker genes after induced DNA damage in comparison to wild-type plants and we experimentally validated MSH6 as an E2F target gene [124].

(p37.2) a AGI Arabidopsis genome initiative b AGI locus code for components involved in DNA metabolic pathways is shown in Table 2 the role of a given plant MMR protein came from in vivo studies. Using a yeast system, we have found that AtMutSc is able to specifically recognize G/T, A/C, T/C, G/A, T/T, or A/A mismatches and/or neighboring sequences containing T [118] and that the expression of AtMutLa affected the repair of IDLs in microsatellite sequences [119]. The functionality of plant MutS and MutL homologs was also assessed using A. thaliana (reviewed in [114]), tomato [120], rice [121] and Nicotiana [122] mutant plants.

(p37.3) Suppression of MSH2, PMS1 or MLH1 was associated with microsatellite instability, an increase in homeologous recombination relative to wild-type plants and a broad spectrum of mutant phenotypes in their progenies. Inactivation of MSH7 led a modest increase in the frequency of recombination between Solanum lycopersicum and a distantly related species (Solanum lycopersicoides) [120], while in A. thaliana, the inactivation of MSH7 did not affect the rates of somatic homologous or homeologous recombination, but influenced the rates of meiotic recombination [123]. Finally, somewhat comparable to mammalian proteins, we demonstrated that msh2 mutant plants showed an altered expression pattern of cell cycle marker genes after induced DNA damage in comparison to wild-type plants and we experimentally validated MSH6 as an E2F target gene [124].
## (s38) Double-strand break repair
(p38.0) Double-strand break (DSB) repair uses two main strategies: a homology-dependent, error-free homologous recombination repair (HR); a potentially error-prone, classical, Kudependent non-homologous end-joining (C-NHEJ) and a recently identified error-prone repair pathway, named alternative non-homologous end-joining pathway (A-NHEJ). The choice between these pathways depends on the phase of the cell cycle and the initiation of DNA end resection [125][126][127].

(p38.1) Double-strand break (DSB) repair uses two main strategies: a homology-dependent, error-free homologous recombination repair (HR); a potentially error-prone, classical, Kudependent non-homologous end-joining (C-NHEJ) and a recently identified error-prone repair pathway, named alternative non-homologous end-joining pathway (A-NHEJ). The choice between these pathways depends on the phase of the cell cycle and the initiation of DNA end resection [125][126][127].
## (s39) Homologous recombination
(p39.0) HR is favored during the S/G2 phase of the cell cycle, when sister chromatids are available as homologous templates [128,129]. This mechanism was the subject of several recent reviews [130][131][132]. In this pathway, four steps are required (Table 6A). (1) DNA end resection and nucleoprotein filament formation. Initial processing of the ends involves the trimeric complex MRE11-RAD50-NBS1 (MRN) and the CtBP (C-terminal binding protein) interacting protein (CtIP) [133,134]. Further resection involves the 5 0 -3 0 exonuclease EXO1 or the combined helicase/ nuclease activities of the BLM/DNA2 (Bloom Syndrome RecQ Like Helicase/DNA replication helicase/nuclease2) [135]. The 3 0 single-strand DNA (ssDNA) tails generated are initially bound by ssDNA-binding protein RPA [136]. Subsequently, RPA is replaced by another ssDNA-binding protein, RAD51, which forms a nucleoprotein filament on the DNA. The replacement of RPA by RAD51 requires several mediator proteins, such as BRCA2 (protein encoded by the breast cancer-associated gene 2) and RAD54 [137][138][139]. Human cells have two RAD54 homologs, RAD54 and RAD54B, which display similar biochemical activities [140]. Evidence also suggests that RAD51 paralogs, such as XRCC2, XRCC3, RAD51B, RAD51C, and RAD51D, function in promoting and/or stabilizing RAD51 nucleofilaments [131,141]. However, unlike RAD51 that self-assembles, RAD51 paralogs form at least four different heterodimeric and heterotetrameric complexes. (2) DNA homology search and strand invasion. The RAD51 nucleoprotein filament begins searching for a homologous DNA sequence and then invades the intact double-stranded DNA molecule to form a heteroduplex DNA structure termed the displacement loop (D-loop). D-loop formation is stimulated by RAD54 [131,132]. Besides ssDNA binding, RAD51 also interacts with dsDNA and associates with the newly formed heteroduplex DNA. (3) DNA heteroduplex extension. The invading strand in the D-loop structure is then extended by several components of the replication machinery, namely DNA polymerase d, PCNA and RFC [142]. (4) Processing of the D-loop. HR can take several different steps: synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA), Holliday junction (HJ) resolution (the DSBR model) and HJ dissolution [130,132]. SDSA involves the displacement of the newly synthesized strand by DNA helicase(s), followed by strand annealing, DNA synthesis and ligation. DSBR is characterized by the capture of the second end of the DSB, formation of a double HJ (dHJ) structure and resolution by specialized resolvases (e.g., GEN1, MUS81-EME1, SLX1-SLX4). Alternatively, the dHJ can be dissolved by the BTB complex consisting of BLM helicase, DNA topoisomerase IIIa and BLAP75. Regulation of HJ processing enzymes has been covered in recent reviews [143,144]. Depending on the pathway employed for HJ processing, different recombination outcomes are generated. SDSA and HJ dissolution lead to the formation of non-crossover while HJ resolution contributes to the formation of non-crossover or crossover. The formation of non-crossover recombinants is promoted in mitotic cells, in contrast with that occurring in meiotic cells.

(p39.1) An alternative process that involves recombination between regions of homology at both sides of the break can also occur. This process, known as single-strand annealing (SSA), requires HR proteins involved in DNA end resection and annealing and also RPA, but is independent of RAD51 [130][131][132]145]. After DNA end resection, the 3 0 ssDNA tails generated can reveal complementary sequences on both sides of the break. These sequences anneal forming a branched structure. The 3 0 tails are then removed and the nicks are ligated. This process inevitably results in a deletion at the repair junction.
## (s41) DSB repair in plants
(p41.0) Knowledge of recombination mechanisms in plants has significantly advanced in recent years, especially because DSB repair emerged as an important tool to achieve controlled modifications of plant genomes (for recent reviews see [177][178][179][180][181][182][183]). Most of the HR proteins have been identified and characterized in A. thaliana (Table 6B). Plants with decreased transcript levels of genes involved in the initial processing of the ends, namely MRE11 [22], RAD50 [22], NBS1 [184] and COM1 (a homolog of the human CtIP, [185]) displayed hypersensitivity (measured as a reduction in root growth, fresh weight or development of true leaves) to some genotoxic compounds [mitomycin (MMC) or methylmethanesulfonate (MMS), agents that produce inter-strand DNA crosslinks or that methylates DNA, respectively]. Interaction between NBS1 and MRE11 has been reported for A. thaliana, maize and rice [184,186]. The NBS1 region involved in the interaction was further characterized in A. thaliana and defined towards the C-terminus [184]. Homologs of BLM, DNA2 and RPA are also conserved in plants. The loss of RECQ4A (a homolog of mammalian BLM helicase, [187][188][189], JHS1 (a homolog of human DNA2, [190] or RPA1C and RPA1E

(p41.1) [89] led to hypersensitivity (measured as a reduction in fresh weight or root growth) in response to a particular DNA damaging agent [MMS; cisplatin (CPT, an agent that mainly induces intra-strand DNA crosslinks); hydroxyurea (an agent that inhibits the ribonucleotide reductase and consequently reduces the dNTP pool and stalls replication forks); zeocin (an agent that induces DSBs) or ionizing radiation]. The recq4A mutant also exhibited an increased frequency of HR [187,189] suggesting a role for the RECQ4A protein in HR regulation. Suppression of HR is dependent on both the N-terminal region and the helicase activity of the protein [189]. A hyper-recombination phenotype was also observed for the jhs1 mutant, probably due to an increased expression of genes involved in DNA damage repair [190].

(p41.2) Several studies have also addressed the functions of RAD51 and RAD51 paralogues in plants [191][192][193][194]. The rad51, rad51c or xrcc3 A. thaliana mutants showed a deficiency in SDSA [192]. Mutants impaired for the other three RAD51 paralogues (RAD51B, RAD51D, XRCC2) were also defective for spontaneous HR [191,193,195], although to differing extents [191,193]. The xrcc2 mutant was the most affected. A further reduction in the recombination rate has been observed in rad51b/xrcc2 double mutant and rad51b/rad51d/xrcc2 triple mutant line [193]. The triple mutant also exhibited a greater sensitivity to the DSB-inducing agent bleomycin (BLE) than the single and double mutants, suggesting a partial functional redundancy [194]. The redundancy of the two AtBRCA2 genes has been also investigated [196][197][198]. Both Atbrca2a and Atbrca2b mutants showed hypersensitivity against CPT and ionizing irradiation, further stimulated in the Atbrca2a/Atbrca2b double-mutant line [196]. Another report indicated that the double mutant also showed hypersensitivity to MMC and a defect in somatic HR frequency [197].

(p41.3) The role of other factors involved in the process of strand exchange or in the stabilization of recombination intermediates has been elucidated using mutant plants. Loss of RAD54 reduced SDSA and loss of FANCM reduced both SDSA and SSA [192]. Proteins involved in the resolution of the D-loop were characterized in vitro or in vivo. Recombinantly expressed SRS2 protein showed a functional 3 0 to 5 0 DNA helicase activity that was able to unwind nicked and partial HJ [199]. Biochemical properties of MUS81-EME1 complexes and GEN1 were also determined after cloning, heterologous expression and purification [200,201]. Two functional EME1 (EME1A and EME1B) and two functional GEN1 [GEN1 (XPG-like endonuclease) and SEND1 (single-strand DNA endonu-clease1)] homologs have been identified in A. thaliana. Both complexes, MUS81-EME1A and MUS81-EME1B, were able to cleave nicked HJs and, with a reduced efficiency, intact HJs [201]. Both GEN1 paralogs preferentially cleaved HJs near the junction point; slight differences in sequence preferences have been detected [200]. The role of MUS81 was also defined in vivo. The mus81 mutant line showed a strong reduction in dry weight to MMC, CPT or MMS treatment [188]. Also, altered sensitivity (measured as a reduction in fresh weight) to MMC and CPT was observed in recq4A, top3A and rmi1 single mutant lines [202]. These three lines also showed an enhanced frequency of uninduced somatic HR [202].
