# DIABETES AMONG ALASKA NATIVES:A REVIEW

CorpusID: 32373642 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d11749541847cb2a99c434e5f752e66bf239f2c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3d11749541847cb2a99c434e5f752e66bf239f2c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Early Studies
(p2.0) The earliest survey for diabetes among Alaska Natives was conducted in 1957 (1). This survey among Eskimos from all parts of Alaska tested 869 National Guardsmen and 358 urban residents over the age of 35 years. A variety of screening tests were used, including capillary glucose determinations using different laboratory methods. Selected
## (s9) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH
(p9.0) Data based on patient care registries may underestimate prevalence because of undiagnosed cases. Conversely, screening studies may overestimate prevalence, if those at higher risk are more likely to participate. In reviewing available information from three screening projects in separate regions of Alaska (17), we found that the proportion of new cases to previously diagnosed ranged from 1:3 to 1:12. However, our experience in screening activities is that people who believe they are at risk to develop diabetes or cardiovascular disease for reasons such as family history, or prior diagnoses of elevated glucose levels, tend to seek out opportunities to be screened. For example, in CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH the study in the Bering Straits villages, 80% of the people already known to have diabetes participated, while the overall participation rate was 50.5% (18). This has two potential effects on the study results; one is a falsely high estimate of prevalence, and the other is that the ratio of new to previously diagnosed cases may be falsely low.

(p9.1) The State of Alaska Section of Epidemiology analyzed data from the Alaska Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS), which is an ongoing telephone survey of residents age 18 and older (25). Data compiled from 1991-2000 showed that Alaska Natives had a prevalence of 38/1000. This was lower than the prevalence for African-Americans (48/1000) and Hispanics (43/1000) but slightly higher than that for whites (33/1000). The fact that Alaska Natives now have a higher prevalence than whites is of concern.

(p9.2) Incidence Only one publication has addressed the incidence of diabetes among Alaska Natives (17). Overall, the incidence in the years 1986 to 1993 was 15.0/10,000. Aleuts experienced the highest incidence at 22.2/10,000 while Eskimos had the lowest at 10.0/10,000 and Indians were intermediate at 18.5/10,000 (age-adjusted to the US 1980 population). Among regions, only Annette Island (Tsimshian Indian) had an incidence in excess of that reported for the US (Annette Island: 31.7/10,000, US: 24.2/10,000, (26)).

(p9.3) It may seem paradoxical that the Alaska Native prevalence of diabetes increased rapidly over a period of time when the incidence was relatively low compared to the US rate. However, at baseline, the prevalence was low compared to that of the US, so a relatively small increase in the number of cases could raise the prevalence by a high percentage from the baseline. Furthermore, there is a limitation in this incidence data because it is based on clinically recognized cases rather that systematic repeated screening of the population. Some patients diagnosed in 1986 through 1993 may have had the disease onset prior to 1986 but this was not recognized.
## (s10) Complications of diabetes
(p10.0) Data on complications of diabetes derives from the Alaska Native diabetes registry and has been published in two articles (17,21) The first article describes the incidence of myocardial infarction (MI) and stroke for the period 1986-1991, and the incidence of end-stage renal di-CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH sease (ESRD) and lower extremity amputation (LEA) for the period 1986-1993, and compares the rates in the different ethnic groups. The second publication extends the observations on ESRD and LEA for Alaska Natives with diabetes as a group through 1998.
## (s12) End Stage Renal Disease
(p12.0) The overall dialysis incidence for diabetic ESRD for 1986-1998 was 2.1/1000 (21) which was substantially lower than rates reported for other Native American diabetic populations (30,31). For the period 1986-93, the rates were reported for each major ethnic group and gender (17). Indians had the highest rate (2.6/1000) followed by Aleuts (1.9/1000) and Eskimos (1.0/1000). Indians of southeastern Alaska had the highest rate at 4.4/1000, significantly higher than other Alaska Indians. Overall, including all ethnic groups, women had a slightly higher rate (2.3/1000) than men (1.6/1000). However, the gender difference was not statistically significant. As for amputations, the incidence of renal replacement fell with time during the 1986-93, which may have been a result of improved care practices, including the use of renal-protective agents in blood pressure control. However, the overall lower rate compared to other Native Americans may also be due to a shorter duration of diabetes or other intrinsic factors.
## (s18) Factors associated with diabetes among Alaska Natives
(p18.0) Insulin resistance Insulin resistance is believed to be the underlying condition leading to type 2 diabetes. The development of insulin resistance is partly genetically determined but is worsened by centripetal obesity and lack of physical activity. The insulin resistance syndrome (IRS) consists of a number of characteristics associated with a high risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). These include obesity, abnormal cholesterol with elevated triglycerides, low HDL-C, high insulin levels, glucose intolerance, and hypertension (41). Whether or not IRS is present in Alaska Natives and especially among Eskimos has been the subject of debate. However, several studies provide evidence bearing on the presence or absence of these factors associated with insulin resistance.
## (s19) Obesity and Body Fat Distribution
(p19.0) In other populations, obesity and centripetal body fat distribution as measured by waist: hip ratios (WHR) are well-documented risk factors for type 2 diabetes. Several studies provide information on obesity in the Alaska Native population. The Yupik residents of villages studied in 1962, 1972, and 1987 documented a steady increase in the percentage of the population ≥ 40 years weighing ≥ 13.6 kg above the Caucasian average for the same age, height, and gender (2,4,23). The proportion increased from 3.0% to 16.3% among men and 6.1% to 27% among women. Controlling for age, the participants in Murphy's study who had IGT or diabetes were significantly more likely to be overweight by National Center for Health Statistics criteria at that time (BMI ≥ 27.8 for men and ≥27.3 for women, (42)) than those with normal glucose tolerance. By these criteria, 34% of Eskimo men and 56% of the women were overweight; among Athabascans, 29% of the men and 55% of the women were overweight.

(p19.1) The Murphy study also included participants ≥ 20 years. However, those 20-39 years had a lower participation rate, and were excluded from analyses summarized above. Analyses of data from this study that included the entire sample found that prevalence of overweight significantly increased with age for all groups except Indian men and
## (s20) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH
(p20.0) confirmed the finding that those with IGT or diabetes were significantly more likely to be overweight (43). As with the older age category, the younger group of Yupiks when compared with Mouratoff's participants showed a striking increase from 1962 to 1987 in the prevalence of those overweight by the earlier criteria (men, 4% to 14.9%, women, 10.1% to 28.8%) (43).

(p20.1) The fact that obesity correlates with abnormal glucose tolerance in Alaska Natives is especially concerning in view of the data from Eskimo participants in Ebbesson's 1994 study in the Bering Straits region. In that study, 27.9% of the women and 36.2% of the men had a BMI of ≥25 but <30 (WHO definition of overweight, (44)); while an additional 32.8% of the women and 15.6% of the men had a BMI ≥ 30 (WHO definition of obese) (45).

(p20.2) Waist: hip ratios were also examined in the 1994 study (18). Women in all ethnic groups in this study were found to have mean WHR >.90 and over 90% of the women in each BMI group (normal, overweight, obese) had a WHR ≥0.8, which was defined as "high" for purposes of comparison to other populations (46). In contrast, among men high WHR was associated with overweight status. High WHR (≥ 0.9) was found in 42% of normal weight, 85% of overweight, and 100% of male obese participants. Since high WHR and BMI are associated with glucose intolerance, it is of concern that over 60% of women were overweight or obese and a large percentage of women had a high WHR regardless of BMI.
## (s21) Other Associations
(p21.0) The 1992 pilot study among 65 Siberian Yupiks measured fasting insulin, glycated hemoglobin, percent body fat by bioelectric impedance, and blood pressure in addition to fasting lipids (16). Analysis showed that the participants had lower mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure, lower triglycerides, and higher HDL cholesterol compared to the US all races sample aged 45-74 years in the NHANES II survey. However, a significant positive linear correlation was noted for fasting insulin and BMI, and patients with diabetes had higher mean systolic blood pressure. The authors noted that fasting insulin levels were found to be lower than those of US Caucasians, implying greater insulin sensitivity among the Yupik participants, although several features of the insulin resistance syndrome were present. Fasting insulin was significantly and positively associated with diastolic blood pressure and fas-CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH ting triglycerides, even after adjustment for age, percent body fat, WHR, gender, and antihypertensive medication. However, it was emphasized that the small sample size was a limitation in the study (16).

(p21.1) Murphy's 1987 study also shed some light on the components of insulin resistance syndrome among Central Yupiks and Athabascans of the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region. Hypertension (systolic blood pressure ≥ 140 and/or diastolic ≥ 90) was significantly associated with glucose intolerance and overweight in both genders (47).
## (s22) Genetics and Environment
(p22.0) Higher fasting insulin levels have been found to be predictive of type 2 diabetes (48). In the 1994 study among the three Eskimo populations in the Bering Straits region (18), the insulin levels were determined in the same laboratory using the same technique as those in the Strong Heart Study (49). The fasting insulin levels were compared after exclusion of all participants in either study who had either IGT or diabetes by WHO criteria, or who had inadequate data to determine glucose tolerance status. Fasting insulin did not differ significantly by age or by ethnicity among the three Eskimo populations (Siberian Yupik, Central Yupik, and Inupiat) but was significantly higher for women than for men and was higher with increasing BMI (50). In a regression model adjusting for age and BMI, Eskimo men and women had significantly lower insulin levels than American Indian men and women. The lower insulin levels in Eskimos could indicate a lesser degree or prevalence of insulin resistance as compared with other Native Americans and would be consistent with the observation that Alaskan Eskimos have a lower prevalence of diabetes compared with other Alaska Natives. However, it is also possible that dietary factors and physical activity are playing a protective role.

(p22.1) In the 1994 Bering Straits study, participants from the three Eskimo populations were asked about a history of diabetes in parents, aunts or uncles, siblings, and children (18). In statistical models containing age, family history and obesity, all three variables were significantly associated with total abnormal glucose tolerance and with diabetes. The authors concluded that as in many populations, genetic and environmental factors play a significant role. In an effort to further examine the relative roles of these factors, a comparison was made of the diabetes prevalence among Siberian Yupik people in Alaska and those living on Russia's Chukotka Peninsula, just across the Bering
## (s23) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH
(p23.0) Straits. Before the cold war, these two populations traveled back and forth frequently and some families had members living on both sides of the Straits. While among Siberian Yupik people in Chukotka, ages 25-64, the prevalence of diabetes was 1.5%; it was 6.6% among the Siberian Yupik people in Alaska. Further study among these populations may elucidate the role of diet, physical activity and other factors in the development of diabetes.

(p23.1) A study in Canada raised other questions about the role of insulin resistance in the health of northern people. Among Canadian Inuit, obesity was not found to correlate with glucose or insulin levels (51). Young did find however that one or more of the lipids showed a relationship to BMI. He postulated a type of selective insulin resistance among Inuit whose metabolism may reflect a traditional diet consisting almost entirely of fat and protein.

(p23.2) In summary, there is evidence that in spite of the lower prevalence of diabetes among Alaska Natives as compared with other Native Americans, there is some evidence of the insulin resistance syndrome in the northern indigenous populations studied. However, further observations would be needed to elucidate the role of genetic factors in different groups, and environmental factors such as diet and physical activity.
## (s24) Dietary Factors
(p24.0) Murphy's 1987 study in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region has contributed information on the possible relationships between dietary factors and glucose intolerance among Alaska Natives. In this study, participants were given a food frequency questionnaire asking them about the 10 most common indigenous and 15 most common nonindigenous foods consumed in the region. Participants were asked whether they ate each food daily, weekly, monthly, or never, and how many times in the stated time period they ate the food (43). Among participants ≥ 40 years of age, daily consumption of seal oil suggested a protective effect against glucose intolerance with an odds ratio of 0.2 (95% CI 0.1-0.7) (52). This association was not confounded by ethnicity, age, BMI, or gender. Daily salmon consumption was also associated with protection when limited to newly diagnosed cases of glucose intolerance. The authors speculated that the fatty acid content of these indigenous foods, which are high in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and omega-3 fatty acids, may be protective (52).
## (s25) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH
(p25.0) Further observations on the possible role of fatty acids in the development of glucose intolerance were based on an analysis of fatty acid profiles in the plasma of the participants of Ebbesson's 1994 survey in the Bering Straits region. It was reported that the 68 people with glucose intolerance had lower concentrations of some omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (PUFAs) and higher concentrations of palmitic and oleic acid than those with normal glucose tolerance (53). It has been postulated that omega-3 fatty acids play a role in cell membrane phospholipids and thus affect insulin secretion and action (54). Ebbesson's data emphasize the importance of understanding the roles of dietary factors in serum fatty acid levels and their relationship to insulin resistance.

(p25.1) Other analyses of Murphy's data in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta region, which included responses of all participants ≥ 20 years, found many associations of frequency of indigenous foods vs. non-indigenous foods with age ethnicity, glucose tolerance status and obesity (43). No clear or consistent pattern emerged with regard to glucose tolerance. For example, with Athabascans and Yupiks included, controlling for age and ethnicity, those with euglycemia had significantly higher frequencies of intake of seal oil. However, among Yupiks only, controlling for age, those with euglycemia had lower frequencies for salmon/fish and seal oil. In general, participants with glucose intolerance reported a significantly more frequent consumption of protein from nonindigenous sources. The findings regarding associations between elements of glucose intolerance and dietary intake appear to be complex, and are strongly influenced by the specific foods, ages, genders and ethnic groups involved in the analyses.

(p25.2) A review of dietary patterns before contact with non-indigenous societies found, in summary, that the pre-contact diet of Arctic and sub-Arctic peoples probably contained very small amounts of carbohydrate and that the major changes with contact were an increase in carbohydrates, and a decrease in total fat and protein (55). A survey of the diets of Alaska Native adults in 11 communities in several different regions of the state was conducted in 1987-88 (56). Alaska Natives in this sample consumed twice the amount of table sugar and slightly more sweetened soft drinks (not artificially sweetened) than a national sample in the NHANES II survey. Similarly, a 1985 survey of dietary intake of teenagers in the Yukon-Kuskokwim region indicated that the participants consumed three to four times the amount of sweetened soft drinks consumed by teens in the U.S. general population (57).
## (s26) CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES AND DIABETES IN THE CIRCUMPOLAR NORTH
(p26.0) Some evidence suggests a possible association between dietary carbohydrate and the occurrence of diabetes among Alaska Natives. First, comparison of the dietary data gathered from Alaska Native adults in several regions and in Chukotka tundra and coastal residents indicated that Chukotka residents, who have a much lower prevalence of diabetes, ate less carbohydrate (58). Second, as dietary carbohydrate intake has increased over time so has the prevalence of diabetes among Alaska Natives. Thirdly, unpublished data from the 1994 study in the Bering Straits region found that higher carbohydrate in the diet correlated with higher waist: hip ratio (Risica, unpublished data). However, an association between high carbohydrate intake and the development of diabetes is not well supported in the literature. Further study of this issue is important in order to formulate scientifically sound recommendations for diabetes prevention.
## (s27) Physical activity
(p27.0) Murphy's 1987 study provided some evidence that physical activity may help protect against glucose intolerance (59). In this study, participants were given examples of common tasks in the region and asked whether they usually performed these activities using mechanized means or carried them out without mechanical assistance (for example, cutting wood by chainsaw or handsaw, using a motor versus paddling a boat, etc). Points were assigned to each activity based on frequency and whether or not mechanized methods were used. The points were summed for each participant and the scores were classified by tertiles into low, moderate and high levels of activity. The analysis was applied to those ≥ 40 years of age. A higher level of activity was associated with lower odds ratios for glucose intolerance when controlling for age, ethnicity, BMI, gender, and seal oil consumption. Overall, a greater percentage of Eskimos than Athabascans had high (31.6% vs. 6.7%) and moderate (33.4% vs. 24.8%) levels of activity.

(p27.1) The 1992 pilot study in one Eskimo village in the Bering Straits region also assessed physical activity by asking participants "How often do you exercise vigorously enough to work up a sweat or breathe hard?" Those who reported exertion of this magnitude less often than once a week were designated as sedentary in the analysis (16). Among those with diabetes, IGT and normal glucose tolerance, 50%, 25%, and 10% respectively, were sedentary.
## (s29) FUTURE DIRECTIONS
(p29.0) There is much to be learned about the occurrence of diabetes and its determinants among northern indigenous people. All research studies to date have been cross-sectional and therefore have major limitations in terms of examining risk factors and effectiveness of possible interventions in the area of primary prevention. There exists a strong need for longitudinal studies using population-based cohorts to establish better prevalence and incidence data, and to examine the roles of life-style factors in the genesis of type 2 diabetes. While there is a need to further elucidate the basic physiologic ramifications of insulin resistance, diet, exercise, and body fat distribution among northern indigenous people, the real frontier is the translation of knowledge of basic physiologic processes into healthy life style choices. Therefore, it is especially important that such studies involve partnerships with social scientists, behavioral and mental health specialists, and village leaders, especially the elders.

(p29.1) Studies involving screening in villages face several challenges. One is that village populations are small and geographically distant from each other. More statistical power could be obtained by coordinated efforts by various groups of investigators using consistent methods and case definitions among different groups of participants. Another challenge is that studies in rural circumpolar regions are expensive and logistically difficult. Obtaining blood samples, storing, processing, and shipping them under precise conditions necessary for laboratory analysis is usually quite difficult. A study conducted by Murphy in 1987 demonstrated that a fingerstick method of glucose determination was practical and quite accurate for determination of glucose tolerance status. The Accu-check II performed with a sensitivity of 75%, a specificity of 93%, and a positive predicative value of 63.1% to detect a glucose of >126 mg/dl (6.72 mM) as determined by the hexokinase method on venous plasma (60). Gastrointestinal intolerance of glucose test beverages also presents difficulties with screening efforts in rural settings. However, a study in southeast Alaska showed polymer beverages were better tolerated than monomer beverages (61).

(p29.2) Funding decisions regarding studies in northern populations, especially in village settings, need to take into account the costs of travel and housing of workers, securing adequate exam facilities, difficulties of using computerized systems in settings where a steady electric supp-
## (s31) CONCLUSIONS
(p31.0) In summary, the evidence indicates that while Alaska Natives have a low prevalence of diabetes compared with other Native Americans, they are experiencing a more rapid rate of increase than other groups. It appears that in the Alaska Native populations studied, three changes have occurred concurrently over the past few decades; an increased proportion of carbohydrate in the diet, increasing prevalence of obesity, and increasing prevalence of diabetes.

(p31.1) On the positive side, traditional lifestyles in Alaska Native communities are still an intrinsic part of every day life and may be providing some protection. There is evidence that elements of the traditional diet, specifically frequent seal oil and salmon intake, correlate with a lesser risk of glucose intolerance. Alaska Natives are consuming fish six times more frequently and in larger amounts when compared to the US general population (56). Thus, promoting the continued consumption of traditional foods through nutrition education may protect against the development of diabetes. There is also evidence that physical activity may be protective among Alaska Natives as it is in other populations. Murphy's 1987 study showed that 65% of Yupik and 32% of Athabascan participants engaged in high or moderate levels of physical activity (59).

(p31.2) While there is much to be learned about the occurrence of insulin resistance among Alaska Natives and other northern indigenous people, it appears that we know enough to make some recommendations. Native foods are to be promoted over diets high in simple carbohydrates; physical activity and weight management need to be encouraged. Further research is needed on factors involved in insulin resistance, the occurrence and implications of gestational diabetes, and the translation of information into life style practice. Those involved in health care and research among northern peoples should search for ways to form partnerships that will assist populations in their own quest for better health.
