# Predicting risk and outcomes for frail older adults: an umbrella review of frailty screening tools Methodological quality

CorpusID: 32235281 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f666b049c235639cb6c44cad030820cc4a0a58e9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s15) Methodological quality
(p15.0) Two independent reviewers assessed methodological quality of 10 reviews. The authors of eight of them were contacted to obtain more details in relation to missing or unclear data. Three authors replied. The answer obtained from one of the authors did not satisfy the mandatory criteria for inclusion in this umbrella review. Besides this review, four other reviews were excluded. Appendix II lists the reviews that were excluded based on critical appraisal and the reasons for the exclusion. There was general agreement among the reviewers to include the five reviews. All included reviews stated clearly and explicitly the review question (Q1), performed the search process in adequate sources of studies (Q4), used appropriate criteria for appraising studies (Q5), delivered recommendations for policy and/or practice that were supported by the reported data (Q10) and indicated appropriate specific directives for new research (Q11). In one review, 37 the inclusion criteria were not sufficiently detailed to decide whether they were appropriate or not for the review question, being evaluated as unclear (Q2). One unclear answer was also obtained in relation to the question addressing the issue of appropriateness of search strategy (Q3). 36 One review 36 provided insufficient information in relation to the critical appraisal process, and unclear whether this process was conducted by two or more independent reviewers or not (Q6). The lack of sufficient information was also observed with respect to the data extraction process in three reviews 36,37,39 that did not specify their method for minimizing errors in data extraction (Q7). One review 36 provided unclear information on the reasons why the method to combine the studies was chosen (Q8). None of the included reviews evaluated likelihood of publication bias (Q9). Table 1 shows the results of the methodological quality assessment of included reviews.
## (s17) Description of included reviews
(p17.0) The date range for the reviews included in this umbrella review was from 2011 to 2014, with the primary studies published between 1980 and 2013. All reviews but one 37 included prospective studies, and two reviews 36,38 focused additionally on retrospective studies. Most of the primary studies included in the cited reviews had observational, cross-sectional or cohort designs; in one case, 38 a secondary analysis of RCT data was additionally included. One review 37 included studies that aimed to develop a screening tool for frailty in older adults and/or evaluate its psychometric properties.
## (s29) Validity of index tests
(p29.0) Validity of frailty measures was addressed in two reviews. 36,37 One review 37 provided data in relation to the Tilburg Frailty Indicator and the Self-Administrated Test. The Self-Administrated Test was compared to MCPS, with the classifications obtained by these two measures being similar in 48% of cases, at a ''better'' level for Self-Administered Test and at a ''worse'' level for MCPS in 45% of cases, and at a ''worse'' level for Self-Administered Test and at a ''better'' level for MCPS in 7% of cases. 37 The description of the Tilburg Frailty Indicator included information about significant Pearson correlations (P < 0.001) for each item and each frailty domain in comparison with the reference measure (CGA). 37 The authors of this review 37 additionally analyzed whether the included primary studies reported  Tables 5-7 for actual findings)

(p29.1) When compared with the Phenotype model, the gait speed, PRISMA 7 and the Timed-upand-go test have high sensitivity for identifying frailty. However, limited specificity implies many false-positive results which means that these instruments cannot be used as accurate single tests to identify frailty Frailty index demonstrates good criterion and construct validity, but its discriminatory ability is poor to moderate. However, future research is necessary to investigate whether the psychometric properties of Frailty Index are generalizable to primary care setting and to facilitate its interpretation and implementation in daily clinical practice Tilburg Frailty Indicator was shown to be the strongest statistically and appears as potentially relevant for screening for frailty in a primary care setting. However, validation of this instrument in larger studies in primary health care settings and with more quality criteria is required SYSTEMATIC REVIEW validity of frailty measures, identifying the tools with fulfilled quality criteria for measurement properties. However, this information was used merely for the purpose of methodological quality assessment, not accompanied by values of statistical tests.

(p29.2) The second review 36 focused on different versions of the Frailty Index, summarizing details regarding criterion validity, construct validity and responsiveness. Given that assessment of criterion validity was performed based on the ability of the analyzed tool to predict adverse health outcomes, without addressing its concurrent and postdictive aspects, it was decided to include these data in the section on the predictive ability of frailty measures.

(p29.3) In terms of construct validity, different versions of the Frailty Index showed a positive correlation with different scales used as reference: the version assessing 36 deficits correlated with Functional Reach Test (r ¼ 0.73), the version assessing 43 deficits correlated with Consolice Study of Brain Ageing score (r ¼ 0.72), the version assessing 70 deficits correlated with Frailty Phenotype (r ¼ 0.65) and the version assessing 50 deficits with Edmonton Frail Scale (r ¼ 0.61). 36 Negative correlations were found between the 50-deficit version of the Frailty Index and Changes in Health, End-Stage Disease and Signs and Symptoms scale. The authors of this review 36 also reported positive correlation between the 38-deficit Frailty Index and self-rated health (r ¼ 0.49), as well as between two different versions of the Frailty index comprising 37 deficits (one including and one excluding activities of daily living and comorbidities) and functional impairments in activities of daily living and comorbidity. In this last case, the coefficients of correlations were not provided. In addition, the Frailty Index was compared  36 It was also revealed that older people and women show higher scores on the Frailty Index. However, in one of the cited primary studies, the opposite association between the Frailty Index score and gender was observed. Unfortunately, the authors of this review 36 did not provide details about the items comprising each of the Frailty Index versions or interpretations of the obtained finding. Thus, it is difficult to explain differences observed in the relationship between the Frailty Index and gender. Findings related to validity of frailty measures are presented in Table 6.
## (s31) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
(p31.0) one 39 addressed frailty indicators. The follow-up reported in three reviews varied from 14 days to 14 years. The adverse health outcomes included recurrent falls and fractures, change in activity of daily living score, functional decline/dementia, new disease at three years, (return) emergency department visits, hospitalization and hospital re-admissions, institutionalization and mortality. The characteristics of reviews addressing predictive ability of frailty measures are summarized in Table 8.

(p31.1) Predictive ability of frailty screening tools in community-dwelling adults The Frailty Index was the only screening tool that was systematically analyzed for predictive ability based on data obtained with community-dwelling older adults. 36 However, the reported data referred to different versions of this measure, ranging from 13 to 92 items. The Frailty Index was shown to be sufficiently accurate to predict increased risk of: (i) recurrent falls and recurrent fractures at eight years after evaluation; (ii) decline in activities of daily living, changes in mental score, new disease and change in hospital days at three years after evaluation; (iii) hospitalization and institutionalization at 12 months after evaluation; and (iv) mortality at 12, 24 and 120 months after evaluation. The Frailty Index was also shown to have sufficient ability to predict increased risk of multiple negative outcomes (such as emergency department visits, out of hour's general  38 Drubbel et al. 36 Vermeulen et al. 39 
## (s34) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
(p34.0) Mortality Risk Index was evaluated in terms of its capacity to predict two-year mortality after presentation to the emergency department, with two thresholds (!3 or 5) used to define ''abnormality'' (the review authors 38 did not specify the concept of abnormality). This measure lacked prognostic accuracy to predict the risk of adverse outcome. 38 Donini Index of Frailty, Winograd Index of Frailty and Schoevaerdts Index of Frailty were analyzed for institutionalization or mortality at 12 months after admission to emergency department and were revealed not to be sufficiently accurate to predict increased risk of any of these adverse outcomes. 38 Rowland and Runciman instruments were examined for returns to the emergency department, hospital readmission, mortality or different combinations of these adverse outcomes at six months after admission to the emergency department. Both instruments were shown to have insufficient ability to predict the indicated outcomes of interest. 38 The CSHA Clinical Frailty Scale was assessed as a predictor of hospital readmission at 30 or 90 days, and was shown to be an inaccurate predictor of this adverse health outcome. The measure of self-rated health stratified as bad (fair/poor) or non-bad (good/excellent) was screened in terms of its predictive ability for return to emergency department at 30 and 90 days after admission. It was shown not to be associated with an increased risk of adverse outcome. 38 The predictive ability of Silver Code was examined in two different studies. 38 One of these studies defined as outcomes of interest returns to emergency department, hospital re-admission, mortality or different combinations of these, and considered results obtained six months after admission to an emergency department. Another study focused on risk of mortality at 12 months after the episode in an emergency department. In both studies, thresholds of !4 and !11 were used to define ''abnormality''. Regardless of threshold and follow-up interval, Silver Code was revealed to have insufficient prognostic accuracy to predict increased risk of adverse outcomes.

(p34.1) Four studies assessed predictive ability of Variables Indicative of Placement Risk. 38 Three studies focused on outcome of hospital re-admission at 30 days using ''abnormality'' thresholds of !1, !2 and !3. Inter-study heterogeneity was evaluated based on data reported in only two of these studies. For the purpose of meta-analysis, threshold of !1 was considered. Pooled estimates of sensitivity (79; 95% CI 69-86) and specificity (18; 95% CI 15-21) demonstrated variable statistical heterogeneity with I 2 ranging from 0 to 99.5%. Based on pooled estimates of LRþ (0.98; 95% CI 0.83-1.17) and LRÀ (1.11; 95% CI 0.59-2.09), the measure Variables Indicative of Placement Risk was considered not sufficiently accurate to predict increased risk of hospital re-admission at 30 days after presentation to the emergency department. The results of the study not considered in meta-analysis pointed in the same direction. 38 Moreover, two studies examined Variables Indicative of Placement Risk for functional decline at 30 days using ''abnormality'' thresholds of !1 and !2. Data reported in these studies were meta-analyzed. I 2 ranging from 0 to 99.5% (sensitivity: 82; 95% CI 77-86; specificity: 37; 95% CI 33-42) indicated significant statistical heterogeneity. Pooled estimates of LRþ (1.92; 95% CI 0.58-6.41) and LRÀ (0.63; 95% CI 0.50-0.78) demonstrated that predictive ability of Variables Indicative of Placement Risk for outcome of interest was not sufficient to be clinically useful. 38 Several studies assessed predictive ability of Triage Risk Screening Tool. 38 Outcomes of interest considered in these studies included returns to the emergency department, functional decline, hospital re-admission and different combinations of these adverse outcomes. The follow-up intervals varied from 30 to 180 days. The thresholds for ''abnormality'' were defined based on one, two or three affirmative responses; however, for the purpose of metaanalysis, only threshold of !2 was used. The pooled estimates of sensitivity and specificity for all outcomes at all follow-up intervals demonstrated statistically significant heterogeneity (I 2 often >50%).  38 Because of different thresholds for ''abnormality'', data from the few studies addressing Triage Risk Screening Tool were not considered in metaanalysis. 38 These studies assessed predictive ability for hospital re-admission, functional decline and any adverse outcomes at 30 days after admission to the emergency department. In no case was the Triage Risk Screening Tool revealed to have sufficient accuracy to be clinically useful.
## (s35) Predictive ability of frailty indicators
(p35.0) The predictive ability of frailty indicators was examined in a single review. 39 This review focused on gait speed, unintended weight loss, low muscle strength or hand grip strength, low physical activity, low balance, low lower extremity function, exhaustion, poor performance on chair stands, 3608 turn, bending over, foot taps and hand signature, investigating their association with future disability in SYSTEMATIC REVIEW activities of daily living. All frailty indicators, with exception of muscle strength or hand grip strength and exhaustion, were revealed to be significant predictors of disability in activities of daily living. The risk of this adverse outcome was studied in different follow-up intervals, varying from one to 8.4 years for gait speed, from three to 10 years for physical activity, from four to 14 years for weight loss, from one to six years for balance, from three to nine years for lower extremity function and from one to three  
## (s36) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
(p36.0) years for chair stands. Predictive ability of 3608 turn, bending over, foot taps and hand signature was analyzed at 12 months after evaluation. 39 Regarding muscle strength or hand grip strength, the reported findings were inconsistent. 39 Three studies with follow-up periods of three, four and eight years concluded that grip strength was not a significant predictor of disability in activities of daily living. In seven studies with follow-up periods from three to nine years, grip strength was found to be associated with higher risk of developing disability in activities of daily living. Exhaustion was analyzed in a single study, with follow-up of eight years, which was the only frailty indicator that was shown not to be a significant predictor of disability in activities on daily living. 39 Findings related to predictive ability of frailty indicators are summarized in Table 11.
## (s43) Reliability of reviewed frailty measures
(p43.0) Regarding reliability, defined in terms of internal consistency and test-retest or inter-rater reliability, of the measures assessed, the Tilburg and the Groningen Frailty Indicators, the Bright tool and the Functional assessment screening package were all evidenced as being reliable, whereas other measures such as the Strawbridge and Sherbrooke questionnaires were shown not to be reliable in the studies reviewed. A notable feature of all of these measures is that they all included items regarding mood, social networks or loneliness, and cognition as well as physical issues such as weight loss, mobility, polypharmacy or eyesight and hearing. That is because many researchers believe a frailty tool based only on physical measures is insufficient and assert that assessment of frailty should also include cognitive, mental health domains and possibly also social domains such as living alone. 11,47 However, only the Functional Assessment Screening Package actually included objectively assessed measures, such as a Timed-up-and-go test or a recall test, with the rest being self-assessed, carer-assessed or nurseassessed via questions. These findings together illustrate that self-assessed and question-based screening without objective measures can be reliable, but objectively assessed parameters can add to this reliability.
## (s48) SYSTEMATIC REVIEW
(p48.0) Another limitation of the current review is that few of the included reviews considered unpublished research, and none of the reviews analyzed the possibility of publication bias. Two common methods for assessing publication bias are searching the gray literature and generating funnel plots. The lack of the latter is unsurprising as none of the included papers were able to synthesize results, meaning that it would be unlikely that review authors would be able to generate funnel plots. The former method was undertaken by only one review 38 and only in terms of inclusion of published conference abstracts, although no assessment of publication bias was made. It is worth being very clear on this issue; publication bias is a serious flaw in a systematic review/meta-analysis, and reviewers in all areas should be encouraged to take this issue seriously. Failure to do so will lead to wasted time and resources as researchers try (and fail) to replicate results that are statistical anomalies. The recent debate in the journal Science 56-58 has shown that psychological research is susceptible to publication bias, with an international team of researchers failing to replicate a series of experiments across cognitive and social psychology. Although there is no certainty that there will be publication bias in any field or area, researchers, when conducting reviews, should endeavor to do all they can to avoid this bias.

(p48.1) One issue to raise concerning diagnostic accuracy (and validity) is the lack of a gold standard. This is not only an issue in the frailty setting, it is an important issue in many other fields, often solved, for analytical purposes, by using some well accepted tools as reference standards as done here. However, this is a concern in this field since diagnostic accuracy measures and validity strongly depend on which frailty paradigm is used as reference, and this is something to take into account in the interpretation. It has been proposed that the Frailty Phenotype (physical frailty construct) and the Frailty Index based on CGA (accumulation of deficits construct) are not in fact alternatives, but they are designed for different purposes and so complementary. 59 
## (s49) Conclusion
(p49.0) In conclusion, only a few frailty measures seem to be demonstrably valid, reliable, diagnostically accurate and have good predictive ability in the reviews considered in this umbrella review. The first is the Frailty Index, an accumulation model that can potentially be calculated electronically from records plus a small number of questions or measures. It was revealed to have good predictive ability and mostly acceptable validity and diagnostic accuracy. These results have been obtained with frailty indices with a variety of numbers of items, thus further research is needed to determine the smallest number possible without losing accuracy to assist healthcare practitioners to use it in a variety of settings. Given that a minimum of 30 deficits has been suggested as the limit at which different types of deficits can be used without major influence on the properties of the Frailty Index, 60 it is notable that one of the primary studies had only 13 items. Further research would be helpful to determine the ideal combination of constituent deficits for specific contexts, especially given that validity did vary between versions.

(p49.1) Some other screening tools, the Tilburg Frailty Indicator, PRISMA-7, the Screening Letter, the Bright Tool and the Functional Assessment Screening Package also showed good characteristics, although analysis of predictive ability was only available for the Tilburg and then only for a very restricted set of three variables in the reviews examined. In comparison, the Groningen Frailty Indicator, general practitioner clinical assessment, index of polypharmacy and Sherbrooke Postal Questionnaire were revealed to have unacceptable diagnostic accuracy, thus their use for identifying frailty in primary care or community settings is not recommended.

(p49.2) Perhaps the most salient positive finding is the clear usefulness of simple risk indicators, with slow gait speed showing as having excellent predictive abilities. It is also noteworthy that some outcomes were predicted better by screening measures than others. A lot of the earlier studies on screening for frailty focused on frailty as a predictor of mortality, which this review shows to be well predicted by the frailty index. However, perhaps more useful in terms of providing care where it is needed is that almost all the individual indicators predicted disability in activities of daily living.

(p49.3) Finally, this study shows clearly that screening for frailty in terms of predicting adverse outcomes is not reliable in terms of use in emergency departments, at least in terms of the measures used here. It is worth noting that even a CFS reference test did not perform well in this context and the need for better ways to assess lack of physiological and psychological SYSTEMATIC REVIEW reserve in people who are also acutely ill or injured in an emergency department are needed. However, given the evidence that some of the outcomes measured may be dependent on the organizational context, there is perhaps a need for contextual factors to be taken into account in such predictive attempts. For example, outcomes can be affected by poor accessibility to general practitioners, leading to patients' return to the emergency department. It is also important to highlight that none of the included systematic reviews provided responses that met all of our research questions on their own. Further research should fill this gap, covering all the issues related with reliability, validity, diagnostic accuracy and predictive ability of the examined instrument(s) within the same study.
