# Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensors: A Review

CorpusID: 3376811 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8925542009d703b4d8e44505cf1936cfd87d2afa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8925542009d703b4d8e44505cf1936cfd87d2afa)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s3) Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensor Based on Exothermic Reaction and Gasochromic Effect of Sensitive Materials
(p3.0) At present the fastest response FBG hydrogen sensor is based on Pt-loaded WO3 undergoing an exothermic reaction in hydrogen atmosphere [36,37]. The chemical reaction can be expressed as the following equation [40]: In the following year, FBG with a spiral groove sputtered with Pd/Ag film (in Figure 7), which was proposed by the same group, was used for hydrogen detection [35]. At room temperature, double spiral micro-structured FBG exhibits 51.5 pm/% responding to hydrogen in air, which is 7.5 times higher that of unprocessed FBG. In addition, the hydrogen sensor can detect 0.2% hydrogen in air. These results indicate the sensitivity of the sensor can be greatly improved by increasing the area for film deposition. fiber, followed by sputtering 520 nm of Pd/Ag composite film on their grating section (Figure 6b). At room temperature (25 °C), the maximum sensitivity of the micro-machined FBG was increased more than 350% when compared with the standard FBG, which can be attributed to the larger surface area of fiber coated with Pd/Ag composite film. A similar phenomenon was observed when the ambient temperature was increased to 35 °C. Notably, the sensitivity the hydrogen sensor can be increased more 10 times at the higher operating temperature. For instance, the wavelength shift of 75-mW micro-machined FBG coated with 520 nm of Pd/Ag composite film was only 47 pm towards 4% hydrogen at 25 °C, while at 35 °C this was increased to nearly 700 pm. More attention should be concentrated on this phenomenon, which demonstrated that much higher sensitivity can be achieved by increasing the operating temperature of hydrogen-sensitive film. In the following year, FBG with a spiral groove sputtered with Pd/Ag film (in Figure 7), which was proposed by the same group, was used for hydrogen detection [35]. At room temperature, double spiral micro-structured FBG exhibits 51.5 pm/% responding to hydrogen in air, which is 7.5 times higher that of unprocessed FBG. In addition, the hydrogen sensor can detect 0.2% hydrogen in air. These results indicate the sensitivity of the sensor can be greatly improved by increasing the area for film deposition. 
## (s4) Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensor Based on Exothermic Reaction and Gasochromic Effect of Sensitive Materials
(p4.0) At present the fastest response FBG hydrogen sensor is based on Pt-loaded WO3 undergoing an exothermic reaction in hydrogen atmosphere [36,37]. The chemical reaction can be expressed as the following equation [40]: Figure 7. Configuration of double spiral FBG hydrogen sensor [35]. 
## (s5) Optical Fiber Grating Hydrogen Sensor Based on Exothermic Reaction and Gasochromic Effect of Sensitive Materials
(p5.0) At present the fastest response FBG hydrogen sensor is based on Pt-loaded WO 3 undergoing an exothermic reaction in hydrogen atmosphere [36,37]. The chemical reaction can be expressed as the following equation [40]:

(p5.1) WO 3 can react with hydrogen drastically by utilizing Pt as a catalyst, which can release energy to the surrounding environment. By measuring the temperature change caused by the exothermic reaction, the hydrogen concentration can be calculated. When there is no hydrogen, WO 3−x can be oxidized to form WO 3 in air. Therefore, the hydrogen sensor based on these reactions can be used for repeated measurements.

(p5.2) In 2007, Caucheteur et al. [40] proposed the first FBG hydrogen sensor based on this principle. FBGs with different lengths (0.5-4 cm) were used for hydrogen sensing. FBGs with a length of 4 cm had the lowest detecting threshold of 1% hydrogen in air, which could be due to the more optical power coupled to the cladding for initiating the exothermic reaction. Higher ambient humidity and lower ambient temperature will increase the threshold of hydrogen sensor. With the optical heating assisted by a 4-cm-long FBG, the hydrogen sensor can detect 1% hydrogen in air. Further improvements (different LPFGs activating the sensing layer) were reported in 2008 [41]. The sensing probe consisting of 1-cm FBG and 15-dB LPFG displayed greater than 6-nm wavelength shifts when the hydrogen concentration was 4% in volume ratio. The sensor can detect 0.6% hydrogen in air at 25 • C, while the threshold of sensing probe without LPFG was 2.8%. The proposed sensor with best responsibility can detect hydrogen as low as 1.5% even at −50 • C.

(p5.3) Although the reported FBG hydrogen sensor [40,41] has better sensitivity and response rate, its low concentration hydrogen responsibility should be further improved. The energy released by the exothermic reaction should be controlled at proper value so as to ensure its intrinsic safety. An FBG hydrogen sensor based on Pt-loaded WO 3 material was developed and its sensing characteristics were developed in 2012 by Yang et al. [42]. The performance of the hydrogen sensitive material was enhanced by optimizing its annealing temperature and constitutes. With the continuous effort, the molar ratio of Pt and WO 3 of hydrogen-sensitive coating was optimized at 1:5 and the annealing temperature was set at 315 • C [43]. Besides, FBG was fixed on glass substrate with higher thermal expansion coefficient so as to increase its temperature sensitivity. Additionally, the glass substrate has a groove for depositing Pt-loaded WO 3 coatings, which can prevent the shedding of the hydrogen-sensitive coating. The typical structure of sensing probe is shown in Figure 8. At room temperature of 25 • C, FBG hydrogen sensor with best sensitivity has a 448-pm wavelength shift towards 0.8% hydrogen, and the threshold of the FBG hydrogen sensor can reach to 200 ppm in air. Ambient humidity had little effect on its performance. FBG hydrogen sensors showed good selectivity (no response to CO and CH 4 ) and repeatability during hydrogen response. Since other reducing gases cannot penetrate the Pt catalyst and react with WO 3 , the Pt-loaded WO 3 coating has good selectivity towards hydrogen at room temperature. The performance of the sensor at different temperatures was studied in the following work [44]. The hydrogen sensitivity will decrease at lower temperature. However, the hydrogen sensor still can detect hydrogen as low as 400 ppm at 0 • C. Moreover, it is possible to compensate the interference of ambient temperature by using reference FBG. Therefore, FBG hydrogen sensor based on Pt-loaded WO 3 coating is very promising for distributed hydrogen leakage monitoring in air. reducing gases cannot penetrate the Pt catalyst and react with WO3, the Pt-loaded WO3 coating has good selectivity towards hydrogen at room temperature. The performance of the sensor at different temperatures was studied in the following work [44]. The hydrogen sensitivity will decrease at lower temperature. However, the hydrogen sensor still can detect hydrogen as low as 400 ppm at 0 °C. Moreover, it is possible to compensate the interference of ambient temperature by using reference FBG. Therefore, FBG hydrogen sensor based on Pt-loaded WO3 coating is very promising for distributed hydrogen leakage monitoring in air.  In 2015, Masuzawa et al. [45] developed the fiber grating sensor based on exothermic reaction. Pt/SiO 2 , Pt/WO 3 , Pt/Fe 2 O 3 , Pt/ZnO, Pt/SnO 2 and Pt/Al 2 O 3 were fabricated for preparing FBG hydrogen sensors. During hydrogen exposure in switching atmosphere of dry and humid air, Pt/SiO 2 showed the better stability than other materials. This work proposed the new material for hydrogen sensing. It is worth noting that the stability of the sensor should be further studied due to the obvious different thermal expansion coefficient of Pt and SiO 2 .
