# Cancer among farmers. A review

CorpusID: 34402326 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2b1b9d83254ac9f834b9b5c203b9876495dcba8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2b1b9d83254ac9f834b9b5c203b9876495dcba8)

Fields: Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s11) Studies of related occupations
(p11.0) The mortality experience of veterinarians is of interest because of exposures they have in common with farmers, particularly to insecticides and zoonotic viruses. Elevated mortality from cancers of the lymphatic and hematopoietic system, brain and central nervous system, and skin (9) among veterinarians raises suspicion that exposures common to both groups may be involved. The increased relative frequency of skin cancer among veterinarians is confined to practitioners specializing in large animals, in accord with their presumed greater exposure to sunlight. Mortality from brain cancer was found to be excessive among all types of veterinarians (small animal, large animal) and nonpractitioners such as regulators and meat inspectors and is, therefore, not likely due to occupational exposures, but rather may reflect the quality of medical care receivedby professional groups. The leukemia excess is probably linked to x-ray exposure, since the excess is mostly confined to veterinarians who practiced during the 1950s and 1960s, a period when there was rapid growth in diagnostic radiography without adequate attention to safety procedures (9). The role of zoonotic animal viruses in the origin of leukemia is possible, but unlikely, since we have no information to suggest that the levelof contact of veterinarians with supposedly infectious animal agents has varied appreciabl y over the past several decades. In conclusion, although the cancer mortality pattern among veterinarians resembles that of farmers, it is unlikely that common environmental agents are involved, except for cancer of the skin.
