# Pressure ulcers in the adult intensive care unit: a literature review of patient risk factors and risk assessment scales

CorpusID: 34965850 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95ce690ab8c1f9fdd736ce03fa20af19ec4ce51c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/95ce690ab8c1f9fdd736ce03fa20af19ec4ce51c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Pressure ulcer risk assessment scales
(p10.0) Eleven articles were identified that examined PrU risk assessment scales in ICUs. Several risk assessment instruments have been developed for early screening of patients at higher risk of developing PrU in the ICU. Table 3 provides a summary of the year of publication, setting, population, study method, scale, cut-off point, sensitivity and results of each study. Table 4 provides background information and overviews of each risk assessment scale used in ICU including; items of assessment, score and total score, and determination of 'at risk' category.  [27] . Lewicki and associates in a descriptive study in 337 cardiothoracic ICU patients examined the sensitivity and specificity of the Braden scale using different cut-off points at various days of hospitalization to determine the optimal cut-off point in a cardiac surgical population. The author recommended that several cut-off scores corresponding with day of hospitalization exist in populations whose conditions change greatly over the course of their hospital stay. Ongoing assessment is always required as the clinical status of patients is liable to change [28] .
## (s13) Age
(p13.0) Patient age was evidenced by literature to be a predictive variable for PrU development in ICU patients. While critical illness has a significant impact on the older adult, older people are at high risk for skin breakdown also because of limitations in their mobility. Additionally, their skin becomes fragile and thin and they have a predisposition to degenerative and other diseases [37] . These considerations suggest the effects of ageing on skin integrity cannot be preventable, but rather need to be managed more carefully. Aggressive implementation of preventative measures in this patient group such as use of appropriate pressure relieving mattresses and other support surfaces, frequent turning, regular bathing and the prevention of skin tears will greatly reduce the risk of PrU.
## (s17) Summary
(p17.0) It should be noted that a risk factor prediction model for critically ill patients has yet to be developed. Development of a model is, however, problematic as there are a multiple risk factors to be considered. Further contributing to this the studies reviewed have utilized different methodologies, different measures of analyses, varying PrU definitions and PrU classifications, and examined PrU across a diverse ICU population. Consequently development of a risk factor prediction model would be difficult. Further, these complexities have limited the translation and implementation of this research into clinical practice [6] . Ideally, to examine the association between risk factors and PrU development a multicentre longitudinal prospective observational study is needed.
## (s18) Pressure ulcer risk assessment scales
(p18.0) The second aim of this review was to examine published studies exploring risk assessment scales that predict PrU development in critically ill patients in ICU settings. In this section, discussion of the reviewed studies will focus on reported reliability, validity measures and sensitivity and specificity of the instruments [42] .
## (s22) Limitations
(p22.0) This review is limited by a number of factors. Firstly, the review was based on specific exclusion and inclusion criteria. Consequently this yielded a smaller number of studies. However, as the last previous work in this field was published in 2002 [6] , the intent of this study was to review studies published after this date contributing to the body of knowledge in this area. Secondly, the inclusion of studies only published in the English language may have introduced a risk of language bias. However, it was beyond the financial scope of this review to include studies requiring translation into English. Consequently, it is acknowledged that this review does not include a potential body of work in this field. Finally, the 19 studies reviewed demonstrated inconsistency in methodological approaches and quality making in-depth synthesis and generalization of results across ICU population difficult.
