# Management of medial humeral epicondyle fractures in children: a structured review protocol for a systematic review of the literature and identification of a core outcome set using a Delphi survey

CorpusID: 3419907 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1da134a339a45a544256f41b7e6f8c73c4674454](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1da134a339a45a544256f41b7e6f8c73c4674454)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Medial humeral epicondyle fractures are one of the most common injuries in childhood and often require surgery [1,2]. Long-term sequelae may include non-union, malunion, instability, nerve injury, growth arrest, deformity and loss of function [1,3]. There are currently no standardised outcome measures to assess progress after an elbow injury in a child. Wide variation in currently reported outcomes (radiographic-, surgeon-and patientreported) makes comparison of the treatment of elbow fractures in children difficult.
## (s4) Eligibility of studies
(p4.0) Two reviewers (SD and JS) will independently screen all titles and abstracts of papers identified in the initial search. Titles of articles will be reviewed and included or excluded by using Rayyan [19]. Full-text manuscripts of any titles/abstracts that may be eligible for inclusion, or for which there is insufficient data in the title and abstract to make a clear decision, will be obtained.

(p4.1) The full-text papers will be assessed independently by two review authors (SD and JS) and any disagreement on the eligibility of included studies resolved through discussion. Where resolution is not possible, a third review author (DP) will be consulted.

(p4.2) The purpose of this study is to identify all outcomes reported irrespective of study quality. In addition as there is no synthesis of outcome data from the included studies, a critique of the methodological quality of the studies is not necessary.
