# Improving the implementation of health workforce policies through governance: a review of case studies

CorpusID: 3530208 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99d5101d66b204841b0badd2a3ddb0007bd08dc0](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99d5101d66b204841b0badd2a3ddb0007bd08dc0)

Fields: Political Science, Medicine

## (s13) Evidence-based policy formulation
(p13.0) Two case studies discuss intelligence, information and/or evidence pertaining to HRH [20,21]. The case study on decentralization (and also recentralization) of HRH responsibilities in Indonesia found that monitoring of stocks and flows of health workers worsened, and that HRH information suffered, following decentralization [20]. In Laos, aid effectiveness efforts included new structures to share analysis of staffing quota systems-resulting in a joint HRH situational analysis-and arrangements for the government to develop a new HRM database, supported by UNICEF [21].
## (s18) Partnership and participation in fragile states
(p18.0) Three case studies highlight participation in conflict areas [22,27,29]. Civil war, by definition, segregates, and this is exacerbated in examples such as the government banning of treating Maoist rebel forces, which resulted in deterring tens of thousands of Nepalese from seeking medical treatment [22]. One of the main recommendations concerns proposals for partnership following the conflict: retraining and mobilizing Maoist health workers following the conflict would not only help to boost health coverage, but would serve as an olive branch for conflict transformation and peace building, bringing both sides together [22]. Teela et al. [27] present a picture where participation, voice and legitimacy were key to a programme's development and success in conflict situations, as formal care provision was often not functioning. By creating an environment of mutual trust between the communities and other actors involved (often development partners and/or funding agencies) success was feasible, despite the wider instability in the region. A community-based approach created a sense of community ownership and inclusiveness. In terms of a participative process, community meetings and communication were considered vital prior to implementation. Such meetings were also an opportunity for stakeholders to engage with the population and demonstrate their competence, equally fundamental to achieving community trust and promoting increased access [27]. Lee et al. [29] describe how community partnership with a local ethnic health department demonstrated that village health workers are capable of successfully implementing malaria control interventions among internally displaced persons in a diverse, community-run team.
## (s19) Partnerships with the private sector
(p19.0) The health workforce available to provide services can be increased by engaging the private sector. This was described in two case studies. Dreesch et al. [23] showed that in Botswana comprehensive partnerships across the board greatly improved the effectiveness of service delivery. Partnerships with the private sector, and the mechanisms that allow it, were key, maximizing use of the available human resources for health in the country for the treatment of and attention to HIV/AIDS. In Tanzania, there is a potential of a similar private sector partnership in contributing to the MDG target of increasing skilled attendance at delivery by allowing 'retired' midwifery workforce in Tanzania to open private practices in rural areas [30].

(p19.1) In Guatemala, outsourcing to local NGO's did not always work out, as many of the commissioned NGOs were soon acting as administrators of care rather than direct implementers. Furthermore, some of the most qualified NGOs decided not to take on the outsourced role in the interest of retaining their autonomy, and other NGOs with no or little experience in delivering health care took up the contract resulting in inefficient parallel systems of care [28].
## (s22) Oversight during conflict
(p22.0) Two cases addressed oversight in conflict-affected eastern Myanmar [27,29]. These cases showed that when a population is isolated, cut off, displaced or neglected, a community oversight mechanism can be established and can function if a seed pool of resources is present (i.e. a critical initial number of educated staff). Regulatory mechanisms evolved in parallel with inbuilt monitoring and evaluation feedback loops. Thus, as successes and failures became more apparent, adjustments in training and delegated responsibilities to community health workers and maternal health workers were adapted in a continuing quest for improved care and expanded access. Devkota et al. [22] showed that in Nepal, during a full-blown conflict, political interference, instability, favouritism and other concerns-i.e. a lack of unified rule of law-resulted in health workers being siezed by rebels, medicines and equipment being stolen and false reports being made.
## (s26) Participation and partnerships
(p26.0) Forms of partnership and participation described in the case studies are numerous and offer different lessons. Partnerships and participation are important for assuring broad ownership of HRH policies and plans, and they are addressed in all articles. What is striking, though, is that in none of the articles was partnership the core focus; and also that no examples were identified regarding community partnerships in HRH policy development, nor implementation in stable states.

(p26.1) Overall, there appears to have been a shift in the way in which the decision to partner and collaborate with other actors is taken. More traditionally, it is the government that is looked to, to set up governance structures. However, with the advent of NGOs and a new aid architecture, more power and leadership is shifted to other partners, and this influences the types of partnerships, their composition and their own respective policies. Partnerships with development partners through harmonization and aid effectiveness efforts can lay new ground and trust for boosting efficiency and performance, and they can also stimulate improved collaboration between government sectors. On the other hand, programs separately funded by global health initiatives (GHI) may enhance treatment capacity in the short term, but one case study showed that there might be a risk of unsustainability and dependency upon GHI funds. Partnership with the private sector seems to hold promise for maximizing staff availability and access to care by creating innovative service delivery methods, and it would be useful to have more learning on this, also from other sectors. Additionally, it is recommended to include unions, from inception, in plans to reform policy, so as to avoid resistance from professional groups during implementation.

(p26.2) In the case studies describing fragile states, community partnerships and involvement in policy design and implementation appear especially important, where agreement at the community level seems to create a solid basis for bottom-up state recovery. A lesson from these articles was that gaining the trust of the community and health workers involved is key to supply meeting demand [22,[26][27][28][29]. The cases also show that immediately after conflict, there are opportunities for real change in governance and systems.
## (s28) Use of framework
(p28.0) The framework that was used to describe and group different aspects of governance was a useful start to assist in drawing common lessons across the case studies for each dimension. The framework assisted in disentangling the broad concept of governance and helped in identifying what governance dimensions are addressed and to what extent. For instance, by regrouping the case studies according to the different dimensions, it became clear that little explicit attention was paid to accountability and to equity and equality. At the same time, regrouping demonstrated how broad and complex the term 'governance' really is. Perhaps unwittingly, most articles do not explicitly define the terms that they use to address the various governance dimensions.

(p28.1) Whilst this allows us to use various examples from the same article to illustrate observations on different dimensions of governance, at the same time it was sometimes difficult to judge which governance dimension within a particular intervention or situation had had the most significant effect or was the most important aspect. It also proved difficult to avoid repetition, as an example could be interpreted in different ways, e.g. covering partnership, but also covering accountability (e.g. Dodd et al. [21] or Devkota et al. [22]).

(p28.2) Overall, decentralization seems to dominate the literature on HRH and governance. In the framework, we placed it under the dimension of 'performance', but in reality it cuts across and includes partnerships, oversight and equity/equality. The dimension of 'equity and equality' is another dimension that could be debated, as it can also be seen as a result of improved partnerships, performance and oversight. This framework would need to be further tested so as to allow adaptation and refinement, and to allow for drawing lessons across interventions. At the same time, this paper is a plea to authors to make explicit and to define governance concepts that are used in HRH interventions and studies, and to develop a common governance vocabulary.
