# Organizations Driving Positive Social Change: A Review and an Integrative Framework of Change Processes

CorpusID: 3500344 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00bdc92e5259414c4a8a993abc955c4b4bdac7a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/00bdc92e5259414c4a8a993abc955c4b4bdac7a8)

Fields: Business, Sociology

## (s2) Research Streams in Management
(p2.0) Three largely separate streams of management research, CSR, social entrepreneurship, and BoP, refer implicitly or explicitly to PSC. Research on CSR is broadly concerned with the organizational policies and actions that take societal expectations into account. See Aguinis and Glavas (2012) for a comprehensive review. CSR research has largely focused on (1) the instrumental, especially financial, returns of CSR activities for the firm and relating CSR to its competitive advantage (Carroll & Shabana, 2010;Wood, 2010); and (2) the individual, organizational, and institutional antecedents of firms' engagement in CSR (Aguilera, Rupp, Williams, & Ganapathi, 2007;J. L. Campbell, 2007). More recently, research on the political activity of firms started to examine how firms' activities influence policy making with the specific objective of benefiting society (Scherer & Palazzo, 2011). This trend importantly expands the scope of analysis beyond the firm. Yet empirical research exploring potential positive effects of organizations' CSR activities on targets outside the firm and on society remains scant. For exceptions identified in our review, see for example, Carrigan, Moraes, and Leek (2011) and Muller, Vermeulen, and Glasbergen (2012).

(p2.1) Research on social enterprises-organizations that leverage market-based activities as a means to address societal challenges (Mair & Marti, 2006)-often remains stuck in conceptual debates (see Dacin, Dacin, & Matear, 2010, for a review). Empirical contributions typically focus on understanding the emergence of social enterprises (Renko, 2013;Seelos, Mair, Battilana, & Dacin, 2011;Stephan, Uhlaner, & Stride, 2015) or on intraorganizational aspects such as governance, identity management, and organizing processes (Battilana, Sengul, Pache, & Model, 2015;Mair et al., 2015;Pache & Santos, 2013). Fewer studies link social enterprise activities to PSC (examples in our review are L. Jones & Snelgrove, 2006;Perrini, Vurro, & Costanzo, 2010;Seelos & Mair, 2005).
## (s4) Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies
(p4.0) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.

(p4.1) We give an overview of the reviewed studies here to illustrate how past research has studied PSC. Details for all 144 studies are included as a data table in the online supplemental material. This supplement also summarizes analyses exploring whether our findings differ across change processes, targets, instigators, disciplines, and domains. We find few differences.

(p4.2) Regarding the focus of the change process, most research studied individuals (as part of households, communities, or organizations or as members of society; 76%) as opposed to change processes related to fields (industries or markets; 21%). A total of 3% studied both. With regard to PSC targets, 66% studied individuals, 22% organizations, 13% households or families, 13% community changes, 8% industry changes, and 8% other targets (e.g., consumer groups, regions), while 20% included more than one PSC target. The distal targets that PSC projects sought to affect in the long term were communities, regions, industry, society at large, country, and consumer groups (44%, 33%, 23%, 15%, 11%, and 10%, respectively) as well as "other" (13%).

(p4.3) Instigators of PSC projects were businesses (14%) and social sector organizations (nonprofits, social enterprises, and community organizations; 29%). A total of 14% were researcher-led efforts, 13% were led by "other" organizations (e.g., local authorities, business associations), and 31% were efforts by alliances or collaborations. We included sources describing actions by researchers and local authorities, which could be easily adopted by organizations (e.g., distributing recycling reminder cards to households), as local authority services are often subcontracted to businesses.

(p4.4) In terms of disciplinary background (identified through the publishing outlet), 22% of studies originated in management and business, 17% in public health, 17% in political science, and 29% in other social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, development studies), and 15% were design studies and practitioner sources.

(p4.5) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.

(p4.6) We give an overview of the reviewed studies here to illustrate how past research has studied PSC. Details for all 144 studies are included as a data table in the online supplemental material. This supplement also summarizes analyses exploring whether our findings differ across change processes, targets, instigators, disciplines, and domains. We find few differences.

(p4.7) Regarding the focus of the change process, most research studied individuals (as part of households, communities, or organizations or as members of society; 76%) as opposed to change processes related to fields (industries or markets; 21%). A total of 3% studied both. With regard to PSC targets, 66% studied individuals, 22% organizations, 13% households or families, 13% community changes, 8% industry changes, and 8% other targets (e.g., consumer groups, regions), while 20% included more than one PSC target. The distal targets that PSC projects sought to affect in the long term were communities, regions, industry, society at large, country, and consumer groups (44%, 33%, 23%, 15%, 11%, and 10%, respectively) as well as "other" (13%).

(p4.8) Instigators of PSC projects were businesses (14%) and social sector organizations (nonprofits, social enterprises, and community organizations; 29%). A total of 14% were researcher-led efforts, 13% were led by "other" organizations (e.g., local authorities, business associations), and 31% were efforts by alliances or collaborations. We included sources describing actions by researchers and local authorities, which could be easily adopted by organizations (e.g., distributing recycling reminder cards to households), as local authority services are often subcontracted to businesses.

(p4.9) In terms of disciplinary background (identified through the publishing outlet), 22% of studies originated in management and business, 17% in public health, 17% in political science, and 29% in other social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, development studies), and 15% were design studies and practitioner sources.
## (s7) Change Mechanisms-Stimulating Positive Behavior Change
(p7.0) This section presents the mechanisms we identified in the review. We label mechanisms by the change a specific project action (see the middle boxes in Figure 2) seeks to elicit in the targets to stimulate them to change their behavior towards PSC (see the righthand boxes in Figure 2), for instance, conducting training to develop targets' skills. The online supplemental material contains detailed descriptions of all 17 mechanisms, including examples for all four PSC domains and all sources providing evidence (also see Table  1). Here we provide a synthesis of the change mechanisms clustered according to each MCO lever.

(p7.1) Motivation. We identified eight motivation mechanisms affecting targets' willingness, that is, their desire (reason) and drive (energy) to change their behavior towards PSC. The motivation lever aligns with self-determination theory, which differentiates motivation ranging from intrinsic (motivation following from individuals' free volition) to extrinsic (motivation resulting from external influences) as mechanisms of behavior change (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000), which are represented as deep-level and surface-level route, respectively, in Figures 1 and 2. Compared to extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation is generally associated with greater persistence, performance, and sustained behavior change as targets are more engaged, interested, and personally committed.

(p7.2) Projects can stimulate targets' intrinsic motivation by framing PSC issues in their communications in such a way that targets experience them as meaningful (personally relevant and important) and by building targets' knowledge and understanding in a PSC domain. Intrinsic motivation can also be facilitated by setting goals that targets perceive as desirable or to which they commit (e.g., through pledging) or by providing feedback to targets when they achieve a desired level of behavior (or fall short of it and, thus, need to invest more effort). More instrumental, extrinsic motivation for behavior change (surface-level route in Figures 1 and 2) can be stimulated through incentives in the form of recognition

(p7.3) This section presents the mechanisms we identified in the review. We label mechanisms by the change a specific project action (see the middle boxes in Figure 2) seeks to elicit in the targets to stimulate them to change their behavior towards PSC (see the righthand boxes in Figure 2), for instance, conducting training to develop targets' skills. The online supplemental material contains detailed descriptions of all 17 mechanisms, including examples for all four PSC domains and all sources providing evidence (also see Table  1). Here we provide a synthesis of the change mechanisms clustered according to each MCO lever.

(p7.4) Motivation. We identified eight motivation mechanisms affecting targets' willingness, that is, their desire (reason) and drive (energy) to change their behavior towards PSC. The motivation lever aligns with self-determination theory, which differentiates motivation ranging from intrinsic (motivation following from individuals' free volition) to extrinsic (motivation resulting from external influences) as mechanisms of behavior change (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000), which are represented as deep-level and surface-level route, respectively, in Figures 1 and 2. Compared to extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation is generally associated with greater persistence, performance, and sustained behavior change as targets are more engaged, interested, and personally committed.

(p7.5) Projects can stimulate targets' intrinsic motivation by framing PSC issues in their communications in such a way that targets experience them as meaningful (personally relevant and important) and by building targets' knowledge and understanding in a PSC domain. Intrinsic motivation can also be facilitated by setting goals that targets perceive as desirable or to which they commit (e.g., through pledging) or by providing feedback to targets when they achieve a desired level of behavior (or fall short of it and, thus, need to invest more effort). More instrumental, extrinsic motivation for behavior change (surface-level route in Figures 1 and 2) can be stimulated through incentives in the form of recognition
## (s9) Organizational Practices as Enablers
(p9.0) Our analysis suggests that organizational practices act as enablers supporting the effective deployment of deep-level change mechanisms in particular. They thereby make projects more or less effective in stimulating PSC. This was especially the case for longer-term and more complex PSC projects. We identified 12 often interconnected practices (see the lower half of Table 1 and the left-hand side of Figure 2) relating to MCO. These capture how to motivate project members, develop project capabilities, build resources, and create opportunities to pursue PSC projects more effectively. The practices are also interdependent: Motivated project teams are more likely to be engaged and willing to build project capabilities and opportunities. The online supplemental material describes each practice in detail along with examples and the sources that provide evidence. Here we provide a synthesis of practices clustered according to each change lever and describe how they enable mechanisms.

(p9.1) Motivation. We identified three practices that help to build and sustain the intrinsic motivation of project members (staff, volunteers, partners, and stakeholders) over the course of a PSC project. None of the reviewed sources covered extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation might be particularly important, especially in deep-level PSC projects, which often extend over longer time periods. Such projects benefit from intrinsically motivated members that are engaged, interested, and personally committed and persist despite setbacks (cf. R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000). Intrinsically motivated project members are also likely to be more effective in interacting with and influencing targets. Related research on service organizations and the service-profit chain reports positive emotional and productivity spillover effects such that intrinsically motivated, committed, and satisfied staff have higher quality interactions with customers leading to more loyal and satisfied customers and higher firm performance (S. P. Brown & Lam, 2008;Hong, Liao, Hu, & Jiang, 2013).

(p9.2) We identified three practices that develop project members' intrinsic motivation by building inspiring shared visions and facilitating feedback. Shared project visions motivate by providing project members with a common meaningful long-term goal, which improves coordination among members and reduces uncertainty about appropriate shorter-term goals and actions (cf. Baum, Locke, & Kirkpatrick, 1998). In PSC projects, shared visions can be particularly powerful by instilling a sense of positive collective identity and purpose. The very nature of PSC projects emphasizes making a positive difference to others, appealing to individuals' universal basic need for relatedness (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000). Projects facilitate motivating feedback by generating quick wins, which are small demonstrable achievements in stimulating PSC achieved in a short time span. This allows members to celebrate successes and creates momentum in the project start-up phase or rekindles motivation in later phases or when the change process may seem "stuck." Similarly, evaluation provides motivating information about progress towards project goals. Both feedback practices also enable project members to make sense of the often complex change process and help to alleviate uncertainty, for example, about (in)effective project actions.
## (s14) A Deeper Understanding of PSC Processes
(p14.0) Research on PSC processes is needed to unpack causal relationships. Research could deepen our understanding of the relationships between deep-and surface-level PSC strategies and the conditions under which they are effective. For instance, it is an open question whether, how, and when deep-and surface-level strategies may be compatible and can be combined in PSC initiatives. More evidence is also needed to corroborate the long-term social impacts and effects on PSC targets of both strategies. Such research was extremely scarce in the review.

(p14.1) Similarly, more research is needed to unpack the causal relationship between change mechanisms and organizational practices. Does the organization itself perhaps change in the process of stimulating PSC? Do organizational practices deployed in deep-level strategies trigger, result from, or evolve alongside the deep-level change mechanisms? An example is the relationship between organizational motivation-based practices and targets' motivation. Research on the service-profit chain maintains that the motivation of organizational members is the precursor to clients' satisfaction, suggesting that intrinsically motivated PSC project staff contribute to developing intrinsic motivation in PSC targets. However, emotional contagion processes and research on work motivation and beneficiary contact (Grant, 2008) suggest causality may run the other way. For surface-level PSC strategies, we did not observe a particular coupling of mechanisms with organizational practices. Is this perhaps due to contextual boundary conditions? If so, which?

(p14.2) In conclusion, we hope that our efforts to integrate and "put to use" knowledge generated by dispersed streams of literatures are beneficial in advancing our understanding of the relationship between market-based organizations and society. Management research has much to gain from leveraging existing knowledge generated by disciplinary research and much to offer to help alleviate social needs and advance societal well-being. The time is ripe for management scholarship to engage more centrally with PSC; the opportunities for theoretical, empirical, and practical contribution are plenty.

(p14.3) (using kappa) for these ratings was above .70 for all raters, indicating an acceptable level of agreement. On the basis of the coding of their abstracts, we narrowed down the relevant sources to include in the review from 10,509 to 198. Inclusion criteria were captured by using a decision tree comprising eight key questions supplemented by a protocol of clarifications and definitions of key concepts and by a list of most commonly encountered problems and suggested resolutions. These materials are available from the authors. Any abstracts that a rater could not make a decision on were discussed in the research team.

(p14.4) For inclusion, a source had to report empirical research (either quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods, or a review of empirical research), which had to be evaluative rather than purely descriptive (such as biographies or press interviews). It had to measure or describe collective behavior change of a positive nature (benefitting others, society, or the environment). The source also had to report on mechanisms, strategies, and processes of how the behavior change was achieved, and it had to describe the actions of an organization (broadly defined, see the Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies section). Our inclusion criteria meant that we also included studies documenting failed attempts at stimulating PSC. We focused on articles longer than six pages to ensure that research was described in sufficient detail.
## (s19) Research Streams in Management
(p19.0) Three largely separate streams of management research, CSR, social entrepreneurship, and BoP, refer implicitly or explicitly to PSC. Research on CSR is broadly concerned with the organizational policies and actions that take societal expectations into account. See Aguinis and Glavas (2012) for a comprehensive review. CSR research has largely focused on (1) the instrumental, especially financial, returns of CSR activities for the firm and relating CSR to its competitive advantage (Carroll & Shabana, 2010;Wood, 2010); and (2) the individual, organizational, and institutional antecedents of firms' engagement in CSR (Aguilera, Rupp, Williams, & Ganapathi, 2007;J. L. Campbell, 2007). More recently, research on the political activity of firms started to examine how firms' activities influence policy making with the specific objective of benefiting society (Scherer & Palazzo, 2011). This trend importantly expands the scope of analysis beyond the firm. Yet empirical research exploring potential positive effects of organizations' CSR activities on targets outside the firm and on society remains scant. For exceptions identified in our review, see for example, Carrigan, Moraes, and Leek (2011) and Muller, Vermeulen, and Glasbergen (2012).

(p19.1) Research on social enterprises-organizations that leverage market-based activities as a means to address societal challenges (Mair & Marti, 2006)-often remains stuck in conceptual debates (see Dacin, Dacin, & Matear, 2010, for a review). Empirical contributions typically focus on understanding the emergence of social enterprises (Renko, 2013;Seelos, Mair, Battilana, & Dacin, 2011;Stephan, Uhlaner, & Stride, 2015) or on intraorganizational aspects such as governance, identity management, and organizing processes (Battilana, Sengul, Pache, & Model, 2015;Mair et al., 2015;Pache & Santos, 2013). Fewer studies link social enterprise activities to PSC (examples in our review are L. Jones & Snelgrove, 2006;Perrini, Vurro, & Costanzo, 2010;Seelos & Mair, 2005).
## (s21) Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies
(p21.0) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.

(p21.1) We give an overview of the reviewed studies here to illustrate how past research has studied PSC. Details for all 144 studies are included as a data table in the online supplemental material. This supplement also summarizes analyses exploring whether our findings differ across change processes, targets, instigators, disciplines, and domains. We find few differences.

(p21.2) Regarding the focus of the change process, most research studied individuals (as part of households, communities, or organizations or as members of society; 76%) as opposed to change processes related to fields (industries or markets; 21%). A total of 3% studied both. With regard to PSC targets, 66% studied individuals, 22% organizations, 13% households or families, 13% community changes, 8% industry changes, and 8% other targets (e.g., consumer groups, regions), while 20% included more than one PSC target. The distal targets that PSC projects sought to affect in the long term were communities, regions, industry, society at large, country, and consumer groups (44%, 33%, 23%, 15%, 11%, and 10%, respectively) as well as "other" (13%).

(p21.3) Instigators of PSC projects were businesses (14%) and social sector organizations (nonprofits, social enterprises, and community organizations; 29%). A total of 14% were researcher-led efforts, 13% were led by "other" organizations (e.g., local authorities, business associations), and 31% were efforts by alliances or collaborations. We included sources describing actions by researchers and local authorities, which could be easily adopted by organizations (e.g., distributing recycling reminder cards to households), as local authority services are often subcontracted to businesses.

(p21.4) In terms of disciplinary background (identified through the publishing outlet), 22% of studies originated in management and business, 17% in public health, 17% in political science, and 29% in other social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, development studies), and 15% were design studies and practitioner sources.

(p21.5) We followed the systematic review procedure (Tranfield, Denyer, & Smart, 2003) and conducted broad searches of the academic and practitioner literature for empirical evidence linking organizational activities to PSC covering 20 years . Details can be found in the appendix. We screened 10,509 sources for inclusion and retained 118 sources, corresponding to 144 studies or pieces of evidence. We included qualitative, quantitative, and mixed-method research (51%, 21%, and 19%, respectively), primary research and reviews (90% and 10%), and published and unpublished research (see the appendix). Three researchers coded these studies, identifying how specific actions lead to PSC with the goal of understanding change mechanisms. This process also uncovered organizational practices. We worked iteratively, going back and forth between independently coding studies and team discussions until consensus was reached. We identified 17 mechanisms and 12 practices. The studies contained on average 2.6 mechanisms and 1.7 practices; 89% of studies contained mechanisms and 56% practices. We used the studies as data to generate our framework through induction, although we derived the PSC levers through abduction.

(p21.6) We give an overview of the reviewed studies here to illustrate how past research has studied PSC. Details for all 144 studies are included as a data table in the online supplemental material. This supplement also summarizes analyses exploring whether our findings differ across change processes, targets, instigators, disciplines, and domains. We find few differences.

(p21.7) Regarding the focus of the change process, most research studied individuals (as part of households, communities, or organizations or as members of society; 76%) as opposed to change processes related to fields (industries or markets; 21%). A total of 3% studied both. With regard to PSC targets, 66% studied individuals, 22% organizations, 13% households or families, 13% community changes, 8% industry changes, and 8% other targets (e.g., consumer groups, regions), while 20% included more than one PSC target. The distal targets that PSC projects sought to affect in the long term were communities, regions, industry, society at large, country, and consumer groups (44%, 33%, 23%, 15%, 11%, and 10%, respectively) as well as "other" (13%).

(p21.8) Instigators of PSC projects were businesses (14%) and social sector organizations (nonprofits, social enterprises, and community organizations; 29%). A total of 14% were researcher-led efforts, 13% were led by "other" organizations (e.g., local authorities, business associations), and 31% were efforts by alliances or collaborations. We included sources describing actions by researchers and local authorities, which could be easily adopted by organizations (e.g., distributing recycling reminder cards to households), as local authority services are often subcontracted to businesses.

(p21.9) In terms of disciplinary background (identified through the publishing outlet), 22% of studies originated in management and business, 17% in public health, 17% in political science, and 29% in other social sciences (e.g., psychology, sociology, development studies), and 15% were design studies and practitioner sources.
## (s24) Change Mechanisms-Stimulating Positive Behavior Change
(p24.0) This section presents the mechanisms we identified in the review. We label mechanisms by the change a specific project action (see the middle boxes in Figure 2) seeks to elicit in the targets to stimulate them to change their behavior towards PSC (see the righthand boxes in Figure 2), for instance, conducting training to develop targets' skills. The online supplemental material contains detailed descriptions of all 17 mechanisms, including examples for all four PSC domains and all sources providing evidence (also see Table  1). Here we provide a synthesis of the change mechanisms clustered according to each MCO lever.

(p24.1) Motivation. We identified eight motivation mechanisms affecting targets' willingness, that is, their desire (reason) and drive (energy) to change their behavior towards PSC. The motivation lever aligns with self-determination theory, which differentiates motivation ranging from intrinsic (motivation following from individuals' free volition) to extrinsic (motivation resulting from external influences) as mechanisms of behavior change (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000), which are represented as deep-level and surface-level route, respectively, in Figures 1 and 2. Compared to extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation is generally associated with greater persistence, performance, and sustained behavior change as targets are more engaged, interested, and personally committed.

(p24.2) Projects can stimulate targets' intrinsic motivation by framing PSC issues in their communications in such a way that targets experience them as meaningful (personally relevant and important) and by building targets' knowledge and understanding in a PSC domain. Intrinsic motivation can also be facilitated by setting goals that targets perceive as desirable or to which they commit (e.g., through pledging) or by providing feedback to targets when they achieve a desired level of behavior (or fall short of it and, thus, need to invest more effort). More instrumental, extrinsic motivation for behavior change (surface-level route in Figures 1 and 2) can be stimulated through incentives in the form of recognition

(p24.3) This section presents the mechanisms we identified in the review. We label mechanisms by the change a specific project action (see the middle boxes in Figure 2) seeks to elicit in the targets to stimulate them to change their behavior towards PSC (see the righthand boxes in Figure 2), for instance, conducting training to develop targets' skills. The online supplemental material contains detailed descriptions of all 17 mechanisms, including examples for all four PSC domains and all sources providing evidence (also see Table  1). Here we provide a synthesis of the change mechanisms clustered according to each MCO lever.

(p24.4) Motivation. We identified eight motivation mechanisms affecting targets' willingness, that is, their desire (reason) and drive (energy) to change their behavior towards PSC. The motivation lever aligns with self-determination theory, which differentiates motivation ranging from intrinsic (motivation following from individuals' free volition) to extrinsic (motivation resulting from external influences) as mechanisms of behavior change (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000), which are represented as deep-level and surface-level route, respectively, in Figures 1 and 2. Compared to extrinsic motivation, intrinsic motivation is generally associated with greater persistence, performance, and sustained behavior change as targets are more engaged, interested, and personally committed.

(p24.5) Projects can stimulate targets' intrinsic motivation by framing PSC issues in their communications in such a way that targets experience them as meaningful (personally relevant and important) and by building targets' knowledge and understanding in a PSC domain. Intrinsic motivation can also be facilitated by setting goals that targets perceive as desirable or to which they commit (e.g., through pledging) or by providing feedback to targets when they achieve a desired level of behavior (or fall short of it and, thus, need to invest more effort). More instrumental, extrinsic motivation for behavior change (surface-level route in Figures 1 and 2) can be stimulated through incentives in the form of recognition
## (s26) Organizational Practices as Enablers
(p26.0) Our analysis suggests that organizational practices act as enablers supporting the effective deployment of deep-level change mechanisms in particular. They thereby make projects more or less effective in stimulating PSC. This was especially the case for longer-term and more complex PSC projects. We identified 12 often interconnected practices (see the lower half of Table 1 and the left-hand side of Figure 2) relating to MCO. These capture how to motivate project members, develop project capabilities, build resources, and create opportunities to pursue PSC projects more effectively. The practices are also interdependent: Motivated project teams are more likely to be engaged and willing to build project capabilities and opportunities. The online supplemental material describes each practice in detail along with examples and the sources that provide evidence. Here we provide a synthesis of practices clustered according to each change lever and describe how they enable mechanisms.

(p26.1) Motivation. We identified three practices that help to build and sustain the intrinsic motivation of project members (staff, volunteers, partners, and stakeholders) over the course of a PSC project. None of the reviewed sources covered extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation might be particularly important, especially in deep-level PSC projects, which often extend over longer time periods. Such projects benefit from intrinsically motivated members that are engaged, interested, and personally committed and persist despite setbacks (cf. R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000). Intrinsically motivated project members are also likely to be more effective in interacting with and influencing targets. Related research on service organizations and the service-profit chain reports positive emotional and productivity spillover effects such that intrinsically motivated, committed, and satisfied staff have higher quality interactions with customers leading to more loyal and satisfied customers and higher firm performance (S. P. Brown & Lam, 2008;Hong, Liao, Hu, & Jiang, 2013).

(p26.2) We identified three practices that develop project members' intrinsic motivation by building inspiring shared visions and facilitating feedback. Shared project visions motivate by providing project members with a common meaningful long-term goal, which improves coordination among members and reduces uncertainty about appropriate shorter-term goals and actions (cf. Baum, Locke, & Kirkpatrick, 1998). In PSC projects, shared visions can be particularly powerful by instilling a sense of positive collective identity and purpose. The very nature of PSC projects emphasizes making a positive difference to others, appealing to individuals' universal basic need for relatedness (R. M. Ryan & Deci, 2000). Projects facilitate motivating feedback by generating quick wins, which are small demonstrable achievements in stimulating PSC achieved in a short time span. This allows members to celebrate successes and creates momentum in the project start-up phase or rekindles motivation in later phases or when the change process may seem "stuck." Similarly, evaluation provides motivating information about progress towards project goals. Both feedback practices also enable project members to make sense of the often complex change process and help to alleviate uncertainty, for example, about (in)effective project actions.
## (s31) A Deeper Understanding of PSC Processes
(p31.0) Research on PSC processes is needed to unpack causal relationships. Research could deepen our understanding of the relationships between deep-and surface-level PSC strategies and the conditions under which they are effective. For instance, it is an open question whether, how, and when deep-and surface-level strategies may be compatible and can be combined in PSC initiatives. More evidence is also needed to corroborate the long-term social impacts and effects on PSC targets of both strategies. Such research was extremely scarce in the review.

(p31.1) Similarly, more research is needed to unpack the causal relationship between change mechanisms and organizational practices. Does the organization itself perhaps change in the process of stimulating PSC? Do organizational practices deployed in deep-level strategies trigger, result from, or evolve alongside the deep-level change mechanisms? An example is the relationship between organizational motivation-based practices and targets' motivation. Research on the service-profit chain maintains that the motivation of organizational members is the precursor to clients' satisfaction, suggesting that intrinsically motivated PSC project staff contribute to developing intrinsic motivation in PSC targets. However, emotional contagion processes and research on work motivation and beneficiary contact (Grant, 2008) suggest causality may run the other way. For surface-level PSC strategies, we did not observe a particular coupling of mechanisms with organizational practices. Is this perhaps due to contextual boundary conditions? If so, which?

(p31.2) In conclusion, we hope that our efforts to integrate and "put to use" knowledge generated by dispersed streams of literatures are beneficial in advancing our understanding of the relationship between market-based organizations and society. Management research has much to gain from leveraging existing knowledge generated by disciplinary research and much to offer to help alleviate social needs and advance societal well-being. The time is ripe for management scholarship to engage more centrally with PSC; the opportunities for theoretical, empirical, and practical contribution are plenty.

(p31.3) (using kappa) for these ratings was above .70 for all raters, indicating an acceptable level of agreement. On the basis of the coding of their abstracts, we narrowed down the relevant sources to include in the review from 10,509 to 198. Inclusion criteria were captured by using a decision tree comprising eight key questions supplemented by a protocol of clarifications and definitions of key concepts and by a list of most commonly encountered problems and suggested resolutions. These materials are available from the authors. Any abstracts that a rater could not make a decision on were discussed in the research team.

(p31.4) For inclusion, a source had to report empirical research (either quantitative, qualitative, mixed methods, or a review of empirical research), which had to be evaluative rather than purely descriptive (such as biographies or press interviews). It had to measure or describe collective behavior change of a positive nature (benefitting others, society, or the environment). The source also had to report on mechanisms, strategies, and processes of how the behavior change was achieved, and it had to describe the actions of an organization (broadly defined, see the Review Method and Overview of Reviewed Studies section). Our inclusion criteria meant that we also included studies documenting failed attempts at stimulating PSC. We focused on articles longer than six pages to ensure that research was described in sufficient detail.
