# Fabrication of Microlens Array and Its Application: A Review

CorpusID: 3685601 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42142ae0db9ea3c126bddcf493ac90cd72f17d12](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/42142ae0db9ea3c126bddcf493ac90cd72f17d12)

Fields: Engineering, Physics, Computer Science, Materials Science

## (s2) Fabrication Methods
(p2.0) The fabrication methods for microlens arrays are categorized into direct methods and indirect methods. The direct method does not need to fabricate a mask or a mold insert with concave 3D microstructures. The shape of microlens is usually formed based on the surface tension effect when the material is in a thermoplastic state or liquid state resulting a super smooth surface (arithmetic average roughness R a less than 1 nm) [27][28][29]. More importantly, these methods involve simple and cost-effective processes, which are preferred in industry. However, it is still very difficult to control the microlens precision because the geometry of the microlens is only determined by the controlling parameters such as temperature, wettability, pressure and process time. The indirect methods need to fabricate the mold with concave microlenses and produce the final lenses by replication technologies, such as hot embossing, compact molding and injection molding. Using the indirect method, the shape of microlens array can be well-controlled but the process is complex.
## (s4) Thermal Reflow Method
(p4.0) The thermal reflow method has been used to produce microlens arrays in the last few decades [30][31][32][33][34]. The fabrication process is depict in Figure 4 [30]: first, the photoresist layer is coated onto the substrate to let the UV-light thrust through the mask which has circular array patterns. Second, the photo-resist layer is developed and the cylindrical isolated-islands are then generated. Third, the isolated-islands are heated to a certain temperature, then the cylindrical island will turn into a spherical structure due to the effect of surface tension. In this method, an optical separator is not needed and the microlens array is fabricated by the common MEMS technique. However, the contact angle is hard to control because it is only affected by the wettability of both the material on the substrate and the surrounded air around the microlens, rather than the size of the isolated-islands.
## (s5) Microplastic Embossing Method
(p5.0) The microplastic embossing method is a low-cost and highly efficient technique, which was developed to the fabrication of plastic microlens [29,[35][36][37]. The partial-filling technology [37] based on the microplastic embossing process does not require a mold insert with the desired microlens geometry, and thereby alleviates the surface defects induced by contact between mold insert and injected materials. Based on this method, a silicon mold insert of circular openings with a few hundred micrometers is first fabricated by a deep reactive ion etching process. Then a polymer substrate is placed between the heating plates and the silicon mold insert, as shown in Figure 5. The microlenses are constructed by applying an external pressure at an elevated temperature above the glass transition point for a given time. Finally, the newly formed microlens is cooled down by decreasing the temperature as slowly as possible to reduce the thermal stress and attendant replication errors. The temperature-dependent viscosity and surface tension are the major factors in the fabrication process, determining both the height and radius of the microlens. The applied pressure has a linear relationship with the height of the microlens but has little effect on the radius. The processing temperature is capable of affecting both the radius and height in a complicated relationship. The microplastic embossing method is considered as a one-step molding process, and is not influenced by the quality of the mold surface [35].
## (s6) Microdroplet Jetting Method
(p6.0) Microdroplet jetting, also known as ink jet printing, is another direct method for fabricating microlenses [38][39][40][41][42]. Figure 6 shows a schematic diagram of the working principle of this method [39]. The droplets of a UV-polymerizable liquid are ejected from a nozzle to a substrate. When the droplets reach this substrate, they are exposed to UV light and converted to a solid state with a super smooth shape. In order to obtain a microlens with large a NA (more than 0.4), the substrate is treated by Nano texturing and fluorodecyltrichlorosilane (PFTS) or C 4 F 8 coating [39][40][41]. This method is suitable for fabricating microlens arrays in a large area rapidly at room temperature. However, it is hard to control the consistency and feature size of the microlens.
## (s8) MEMS Based Methods
(p8.0) The standard MEMS methods utilizes photolithography to generate patterns on the mask layer and chemical reactions to etching the curvature of microlens onto the substrate [40,[43][44][45][46][47][48]. Albero et al. [43] proposed a novel microlens wafer-scale fabrication method based on isotropic wet etching technology, shown in Figure 7. First, the protection layers of SiO 2 , Si 3 N 4 and NiCr are coated on the substrate. Then the patterns are generated though photolithography, reactive ion etching (RIE) and the HF solution step by step. After that, the wafers are immersed in the isotropic etch solution to generate the concave microlenses. Finally, the mold is finished after the removal of the mask layer. A wide range of lens geometries and lens arrays with good surface smoothness, high uniformity and repeatability can be achieved using on this method. However, this approach requires expensive equipment and complicated procedures to produce the mask on the wafer. Besides, the control precision of the mask fabrication technology must be improved to meet the requirements in the miniaturization of lenses.
## (s9) Ultraprecision Machining Methods
(p9.0) Ultraprecision machining technologies, such as diamond micro-milling and single point diamond turning (SPDT) are effective methods to fabricate microstructures and nanostructures with good uniformity in a large area [18,21,[56][57][58]. Such ultraprecision technologies are integrated into the process chain for mass fabrication of microlens arrays. Ball-ending milling usually utilizes half-arc single crystal diamond tools to removal metallic materials [56,57]. Metallic materials such as OFHC-Cu, AlMg 3 and NiP can be processed. The achieved surface roughness (R a ) is as low as 5 nm. However, this method needs to machine the microlenses one by one, which severely extends the operation time and increases the cost. To our knowledge, the bottom of the each concave microlens is affected by the alignment error (around 1 μm) between the vertex of the cutting edge and the spindle axis. With regard to this, the single point diamond turning (SPDT) method is performed to produce microlens arrays with high quality by a slow slide servo [18,19,58] or a fast tool servo [21,59,60].

(p9.1) The procedures of single point diamond turning of microlens arrays on a flat surface were described by Zhang et al. [20]. A design model is first generated based on the ideal structures of microlens array. Then the ideal tool path is calculated based on the design model and cutting parameters such as spindle speed (S) and feedrate (F) based on the cylindrical coordinate method [18,19]. After that, the final tool path is modified by considering alignment error, tool radius error and squareness error. Two translation axes (X and Z) and a rotational spindle axis (C) are precisely controlled to generate the 3D structures on the cylindrical end face of the workpiece. The form errors of the microlens array influence the The surface fluctuation appears due to the limit of the machine dynamic response. With regard to this, a new fabrication method is proposed to cut the microlens on a metal sheet mounted on the side face of a cylindrical basement, as shown in Figure 9. After the turning process, the metal sheet is striped off and inserted in the injection mold. Then the microlenses are produced by microinjection molding process. Based on this method, the surface fluctuation is reduced and a smoother surface is obtained, with the surface roughness (R a ) less than 10 nm and the PV-value less than 0.150 µm [61]. One of the drawbacks of this method is that, in order to avoid the interference between the clearance face of diamond tool and the machined concave microlens, a small F number (less than 4) is difficult to achieve. It is expected that the surface finish will be further improved by adaptive tool path planning, considering the dynamic response of the machine tool. Some improvement has been achieved by developing the quasi-elliptical tool servo (QETS) technique when producing a single microlens on the mold [62].

(p9.2) Ultraprecision machining was also applied to fabricate 3D compound eye lens arrays [63,64]. It was reported that 601 individual compound eye microlenses (aperture of 0.58 mm) and the related microprisms were produced in a 20 mm diameter area, providing a large light deviation angle of 18.43° and maximal FOV of 180°, if the entire hemispherical surface is fabricated with microlenses. The microprism array and microlens array were precisely fabricated on a curved and a flat surface respectively, with a combination of single point diamond turning, diamond broaching and micromilling processes [63]. However, the intensity of the microlens on the hemispherical surface is low, therefore the measured FOV is much smaller than the maximum theoretical value.
