# Prospects & Overviews Review essays

CorpusID: 3780728 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/383416eae2a40bb92e2aed66b5e5e38629846a77](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/383416eae2a40bb92e2aed66b5e5e38629846a77)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Dosage disequilibrium introduced by the heteromorphic nature of the X and Y sex chromosomes is compensated by mechanisms that specifically target the X chromosome and modulate its transcriptional competency. The first hint of male/female chromatin difference in mammals was cytological evidence of a nuclear body specific to female somatic cells, referred to as the Barr body [1], and identified as a condensed X chromosome [2]. The formation of this sex chromatin was proposed by Mary Lyon to arise early during development and to result in the transcriptional silencing of one the two Xs, in females only [3]. Balancing X-linked gene products in females through X chromosome inactivation (XCI) is essential for proper development, and failure to do so blocks embryogenesis shortly after implantation [4,5]. In adults, presence of two active X (Xa) chromosomes in somatic cells has been observed mainly in deleterious cell states such as cancer cells [6,7], and loss of X-linked gene dosage compensation is believed to cause aggressive hematological cancers [8].

(p0.1) XCI is triggered by chromosome-wide coating of the long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) Xist and characterized by profound changes of the epigenetic landscape of the inactive X chromosome (Xi) with respect to its active counterpart. Molecular events downstream of XIST accumulation and leading to stable silencing include eviction of RNA polymerases, accumulation of specific histones modifications and variants, changes in DNA methylation profiles, switch of replication timing, and reallocation of the Xi to specific nuclear compartments. XCI is a striking example of facultative heterochromatin formation. In this case, the facultative nature of the heterochromatin, as opposed to the constitutive one, refers primarily to the fact that one X chromosome is packaged into condensed chromatin while its homolog is organized into open, transcriptionally active euchromatin. As XCI is random in most species, the parental origin of the inactive X can vary from cell-to-cell, so that the maternal X can be inactive in one cell and active in the other. In addition, although the inactive status is remarkably stable throughout adult life, it fluctuates during the early life cycle, where the X chromosome undergoes waves of inactivation and reactivation. In fact, XCI depends on a highly wired and dynamic network that connects the process of inactivation to the cellular state. The epigenetic landscape of the inactive chromatin may also vary from one developmental stage to another, and from one species to the next, influencing the stability of XCI and the probability of X-linked genes to escape from this inactivation. Here, we will discuss the developmental regulation of XCI and how this process is connected to cellular states, both within and across organisms. We will also review the variety of epigenetic signatures of the inactive X chromosome, and how they relate to cellular contexts and to the stability of the inactive state in eutherians as well as non-eutherian species.

(p0.2) X chromosome inactivation and reactivation are dynamically regulated in physiological and pathological contexts XCI initiates early in development, concomitantly to cellular differentiation Dosage compensation of sex chromosomes is absolutely required for mammalian development to progress properly. The presence of two active X chromosomes appears to be tolerated in some contexts, which may vary from one species to the other, but these usually correspond to undifferentiated or poorly differentiated states. The first hint that XCI was coupled to cell differentiation came from biochemical analysis of X-linked enzymatic activities in early mouse embryonic stages, which highlighted different XCI kinetics in extraembryonic versus embryonic tissues that follows the differentiation timing of these lineages [9].
## (s1) X chromosome reactivation
(p1.0) The progression to a differentiated state is accompanied by the inactivation of one X chromosome in female. Hence reprogramming toward pluripotency generally leads to the reactivation of the inactive X, both in vivo and ex vivo [33]. The first occurrence of developmental XCR takes place in the zygote, after the fusion of the highly specialized germ cells, the spermatozoa and oocyte, and concomitantly to zygotic genome activation (Fig. 1A). Indeed, the paternal X is inactive in the sperm, an effect that results from meiotic silencing of un-synapsed sex chromosomes that occurs during spermatogenesis (meiotic sex chromosome inactivation, MSCI). However, Figure 1. Contexts for X chromosome in-and reactivation in vivo and ex vivo. A: Developmental timing of X chromosome inactivation and reactivation in human, mouse, and rabbit embryos of different stages (active and inactive X chromosomes are depicted in green and red, respectively). XIST RNA expression is schematized by the colored background. Imprinted XCI (iXCI) is observed in preimplantation stages and extraembryonic tissues in the mouse, while random XCI (rXCI) is observed at later stages of mouse development, and in human and rabbit. The X chromosome is reactivated in primordial germ cells (green halo in embryo and fetus). The X chromosome is inactive in the sperm due to meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI). B: Patterns of XCI in mouse (top) and human (bottom) ex vivo cellular models. C: Genetic and epigenetic instability leading to abnormal XCI figures in cancer cells. the paternal X undergoes a transient phase of activity in the zygote before imprinted XCI is established [34][35][36]. A second wave of XCR is observed in the early mouse blastocyst, when the paternal X is reactivated prior to the establishment of rXCI, but this might be specific to some mammalian species undergoing imprinted XCI, such as rodents, and possibly bovines (Fig. 1A). XCR also occurs later in a subset of epiblast cells that dedifferentiate to give rise to primordial germ cell (PGCs), before meiosis and prior to sex specific differentiation of the germline (Fig. 1A) [37][38][39][40][41].

(p1.1) XCR can also be induced ex vivo during reprogramming of differentiated cells toward pluripotency. Nuclear transfer, cell fusion, or ectopic expression of reprogramming factors is accompanied by the reactivation of the inactive X, at least in mouse cells [42][43][44][45][46]. Whether Xi reactivation occurs when human differentiated cells are reprogrammed is still a matter of debate, but this might be linked to the difficulty of deriving and maintaining human pluripotent stem cells with two active X chromosomes. This emphasizes the importance of understanding the mechanisms governing both pluripotency and XCI reactivation in human, as further clinical applications of disease modeling in female human induced pluripotent stem cells might be influenced by this incomplete reprogramming of the Xi and/or by erosion of XCI [30,47].
## (s2) X chromosome inactivation may be altered in pathological contexts
(p2.0) While XCI is extremely stable in normal differentiated cells, abnormal XCI patterns are a hallmark of some pathological contexts, including aging and cancers. For example, female cells without a Barr body have been observed in breast and ovarian tumors [7], and X chromosome aneuploidies were reported in several tumor types [48]. Although genetic instability due to mitotic segregation errors commonly accounts for the loss of the Xi and duplication of the Xa, recent work has identified major epigenomic remodeling of the Xi in some cancer cells associated with abnormal dosage of some X-linked genes ( Fig. 1C) [49]. Impairing Xist expression in the hematopoietic lineage results in the development of aggressive hematological cancers in females only [8], further suggesting that loss of XCI could play a causative role in tumorigenesis. In cancers also, the presence of more than one Xa is linked to the differentiation status of the tumor cells, because the loss of the Xi has been observed in aggressive, poorly differentiated, tumor cells [7,50,51]. The instability of X chromosome activity in cancer cells might be related to the fact that the X chromosome harbors many genes (tumor suppressors, chromatin remodelers) that are related to cancer progression. Abnormal X-linked gene dosage might thus, confer a selective advantage to the cell, a situation that is reminiscent of human pluripotent stem cells in which erosion of XCI spontaneously occurs in culture.

(p2.1) X chromosome activity is thus, connected to the differentiation status of the cell, and only undifferentiated or poorly differentiated cells in physiological, or pathological contexts cope with the presence of two active X chromosomes. A recent study proposed that XCI is required for differentiation to proceed, because double dosage of X-linked genes prevents the cells from exiting pluripotency [52]. This study, conducted in mouse, identified signaling pathways critical for differentiation that are blocked by the presence of two Xa. This would ensure that differentiation would progress only after XCI has been achieved. A tight coordination between dosage compensation and early developmental transition is further secured by direct control of XCI regulators by the pluripotency network. Whether X-linked gene dosage also controls differentiation in human is currently unknown. There is, however, no evidence so far that XCI profiles of female hESCs influence their differentiation potential; cells with eroded XCI, in which X-linked genes reactivation is irreversible [30], appear to differentiate properly. In that case, however, X chromosome dosage compensation might be achieved through a different mechanism, as recently reported in human preimplantation embryos [53].
## (s3) Xist-mediated silencing initiates in defined developmental contexts
(p3.0) Xist is essential for triggering XCI, yet, it can only do so in certain cellular environments. Elegant experiments using inducible Xist cDNA transgenes indeed defined developmental contexts favorable for the establishment of Xist-mediated silencing. In pluripotent ESCs, for instance, overexpression of Xist causes long-range transcriptional silencing, but this repression is reversible, and depends on continuous expression of Xist. The repression becomes stable and maintained independently of Xist when differentiation is triggered. In contrast, forcing Xist expression in cells differentiated for more than 48-72 hours fails to induce silencing. The early stages of ESC differentiation thus, provide a window of opportunity for the establishment of stable silencing induced by Xist [75].

(p3.1) Similar experiments performed in vivo indicated that Xist is able to initiate silencing from the blastocyst stage up to mid gestation (E9.5-12.5), from which Xist competency to cause inactivation is gradually lost [76]. A notable exception was found specifically in adult hematopoietic progenitor cells, in which ectopic XCI can be initiated. This is not the case in the stem or the mature cell compartment [76]. These results suggest the existence of competency factors for Xist-mediated silencing that are downregulated as cells commit to differentiation in most somatic lineages, except in hematopoietic progenitors. SATB1 was identified as such a competency factor in a mouse T-cell lymphoma model [77]. Its overexpression in cultured mouse embryonic fibroblasts restored the ability of Xist to induce silencing in this differentiated context. SATB1 is, however, unlikely to be the only factor for XCI initiation, because its mutation is compatible with female development [78]. Other proteins that bind to Xist RNA and are necessary for various aspects of gene silencing have been systematically identified, and some of these Xist interactors could also function as competency factors [79][80][81][82][83]. These proteins may contribute to provide the proper context for Xist to be functional, but they are also directly involved in shaping the inactive X chromosome and its particular heterochromatin epigenetic signature.
## (s4) Imprinted and random XCI lead to distinct Xi signature in the mouse
(p4.0) In mice, the molecular bases of imprinted inactivation are set during pre-implantation embryogenesis, and have been studied in vivo in early mouse embryos [16]. Epigenetic marks of inactivation accumulate as early as the four-cell stage: loss of H3K4 methylation and H3K9 acetylation immediately follows the accumulation of Xist, and the exclusion of the RNA Polymerase II on the future inactive X. Accumulation of members of the PRC2 complex, such as EED and EZH2, and the resulting H3K27me3 enrichment, takes place subsequently, at the morula stage (16-cell), concomitantly to that of the histone variant macro-H2A (mH2A). Enrichment on the Xi of H3K9me2 is only detected from the blastocyst stage (32-cell).

(p4.1) The kinetics of rXCI initiation has been inferred from in vitro studies using ES cell differentiation. Similarly to imprinted XCI, the process is initiated with Xist coating, immediately followed by loss of RNA Polymerase II and of active histone marks from the future inactive X [84][85][86]. Dynamics of downstream histone modifications during rXCI, however, differ from iXCI; PRC1 and PRC2 complexes are rapidly recruited, and H3K27me3 and H2AK119Ub accumulate early in the process, concomitantly to the loss of histone acetylation, at around day 2 of differentiation [87]. H3K9me2 enrichment is also observed early in differentiation [88] and simultaneously with H3K27me3 [89,90]. In contrast, association of the histone variant macro-H2A only occurs several days after Polycomb recruitment. Are these differences in the timing of epigenetic transformation of the Xi linked to differences in the kinetics and stability of gene silencing? Studies in pre-implantation embryos have shown that if most X-linked genes are efficiently silenced upon iXCI, some genes are only partially inactivated (Atp6ap2 and Mecp2) or escape inactivation (Huwe1) up to the blastocyst stage [91]. These genes are ultimately subjected to iXCI, as observed later on in extraembryonic tissues, suggesting that iXCI might not be complete in the pre-implantation embryo. This delayed inactivation might be related to the slow kinetics of repressive histone marks enrichment during iXCI compared with rXCI. The partial nature of the iXCI process at this developmental stage might also facilitate its reversal in cells of the ICM, prior to rXCI.

(p4.2) The inactive state of the Xp is, however, passed on and maintained, at least for the period of in utero life, in cells of the extra-embryonic lineage. The maintenance and stability of iXCI in this post-implantation context has mainly been addressed in vitro, through the analysis of cells derived from the trophectoderm (TS, trophoblast stem cells, and differentiated derivatives such as TGC, trophoblast giant cells) and from the primitive endoderm (XEN cells) -and in rare cases, from in vivo analyses [92][93][94]. These studies revealed peculiar features of imprinted Xi chromatin and lower stability of iXCI. Enrichment of H3K27me3 on the Xi has been observed in all cells from the extra-embryonic lineages [93][94][95], yet, to a lower extent compared to a randomly inactivated X: approximately 76-80% of X-linked genes display female-specific enrichment of H3K27me3 in XEN and TS cells, while this number reaches 93% in liver cells [93]. This is in agreement with the observation that levels of H3K27me3 are globally lower in TS and XEN cells compared with post-implantation embryonic stages [96]. Extra-embryonic tissues also display reduced levels of DNA methylation, especially at promoters of X-linked genes [97,98]. Dnmt1 deficient mice show reactivation of transgenes on the Xi in the embryonic lineage, but not in the extra-embryonic annexes [98], which further suggests that DNA methylation does not play a major role in the maintenance of iXCI. Other epigenetic marks further distinguish the imprinted Xi from its random counterpart. Notably, while the Xi is globally depleted from H3K4me2 and H4 acetylation in somatic cells [16,84,85,99], TGCs, which are derivatives of TS cells, display only partial or no hypoacetylation of H4, and only partial hypomethylation of H3K4 of the Xi [92]. Moreover, these cells do not show enrichment in another Xi characteristic repressive mark, H4K20me1.

(p4.3) It remains to be fully understood to what extent this peculiar epigenetic Xi signature in extra-embryonic lineages is directly linked to partial lack of XCI and/or frequent reactivation events from the Xi. Indeed, more genes escape XCI in placental progenitor cells (around 13% in TS cells) than in various adult tissues [93,[100][101][102]. Relaxation of XCI has been observed in up to 40% of TGCs for X-linked genes (Huwe1 and Atrx), which do not escape XCI in other lineages [92]. This confirms earlier results showing spontaneous reactivation of X-linked GFP and LacZ transgenes in cells from the trophectoderm lineage [19,103]. These findings taken together highlight the plasticity of imprinted XCI, which might be linked to reduced epigenetic lockdown of the Xi silenced state in this lineage [104]. It must be noted, however, that in some cases, the epigenetic status of X-linked genes might not fully correlate with their transcriptional state: the gene G6pd displays low promoter DNA methylation in TGCs, yet, it remains tightly regulated and solely expressed from the Xa [92].
## (s5) Heterochromatin signature of the Xi varies across cellular states
(p5.0) Pioneer immunofluorescence (IF) studies on human metaphase chromosomes have defined two major subtypes of facultative heterochromatin on the human Xi: one resembling constitutive heterochromatin, characterized by H3K9me3, HP1 [105][106][107][108], and H4K20me3 enrichment [105] and a second distinguished by H3K27me3, macroH2A, and XIST RNA accumulation [105]. These signatures were shown to be mutually exclusive, each being associated with different cytogenetic bands on the Xi in hTERT-RPE1 cells [105]. Further analysis of these epigenomic marks on metaphase spreads from additional cell lines; however, highlighted a variability in this organization, with substantial cell-to-cell, and line-toline differences in H3K27me3 and H3K9me3 distribution on the Xi [109]. The banding pattern of H3K27me3 appears to be a consistent feature of all cell lines examined; however, only one region, Xq22-23, remained commonly enriched in H3K27me3 in all cells and across all cell lines. In contrast, H3K9me3 was rather found restricted to Xi centromeres and telomeres. Although confined to the organization of metaphase chromosomes, these initial observations already suggested the existence of an epigenetic plasticity of the Xi in somatic cells, and implied that the X chromosome inactive state might not be propagated with a single epigenetic signature.
