# Health habits and other characteristics of dietary supplement users: a review

CorpusID: 3889704 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e64e47437f573eb7d21327bf73f76d14a09fcf](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50e64e47437f573eb7d21327bf73f76d14a09fcf)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Beer, wine and spirits
(p8.0) In the first NHANES survey (1971-74), it was observed that drinking wine was associated with a higher prevalence of dietary supplement use, while there was no association with beer drinking [10]. It was speculated that this was related to the somewhat higher socioeconomic status of supplement users.
## (s9) Reasons for using dietary supplements
(p9.0) Surveys typically inquire about dietary supplement use but not about the reasons for using such products. A report on NHANES 2007-2010 for the first time reports national survey data on consumers' reasons for using dietary supplements [3]. The Council for Responsible Nutrition (CRN) has conducted two series of surveys, one series on consumer use of supplements and one series on health professionals' use of supplements, and these surveys also include an analysis of the reasons given for supplement use [5,[11][12][13]. Table 3 shows comparative data from these three sources, relating to the reasons people give for using dietary supplements. From the CRN surveys, the table shows the 2011 data on consumer reasons for using supplements and the 2009 data on dietitians' reasons for using supplements [5,11]. Improving or maintaining overall health, supporting bone health, and filling nutrient gaps rank at or near the top in all these surveys.
## (s10) Diet quality
(p10.0) People who use dietary supplements are more likely than nonusers to pay attention to their diets and to make an effort to improve dietary intake. In people over 50, in the CSFII 1994-96, the perceived importance of consuming a healthy diet was "a significant predictor of supplement use [7]".

(p10.1) In the Multiethnic cohort, persons who consumed diets high in fat or low in fiber or low in fruit were less likely to use dietary supplements [4]. Thus, dietary supplement use was related to consuming better diets, in terms of being lower in fat and higher in fiber and higher in fruits. The authors of the report on the Multiethnic cohort concluded that the findings "suggest that a 'health conscious' attitude predominates among dietary supplement users [4]".
## (s11) Nutrient intake from multivitamins
(p11.0) In the Multiethnic cohort, nutrient intake specifically from multivitamins was examined. Among 159,017 people who responded to a 1999-2001 survey on nutrient intake from supplements, about 50% reported use of multivitamin products (with or without minerals) [15]. Median daily nutrient intakes from multivitamin/multimineral supplements were well above the RDA or AI for: vitamin A, thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pantothenic acid, vitamin B-6, folate, vitamin B-12, vitamin E, zinc, copper, manganese, molybdenum, and chromium. Median intakes were close to or below the RDA or AI for biotin, vitamin C, and vitamin D. Median intakes of calcium and selenium were much less than the RDA or AI. Ninetieth percentile intakes of nutrients from multivitamins were below the UL except for vitamin A, niacin, and folate.
## (s12) Nutrient intakes of supplement users vs nonusers
(p12.0) An analysis of CSFII, 1994-96, reported that supplement users over the age of 50 were less likely than nonusers to have inadequate nutrient intakes from food alone (as compared to the EAR) [7]. Regular supplement use "reduced the percentage of older adults with inadequate intakes by at least three-fourths for most nutrients [7]". The authors commented: "Supplements had a positive influence on nutrient adequacy for men and women aged 51 years and older. Whereas dietary modifications to improve intake are paramount, the use of supplements by older adults appears beneficial to attain nutrient adequacy [7]".

(p12.1) Murphy et al. examined nutrient intake from food and supplements in subjects in the Multiethnic Cohort who took multivitamins (with or without minerals or other components), compared to people who did not take any vitamin or mineral supplements [16]. Nutrient intake from food only was calculated for people who did not use any multivitamins or other supplements included in the survey (38,374 men and 31,341 women). Nutrient intake from food only and from food plus supplements was calculated for people who used a multivitamin for two years or more but did not take any of the specified single supplements (11,125 men and 9,931 women).

(p12.2) The probability of nutrient adequacy was calculated for 17 nutrients. The "prevalence of dietary nutrient adequacy based on food intake alone was similar for multivitamin supplement users and nonusers [16]". The average prevalence of adequacy for all 17 nutrients in men was 74% for nonusers and 76% for multivitamin users. The average prevalence of adequacy for women was 72% for nonusers and 75% for multivitamin users. When nutrients from food and supplements were included, the prevalence of adequacy for people who used multivitamins was 84% for men and 83% for women.

(p12.3) The Multiethnic Cohort study found that some people consumed more than the UL (Upper Level of Tolerable Intake) for some nutrients from food alone (niacin, folate, vitamin A, iron, zinc, calcium) [16]. When food plus supplement intake was included, over 50% of men and over 40% of women who used multivitamins consumed more than the UL for niacin and for folate. Over 15% consumed more than the UL for vitamin A, and over 10% consumed more than the UL for iron. More than 10% of men and almost 10% of women who used multivitamins consumed more than the UL for zinc. The UL is defined as the highest level of daily intake that is likely to pose no risk of adverse effects for almost all healthy people. As intakes increase above the UL, the risk of adverse effects may increase. More research is needed regarding the significance of intakes above the UL, especially for nutrients such as niacin, folate, vitamin A, and zinc, where the UL is only two or three times greater than the RDA. (For comparison, the ULs for vitamin C and vitamin E are, respectively, more than 20 and more than 60 times the RDA). It would be desirable for consumers and healthcare professionals to be aware of these levels, and companies that market dietary supplements should put a priority on tailoring formulations to provide meaningful supplementation without exceeding ULs.

(p12.4) Fulgoni, Bailey and co-authors examined sources of nutrient intake in NHANES 2003-2006 [17]. They found that many Americans of all ages failed to consume the Estimated Average Requirement (EAR) for many nutrients, when only naturally-occurring nutrients in foods were considered. The authors make no comparisons of nutrient intakes to Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA), but obviously people who were below the EAR were even further below the RDA, which is by definition higher. Nutrients added in enrichment and fortification decreased the prevalence of intakes below the EAR, and the use of dietary supplements further decreased shortfalls [17]. For example, more than half of the respondents fell short of the EARs for vitamin A and calcium, when only naturally-occurring nutrients were considered. When enrichment and fortification were taken into account, the prevalence of shortfalls fell below 50% for both nutrients. When supplementation was taken into account, the prevalence of shortfalls for these two nutrients fell further, but remained above 33%.

(p12.5) These same authors separately examined nutrient intakes from food in 8,860 adults surveyed in NHANES 2003-2006 and calculated nutrient intakes of dietary supplement users as compared to nonusers [18,19]. They found that people who used dietary supplements had somewhat higher intakes of most nutrients from food alone (not counting the nutrients in dietary supplements) than people who were not supplement users. The prevalence of intakes below the EAR was substantial for many nutrients, in people who were not supplement users, as shown in Table 4. The prevalence of intakes below the EAR fell rather dramatically for users of dietary supplements, when the nutrients contributed by the supplements were taken into account, as also shown in Table 4. However, for some nutrients such as vitamin D and calcium, the prevalence of intakes below the EAR remained substantial (25% and 20%, respectively), even including supplemental intakes [18,19].

(p12.6) Supplement use among respondents in NHANES 2003-2006 somewhat increased the chance of exceeding the level designated as the Upper Level of Tolerable Intake (UL) for some nutrients [18,19]. For example, 1 to 2% of adult supplement users in various age groups had vitamin C intakes that were above the UL, and 1 to 5% of adult supplement users in various age groups had vitamin A intakes that were above the UL. Results for most minerals were similar, but the prevalence of intakes above the UL was higher for some minerals. For example, in people 51 to 70 years of age, 14% of men and 6% of women who used supplements had iron intakes above the UL.
