# Can Autism be Catered with Artificial Intelligence-Assisted Intervention Technology? A Comprehensive Survey

CorpusID: 3968293 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e815ba4597f4819e23444e4446fc6f44807c56a8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e815ba4597f4819e23444e4446fc6f44807c56a8)

Fields: Psychology, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Facial expressions play a vital role in our daily lives and our day to day social settings. Facial expressions are an effective form of non verbal communication and provides a cue about emotional states, mindsets and intentions [1]. Facial expressions along with verbal cues typically let us understand what an individual really means. Human beings follow a similar pattern of development in terms of physical and mental abilities and also during the development of basic facial expressions [2] [3] [4]. Normally developing individuals decode daily life expressions of others with whom they interact, and then behave accordingly [5]. Deficits in facial expressions can limit an individual's ability to network with others and impact negatively on health and quality of life [6] [7]. Deficits under certain medical conditions like ASD can also impact social skills, interactions with others as well as the perception of expressions. Similar is the case with individuals facing autism [8].

(p0.1) Neurodevelopmental disorders such as ASD are linked with abridged ability to produce [9] and perceive [10] facial expressions [11]. Defining criteria for autistic disorder, as set by the diagnostic handbooks, and accepted worldwide such as ICD-10 WHO (World Health Organization Researchers studied and utilized automatic expression recognition algorithms to aid individuals having ASD by intervening in social skills, expression recognition and production of expressions e.g by serious games [18] [19] [21] [30]. It has been theorized that technology is independent from inclination towards someone depicting maladaptive behaviors and is just, whoever is using it. While humans (therapists) tend to reinforce maladaptive behaviors unintentionally [31] causing the results to be not concrete or not exactly true to make conclusions. Maladaptive behaviors are behaviors that are commonly and most frequently used to reduce an individual's anxiety, but the results are dysfunctional and non-productive. For instance, avoiding some scenarios because you have unrealistic fears may for the time being reduce your anxiety, but it is non-productive in alleviating the actual problem in the long term.
## (s4) Distinct CAS / CVAT Based Interventions
(p4.0) A question from the researchers that is being handled quite critically, is whether CAS actually is more effective than traditional teaching methodologies or not. Researchers have reported positive outcomes but only in terms of statistical inferences [34]. Some notable studies have specifically addressed the subject of the efficacy of CAS over traditional approaches [50] with individuals facing ASD [22] [51].

(p4.1) Regardless of whether CAS is better than traditional approaches in terms of efficiency or not, CAS can be given preference over traditional methods just because it could be more easier with CAS to devise treatments with unlimited repeats, greater precision and lesser variability thus, ensuring higher treatment fidelity. This would also make it possible to reach-out remote areas at a larger scale by saving cost, due to automation. Along with reduced requirement for highly qualified and trained, expensive, service providing professionals, this also paves way for larger rate of diffusion of treatment, training, and education. We can also discern that CAS compared to human interventions is more effective because the helper or the attendant in human instructed sessions can induce maladaptive behaviors unintentionally while giving individual more attention.

(p4.2) In the facial expression based interventions we have sub divided the categories into interventions that target -Non-Verbal Communication Skills (refer to Section 3.1) i.e. facial expressions, emotion recognition, affect recognition, maintaining eye contact, decision making, etc. -Verbal Social Skills (refer to Section 3.2) i.e. social interaction such as dealing with everyday conflicting scenarios, communicating with people, dealing with people in the society, language and reading skills, spontaneous greetings to peers, etc.
## (s5) Non-Verbal Skills
(p5.0) Communication with people is much more than what a person has to say or the messages given by physiological changes and facial expressions. This includes implicit messages whether intentionally or unintentionally which are expressed through non-verbal cues. Non-verbal communication includes facial expressions, the tone and pitch of the voice, gestures, body language (kinesics) and distance between the communicators (proxemics) but the main focus lies with the expressions of the face. Plienis et al. [31] reported seventeen individuals (aged 4-14 years with mean age 8 years 2 months) out of which 6 individuals had ASD. Individuals were involved in both human and computer instructed sessions in an alternating treatment design which consisted of judgmental tasks. The displaying video was faced by a two key plexiglass response panel that seperated the screen down the vertical midline.The apparatus was situated in a medium sized sound diminished room illuminated by florescent bulbs (2x 15W). Plienis et al. [31] theorized that CAS sessions are equally efficacious to human instructed methods which was contrary to the previous studies [52] [53] but according to the claims of the authors the reason for this efficacy was high quality of the speech synthesizer, developed / programmed to produce verbal instructions for the individuals.

(p5.1) Chen et al. [54] compared computer and human-instructed tasks with four individuals age ranging between 4-7 years with ASD, to understand independently selected tasks. They developed an enthusiasm scale to assess whether CAS was more amusing than traditional human instructed mechanism. Moreover assessing whether CAS resulted in a better task performance comparatively. Like Plienis et al. [31], Chen et al. [54] theorized enhanced motivation in individuals using CAS.

(p5.2) Kodak et al. [55] performed experiment with only one female individual (age 7 years) which showed positive results in showcasing the supremacy of CAS over human instructions. There were several limitations in the experiment performed by Kodak et al. [55], for example inclusion of a therapist to move the CAS to the next trial. Secondly, the CAS was not designed to assess generalization of the targets in a natural environment.
## (s7) Virtual Reality / Augmented Reality
(p7.0) Virtual Reality (VR) provides a framework to simulate real world scenarios using computer vision and computer graphics. Thus, VR technology allows instructors and therapists to offer a safe, repeatable and diversifiable environment during learning for individuals facing ASD [86]. Artificial Intelligence (AI) inculcates human-like senses and provides realism alongside stimulus or environmental control, which facilitates scenario creation required for learning in ASD intervention / therapy. VR advances have demonstrated potential for learning and evaluation of kids, young people, and grown-ups with a mental imbalance.

(p7.1) In the last decade, Moore et al. [63] used VR as a CVAT changing the technological medium of CAS for ASD. [63] used emotional facial expression recognition with an anthropological 'avatar' for individuals of ASD. The CVAT allowed representation of facial expressions and animated sequences conveying emotional scenarios. The avatar displayed four exclusive expressions happy, angry, sad and afraid. The study was conducted in modular fashion. In the first module, individuals were asked to recognize expression of computer generated avatar. Second module was expression prediction. While, third module was designed to test / enhance individuals skill in predicting event that causes different expressions. Analysis of the data was done by relatively comparing the total observed responses to the total responses expected if they were selected by chance. The author reported that 90% of the individuals who participated, were able to recognize, predict and interpret the avatar's emotional expressions. Moreover, they concluded that this CAS methodology allowed the children to effectively communicate with others.
## (s8) Summary
(p8.0) This section presents most influential / innovative reviewed studies in tabular form ( Table 2). The resulting 31 studies (graphically presented in Figure 1) include a total of 610 participants from which 550 individuals had ASD, while the remaining 60 participants were typically developing individuals. The reviewed 31 studies presented different intervention skills which are categorized into Non-Verbal Communication Skills (NVCS) and Verbal Social Skills (VSS) as described above, refer Section 3.   [98] are the inculcation of VR / AR into CAS/ CVAT with respect to non-verbal social skills. Table 2 defined below has the fields described as:
## (s9) Conclusion and Future Directions
(p9.0) This survey describes how individuals of Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are handled by technology based intervention methodologies, which include: contemporary Computer Aided Systems (CAS), Computer Vision Assisted Technologies (CVAT) and Virtual Reality (VR). Individuals with ASD have difficulty interacting with their peers, teachers and parents, etc. Most of them prefer to interact with computers or augmented reality systems, which proves that technology based interventions can be an effective tool for enhancing the purpose of teaching and learning facial expressions as well as social skills. As summarized in Table 2, most of the technology based interventions are not designed to fulfill needs of individuals suffering from ASD completely, as they have variable needs. Major conclusions and future directions drawn from this extensive literature survey are presented below:

(p9.1) 1. Generally, surveyed literature concluded much promise for CAS / CVAT interventions although none of the studies reported concrete evidence that it was able to train or modify a complete behavior of the selected individuals. However, many studies reported significant improvements often through statistical validations. 2. There is a need to design an intervention technology that follows a standard which is accepted to the clinicians as well as to the Artificial Intelligence (AI) research community. An effort to standardize intervention technologies can be seen in a recent study in robotics [101], while Clark et al. [102] & Higgins et al. [103] suggested principles to guide the development of an effective CAS / CVAT. 3. There is a dire need to create standard audio / video database of individuals facing ASD. In the absence of such database making artificial intelligence / machine learning algorithms is highly challenging. Secondly, the efficacy or robustness of published results remain doubtful or uncertain. 4. Most of the researchers described their CAS / CVAT in a therapeutic or a clinical fashioned way. They demonstrated their findings and observations but do not elaborate the architecture and design of CAS / CVAT thoroughly i.e. the way an application is structured and what algorithms are defined and utilized in developing those CAS / CVAT w.r.t. computer vision (CV). While some researchers described and elaborated the architecture w.r.t CV domain [80] [17] [19] [18]. 5. It is required to develop flexible intervention technology targeting the deficit skills in an individualized instruction settings. Designing an intervention technology, it is to be considered that the system design should handle the common problems and cater the generic issues faced by individuals of ASD. Thus, developing a single handed solution that can work with a variety of deficit issues which are described above in section 3. 6. Collaborative efforts are required by the research community of AI, psychology and neuroscience to develop an AI assisted intervention technology for individuals suffering from ASD, to better understand needs of both the worlds. Scientists should focus on to remove the barrier and boundaries between disciplines and move towards a broader perspective of education and contribution towards the scientific community by providing more essential and effective findings.
