# Imaging modalities in head and neck cancer patients- overview

CorpusID: 40342612 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395177140752475fef96facc64388f820cdfd770](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/395177140752475fef96facc64388f820cdfd770)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The last 30 years have seen an increase in knowledge on technical advances in the diagnosis of oral cancer (major advances in the knowledge and understanding of the epidemiology, aetiopathogenesis, diagnosis, management and prognosis of oral cancer, 2009). Accurate staging at presentation of patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is critical for treatment selection: delineation of the primary tumor, assessment of the presence and extent of lymph node metastases and screening for distant metastases (Remco de Bree, 2009). Computerized tomography, introduced in the early 70s followed by magnetic resonance imaging, positron emission tomography, refinement in *Corresponding author. E-mail: ehtaihsham@yahoo.com. Tel: 0988623262.
## (s1) PRIMARY TUMOR
(p1.0) The most important information required before treatment for proper therapeutic planning is accurate knowledge of location, size, extent and depth of invasion of a primary tumor and its relation to the surrounding structures (Remco de Bree, 2009). Sensitivity of FDG-PET (F-18fluoro-deoxyglucose -positron emission tomography) is reported to be 98% and that of FDG-PET-CT 97% for the detection of primary tumors in patients who had newly diagnosed HNSCC. PET alone cannot delineate the extent of tumor (Roh et al., 2007). Since physical examination usually shows the primary tumor, the role of FDG-PET is limited to the detection of the occult primary tumors in patients with cervical lymph node metastases in Sham and Nishat 23 
## (s3) Detection of distant metastases
(p3.0) The reported incidence of clinically identified distant metastases in HNSCC at presentation varies from 2 to 18% (Bree et al., 2000). This incidence is directly related to the stage of disease, particularly to the presence and extension of lymph node metastases and loco-regional control and depends on the applied diagnostic methods (Bree et al., 2000). FDG-PET is a sensitive whole-body technique which has shown potential for the detection of distant metastases (Brouwer et al., 2006). Most studies that used FDG-PET in screening for distant metastases lack fair and controlled comparison between PET and other standard conventional imaging such as chest CT and/or an adequate gold standard such as reasonable follow up (Senft et al., 2008). FDG-PET had a higher sensitivity and had higher predictive positive value. One concern of using FDG-PET for screening is its cost. On the one hand FDG-PET is an expensive diagnostic technique, but on the other hand detection of distant metastases avoids futile expensive treatment. FDG-PET lacks precise anatomical resolution and may over diagnose some inflammatory conditions. By virtue of its high spatial resolution, multi-detector row CT( MDCT) may serve as a cross sectional imaging tool complementary to FDG-PET in evaluation of distant metastases in HNSCC patients and help to characterized FDG abnormalities (Remco de Bree, 2009). Combination of PET and CT in PET-CT is an attractive option, potentially combining the best of both worlds, and providing a onestop shop for the patient .In recent years, dual modality PET-CT has been used to provide accurately fused functional PET and morphological CT in a single examination (Remco de Bree, 2009).

(p3.1) However, in clinical practice the detection of asymptomatic distant metastases during follow-up is of less importance since currently no treatment options with curative intent are available. Unfortunately, comparisons between the accuracy of CT, PET, visual correlation of PET and CT integrate PET-CT were not made. Due to the introduction of multi-receiver channel MR, whole body MRI (WB-MRI) has become clinically feasible, with substantially reduced examination times. WB-MRI shows potential in detecting metastases of primary head and neck tumors (Ng et al., 2008).
## (s4) IMAGING DURING (CHEMO) RADIOTHERAPY
(p4.0) Measurable anatomic changes occur during the course of radiotherapy for head and neck cancers, mainly during the second half of the treatment. Such volumetric and geometric changes can have a potential dosimetric impact when conformal treatment techniques are applied. Compared to pre-treatment CT, the per-treatment tumor volume appeared significantly smaller on MRI than on CT. Per-treatment automatic segmentation of tumor volume on FDG-PET is not possible due to tremendous increase in background signal by radiation-induced inflammation (Robert, 2006).
