# A Review on Chemical Constituents and Biological Activities of the Genus Beilschmiedia (Lauraceae)

CorpusID: 41234702 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a3cc494253f305715ad0367e32be54d00ce82ad2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a3cc494253f305715ad0367e32be54d00ce82ad2)

Fields: Medicine, Chemistry, Biology

## (s7) Cytotoxicity activity
(p7.0) The in vitro cytotoxicity of the methanol extracts of B. erythrophloia showed weak activity against HUVEC (human umbilical vein endothelial cells), MCF-7 (breast cancer cell) line and HL-60 (human promyelocytic leukemia cell) cell lines, showed weak activity with MIC values reaching more than 100 μg/mL at the range of concentration 25 -500 µg/mL [23]. In another study, the B. acuta fruits, leaves and bark extracts showed the inhibition of CCRF-CEM leukemia cell growth of 65.17, 26.35 and 21.33 %, respectively, as measured by the resazurin reduction assay. In addition, the leaves extract also displayed significant activity towards cell lines HCT116p53 (colon cancer cell), MDA-MB-231 (human breast carcinoma cell) and U87MG (human glioblastoma cell) with IC 50 of 4.79, 6.45, and 7.46 µg/mL, respectively. The bark extract also showed activity against the cell line MDA-MB-231 with an IC 50 value of 6.66 µg/mL [24].
## (s8) Anti-plasmodial activity
(p8.0) According to Lenta et al [16] among the methoxylated flavonoid tested for in vitro antiplasmodial activity, 5-hydroxy-7,8dimethoxyflavanone exhibited the most significant activity against Plasmodium falciparum chloroquine-resistant strain W2 giving an IC 50 value of 9.3 µM. The other compounds which showed remarkable activity were pipyahyine and betulinic acid which gave IC 50 values of 3.7 and 5.2 µM, respectively. Talontsi et al [21] studied the anti-plasmodial activity of the isolated endiandric acid derivatives from B. cryptocaryoides. Cryptobeilic acid B exhibited anti-plasmodial activity against the erythrocytic stages of chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium falciparum strain NF54, followed by tsangibeilin B and cryptobeilic acid D at a concentration of 10 μg/mL.
## (s10) Anti-cancer activity
(p10.0) The anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-2, Bcl-xL, Bcl-w, Mcl-1, and A1, members of the Bcl-2 family, have become attractive molecular targets for cancer treatment. The discovery of dual inhibitors acting on Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 could play a significant role in cancer treatment. Apart from that, Apel et al [22] had investigated the anti-cancer activity of isolated endiandric acid from B. ferruginea, ferrugineic acid A-K against anti-apoptotic proteins Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 by using a fluorescence polarization assay. Ferrugineic acid B-C and ferrugineic acid J were proved to have significantly exhibited binding affinity for both anti-apoptotic proteins, Bcl-xL.

(p10.1) Meanwhile, ferrugineic acid D showed only a strong inhibiting activity for anti-apoptotic protein, Mcl-1. Considering the weak binding affinity for Mcl-1 of other tested compounds, it could be postulated that the length of the saturated carbon side chain (preferentially five or seven CH 2 groups) associated with a terminal 4hydroxyphenyl ring, play a crucial role for Bcl-xL and Mcl-1 binding affinities.
