# A Review of IEEE 802.15.6 MAC, PHY, and Security Specifications

CorpusID: 42497499 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7540b9790ef02a5e9e1a18fd5648ea645180dd52](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7540b9790ef02a5e9e1a18fd5648ea645180dd52)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Nonbeacon Mode without Superframe Boundaries.
(p4.0) In this mode, the hub provides unscheduled Type II polled or posted allocations or a combination of both, as depicted in Figure 4(c).   into a single EAP1 period and EAP2 and RAP2 into a signal EAP2 period. When using slotted ALOHA for high-priority traffic, EAP1 and EAP2 are not extended, but RAP1 and RAP2 are simply replaced by another EAP1 and EAP2 period. The following sections briefly describe the slotted ALOHA and CSMA/CA protocols.

(p4.1) (1) Slotted ALOHA Protocol. In the slotted ALOHA protocol, the nodes access the channel using predefined User Priorities (UPs), as given in Table 1. These priorities are used to classify the high-and low-priority traffic. Initially, the Collision Probability (CP) is selected according to the UPs. The nodes obtain contended allocation if ≤ CP, where is randomly selected from the interval [0, 1]. If the node fails to transmit, the CP remains unchanged into an odd number of failures and the node divides it equally for an even number of failures.

(p4.2) (2) CSMA/CA Protocol. In the CSMA/CA protocol, the node initially sets its backoff counter to a random integer that is uniformly distributed over the interval [1, Contention Window (CW)], where CW ∈ (CW min , CW max ). As given in Table 1, the values of CW min and CW max are selected according to the UPs. The high-priority traffic will have a small contention window compared to that of low-priority traffic, which increases the probability of accessing the channel to report emergency events. The node starts decrementing the backoff counter by one for each idle CSMA slot with a length equal to pCSMASlotLength. Particularly, the node considers a CSMA slot to be idle if it determines that the channel has been idle between the start of the CSMA slot and pCCATime. The node decreases the backoff counter pCCATime after the start of the CSMA slot. Once the backoff counter reaches zero, the node transmits the frame. If the channel is busy due to frame transmission, the node locks its backoff counter until the channel is idle. The CW is doubled for an even number of failures until it reaches CW max . Figure 5 shows an example of the CSMA/CA protocol. As shown in the figure, the node unlocks the backoff counter in RAP1. However, the contention fails and the value of CW remains unchanged because CW does not change for an odd number of failures. In the following CAP period, the backoff counter is set to five; however, it is locked at two because the time between the end of the slot and the end of the CAP is not sufficient to accommodate the data frame transmission and Nominal Guard Time (GT ). The backoff counter is then unlocked in the RAP2 period. This time, the value of CW is doubled because there is an even number of contention failures. The backoff counter is set to eight and is unlocked. Once the backoff counter reaches zero, the data are transmitted and the value of CW is set to CW max . We analysed the performance of an IEEE 802.15.6based CSMA/CA for NB PHYs in terms of the theoretical throughput, delay and bandwidth efficiency, as presented in Table 2 [19][20][21]. The theoretical bounds are presented for No Acknowledgement (NACK) and Acknowledgement (ACK) policies. This analysis considers a single sender and single receiver with no collisions on the channel. The theoretical throughput and delay are bounded because of the additional overhead accumulated in each layer. These strict bounds cannot be achieved in a practical environment. However, these bounds can be used by the system designer for network provisioning and packet-size optimisation for different application scenarios.
