# A Review on Aptamer-Conjugated Quantum Dot Nanosystems for Cancer Imaging and Theranostic

CorpusID: 43995000 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227286746d568614be1b1c2ba563a2b3a432ebc8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/227286746d568614be1b1c2ba563a2b3a432ebc8)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Cancer diagnosis and therapy remains a major obstacle worldwide. An increasing rate of cancer mortality is expected to growth to about 13 million deaths per year by 2030 [1]. Currently, six powerful diagnostic modalities including computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET-scan), single-photon emission CT, ultrasound and optical imaging are available for cancer imaging and staging [2]. However, classifying the cancers and delivering proper dosages with maximum therapeutic effects and minimum toxicity of therapeutics are the main hurdles that seems clinicians have to overcome in the field of cancer treatment. In addition, immune-editing process supporting cancer cells in escaping from the human immune system help tumor cells survive and metastasize other organs [3].

(p0.1) In recent two decades, nanotechnology as an emerging scientific discipline has received significant attention in all areas of science encompassing chemistry, physics and biology [4]. Indeed, nanotechnology is ever more firming a foothold in medicine, especially in oncology [5]. Nanoparticles such as quantum dots and superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO) are useful contrast agents for medical imaging with CT or MRI in animal studies [6]. Among quantum dots, fluorescent inorganic quantum dots (QDs) with diameter of 2 to 10 nm display superior fluorescent properties without photo-bleaching in comparing with organic fluorophores [7]. Significant evidences suggest that QDs can be used in imaging [8]. It seems that one potential area of application would be in the development of advanced materials for early diagnosis or convergence of imaging and therapy (theranostic) of cancer.
## (s1) Fluorescent Semiconductor Quantum dots (QDs)
(p1.0) QDs are nanocrystals whose size-tunable fluorescence can cover electromagnetic spectrum generally from the ultraviolet (UV) to the near infrared (NIR) regions [9]. As a rule, QDs with a large diameter emit fluorescence in red region, whilst QDs with a smaller diameter radiate photons in the blue region [10]. Narrow and symmetric emission peaks obtained by excitation with broad ranges of wavelengths render multicolored single QD that enables multimodal cancer imaging [11]. For this reason, these QDs can be suggested as a potential candidate multimodal optical imaging, especially in the near infrared region (NIR), for human studies [12].

(p1.1) The term of QD is generally supposed of spherical nanocrystals in the size ranges of 1-10 nm diameter [13], but it can be produced in the other shapes such as rods and tetrapod [14]; however, the most widely used QDs for biological applications are spherical, and will be the focus of the current review article.
## (s2) Bulk semiconductor physics
(p2.0) Based on electrical conductivity, solid state physics classifies materials into three categories: insulators, semiconductors, and conductors ( Figure 1). The conductivity is generally expressed as the difference in energy between the valence and conduction bands. The valence band has the highest energy level which is occupied with electrons at room temperature. Likewise, the conduction is the lowest energy electronic state that may be occupied by thermal excitation. An electron in the valence band by gaining energy (by the absorption of a photon or thermally) can enter the conduction band and leave a positively charged hole in the valence band. In semiconductors, Band-gap energy (Eg) typically expressed as the difference in energy between the valence and conduction bands are small enough that some electrons could be thermally excited at room temperature to form charge carriers [15].
## (s3) Photo-physic of QDs
(p3.0) An interesting characteristic of particulate semiconductors is that the Eg not only depends on the composition but are also affected by the particle size. Typically referred to as the "quantum confinement effect," this size dependency is remarkable when one or more dimensions of a semiconductor decrease to the nanometer scales. When all dimensions are confined to the nano-scaled ranges, the nanoparticle is named as a QD, which has characteristics between bulk state and individual atoms. The dependence of emitted wavelength on the size of nanoparticles make the development of new fluorescence nano-probes possible for obtaining tunable emission wavelengths. For example, in bulk state cadmium selenide (CdSe) has Eg of 1.7 eV corresponding to 730 nm light emission, while QD of this material can be engineered to emit 450-650 nm by tuning the diameter of QDs from 2 to 7 nm ( Figure 2). Additionally, the composition of the material is another important parameter which alters the Eg of a semiconductor. QD with a diameter of 5 nm can be engineered to radiate photon between 610-800 nm by changing the construction of the alloy CdSe and Te ( Figure 2) [16].
## (s4) Comparison with organic dyes
(p4.0) Organic fluorescent materials are extensively exploited as labeling dyes for fluorescence imaging. Due to the unique spectroscopic characteristics of QDs in comparison with organic dyes, QD opened new opportunities in a number of research areas. As shown in Figure 3, QD emit narrow/symmetric emission peaks [17] (typically 25-35 nm full width at half maximum), which can be exited with a single light source due to the broad excitation profiles.

(p4.1) Therefore, multicolored QD can be simultaneously obtained with minimum optical overlapping, offering substantial advantages for multiplex analysis of molecular targets. Furthermore, QD seems to remain stable and bright after long episodes of excitation, whereas organic fluorophores are affected by photo-bleaching rapidly [18]. For these reasons, QD provide the possibility of real-time and continuous imaging single cells or single molecules over an extended period of time. A: Solid state materials are classified as either electrical insulators, semiconductors or conductors, depending on the band-gap energy (E,) between the valence and conduction bands. The valence bands are below the conduction bands for each material type, and electron occupation is represented by black shading. B: In semiconductor, Absorption of a photon causes the excitation of an electron, generating charge carriers, an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band. These two carriers quickly lose energy as they relax to the band edges, and their recombination leads to the emission of a photon.
## (s9) QDs as contrast agents for optical imaging
(p9.0) Inorganic QDs are commonly classified into major two types depending on their chemical composition. In the first classification, QDs are composed of elements from groups III to V of the periodic table [30]; for example, Indium (In) from group III, phosphorus (P) from group V. In the second classification, QDs are composed of elements from groups II-VI of the periodic table; for example, cadmium (Cd) from group II, Selenium (Se) from group VI. The second category especially CdSe [31] and CdTe [32] are generally utilized in favor owing to their higher quantum yield compared to QDs from the first group. However, QDs from group 2 are potentially toxic because of the release of heavy metals, then, must be protected by engineering a physical shell between the main core and the environment. thioglycolic acid [9], polyethylene glycol (PEG) [21], carboxyl-functionalized groups, as well as amine-functionalized groups [33] are conventional barriers used in reducing QDs toxicities.

(p9.1) These QDs also are used for real-time in vitro [34] and in vivo [35] optical imaging of cancer cells. Cancer biomarkers such as prostate-specific antigen [36], HER2 [37], CD44 [38], and folic acid [39] specifically present in the tumor microenvironment or on the cancer cells surface, can be recognized by the appropriate monoclonal antibody [40], peptide [41], or immunoglobulin [18,42] that are conjugated onto the QDs surface ( Figure 4). In some circumstances, it has been shown that QDs encapsulated in magnetic liposomes covered by Arginyl-Glycyl-Aspartic acid (RGD) ligands have been utilized for the MRI imaging of tumor angiogenesis [43].

(p9.2) Apart from cancer imaging capability, QDs have also be utilized as 'light beacons' in which chemotherapeutic drugs such as doxorubicin (Dox) have interacted with QDs [44]. Once intracellularly delivering aptamer-functionalized QDs that were conjugated to Dox, upon the release of Dox from the nanosystem, the QDs fluorescent signals were on ( Figure 5). 
## (s13) SELEX process
(p13.0) To make the SELEX technology more efficient and less time consuming, the selection process has frequently been modified for different applications and for different target molecules [60]. The initiation step of a common SELEX process is an artificially synthesized random DNA oligonucleotide library containing about 1013-1015 diverse sequences [45]. In the first round of SELEX process, the DNA or RNA pool is incubated with a specific target. Washing process separates weakly bound and unbound strands from target-oligonucleotide complexes. In the second step, the oligonucleotide sequences bound to target are amplified by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) for RNA SELEX or by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) experiments for DNA SELEX. The resultant pool of enriched oligonucleotides would be used in the next round of SELEX procedure. Enrichment up to a saturation condition determines the end of SELEX process. The selected aptamer is cloned and sequenced for subsequent analysis and binding assays including the specificities and affinities. 
## (s15) Cancer cell imaging by aptamer-conjugated QDs
(p15.0) Tenascin-C is a dominant extracellular matrix protein that distributes on the surface of glioma cells. Chen et al. [57] constructed a new bioprobe by conjugating GBI-10 aptamer to the QD surface, and used this fluorescent QD-labeled aptamer (QD-Apt) nanoprobe convenient and sensitive in vitro diagnostic assays to recognize the Tenascin-C molecules [52]. Likewise, Shieh et al. [56] conjugated prostate-specific membrane antigen (PSMA) aptamers with QDs surface to label and image prostate carcinoma cells.

(p15.1) One of the major challenges of bioanalytical chemists is multiplex sensing of analytes specifically tumor markers [4]. Tried to image tenascin-C and nucleolin simultaneously using two types of aptamer-conjugated QDs. they showed that this imaging was reliable and cell line-specific; however, current requirements for cancer imaging technologies include the need for simple preparation methods and the ability to detect multiple cancer biomarkers and evaluate their intracellular localizations [65,66].

(p15.2) Ko exploited AS1411 aptamer (targeting nucleolin) for engineering dual-colour QD based visualizing system to target biomarker with probes labeled with an aptamer and a peptide [53]. Simultaneous derby imaging of the cellular distribution of nucleolin and integrin using AS1411 aptamer modified QDs enables easy monitoring of separate targets in cancer cells and in normal healthy cells. The results suggested that synchronized visualization of cancer biomarkers would be possible via quantum dot-based aptameric nanosystem.

(p15.3) Detection of nucleolin protein expressed on extracellular matrix with AS1411 aptamer-conjugated CdTe QDs was another work that made targeted bio-imaging of glioblastoma cells (U87 cell line) possible [67]. Liu and coworkers developed an effective strategy by which Mucin-1 (MUC-1) aptamer was covalently conjugated to magnetic beads for selective collection and detection of breast cancer cells [68]. Since MUC-1 antigen is overexpressed on epithelial cancer cells, the developed nano-probe containing aptamer was able to specifically detect captured cells.

(p15.4) The MUC-1 is a protein that contains an extracellular domain consisting of 20 amino acids per repeat [69] and a cytoplasmic domain of 69 amino acids [70]. MUC-1 function as a protecting element when pathogens bind to biological membrane [71], and also as a signal transduction pathway [72]. In many cases, higher content of the MUC-1 protein, an extracellular glycoproteins [70] that are bound to the cell surface via the formation of a gel matrix through transmembrane domains [73], are found in blood samples of gastric, colorectal, prostate, breast, bladder, pancreatic, and lung carcinomas [74]. This makes serum analysis for MUC-1 potentially valuable for tumor diagnosis, because almost all human epithelial adenocarcinomas express elevated levels of this protein on cell surfaces. At least, two types of assays based on MUC-1 antibody analyses have been proposed for monitoring its concentration: the CA 15-3 assay and the CA 27.29 assay [75]. Since large amounts of this protein are found in blood of cancer patients, serum analysis for MUC-1 can be potentially useful for early cancer detection. However, effective treatment of cancers deeply depends on the early detection of the malignancies [76].

(p15.5) Although two types of monoclonal antibody-based assays have been successfully developed to determine the concentration of MUC-1, the production of specific antibodies for these assays is a costly procedure and time-consuming. Additionally, the procedures need radioactive or fluorescent labeling of secondary antibodies. In this regards, an aptamer-based nanosystem for MUC-1 quantitation, with an ultimate goal of developing reliable and robust tools, will be useful for cancer imaging and therapy.

(p15.6) A DNA aptamer for MUC-1 antigen was first time selected by Ferreira et al. [77]. The selected aptamers were shown to detect MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Cheng et al. [57] introduced an aptameric detecting system based on a three-compartment DNA hybridization method for MUC-1 identification using quantum dot labeling [74]. The sensor was based on a construct of three predetermined DNA strands including the MUC-1 aptamer, a quencher sequence, and quantum dot-labelled reporter, which represent a strong fluorescence signal in the absence of the analyte. In the presence of MUC-1 antigen, the attenuated fluorescence signal is detected as a result of changes in the 3D structure aptamer strand upon binding to MUC-1. Since the fluorescence reporter and the quencher were brought into close proximity, FRET event (Förster resonance energy transfer or fluorescence resonance energy transfer) occurred between the QD and quencher. The LOD (limit of detection) for this analysis was at the nanomolar level. The method offered some advantages in the early diagnosis of epithelial cancers.

(p15.7) Shin et al. [78] reported QD based probe (emission maxima at 565 nm) covalently conjugated to MUC-1 aptamer. BOBO-3 that demonstrates significant fluorescence enhancement when intercalated into folded regions of aptamer with double helix structure was used to stain the duplex regions, resulting in the assembly of QD-aptamer conjugates over-loaded with BOBO-3 molecules. In the absence of MUC-1 molecules, a FRET-associated emission of the intercalated BOBO-3 molecules is detected when QD is excited at 365 nm. The excitation (365 nm) of aptamer conjugated QDs loaded with the intercalating dye molecules leads to the reduction of QD fluorescence intensity and the intensification of BOBO-3 fluorescence. On the other hand, the presence of MUC-1 molecules bound to the aptamer causes significant conformational change in folding of aptamer molecules, leading to the detachment of BOBO-3 molecules from aptamer conjugated QDs. Hence, a reduction in the FRET-associated BOBO-3 emission and an enhancement in the QD fluorescence intensity are remarkable, which allow development of well-established assay for MUC-1 quantification.

(p15.8) Very recently, [79,80] aptameric optical probes for fluorescent imaging and rapid monitoring of circulating cancer cells [79,80]. Detection of epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM/muc1) overexpression directed to the cancer metastasis provides noninvasively critical information about CTC (circulating tumor cell) occurrence. Shie et al. [56] also exploited graphene quantum dots (GQDs) and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) nanosheets for construction of fluorescence turn-on aptameric biosensor for EpCAM detection [81]. They used PEGylated GQDs as donor molecules and the sensing platform was realized by adsorption of PEGylated GQD labelled EpCAM aptamer onto MoS2 surface via van der Waals force. The fluorescence signal of GQD was quenched by MoS2 nanosheets via FRET mechanism. Specific affinity interaction between aptamer and EpCAM protein, In the presence of EpCAM protein, could detach EpCAM aptamerlabeled GQD from MoS2 nanosheets, resulting in the restoration of fluorescence intensity.

(p15.9) Hashemian et al. [82] introduced aptasensor based on FRET using CdS QDs as a donor and polypyrrole (Ppy) as an acceptor for the analysis of adenosine in urine samples of lung cancer patients. The QDs were covalently bonded to anti-adenosine aptamer where its fluorescence was quenched by Ppy.
