# To Teach Modal Logic: An Opinionated Survey *

CorpusID: 43162780 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c019799ce75fc50a1cee70e7d90dc72b5bcf7aa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c019799ce75fc50a1cee70e7d90dc72b5bcf7aa)

Fields: Education, Mathematics, Computer Science, Philosophy

## (s1) 2
(p1.0) Modal Logic: Philosophical Issues I am going to take a look now at some themes which populated the relationships between modal logic and philosophy during the twentieth century. I think that these examples can serve to articulate a bunch of topics for teaching modal logic. Admittedly, this is not an exhaustive enumeration, but it will suffice to give an idea of the approach we have in mind. I will articulate these issues in a pedagogical approach towards the end of the paper. A very useful summary to start with is given by the comprehensive article by Linsdström and Segerber in The Handbook of Modal Logic [9], where they point out some themes concerning the relationship between modal logic and philosophy that are also relevant from our point of view. They enumerates the followings: 1. The back-and-forth between philosophy and modal logic: good examples are Carnap and Prior among many others, who tried to use modal logic to throw light on old philosophical questions.
## (s3) The Readings of Modality
(p3.0) As it was said above, Carnap and Prior constitute two important philosophical landmarks in the development of modal logic. Thence, it is worthwhile to isolate the philosophical approach to modalities of these authors and to introduce thereby other themes which are related with their work. Lindström and Segerberg observe that Carnap's project was not only to develop a semantics (in the sense of Tarski) for intensional languages, but also to use metalinguistic notions from formal semantics to throw light on the modal ones. In "Modalities and quantification" from 1946, he writes:

(p3.1) It seems to me ... that it is not possible to construct a satisfactory system before the meaning of the modalities are sufficiently clarified. I further believe that this clarification can best be achieved by correlating each of the modal concepts with a corresponding semantical concept (for example, necessity with L-truth).

(p3.2) Concerning Prior, years ago, in a remarkably thoughtful article [10], Christopher Menzel analyzed Prior's approach to modal logic and his deep philosophical concerns. Menzel points out that, for Arthur Prior, "the construction of a logic was a supremely philosophical task". Being a clever logician, Prior joined the virtue of appreciating "a finely crafted formal system for its own sake", apart of its "meaning" or philosophical significance, as well as the power of a genuine logic "to lays bare the nature of those concepts that it purports to be a logic of". This last task can be accomplished only by way of deep reflection and insightful philosophical analysis. Menzel remarks that Prior's search for the "true" modal logic is where this sort of reflection and analysis is more evident 1 . Menzel's paper in its turn is a nice guide "to trace the course of Prior's own struggles with the concepts and phenomena of modality, and the reasoning that led him to his own rather peculiar modal logic Q". It is also an advisable starting point to appreciate Prior's intuitions and the arguments that rest upon them.

(p3.3) Let us also consider Prior's work under a new light. In a recent article about Arthur Prior's work on hybrid logic [2], Patrick Blackburn has considered extensively those aspects of Prior's philosophy which motivated his interest on hybrid logic. This kind of logic departs from traditional logical categories, allowing that formulas can be used as terms. Blackburn's article is also an excellent starting point to stimulate the reflection on philosophical questions, which have motivated the development of modal languages. Blackburn points out that Prior's development of hybrid logic was fuelled by "his most fundamental convictions concerning time and tense, namely that the modal perspective, and in particular the internal view offered by modal logic, was the way to capture genuinely temporal logic". In the early years of the last Century, the Hegelian philosopher John McTaggard posed a tricky argument concerning the unreality of time. McTaggard's argument is based on the postulation of two alternative series, which respectively constitute two ways of conceptualizing time: the A series and B series conceptions. In his work Past, Present and Future, Prior discusses McTaggard argument. The A series considers the flow of time from past, through present, to future. It is an internal and situated conception of time, which reflects the experience of temporality of human beings.

(p3.4) Under the B series, time is a collection of instants ordered by a relation of temporal precedence, i.e. positions are ordered from earlier-than to later-than relations. Particularly, Prior favours A series talk over B series talk, because he thought that the external perspective underlying B series did not reflect the way in which human beings experience time. This motivate, in its turn the development of hybrid logic, since Prior believed that hybrid logic was the A series logic underpinning everyday tensed logic. There are too many connections between Prior's temporal logic and philosophical problems raised by Blackburn's article. I cannot survey all of them here. Nonetheless, the following quotations from [2] will be useful to illustrate an important point concerning the changes experimented by the relationship between logic and philosophy through the years:

(p3.5) It is important to realize that Prior's willingness, so clearly in evidence here, to base the core of a philosophical position at least on the differing properties of formal logical systems, contrasts sharply with the attitude of many, perhaps most, contemporary modal logicians. Nowadays logicians are rather more guarded about the direct relevance of the properties of particular formal systems to philosophy. (. . . ) Much of this contemporary attitude stems from the model-theoretic perspective which underlies current practice.
## (s5) The Nature of Modality
(p5.0) It will be worthwhile to return here to some reflections about modal logic recently introduced by John P. Burgess that we just referred to [3]. According to Burgess' approach, it is convenient to look backward to the origins of modal logic. Originally logic used to "name an enterprise aiming to prescribe the norms of deductive argumentation in philosophy and elsewhere". However, "the pursuit of what were the original aims of logic is now for many inseparable from philosophy generally, and philosophy of language especially. [3] Thus, logic progressively has gone far away from its original motivations. In fact, logic is no more restricted to the study of correct or valid reasoning. Formal systems are studied in its own right. Burgess' observation also enables to see that the original logic's aim is now shared by many disciplines other than logic. In consequence, in order to fulfil this original aim one must cross some disciplinary borders, since it is no longer in the domains of logic alone. Burgess also considers the case of modal logic in particular and thinks that we must go back to the work of Aristotle to appreciate the initial sense of modality that was getting lost as time went by. Moreover, a neglected question at this point is what is meant by "modal" here. And if there is a sense which is particular relevant to philosophy. What is characteristic of modality is the expression of irreality of one kind or another, as it is expressed by means of grammar. It is widely accepted the distinction between deontic, epistemic and dynamic modalities. In the beginnings of modal logic, H. von Wright also made an almost similar distinction. In fact, all of them were of interest in philosophy, but specially the third, which more or less corresponds to what is called "metaphysical" modality. This is the conclusion of Burgess, which is worth to consider in the setting of teaching modal logic in philosophy. The notions associated with this type of modality are the necessary, in the sense, of what is and would have been (could not failed to be) no matter what, and the possible in the sense of what is or isn't but potentially might (or could) have been. The idea of a true modal logic endorsed by Burgess and other philosophers must be interpreted as an effort to put modal logic again in the right way. In the words of Burgess [3]:

(p5.1) Very little of modal logic is devoted to the attempt to determine what are the valid forms of argument involving necessity and possibility in any sense, and vanishingly little is devoted to the original aim of modal logic, that of dealing with the logic of modality in our default sense.

(p5.2) The starting point in this regard is a distinction, which admits two contrasting opinions about modality that have coexisted through the whole history of modal logic. Together with this initial idea of necessity, there would be an idea of necessity as analyticity, which is also unconsciously influenced by thoughts about necessity in the "metaphysical" sense. According to Burgess, the general pre-Kripkean failure to recognize both notions explicitly and to distinguish between them naturally made it impossible to appreciate that different logics may be appropriate to the different notions. As it happens with the precedent observations in this paper, I believe that this thesis about the confusion between two alternatives ideas of necessity can be usefully incorporated in a strategy for teaching modal logic. Among other confusions that one can take into account regarding the application of modal logic, Burgess also considers "the modal distinction between the contingent and the necessary". Let us consider the following examples also from [3].
## (s8) A Modal Puzzle
(p8.0) Let us close this section by considering a well-known tricky puzzle about modality which can swell the list of teaching devices. The question concerning the right modal logic for "metaphysical modality" has already prompted the interest of philosophers and logicians. The most favoured systems have been S5 and S4, though there have been alternatives like McKinsey S4.1. Nathan Salmon and others have developed an argument for the system T, or rather against S4. As you know the characteristic law distinguishing S4 and T claims that if a proposition P is necessary, it is necessarily necessary (or if P is possibly possible), then it is possible. Salmon's argument has became to be known as the "modal paradox". Let us now describe the example which centres in the S4 axiom following the exposition of Burgess [3].

(p8.1) The same principle [S4] would seem to apply to, say, a ship made of a thousand planks. There is an intuition X to the effect that the same ship could have been made of 999 of the same planks, arranged the same way, plus a replacement for plank 473; but at the same time there is an intuition Y to the effect that a ship made of a thousand different planks would have been a different ship. The puzzle is that these two intuitions, X and Y, seem to conflict.
