# A literature review of empirical research on learning analytics in medical education

CorpusID: 4452963 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/695e2fa78255f89ae5983a0ab6177351fe7c3e2e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/695e2fa78255f89ae5983a0ab6177351fe7c3e2e)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Validity and reliability
(p3.0) Most studies did not use usual validation methods to test the performance of the predicting models across multiple courses. [10,13] Nonetheless, 10 cross fold-validation was used in two studies. [10] 10 cross fold-validation is a split sample technique (divides dataset it into 10 equal parts, and uses nine parts as a training dataset and one as a test). [10,16] In summary, evidence is growing toward individualizing prediction models for each context and against using a one size fits all prediction model. [13] 
## (s5) LA in medical education
(p5.0) The number of publications in the field of medical education is still markedly scarce, [25] Despite recognition of the value of the discipline in the medical education literature, [26,27] and exponential growth of publications in other fields. [28] The reasons LA in medical education is lagging behind other educational fields include implementation issues that require advanced technical and analytical skills, the ethical and privacy issues and the lack of awareness about the potentials and benefits LA can bring. [25,26,29] A review of LA in medical education does not yet exist; Thus, the aim of this paper is to offer a systemic methodological review of empirical LA research in medical education to shed light on an emerging discipline to medical educators. The hope is that more researchers may appreciate the merits of the field and contribute to the existing volume of research.
## (s8) Results
(p8.0) A Medline search for the term "LA" performed on September 13, 2017, resulted in 26 abstracts, one article was excluded as it was repeatedly published, 25 unique abstracts remained. All articles were retrieved and carefully reviewed. Five articles were excluded as they were opinion articles, four articles discussed a possible framework or methodology but did not assess it empirically, seven articles were not relevant to the topic of the study, two articles discussed the ethics of LA, and one article was excluded as it assessed the attitude toward LA.

(p8.1) Only six articles were found to be empirical research articles fulfilling the inclusion criteria for this review as shown in Table 1. These articles were labeled as S1 to S6. S1by Choi-Lundberg et al., 2016, Australia, [30] S2 by Manzanares et al., 2017, Spain [31] S3 by Braatvedt et al., 2017, New Zealand, [32] S4 by Pecaric et al., 2017, Canada, [33] S5 by Saqr et al., 2017, Saudi Arabia, [29] and S6 by Scott et al., 2017, Australia. [34] All of these articles were published in the past two years; one study S1 was published in 2016, [30] the other five studies S2, S3, S4, S5, and S6 were published on 2017. [29,[31][32][33][34] The objectives of LA research were quite diverse, S1 aim was to improve students' preparedness for dissection sessions, S2 was to study the pattern of students' usage of blended learning, S3 was to study the pattern and engagement of usage of anatomy e-cases, S4 was to improve feedback and diagnostic skills of radiology simulation, S5 was to predict underachievers, and S6 investigated the learning habits and patterns of final stage clinical students. Regarding data collected, most studies (S1, S2, S5, and S6) collected LMS log data of student access, clicks and time of usage of online learning resources. The other two studies were more limited in scope as they collected usage data of a single online (anatomy e-cases in S3, and radiograph case simulation in S4). Given that most studies aimed to study the patterns of usage of online resources, the analysis methods were basic in most studies, including descriptive statistics and time pattern analysis; this was the prevalent analysis method in S1, S2, S3, and S6. S5 and S5 included more advanced regression analysis and predictive techniques. Most of the studies included only quantitative methods except for S3 that included thematic qualitative analysis.

(p8.2) The outcomes of these results were not far from the objectives they sought, S1 was able to show students' engagement with the e-cases and that e-cases were associated with better dissection skills. S2 was able to show a correlation between the degree of blending in e-learning and students' online behavior and that pattern of online learning can be used to predict performance. S3 reported the pattern and engagement with the online anatomy cases. Similarly, S6 reported the patterns of usage of online resources. S4 was able to use the insights generated by LA to improve feedback given to radiology trainees. Finally, S5 used LA to predict underachieving students at the end of the course and at the mid-course time.
