# Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment Dovepress Yokukan-san: a review of the evidence for use of this Kampo herbal formula in dementia and psychiatric conditions

CorpusID: 4659146 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54201d91679162e2362f0fb9224147198686b72e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/54201d91679162e2362f0fb9224147198686b72e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Case reports
(p5.0) The first report of the clinical efficacy of YKS appearing in a Western medical journal was a case report in 2005 written by the authors' group, in which YKS was found to be effective in the treatment of tinnitus, headache, and insomnia in the case of an undifferentiated somatoform disorder. 26 This report demonstrated the clinical efficacy of YKS in treating both physical and mental symptoms. Since then, other case reports have also described therapeutic effects of YKS. These are summarized in Table 2.

(p5.1) In one of these other case reports, YKS improved psychosis and sleep disturbance in a case of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 1 In a case of an 85-year-old man with dementia that developed after traumatic brain injury, YKS markedly reduced aggressive and impulsive behavior that was refractory to conventional neuroleptics, and did this without producing any adverse effects. 27 In non-dementia diseases, YKS has been reported to reduce visual hallucinations due to vision loss in patients with Charles Bonnet syndrome. 28 There are also reports on the successful treatment of sleep disorders (three cases of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder 15 and three cases of restless leg syndrome), 16 post-stroke emotional incontinence (uncontrollable episodes of crying or laughing in two cases), 29 and nocturnal eating/drinking syndrome accompanied by restless leg syndrome and schizophrenia in one case. 30 YKS is thus widely used for a variety of diseases in Japan. Furthermore, the authors' group recently reported that the addition of Orengedoku-to, another Kampo formula, to YKS was markedly effective in three cases (Alzheimer-type dementia, tardive dystonia, and intermittent explosive disorder) and that this augmentation with Orengedoku-to is worth trying in case in which the efficacy of YKS is limited. 31 
## (s11) Antidepressant-like and pain-relieving effects
(p11.0) To test the antidepressant-like and pain-relieving effects of YKS, a study was designed to assess behavioral and mood effects under circumstances intended to cause behavioral despair. 37 YKS was administered for 14 consecutive days in the drinking water of mice. The mice were then placed for 15 minutes in a water tank from which there was no escape containing a water wheel. In this model, the number of wheel rotations counted as escape attempts. YKS administration had a biphasic effect, markedly increasing the number of wheel rotations at lower doses (60 and 150 mg/kg/day) but decreasing the number at the highest dose (300 mg/kg/day). This study suggests the possibility that YKS has antidepressantlike effects at some doses and counterproductive effects at other doses. In the same paper, YKS was reported to reduce the number of acetic acid-induced writhing responses and have an antinociceptive function.
## (s12) Anti-aggressive properties
(p12.0) Animal studies have also revealed anti-aggressive properties of YKS. This is consistent with both traditional uses and results from human studies. YKS has been found to ameliorate aggressiveness induced by social isolation in rats, 39 by zinc deficiency in young mice, 40 by social isolation in zinc-deficient and pair-fed mice, 41 by the intravenous injection of para-chloroamphetamine in rats, 42 and by the intracerebroventricular injection of amyloid β protein in mice, which is a model for Alzheimer's disease. 43 Additionally, YKS (300 mg/kg) inhibited methamphetamineinduced hyperlocomotion, while YKS at the same dose had no effect on hyperlocomotion induced by MK-801, an N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist, suggesting that the psychopharmacologic effects of YKS might be mediated by inhibiting the activity of the dopaminergic system. 39 Another paper discusses the possibility that the anti-aggressive effect of YKS may be related to the glutamatergic system. 41 Both MK-801 and aminooxyacetic acid, a γ-amino butyric acid (GABA) transaminase blocker, attenuated aggressive behavior in zinc-deficient mice but not in pair-fed mice, while YKS (312 mg/kg/day) attenuated aggressive behavior in both groups of mice, suggesting that YKS ameliorates the social isolation-induced aggressive behavior of zinc-deficient and pair-fed mice through action against the glutamatergic neurotransmitter system and other neurotransmitter systems. YKS's ameliorating effect on the isolation-induced aggressive behavior of zinc-deficient mice is probably related to amelioration of abnormal glucocorticoid secretion. 40 This is because the basal level of serum glucocorticoid, which was significantly higher in zinc-deficient mice, was decreased by YKS administration, because YKS administration to zincdeficient mice significantly increased serum glucocorticoid levels after a resident-intruder test, and because after the test the significant difference in serum corticosterone levels between control and zinc-deficient mice disappeared. 40 There are several reports that indicate that the antiaggressive efficacy of YKS is related to the serotonergic system. In one such study, para-chloroamphetamine reduced not only the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) concentration but also the high potassium-induced 5-HT release in the rat hypothalamus. 42 In the same study, a single injection of YKS ameliorated the para-chloroamphetamine-induced decrease in social behavior but not aggressive behavior. Additionally, chronic treatment for 14 days with YKS ameliorated parachloroamphetamine-induced abnormal behavior, decreased social behavior, and increased aggressive behavior. The ameliorative effects of chronic YKS on behavior were Table 5 Animal studies Antidepressant-like effects YKS increased the number of wheel rotations in a water tank, counted as escape attempts, at lower doses (60 and 150 mg/kg/day) and decreased the number at the highest dose (300 mg/kg/day) 37 
## (s13) Pain-relieving effects
(p13.0) • YKS reduced the number of acetic acid-induced writhing responses 37 • YKS inhibited mechanical and cold allodynia in the von Frey hair or acetone test, respectively 38 Anti-aggressive properties YKS ameliorated aggressiveness induced by:

(p13.1) • Social isolation 39 • Zinc deficiency 40 • Social isolation in zinc-deficient and pair-fed mice 41 • The intravenous injection of para-Chloroamphetamine 42 • intracerebroventricular injection of amyloid beta protein 43 Anxiolytic effects

(p13.2) • Repeated administration of YKS decreased anxiety-like behavior in an open-field test and an elevated plus-maze test in a dose-dependent manner 45 • YKS's anxiolytic effect was inhibited by flumazenil, a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist 46 • Three months of YKS administration improved age-related anxiety in F344/N aged rats 47 • Repeated administration of YKS suppressed rats' freezing behavior on re-exposure to the box where they had experienced footshock in a contextual fear conditioning test and increased the time spent in open arms in rats subjected to footshock stress compared to control rats 48
## (s14) Efficacy of YKS in dementia models of Alzheimer's disease
(p14.0) • Treatment with YKS for 2 months reduced the increased number of entries and the time spent in open arms in the elevated plus-maze test, treatment for 5 months shortened the time until reaching the platform in the Morris water maze test, and treatment for 9 months suppressed the increase in locomotion in the open-field test in the Tg2576 mice expressing the human form of the APP695SWE 49 • YKS ameliorated spatial memory impairment in an early-phase Alzheimer's disease rat model 51 • YKS improved learning and memory impairments in olfactory bulbectomized mice 52 Studies using animal models of other dementia types YKS ameliorated:

(p14.1) • Memory disturbance as well as BPSD-like behavior such as anxiety-like behavior, increases in aggressive behaviors, and decreases in social behaviors in thiamine-deficient rats 53 • Age-related impairments of working memory and reversal learning in aged (24-month-old) rats 55 • Anxiety-like behaviors in rats subjected to repeated cerebral ischemia 56 
## (s15) Studies on other clinical efficacies of YKS
(p15.0) • YKS ameliorated vacuous chewing movement in rats, an index for tardive dyskinesia, caused by haloperidol decanoate 57 • YKS had a reversal effect on the decrease in pentobarbital sleep by social isolation without affecting pentobarbital sleep in group-housed mice 58
## (s18) 1737
(p18.0) A review of the evidence for use of Yokukan-san counteracted by the co-administration of WAY-100635, a 5-HT 1A antagonist. These results suggest that YKS may have two different effects: an acute effect on social behavior and a chronic effect on aggressive behavior. One of the mechanisms of these effects of YKS may be related to its agonistic effect on 5-HT 1A receptors.

(p18.1) Another study suggests that geissoschizine methyl ether in Uncaria hook, a constituent herb of YKS, is a potent 5-HT 1A receptor agonist and a candidate for explaining the pharmacological effect of YKS on aggressiveness and sociality in socially isolated mice. 44 
## (s19) Anxiolytic effects
(p19.0) Several animal studies have shown anxiolytic effects of YKS. While neither single nor repeated administration of YKS had an effect on basal or stress-induced levels of serum corticosterone, repeated administration of YKS decreased anxiety-like behavior in an open-field test and an elevated plus-maze test in a dose-dependent manner in mice, though a single administration had no effect on locomotor activity or anxiety-like behavior. 45 In addition, repeated administration of YKS also decreased stress-induced c-Fos expression in the prelimbic cortex and basolateral and medial amygdaloid nuclei. 45 These results suggest that not single, but repeated, administration of YKS yields anxiolytic effects without affecting serum corticosterone levels, and that its anxiolytic effect may be associated with attenuated neuronal activity in the medial prefrontal cortex and amygdala.

(p19.1) In another study on mice, the anxiolytic effect of YKS was inhibited by pretreatment with the benzodiazepine receptor antagonist flumazenil, suggesting that YKS produces an anxiolytic effect mediated by the benzodiazepine system. 46 Three months of YKS administration improved aspects of age-related anxiety in F344/N aged rats in a study whose results suggest that this improvement may result from the enhancement of serotonergic and dopaminergic transmissions. 47 Another rodent behavioral study indicates that the anxiolytic effect of YKS is related to the serotonergic system. 48 Repeated administration of YKS did not affect the decrease in locomotor activity induced by re-exposure to the footshock box 14 days after footshock stress in an open-field test. In a contextual fear conditioning test, rats that had experienced footshock showed significant freezing behavior on re-exposure to the box 14 days after footshock stress, but YKS significantly suppressed this behavior. In an elevated plus-maze test on the 16th day after the contextual fear conditioning test, YKS significantly increased the time spent in open arms in rats subjected to footshock stress compared to control rats. Interestingly, these anxiolytic effects by YKS were antagonized by WAY-100635, the aforementioned selective 5-HT 1A receptor antagonist, in the contextual fear conditioning test but not in the elevated plus-maze test. Furthermore, the 5-HT 1A receptor agonist buspirone significantly suppressed freezing behavior in the contextual fear conditioning test but induced no change in the time spent in open arms in the elevated plus-maze test. 48 These findings strongly suggest that YKS has an ameliorating effect on anxiety-like behaviors induced by both innate fear and memory-dependent fear, and that YKS's anxiolytic effect on memory-dependent fear induced by aversive stress is exerted via 5-HT 1A receptors.
## (s21) Studies using animal models of other dementia types
(p21.0) There have been several reports using rodent models of dementia other than Alzheimer's disease. Thiamine-deficient (TD) rats, a rodent dementia model, develop degeneration of cerebral cells and dementia-like symptoms, including memory disturbance and behavioral and psychological symptoms. YKS has been found to ameliorate this memory disturbance as well as BPSD-like behavior such as anxiety-like behavior, increases in aggressive behaviors, and decreases in social behaviors in TD rats in a dose-dependent manner. 53 In addition, the same group showed that YKS ameliorates not only TD-induced aggressive behavior and neurological symptoms but also degeneration of the cerebral cells, which provides further support for YKS's efficacy using electron microscopic evidence. 54 In another study, the ameliorative effect of YKS on age-related impairments of working memory and reversal learning was examined in aged rats. 55 The ability to learn initially a reward rule for a T-maze discrimination task (initial learning) was tested in young control (4-month-old), aged control (24-monthold), and YKS-treated aged (24-month-old) rats. Working memory and reversal learning were also examined in delayed alternation and reversal discrimination T-maze tasks, respectively. YKS treatment significantly reversed age-related decreases in accuracy in the delayed alternation and reversal discrimination tasks. These ameliorative effects of YKS on impaired delayed alternation performance were reduced by intracranial infusions of a dopamine D1 receptor antagonist, SCH 23390, into the prelimbic cortical region of the prefrontal cortex, suggesting that YKS's ameliorative effect on age-related impairments of working memory and reversal learning may be mediated by a dopaminergic mechanism in the prefrontal cortex. 55 There has also been a report on the therapeutic effect of YKS in a rodent model of cerebrovascular dementia. 56 Rats subjected to repeated cerebral ischemia exhibited anxiety-like behavior in a plus-maze task, a light/dark box test, and an open-field task. Those anxiety-like behaviors were reversed by YKS administration, suggesting that YKS improves BPSD in patients with cerebrovascular dementia as well as other types of dementia.
## (s22) Animal studies on other clinical efficacies of YKS
(p22.0) There have been other intriguing animal behavioral studies supporting YKS's other clinical efficacies. YKS has been found to ameliorate vacuous chewing movement in rats, an index for tardive dyskinesia, caused by haloperidol decanoate. 57 This effect of YKS may be involved in extracellular glutamate level and GLT1(glutamate transporter 1) messenger RNA expression in the striatum. YKS has a reversal effect on the decrease in pentobarbital sleep by social isolation without affecting pentobarbital sleep in group-housed mice. 58 This prolongation of sleeping time in socially isolated mice is reversed by bicuculline, a competitive antagonist of GABA A receptors, and flumazenil, a benzodiazepine receptor antagonist, but not WAY100635, a 5-HT 1A receptor antagonist. These results suggest that the GABA A -benzodiazepine receptor complex, but not 5-HT 1A receptors, is involved in YKS's ameliorating effect on sleep.
## (s26) 1739
(p26.0) A review of the evidence for use of Yokukan-san and inhibited the head-twitch response in mice induced by 2, 5-dimethoxy-4-iodoamphetamine (a 5-HT 2A receptor agonist). 65 As described previously, YKS's anxiolytic effect on memory-dependent fear is exerted via 5-HT 1A receptors. 48 YKS was also found to inhibit the binding of ( 3 H)8-OH-DPAT (a research chemical used to study the function of the 5-HT 1A receptor) to 5-HT 1A receptors in a concentrationdependent manner. 66 In another study, the ameliorative effects of YKS on aggressive behavior were counteracted by the coadministration of a 5-HT 1A antagonist, 42 suggesting that YKS has an agonistic effect on 5-HT 1A receptors. Given reports that YKS improves abnormalities of the 5-HT system, such as the function of 5-HT 2A receptors associated with BPSD in Alzheimer's disease 67 and reports that tandospirone (a 5-HT 1A partial agonist) improves BPSD symptoms, 68 the effects of YKS on the serotonin system might play an important role in its clinical effects.
