# bioengineering Comminution of Dry Lignocellulosic Biomass, a Review: Part I. From Fundamental Mechanisms to Milling Behaviour

CorpusID: 46935829 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a2228524333352274485cf0e3425a0646e6bb4c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9a2228524333352274485cf0e3425a0646e6bb4c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Milling Processes
(p2.0) Size reduction could be defined on the basis of an absolute scale associated to a metric size or an histological scale related to the structure of the plant materials as illustrated in Figure 2 [43]. Due to the heterogeneous structure of lignocellulosic biomass, the comminution involves generally several steps. The first one is generally coarse milling which leads to organ dissociation (from meter to centimeter) with cutting or crushing processes, then intermediate comminution (from cm to 1 mm) at the tissue scale, with shearing or impact processes, then fine milling at the tissue scale between 50 and 500 μm and finally ultra-fine milling, below the cell scale (<20 μm). Currently, it is not possible to reach particle size below 1 μm by dry milling processes. Thus the dissociation at the scale of the lignocellulosic matrix can be reached only by wet milling which is not in the scope of this review.  
## (s3) Milling Processes
(p3.0) Size reduction could be defined on the basis of an absolute scale associated to a metric size or an histological scale related to the structure of the plant materials as illustrated in Figure 2 [43]. Due to the heterogeneous structure of lignocellulosic biomass, the comminution involves generally several steps. The first one is generally coarse milling which leads to organ dissociation (from meter to centimeter) with cutting or crushing processes, then intermediate comminution (from cm to 1 mm) at the tissue scale, with shearing or impact processes, then fine milling at the tissue scale between 50 and 500 µm and finally ultra-fine milling, below the cell scale (<20 µm). Currently, it is not possible to reach particle size below 1 µm by dry milling processes. Thus the dissociation at the scale of the lignocellulosic matrix can be reached only by wet milling which is not in the scope of this review. In practice, at the process scale, the different milling devices can be compared on the basis of the main mechanical stress they generate. Among them we can distinguish: compression, impact, shearing and abrasion/attrition, illustrated schematically in Figure 3.

(p3.1) The two first mechanical stresses (impact and compression) are similar in the force applied to the materials but in the first case, the energy is given to the materials in a quite instantaneous manner whereas in the second case the energy is transferred during a longer contact time. Impact and compression can be generated by projection of milling media (balls, bars in ball-mills) on particles, particles against one another (as in jet-mills for example) or against a wall or a milling tool (as in hammer-mills).

(p3.2) Shear and attrition act both also in quite a similar way on the materials. However, attrition is a surface mechanism, comparable to erosion of the materials and is generated by friction against walls, other particles or beads. Shear acts rather in the bulk of the materials and is often created by rolling mechanisms, and/or differential velocities between two milling tools.
## (s6) Influence of Milling on the Properties of Particles (Size, Shape, Surface Area)
(p6.0) The main property of ground biomass powders affected by grinding processes is the particle size distribution. Several factors can be used to summarize the whole distribution but the most commonly used are the median size (d50), the percentiles 10th (d10) and 90th (d90) related to the proportion of fine and coarse particles in the powder, and the span which reflects the width of the distribution.

(p6.1) This size distribution is influenced by the grinder type and the process parameters (residence time, velocity of the grinder tools, etc.) [12]. Depending on the mechanical stress, particles will break in different ways as illustrated in Figure 3 [45,52]. Abrasion has tendency to create two types of populations by erosion of the raw first particles: very fine particles and coarser particles resulting in a median average size close to the original particle size. Compression tends to result in particles of similar diameters with a tighten particle size distribution. Impact, by explosion due to the transmission of a high energy in a very short time, will conduct to a wide range of particle sizes.

(p6.2) The structure of the plant materials plays also a key role on the resulting particle size distribution obtained from ground biomass. Most of the time, the different populations obtained are related to the histology and their relative importance are function of the mechanical stresses as illustrated in the work of Mayer-Laigle et al. (2017) on the milling of oat bran in different devices. The authors have shown that four populations (≤1 µm, ≈20 µm, ≈100 µm, ≈500 µm) appear during the milling steps. However, shear generated by the high shear mill and the pin-mill is more efficient to grind the material at the cellular scale, as these devices favor the particle population around ≈20 µm [47].
