# Parents' Executive Functioning and Involvement in Their Child's Education: An Integrated Literature Review

CorpusID: 4791243 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3b268380686e7fd5169ffc59d630b1773461b55](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3b268380686e7fd5169ffc59d630b1773461b55)

Fields: Education, Psychology, Medicine

## (s2) How EF Affects Parenting
(p2.0) EF describes high-ordered cognitive processes that guide control and coordination of thoughts and behaviors mediated by the brain's prefrontal cortex. [11][12][13][14] EF is an umbrella term that encompasses multiple interrelated components and is most often described as having 3 domains:
## (s5) IMPLICATIONS FOR SCHOOL HEALTH
(p5.0) There is robust evidence that practice and training using a variety of modalities improve EF skills in children. [64][65][66][67][68] Among adults, however, the evidence is less compelling. There is some evidence that training can improve skills, but improvements are effortful, appear to be short term, and success in one skill does not readily generalize to success in other skills or situations. 25,[69][70][71] Therefore, the following recommendations are not designed to change parental EF but offer strategies for schools to partner with parents who have limitations in their EF. These recommendations are grounded in the science of EFs and skill development of EF among young people adapted to the recommendations in Table 1 for parents.
## (s7) Help establish and maintain routines.
(p7.0) It is not as demanding for adults to keep doing something consistently, even if it is counterintuitive or counter to their initial inclination as over time it becomes almost automatic. 17 What is most challenging is switching back and forth between ways of thinking about or acting in response to a stimulus. The way something becomes second nature or automatic is through repeated practice. 17 Example: Standardize due dates, for example, book reports are due the first Friday of every month, Show and Tell is every Monday. Have a homework folder that parents must sign off on every week. Share the class schedule with parents. Provide a checklist for assignments and activities.

(p7.1) 8. Be supportive. Create a school community. Recognize that all parents, regardless of age, income, employment, education, or cultural background, want to be involved in their children's education and want their children to do well in school. People perform better and show better EF if they feel they are in a supportive community, one that is inviting, consistent and dependable. 17 A previous study found that parental perceptions and experiences with the school impact involvement where parents who reported more contact from the school and higher levels of school outreach were more involved with children's schooling 74

(p7.2) Example: Listen. Show a willingness and interest in learning about the student from their parents. Include students in parent conferences. Visit parents directly at their homes or other safe, comfortable locations. Invite parents into the classroom. Initiate school-wide programs such as family math night or exercise night. Establish an open-door policy between parents and school personnel. Create an anonymous suggestion or comment box. Embrace a philosophy of partnership. Create a parent buddy system whereby 2 parents are matched with the ability to connect with one another for support, encouragement, or verification of schools' processes. 73 
