# Molecular Sciences An Overview on the Clinical Development of Tau-Based Therapeutics

CorpusID: 4811601 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2182764f0f25d4d668f7c7cd66acd86ea0e8eced](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2182764f0f25d4d668f7c7cd66acd86ea0e8eced)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Modulating Tau Phosphorylation
(p1.0) The robust correlation existing between tau phosphorylation and pathology has provided the groundwork for the search for tau protein kinase inhibitors as potentially useful therapeutic agents. Considering that in vivo tau hyperphosphorylation is most likely the result of multiple protein kinase activities [15][16][17], whether the more effective target for reducing pathological tau phosphorylation is a specific kinase or distinct groups of protein kinases has remained an open question [18]. Several protein kinases, including GSK-3β, MARK, and CDK5, have all been proposed as potential therapeutic targets [19]. Notwithstanding the challenges faced by such approaches, especially concerning the issues of toxicity and specificity, developing protein kinase inhibitors has continued to be an area of intense preclinical efforts in recent years. The most advanced protein kinase inhibition strategy in the clinic so far has been aimed at GSK-3β [20,21].

(p1.1) It has been generally presumed that a meaningful proportion of the therapeutic effects observed with the mood stabilizing drug lithium is due to the inhibition of GSK-3, although the compound has other effects that cannot be disregarded, in particular on the inositol pathway. Thus, a handful of observational pilot studies have made an effort to address the clinical effect of lithium in patients with either AD or mild cognitive impairment, with inconsistent results partially attributable to low number of subjects recruited, low compliance, and narrow therapeutic window [22,23].

(p1.2) Tideglusib (NP031112, NP-12) is an orally available GSK-3β inhibitor [24] that in preclinical studies reduced tau phosphorylation, neuronal loss, and gliosis, and reversed a spatial memory deficit in transgenic mice [25]. Thirty patients with mild to moderate AD were treated for 20 weeks with tideglusib in a placebo-controlled, escalating-dose phase IIa clinical trial (NCT00948259), showing positive trends on the MMSE and ADAS-Cog tests [26]. A subsequent 6-month, phase IIb trial in 308 patients with mild to moderate AD was conducted in 55 centers across several European countries (NCT01350362). Tideglusib proved safe in the trial but missed its primary endpoint and some of the secondary endpoints, thus showing no significant clinical benefit [27]. The compound received U.S. food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency (EMA) orphan drug status and was also evaluated in a 1-year study in 146 patients with PSP (NCT01049399). Again, this study did not meet the primary endpoint [28], although signs of decreased brain atrophy were reported in a subgroup analysis [29].

(p1.3) Another protein kinase that has received increasing attention as a potential therapeutic target is the tyrosine kinase Fyn, which phosphorylates tau in the N-terminal domain in dendrites and also has a role in the amyloid signaling pathway [30]. The repurposed small molecule saracatinib (AZD0530) is a Fyn inhibitor shown to reduce memory deficits in transgenic mice and reported to be safe and well tolerated in a phase I clinical trial (NCT01864655) [31]. A phase IIa multicenter study in 159 mild AD patients treated with saracatinib is still ongoing (NCT02167256).

(p1.4) On the other side of the phosphorylation coin are the phosphatases. Hence, activation of protein phosphatases has also been suggested as an additional strategy to reduce tau phosphorylation, especially in the instance of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A), the main brain phosphatase involved in tau phosphorylation [32]. Activation of PP2A is particularly challenging though, as it has broad substrate specificity and several regulatory subunits, which makes it difficult to identify the right pool of PP2A to be targeted to the right extent in the right place and time [33].
## (s2) Targeting Other Tau Post-Translational Modifications
(p2.0) Apart from phosphorylation, tau is also extensively post-translationally modified by lysine acetylation, which leads to impaired tau function and promotes pathological aggregation, which in turn has prompted proposing the use of tau acetylation inhibitors as a potential therapeutic strategy for AD and other tauopathies [6]. Thus, salsalate-a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) approved by the FDA to treat arthritis and other conditions that cause swelling-has been shown to inhibit acetyltransferase p300-induced tau acetylation and improve tau-mediated behavioral impairments and neurodegeneration in an frontotemporal dementia (FTD) mouse model [34]. This compound is about to complete a 6-month multicenter, open label, pilot futility phase I clinical trial to assess the safety, tolerability, pharmacodynamics, and preliminary efficacy of orally administered salsalate in 10 patients with PSP (NCT02422485). More recently, a phase 1b clinical trial has been launched with the aim of evaluating its safety and tolerability in patients with prodromal to mild AD (NCT03277573). Forty participants will be randomized to receive either a placebo or salsalate twice daily for 1 year. Outcomes include changes in cerebrospìnal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, brain MRI, and cognitive function. The study is expected to be completed by the end of 2018.

(p2.1) Another tau post-translational mod ification is glycosylation since tau has been shown to be O-GlcNAc-modified in human brain. In particular, the carbohydrate N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) can form β-glycosidic O-links with serine and threonine residues on tau. This reversible process is regulated by two main enzymes: O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) inserts O-GlcNAc, while O-GlcNAcase (OGA) eliminates this modification from proteins. Since in certain cases GlcNAc may affect phosphorylation and aggregation of tau protein [35], it has been hypothesized that increasing tau O-GlcNAc could be a sensible strategy to hamper neurodegeneration brought by pathological tau. In fact, OGA modulators have been developed as a disease-modifying strategy for tauopathies.

(p2.2) As a matter of fact, the selective and potent small-molecule inhibitor of the OGA enzyme known as MK-8719 has recently entered into early clinical trials for the treatment for PSP. Clinical development of this compound was initiated with a single ascending dose phase I study in 16 healthy volunteers, with the objective of evaluating the compound's safety, tolerability, and plasma pharmacokinetics. The study revealed promising human pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamic effects of OGA inhibition in blood by measuring the O-protein in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). Moreover, brain OGA target engagement was assessed in a second phase I study, taking advantage of the suitability of the labeled compound ( 18 F-MK-8553) as a positron emission tomography (PET) tracer [36,37]. The results obtained support further clinical development and evaluation of safety and efficacy in patients with PSP.

(p2.3) ASN120290 (previously ASN-561) is a brain-permeable small-molecule O-GlcNAcase enzyme inhibitor that has just initiated a phase I clinical trial in healthy volunteers, following regulatory approval, as presented at the 13th International Conference on Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Diseases recently held in Vienna. The randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase I study was designed to assess the safety, tolerability, food effect, pharmacokinetics, and pharmacodynamics of single and multiple doses of the compound. The assessment of a blood-based biomarker in the trial will support the optimal dose selection of ASN120290 for future studies. Furthermore, a phase II proof-of-concept study for the treatment of the orphan tauopathy PSP is being planned after the successful completion of the phase I trial.

(p2.4) Genome-wide association studies have revealed common variants of the gene EIF2AK3, which encodes the double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) that increases the risk for PSP [38]. Neuropathological evidence has emerged implying the involvement of anomalous PERK signaling in the pathogenesis of tauopathies. PERK constitutes an integral part of the unfolded protein response (UPR). Tau accumulation in cells could activate PERK, which in turn activates GSK-3β, but the precise molecular mechanisms of PERK function in tau pathophysiology are not fully understood yet [39]. Nevertheless, studies on animal models strongly suggest that PERK activation may be a feasible approach for treating PSP as well as other tauopathies. Actually, the small molecule PERK activator CCT020312 is about to initiate phase I clinical trials.

(p2.5) Although not much information is available regarding the specific mechanism of action, AZP2006 is an orally available drug candidate that has been given orphan drug status by the EMA for the treatment of PSP. According to the EMA opinion on orphan designation for AZP2006, the drug appears to work by blocking tau phosphorylation and preventing it from folding incorrectly. In addition, it seems to stimulate macroautophagy, thus helping to clear and eliminate misfolded proteins. The first phase I clinical trials on healthy volunteers (males aged between 18 and 55) was initiated in 2015. These randomized, placebo-controlled studies allowed evaluating the safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of several doses of AZP2006 during a short 10-day treatment. AZP2006 has been well tolerated and, in 2016, additional studies were launched on healthy volunteers (males and females aged over 65) using a longer 28-day treatment period. The compound is finishing phase I studies for PSP and AD in France, although no detailed results are available yet. A phase II study on PSP is planned for 2018.

(p2.6) Nilotinib is a c-Abl tyrosine kinase inhibitor approved for use in patients with leukemia [40]. The rationale for using nilotinib is based on research regarding clearance of tau and other proteins accumulated in the brain of patients affected by neurodegenerative diseases. Although the precise molecular mechanism is not known in full detail, nilotinib appears to penetrate the blood-brain barrier and induce autophagy inside neurons to clear not only tau, but also amyloid-β and other toxic proteins. Promising results in a small study undertaken in 2015 in a few Parkinson's disease patients (NCT02281474) provided the basis for a phase II randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to assess the impact of nilotinib on safety, biomarkers, and clinical outcomes in 42 patients diagnosed with mild to moderate AD (NCT02947893). The study's primary objectives are to test the drug's safety and tolerability (orally administered once a day) after 12 months and to measure whether nilotinib reduces inflammation and the presence of β-amyloid and tau in spinal fluid. Cognitive and functional ability tests will also be performed. Estimated completion date is set to be by the end of 2019.
## (s3) Microtubule Stabilizers
(p3.0) The idea that tau detachment from microtubules leads to a loss of its normal MT-stabilizing function and may eventually result in axonal transport defects and synaptic dysfunction has led to proposing the use of MT-stabilizing molecules as therapeutic agents. Nevertheless, whether MT destabilization is an early and/or relevant event directly involved in tau toxicity in AD or other tauopathies is still under debate [14]. Actually, whereas the effect of tau in promoting MT assembly is unquestionable, a direct involvement in impairing axonal transport under physiological conditions in vivo is a controversial issue in light of some gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies in mice [41]. Interestingly, it has been reported that Aβ oligomers are able to destabilize MT and disrupt fast axonal transport via calcineurin activation in tau-deficient mice, which has led to the idea that MT destabilization might be a general downstream event during neurodegeneration [42].

(p3.1) Among those MT-stabilizing molecules, some antimitotic drugs such as paclitaxel or epothilone D have been tested in tau-overexpressing mouse models. Epothilone D (BMS-241027) is a taxol-derived small-molecule microtubule stabilizer that readily crosses the blood-brain barrier and has been described as restoring the spatial memory deficits by reducing tau pathology and hippocampal neuronal loss in transgenic animals [43]. The compound was tested in 2013 in a phase I multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study (NCT01492374) to assess its safety, tolerability, and pharmacodynamics in 40 patients with mild AD, but no results have been published and drug development efforts for AD have been halted.

(p3.2) More recently, a novel small molecule derived from taxol, termed as abeotaxane or TPI-287, was tested in a phase I trial to address safety and tolerability in 44 patients with CBD or PSP (NCT01966666) and 33 AD patients (NCT02133846). Abeotaxane was administered by intravenous infusion for 9 weeks (once every 3 weeks), with an option for open-label extension up to 3 months. As presented in the last Clinical Trials on Alzheimer's Disease (CTAD) meeting in Barcelona in December 2017, the treatment was not well tolerated by AD patients and led to some undesired side effects in the CBD/PSP cohort. Exploratory cognitive endpoints did not show any significant improvement.
## (s4) Tau Aggregation Inhibitors
(p4.0) Tau aggregation and the various tau species formed (monomers, oligomers, prefilaments, granules, fibrils, insoluble aggregates) along the aggregation process have also been a focus of interest for potential therapeutic intervention. Hence, the use of in vitro and/or cell-based screening assays have permitted the identification of several small-molecule chemical families capable of inhibiting tau aggregation (reviewed in [47]). Although these compounds have shown efficacy through various in vitro assays, evidence of efficacy for inhibiting tau aggregation in vivo and significant cognitive improvement is for the most part lacking.

(p4.1) Nevertheless, a proprietary formulation of the non-neuroleptic phenothiazine methylene blue (methylthioninium chloride)-a compound that has been used for quite some time for the treatment of malaria [48] and is FDA-approved for a number of conditions [49]-has moved up the clinical development ladder in recent years. The compound (also termed as Rember or TRx0014) readily crosses the blood-brain barrier and prevents tau aggregation in vitro as well as in cell and animal models [50]. A single-center, 24-week, dose-ranging monotherapy trial on 321 mild to moderate AD patients not taking acetylcholinesterase nor memantine (NCT00515333) was reported to have shown signs of benefit in moderate, but not mild, AD [51]. Although, the methodology, blinding status, and claims of efficacy have been highly criticized.
