# 06+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES Chapter from the book Aluminium Alloys -New Trends in Fabrication and Applications Downloaded from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/aluminium-alloys-new-trends- in-fabrication-and-applications Durability and Corrosion of Aluminium and Its Alloys: Overview, Property Space, Techniques and Developments

CorpusID: 48639081 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c5a03cbf7235fb264f048e554604524107c9a616](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c5a03cbf7235fb264f048e554604524107c9a616)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s6) 6xxx series alloys
(p6.0) Silicon additions alone can lower the melting point of aluminium whilst simultaneously increasing fluidity (which is why the vast majority of cast Al products contain various amounts of Si). These alloys are increasing in importance in automotive applications for engine and drive train components -however are yet to realise the majority of market share. Heat-treatable Al-Mg-Si are predominantly structural materials (strengths >300MPa are possible), all of which have an appreciable resistance to corrosion, immunity to SCC and are weldable. To date, 6xxx series alloys are mainly used in extruded form, although increasing amounts of sheet are being produced (Birbilis, Muster et al. 2011). Magnesium and silicon additions are made in balanced amounts to form quasi-binary Al-Mg 2 Si alloys, or excess silicon additions are made beyond the level required to form Mg 2 Si. Alloys containing magnesium and silicon in excess of 1.4% develop higher strength upon aging.
## (s12) The property space and corrosion property profile of aluminium alloys
(p12.0) As technologies continue to advance with more challenging applications and environments, a general understanding of durability limits across the class of Al-alloys is essential. Durability needed in a broad sense is the ability to withstand an environment while maintaining mechanical integrity. This indicates a requirement to understand the property space for Al and its alloys. Figure 5 shows a trend that is in line with the notion that increases in hardness (used here as a proxy to yield strength) show increases in corrosion rate. From Figure 5, it can be argued that the data is divided into two main groups, one at each end of the corrosion rate spectrum. High hardness/strength aluminium alloys were found to populate the high corrosion rate space. This is in contrast to the medium to low hardness/ strength alloys that revealed considerably lower corrosion rates. The alloys that show the highest corrosion rates are the 'precipitation hardenable' family. Besides the high number density of precipitate particles in such alloys, they also contain an appreciable population of constituent type particles (Chen, Gao et al. 1996 . These particles are industrially necessary, since the complex chemistry of precipitation hardenable alloys (that can contain up to 10 alloying elements) have significant alloying additions added via alloy rich master alloys. It is also observed that the alloys that show the highest corrosion rates also contain appreciable amount of copper.

(p12.1) The plot in Figure 5 allows one to identify a region of property space (at the top left corner) that has potential for future alloys, with ongoing efforts aiming to reach such space (in addition to controlling ductility). Efforts that regard in are underway, focusing on corrosion rate 
## (s15) Influence of magnesium
(p15.0) Mg is one of the major elements added to Al to improve mechanical properties by solid solution strengthening -and can be found in 5xxx alloys, as well as 2xxx, 3xxx, 6xxx and 7xxx commercial alloys. Mg can stabilize GP zones, has a high solubility in Al and decreases the alloy density. Muller and Galvele showed that Mg when present in solid solution does not have a significant effect on the pitting corrosion of Al which can be understood on the basis of standard potentials of Al and Mg (Muller and Galvele 1977). Moreover, Mg decreases the rate of the cathodic reaction when present in solid solution, increasing corrosion resistance, which may appear counterintuitive, but is rather obvious (as Mg has a very low exchange current density and hence retards the cathodic reaction). In contrast, excess amounts of Mg in the alloy or a long term exposure to elevated temperature will cause the precipitation of either Al 8 
## (s20) Influence of manganese
(p20.0) The addition of Mn is effective in reducing the pitting susceptibility of Al alloys particularly in the context of modifying Fe containing intermetallic particles (Nisancioglu 1990) (where Mn can substitute for Fe, rendering the resulting constituent particle somewhat less noble) The presence of Mn has been noted as reducing the concentration of Fe and reducing the degree of resultant corrosion (Koroleva, Thompson et al. 1999); owing to the formation of Al 6 MnFe has a similar electrochemical potential with that of the Al matrix. However, it has also been noted that an excess of Mn can lead to an increase in the cathodic activity when beyond the solubility limit (solubility of Mn in Al is 1.25 wt%) -with constituents such as Al 6 Mn readily forming (Liu and Cheng 2010 
## (s25) High throughput assessment
(p25.0) In terms of high-throughput techniques, those based on electrochemical approaches are of most interest, since their measurement principles are closely related to familiar research techniques such as Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) and potentiodynamic polarisation (PP), while at the same time offer quantitative information about the corrosion and corrosion protection mechanisms.

(p25.1) Chambers and Taylor (Chambers, Taylor et al. 2005; Chambers and Taylor 2007) first presented the use of multi-electrode arrays for rapid screening of corrosion inhibitors in different concentrations and pHs, putting identical pairs of AA2024-T3 wires into a large number of separate reaction cells containing different inhibitive solutions and applying a 100mV potential between the two wires in each cell (Figure 8(a)). The current between both electrodes was used to determine the polarisation resistance. With this set-up they were able to evaluate for one metal many different combinations of inhibitors and their synergistic behavior, while at the same time showing its possible application for evaluating the influence of the pH on inhibitors' efficiency.

(p25.2) Based on the work of Taylor and Chambers, Muster et al. ) proposed a variation of the method using a combination of different pairs of metals assembled together (Figure 8(b)) to form what was presented as a multielectrode (ME). The basic idea of this ME was to test a combination of nine pairs (or as many as are interesting) of different metals in the same electrode configuration connected by means of a multiplexer to a potentiostat/galvanostat. Measurements consist of applying 100mV between a selected pair of the same metals within the ME and measure the current flow between them, repeating afterwards the same procedure for the other metal pairs. This set up was employed to rapidly evaluate, without removing the ME from the solution, the concentration range at which a particular inhibitor or combination of inhibitors were offering corrosion protection. Hence, the setup allowed the determination of optimal metal-inhibitor combinations, while significantly reducing the evaluation time with respect to conventional PP tests, without the need of a reference electrode, which simplifies the experimental setup.

(p25.3) In a second paper (Garcia, Muster et al. 2010), the authors studied the effect of the pH and inhibitor type on the correlation between the ME and PP for AA2024-T3. The findings were promising due to the high level of correlation between the ME and traditional techniques, although some discrepancies were found for corrosion inhibitors that can speciate or precipitate at certain pHs. Nevertheless, the non-correlation was assumed to be dependent on the type of corrosion inhibitors and not due to conceptual or experimental mismatching between techniques.
## (s27) Staircase impedance
(p27.0) Staircase potentio-electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (SPEIS) is based on EIS, nowadays common for investigating electrochemical and corrosion system. The basis of EIS is by measuring impedance over a range of frequency and the data obtained is expressed graphically in Bode or Nyquist plot format. As for SPEIS, it is designed for impedance measurements over a range of frequency as well as over a range of voltages (similar to the signal sequence used for Mott-Schottky analysis (Barsoukov and Macdonald 2005; Orazem and Tribollet 2008). The potential range is divided into several potential steps and each step contains a DC relaxation period for a given rest time (T R ) to allow the current to stabilize; subsequently followed by an EIS test (Zhou, Birbilis et al. 2010). During the DC potential signal, the current at each potential is also recorded. Figure 10 demonstrates this process.

(p27.1) This method is used to assess the kinetic stability of electrochemical reactions over a range of potentials and pH, which gives a rather detailed insight into the corrosion behavior. In SPEIS however, by setting a range of voltage allows more details observation of how the system response at a particular voltage or 'step', even though it is not sufficient to explain the kinetic processes occurring. As reported by Zhou, SPEIS is able to illustrate the effect of pH and potential on the corrosion kinetics with clarity and able to obtain more information beyond the Pourbaix diagram (Zhou, Birbilis et al. 2010), including structural effects such as alloying, etc. 
## (s29) Summary and challenges
(p29.0) This chapter has given an abridged and focused treatment of the corrosion behavior of Al alloys on the basis of chemistry, microstructure and environment. Understanding these parameters is crucial in deployment of Al-alloys, but also in the development of more durable Al-alloys. It is obvious that alloying (i.e. chemistry) and microstructure dictates not only mechanical strength -but also corrosion performance. In this chapter we stopped short of discussing corrosion propagation such as intergranular corrosion, exfoliation corrosion and stress corrosion cracking -given space constraints, however such topics (along with hydrogen embrittlement) remain critical for structural alloy deployment.

(p29.1) In regards to corrosion protection, we have attempted to cover some modern developments and present some new techniques to assess the corrosion behavior designed to meet the more complicated and challenging requirements of inhibitor selection / chromate replacement. The information gathered from these techniques is beneficial for future protection and alloy development.

(p29.2) Looking to the future, the current strategy to increase strength by precipitation hardening of a crystalline matrix may no longer be feasible if an alloy with strength higher than 1000MPa is required. Methods to meet this threshold include (the un-upscalable) severe plastic deformation method such as High Pressure Torsion (Liddicoat, Liao et al. 2010) -however the thermal stability of these structures is low. Alternatively the strength of Al based metals could be significantly enhanced (up to 1500MPa) when rapidly quenched to form amorphous alloys (Masumoto 1994 
