# Complexity and stability of ecological networks: a review of the theory

CorpusID: 49583525 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/947884589a6622bcbb937f0e5262cacf9cf9d966](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/947884589a6622bcbb937f0e5262cacf9cf9d966)

Fields: Environmental Science, Mathematics, Biology

## (s3) Interaction strength
(p3.0) Weight of an interaction in the interaction matrix Food webs: Paine (1992), McCann et al. (1998), Berlow (1999), Borrvall et al. (2000), Berlow et al. (2004), Wootton and Emmerson (2005), Rooney et al. (2006) and Otto et al. (2007) Mutualism: Okuyama and Holland (2008), Allesina and Tang (2012), Rohr et al. (2014) and Suweis et al. (2015) Competition: Lawlor (1980), Hughes and Roughgarden (1998), Kokkoris et al. (1999Kokkoris et al. ( , 2002, Christianou and Kokkoris (2008) and Allesina and Tang (2012) 
## (s11) Weighted connectance
(p11.0) Only a recent study by van Altena et al. (2016) started its use into the complexity-stability context, although they found that there is no relationship between food web stability and unweighted connectance and that a high level of weighted connectance stabilizes food webs. Following a different perspective, Haydon (2000) focused on communities constructed to be as stable as they could be, and show that communities built in this way require high levels of weighted connectance, in agreement with van Altena et al. (2016). According to these studies, high stability requires high connectance, especially between weakly and strongly self-regulated (intraspecific competition) elements of the community.
## (s12) Degree distribution
(p12.0) Degree distribution in food webs differ from a Poisson distribution (typical of random networks). However, there is no universal shape that fits food webs degree distribution. Most of the webs display exponential degree distribution (Camacho et al. 2002;Dunne et al. 2002b) and those with high connectance show a uniform distribution. Power-law and truncated power-law with an exponential drop-off in the tail also fit few of food webs degree distribution (mostly those having very low connectance) (Dunne et al. 2002b;Montoya and Solé 2002).

(p12.1) The skewness of degree distribution, especially exponential-type degree distribution (Dunne and Williams 2009) makes food webs more robust to targeted removals (from the most generalists) (Solé and Montoya 2001;Dunne et al. 2002a). However, the hierarchical feeding feature due to size scaling laws imposes a cost to food web robustness (Dunne and Williams 2009).  showed that broad degree distributions tend to stabilize (in term of asymptotic stability of the community matrix) large size-structured food webs, obtained either empirically or with the cascade and niche models.
## (s18) Degree distribution
(p18.0) Although network size and connectance partially determine the complexity of the network, they discard important information regarding individual species connectivity as well as distribution of the overall connectivity among species (node degree distribution). Early studies on species connectivity in mutualistic networks mainly concentrated on how interactions are distributed among species. Attentions were mainly focused on the prevalence of either generalists or specialists in mutualistic networks (Waser et al. 1996;Memmott 1999;Vázquez and Aizen 2003). Stimulated by these early studies, Jordano et al. (2003) found generalized patterns in the node degree distribution of a large number of plant-pollinator and plant-frugivore networks. Most of the networks showed a distribution of node degree that fits a truncated power-law regime, suggesting the prevalence of specialists and the rarity of super generalists. Few of the networks showed a power-law or an exponential distribution in their node degree. Moreover, gamma distribution was also found to best fit the distribution of node degree in mutualistic networks (Okuyama 2008). The heterogeneity of node degree distribution was found years later to be a primary factor affecting negatively the local stability of mutualistic networks (Feng and Takemoto 2014). However, when node degrees are considered individually for each species, they were shown to be a good predictor of species own survival and thus of the community persistence (James et al. 2012).
## (s19) Strength of interactions
(p19.0) Instead of only considering qualitative interactions (presence or absence), quantitative measurement of strength of interaction also prevails in mutualistic network studies. In plant-pollinator as well as in plant-frugivory interactions, strength of interaction often refers to the relative number of visits of the animal to the plant. Jordano (1987) observed an extremely skewed distribution of species dependences in mutualistic communities: weak dependences greatly exceed in number strong ones. By including more datasets in their  Bascompte et al. (2006) confirmed Jordano's (1987) finding of a skewed distribution of interaction dependences. Additionally, mutualistic networks were also found to be highly asymmetric in terms of species roles: while animals depend strongly on the plants, plants rely poorly on their animal pollinators or seed dispersers (Bascompte et al. 2006). The maintenance of biodiversity was suggested to be facilitated by both the heterogeneity of species strength distribution and the asymmetry of species dependences (Bascompte et al. 2006). Localization, or the ability of the system to reduce the propagation of perturbations through the network, has also been shown to be enhanced by the heterogeneity of species strength distribution (Suweis et al. 2015). Notice that Suweis et al. (2015) defined the strength of a species as its weighted degree or the sum of interaction strengths in which the species is involved. Opposed to the finding of Bascompte et al. (2006) who used a linear functional response in their model, Okuyama and Holland (2008) argued that the asymmetry of species dependences, implying an asymmetry of strength of interaction between animals and plants (measured as similarity of the pairwise half-saturation constants), has a negative effect (although small) on the resilience of mutualistic communities when a nonlinear functional response is used. Feng and Takemoto (2014) also showed that the heterogeneity of the distribution of strength of interaction (estimated from visiting frequencies adjusted for uneven species abundances) indeed impacts negatively on the local stability of mutualistic communities. Moreover, by also using a saturating functional response, Rohr et al. (2014) demonstrated that regardless of the distribution of interaction strength, mutualistic communities that have on average a high level of interaction strength are more likely to be structurally stable (have a wider domain of feasible and stable coexistence).
## (s21) Competitive communities
(p21.0) Competitive interactions have sometimes been considered together with trophic interactions in food webs models, and their contribution to stability assessed. There is common agreement that self-regulating interactions due to intraspecific competition (i.e., negative terms on the diagonal of the interaction or community matrix) increase stability. For example, De Angelis (1975), using plausible food web models, showed that the probability of stability increases if the food web is characterized by a bias toward strong self-regulation (intraspecific competition) of higher trophic level species. Haydon (1994) found a similar result, i.e., that considering intraspecific competition increases food web stability. Again, Haydon (2000) focused on communities constructed to be as stable as they could be, and show that communities built in this way require high connectance between weakly and strongly self-regulated (intra-specific competition) elements of the community. Neutel et al. (2002) showed and explain mathematically that the patterning of real food web Jacobian elements enhances stability because it reduces the amount of intraspecific interaction needed for matrix stability. Yodzis (1981) also found that the presence of selfregulatory terms (intraspecific competition) in some consumer species stabilizes the network. However, the role of interspecific competition is less clear. For example, Yodzis (1981) showed that interspecific competition tends to be destabilizing: assuming that interspecific competition only happens among consumers sharing resources, he found that the fraction of stable community matrices decreases with the number of competitive pairs. By contrast, Allesina and Tang (2012) showed that competitive interactions are destabilizing, in the sense that the number of species S and the connectance C that result in an unstable equilibrium are lower for competitive rather than trophic communities.

(p21.1) In the 1970s, it was believed that ecological communities were structured by competitive interactions (e.g., MacArthur 1972). Theoretically speaking, purely competitive communities are simpler compared to food webs and mutualistic networks because they are composed of only one trophic level. Thus, the simplicity of competitive communities makes them an ideal theoretical framework for studying the relationship between community complexity and stability, and studies relating biodiversity and ecosystem function tended to focus on the diversity of primary producers (e.g., Hooper et al. 2005). For these reasons, extensive experimental (Lawlor 1980;Tilman and Downing 1994;Tilman 1996;Lehman and Tilman 2000) and theoretical (Lawlor 1980;Tilman et al. 1997Tilman et al. , 1998Doak et al. 1998;Tilman 1999;Cottingham et al. 2001) studies have been done on the relation between species richness of plants and community stability (Table 6).
## (s22) Species richness
(p22.0) Species richness has been reported to affect the stability of competitive communities. Tilman and Downing (1994) empirically showed that primary productivity in more diverse plant communities is more resistant and recovers fully after a major drought. Tilman et al. (1997) confirmed such findings using theoretical competition models. Doak et al. (1998) however showed that such result could be statistically inevitable using the temporal variation in aggregate community properties as indicators of stability (see also Tilman et al. 1998 for a reply). Lehman and Tilman (2000) analysed different models of multispecies competition and empirical data (Tilman 1996), finding that greater diversity increases the temporal stability of the entire community but decreases the temporal stability of individual populations. Specifically, temporal stability of the entire community increases fairly linearly without saturation with increased diversity. Species composition of each community was also predicted to be as important as diversity in affecting community stability. The work by Tilman (1999) summarizes the empirical and theoretical positive relationship between species diversity and community stability, primary productivity, and invasibility in grassland competitive communities (see, however, the critical review in Cottingham et al. 2001). Lawlor (1980) compared observed communities (defined by symmetric interaction matrices where each competition coefficient is given by a measure of overlap of resource utilization) with analogous randomized versions of them (note that he randomizes the resources utilization spectra rather than the competition coefficients themselves): he found that stability of observed communities decreases with the number of species, however, observed communities are generally more stable than randomly constructed communities with the same number of species. The higher stability of observed (compared to random) communities is due to lower similarities among consumer species, suggesting that interspecific competitive processes are very important in shaping communities. Christianou and Kokkoris (2008) reported that increasing the number of species in the community also decreases the probability of feasibility of the system, however, species richness does not significantly affect the probability (proportion of random communities) of local stability and the resilience of feasible competitive communities. By contrast, Fowler (2009) demonstrated that increasing the number of species in a discrete-time competition model (both symmetric and asymmetric, with a skew towards weak interactions) results in an increased probability (species growth rate parameters region) of local stability in competitive feasible communities: increasing the competitive negative feedbacks adding more species or links in the network dampens oscillatory dynamics and contributes to equilibrium stability.
## (s24) Strength of interactions
(p24.0) Most studies on competitive communities focused on the implication of competition coefficients, i.e., interactions strengths, on community stability. However, different Negative complexity-stability relationship Lawlor (1980) S-Asymptotic stability Lead eigenvalue of random vs. observed symmetric interaction (overlap) matrices

(p24.1) Observed communities are generally more stable than randomly constructed communities with the same number of species Lehman and Tilman (2000) S-Asymptotic, temporal stability Lead eigenvalue and simulations of three different models (mechanistic, phenomenological, statistical) and empirical time series in competitive compared to trophic communities measurements of stability have been used. For example, Hughes and Roughgarden (1998) studied temporal stability measured as the aggregate community biomass in a discrete time two-species competition model. They found that temporal stability is relatively independent of the magnitude of interaction strengths but the degree of asymmetry of interactions is the key to community stability. Quantifying the stability of the community by its invulnerability to invasion, Kokkoris et al. (1999) studied the distribution of interaction strengths (competition coefficients)-not Jacobian elements-during the assembly process of theoretical competitive communities. They found that the mean interaction strength drops as assembly progresses and most interactions that are formed are weak. It suggests that communities that are invulnerable to further invasion are those where interspecific interactions are weaker than the average interaction strength between competing species of a regional pool. In a later study (Kokkoris et al. 2002), the same authors explored how the number of coexisting species vary with the average interaction strength. Confirming their previous finding on the importance of weak interactions to community stability, they found that the preponderance of weak interactions indeed allow many species to coexist. Moreover, correlation in the interaction matrix, mainly a result of trade-offs between species characteristics, can increase the probability of species coexistence. Christianou and Kokkoris (2008) even deepened the study on the importance of weak interactions to stability by considering system feasibility of a competitive community. Consistent with previous findings, they showed that the probability of feasibility decreases with increasing interaction strength.
## (s26) Trait-mediated interactions and adaptive networks: food webs
(p26.0) The discussion thus far has implicitly assumed that links among species remain unchanged over time. This is often a simplifying assumption, as adaptive foraging (see review in Valdovinos et al. 2010) or other forms of adaptive behaviour in response, e.g., to environmental changes (Strona and Lafferty 2016) can often cause links to form, change in strength, or disappear as time progresses. Adaptive networks has been shown to reproduce realistic food-web structures (Nuwagaba et al. 2015), to promote stability (Nuwagaba et al. 2017), and to allow for positive complexity-stability relationships. For example, Kondoh (2003) and Kondoh (2006) showed that foraging adaptation enhances stability of trophic communities. Without adaptation, complexity is destabilizing, while adaptive foragers help buffering environmental fluctuations resulting in a positive relationship between complexity and persistence. Visser et al. (2012) examined the effect of adaptive foraging behaviour within a tri-trophic food web and demonstrated that adaptive behaviour will always promote stability of community dynamics.

(p26.1) Predator-prey body mass ratio, affecting the interaction strength distribution, contributes largely to food-web stability (Emmerson and Raffaelli 2004;Brose et al. 2006;Otto et al. 2007). Heckmann et al. (2012) combined this allometric body-size structure and adaptive foraging behaviour in random and niche food web models with nonlinear functional responses, showing that both body-size structure and adaptation increase the number of persisting species through stabilising interaction strength distributions Moreover, adaptive foraging explains emergence of size-structured food webs (in which predators tend to focus on prey on lower trophic levels and with smaller body sizes) from random ones, linking these two stabilising mechanisms.

(p26.2) Trait adaptation can also be modelled and give rise to complex trophic interaction networks (Brännström et al. 2011(Brännström et al. , 2012Landi et al. 2013Landi et al. , 2015Hui et al. 2018), and their complexity-stability relationship assessed (Kondoh 2007;Ingram et al. 2009). In particular, Kondoh (2007) studied adaptation in predator-specific defence traits, reporting its unimodal effect on the complexity-stability (connectance-persistence and robustness) relationship, while species richness always has a negative impact on stability. Ingram et al. (2009) studied body size and niche width adaptation in different environmental conditions, emphasizing a positive correlation between omnivory with temporal variability and species turnover through extinctions and invasions-speciations.
