# The evolution of nucleoside analogue antivirals: A review for chemists and non-chemists. Part 1: Early structural modifications to the nucleoside scaffold

CorpusID: 4976297 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/862110c1ddf0008f7297bf01bc35b44796ff90e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/862110c1ddf0008f7297bf01bc35b44796ff90e3)

Fields: Engineering, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s3) 3′-OH modifications
(p3.0) Due to the initial success with the 2′-modified nucleoside analogues, scientists also explored modifications at the 3′ carbon. Some of the first 3′ modified nucleosides include 3′-methyl analogues such as 3′-C-methyluridine and 3′-C-methylcytidine (Fig. 6). (Mikhailov et al., 1983) From these initial SAR studies, it was found that 3′-C-methyladenosine served as a potent anticancer agent against numerous human leukemia and carcinoma cell lines, with IC 50 values of ∼18 μM (Franchetti et al., 2005;Cappellacci et al., 2006). Further analysis found that shifting the methyl from the 3′ position of 3′-C-methyladenosine to another position on the sugar ring was associated with a decrease in activity, thus highlighting the importance of this moiety (Cappellacci et al., 2006). Similarly, this study found that the adenosine nucleobase was the most active analogue against human myelogenous leukemia K562 cells and human colon carcinoma HT-29 and CaCo-2 cell lines, with no antiproliferative activity found with the other nucleobases (Cappellacci et al., 2006). To further test the ability of these 3′-C-methyl analogues as potential therapeutics, the Osolodkin group studied 3′-C-methyluridine and cytidine against Tickborne encephalitis virus, however, none of these analogues demonstrated potent antiviral activity (Orlov et al., 2017). Due to the lack of antiviral activity, as well as the development of more potent anticancer agents, these analogues have not been extensively pursued any further.
## (s5) Carbocyclic nucleosides
(p5.0) The use of an atom replacement in the sugar moiety as exemplified by Lamivudine and Emtricitabine were not the first examples of this type of modification. In 1966 an unusual nucleoside was synthesized by Shealy and Clayton that featured a cyclopentyl ring in place of the furanose sugar moiety (Fig. 9). (Shealy and Clayton, 1966) This analogue, later named Aristeromycin (Ari), was subsequently isolated from Streptomyces citrocolour and found to have potent antiviral properties against viruses such as measles, parainfluenza, vaccinia virus, and vesicular stomatitis (De Clercq, 1985;De Clercq et al., 1989;Rawal et al., 2016). Similarly, a closely related structural analogue was first isolated from Ampullariella regularis in 1981 (Hayashi et al., 1981), and later synthesized and named Neplanocin A (NpcA). Similar to Ari, NpcA also featured a cyclopentyl ring in place of the furanose sugar, however, in NcpA the cyclopentyl ring possesses a double bond between the C4′ and C6′ carbons ( Fig. 9). (Rawal et al., 2016;Hayashi et al., 1980Hayashi et al., , 1981 Both NpcA and Ari were highly active, however, they were also quite toxic, as their triphosphate forms closely mimicked ATP, thus leading to misincorporation and disruption of many important biological systems (De Clercq, 1985;De Clercq et al., 1989;Rawal et al., 2016;Hayashi et al., 1980;Wolfe and Borchardt, 1991).
## (s6) Second generation carbocyclic nucleosides
(p6.0) As Neplanocin A and Aristeromycin were unable to be used as drugs due to the toxicity of their triphosphate forms, focus turned to the design of carbocyclic analogues that could not be phosphorylated at the 5′ position. One pivotal example was 5′-deoxy-Ari, where replacement of the CH 2 OH group with a simple methyl group led to a dramatic increase in activity against both vaccinia virus as well as vesicular stomatitis virus ( Fig. 10). (Marquez, 1996;Siddiqi et al., 1992) Another approach that proved advantageous was the development of the 5′-nor analogues by Schneller et al., where the 5′-methylene group was removed resulting in the direct connection of the 5′-OH to the cyclopentyl ring (Patil et al., 1992;Das and Schneller, 2014;Seley et al., 1997aSeley et al., , 1997bSeley et al., , 1997cSeley et al., , 1997dSeley et al., , 1998Hegde et al., 1999Hegde et al., , 2000Barnard et al., 2001). Surprisingly, despite the presence of a hydroxyl group, phosphorylation did not occur since the shortened bond did not position the hydroxyl group correctly such that it was recognized by cellular and viral kinases (Patil et al., 1992). Taking it one step further, Borchardt, Schneller, Seley-Radtke and others completely removed the 5′-hydroxymethylene group leading to the truncated Ari and NpcA analogues (Hasobe et al., 1987;Zimmermann et al., 2014;Seley et al., 1997e). These truncations Fig. 9. Early carbocyclic nucleosides that feature a C-C-N glycosidic bond that is more stable compared to the corresponding hemiacetal bond found in the natural sugar nucleosides.

(p6.1) proved extremely fruitful in that they retained similar activity to the Ari and NpcA analogues, however, the associated toxicity was not observed (Zimmermann et al., 2013(Zimmermann et al., , 2014Seley et al., 1997e).

(p6.2) One of the most important findings for the carbocyclic analogues was that they proved to be some of the most potent inhibitors against Sadenosyl-L-homocysteine hydrolase (SAHase)an enzyme key to many biological methylations (Marquez and Lim, 1986;De Clercq et al., 1989;Wolfe and Borchardt, 1991;Marquez, 1996;Wang et al., 2011). SAHase was not the only enzymatic target available for the carbocyclic analogues, as many carbocyclic compounds were also found to be effective polymerase inhibitors (Price et al., 1992;Matyugina et al., 2012). One example is (−)-Carbovir, which resembles the d4T sugar structure in that there is a double bond between the 2′ and 3′ carbons, however, (−)-Carbovir possesses a cyclopentyl ring instead of the furanose ring seen in d4T as well as a guanine nucleobase instead of the thymine nucleobase found in d4T (Fig. 11). (Vince et al., 1988;Carter et al., 1990) This was highly strategic in that the unsaturation of the cyclopentyl ring increased the rigidity of the analogue, and the lack of the furanose oxygen lead to increased stabilization of the glycosidic bond of (−)-Carbovir (Vince et al., 1988;Carter et al., 1990;Parker et al., 1993). While (−)-Carbovir has demonstrated its ability to be a potent anti-HIV therapeutic, cytotoxicity, low solubility, and poor oral bioavailability have limited its use in clinical applications (Yeom et al., 1989). In order to alleviate some of these issues, further studies with (−)-Carbovir led to the development of Abacavir, a carbocyclic analogue with a unique modification on the exocyclic amine group at the 6 position of the nucleobase (Fig. 11).  The cyclopropyl group acts as a prodrug moiety and, once Abacavir is anabolized to Abacavir 5′-monophosphate, the cyclopropyl group undergoes deamination in vivo to yield (−)-Carbovir 5′-monophosphate Faletto et al., 1997;Tisdale et al., 1997;Yuen et al., 2008). From here, (−)-Carbovir 5′-monophpshate is converted into the 5′-diphosphate and subsequently to the 5′-triphosphate by various cellular kinases to give the bioactive (−)-Carbovir 5′-triphosphate (Vince et al., 1988;Daluge et al., 1997;Faletto et al., 1997). Since Abacavir is converted into the active form of (−)-Carbovir in vivo, it also acts as a potent HIV-1 therapeutic. Abacavir is typically administered with other nucleoside analogues as part of combination therapy, and has demonstrated the ability to overcome some of the bioavailability limitations associated with (−)-Carbovir Tisdale et al., 1997;Harrigan et al., 2000).

(p6.3) One of the most important examples of the carbocyclic nucleosides is Entecavir, which possesses a 3′-OH group but introduced a highly unique exocyclic double bond in place of the furanose oxygen (Fig. 12). (Bisacchi et al., 1997;Wilber et al., 2011) Entecavir is an FDA approved drug for treating both HIV and HBV (Bisacchi et al., 1997;Wilber et al., 2011;Tang et al., 2013). Interestingly, the presence of the exocyclic double bond is critical to the increased binding affinity, as it fits into a hydrophobic pocket of the HBV polymerase, increasing the efficacy of Entecavir against HBV (Tang et al., 2013;Rawal et al., 2015). Initially however, this was not part of the rationale of the overall design -the exocyclic double bond was merely chosen to increase rigidity of the nucleoside and prevent the sugar ring flipping between the North and South conformations, as well as to maximize the distance and orientation between the nucleobase and the 5′-hydroxyl (Tang et al., 2013;Langley et al., 2007).

(p6.4) Interestingly, Entecavir is one of the rare examples of a rationally (although some might consider it irrationally!) designed nucleoside (Fig. 13). In 1992, another carbocyclic nucleoside, Lobucavir, was garnering much attention, due to its potent antiviral activity against HBV and HSV (Marquez, 1996;Hayashi et al., 1990;Norbeck et al., 1990). Lobucavir possesses a cyclobutyl "sugar", i.e. four-membered ring, and resembles the naturally occurring Oxetanocin G, which was isolated from bacteria in 1986 and later demonstrated antiviral activity against HIV (Fig. 14). (Marquez, 1996) At the time, researchers at Bristol Myers Squibb, including the lead chemist on the project Robert Zahler, were looking to design something that would occupy the same space as Lobucavir, a unique carbocyclic cyclobutyl nucleoside structurally similar to the naturally occurring Oxetanocins, which also possess a four member sugar ring (Bisacchi et al., 1997;Hayashi et al., 1990). More specifically, they wanted the nucleoside to mimic the orientation of the nucleobase, as well as the distance between the 5′-OH and the guanine base (Fig. 13). (Wilber et al., 2011) Zahler felt strongly that these two factors were the key to Lobucavir's potent activity. Since computational chemistry was only in its early stages, chemists relied on physical models, thus Zahler rationalized that it didn't matter what was in the middle, only that it kept the base and 5′-OH group positioned in the correct distance and the right spatial orientation (Wilber et al., 2011). More specifically, knowing that a sugar ring was prone to flipping conformations, which could subsequently abolish the activity, he knew it would be important to hold the sugar ring rigid enough such that this flip did not occur (Wilber et al., 2011;Tang et al., 2013;Langley et al., 2007). In addition, since ring flipping would impact the orientation of the heterocyclic base into either an anti or syn conformation, which would also impact recognition, mimicking the specific distance between the 5′-OH and the heterocyclic Fig. 10. Examples of second generation carbocyclic nucleosides with the 5′-OH or 4′-substituent removed to generate "truncated" nucleosides. Fig. 11. Structure of the 2′,3′-dideoxy obligate chain terminator Carbovir, a nucleoside that features unsaturation in the sugar ring. base could potentially be achieved by holding the base in the preferred conformation. Zahler tried a number of approaches but ultimately conceived of a cyclopentyl ring wherein an exocyclic double bond replaced the furanose oxygen (Bisacchi et al., 1997;Wilber et al., 2011;Tang et al., 2013). Not only would this rigidify the ring enough to avoid the ring flip, he also predicted this would hold the nucleobase and OH group in the correct orientation and distance (Bisacchi et al., 1997;Wilber et al., 2011). As it turned out, the overlap with Lobucavir was quite remarkable and Entecavir still represents one of the best and most widely prescribed anti-HBV drugs on the market (Langley et al., 2007). Notably, it has also been shown to be particularly effective against HIV/ HBV co-infected patients (McMahon et al., 2007;Pessôa et al., 2008).
## (s8) Replacement of oxygen in the furanose ring by heteroatoms
(p8.0) Given the potent activity exhibited by the carbocyclic nucleosides, researchers next turned to replacing the furanose oxygen with other atoms to see the potential impact on biological activity. One such replacement included that of the isosteric sulfur atom to yield thionucleosides, which have a similar benefit to carbocyclic nucleosides in that they are also unaffected by glycoside hydrolases (Fig. 17). (Messini et al., 1999;Elzagheid et al., 1999;Crnugelj et al., 2002) Sulfur is related to oxygen in several ways, including a similar electronic configuration and the same number of valence electrons, however, sulfur is less electronegative and larger in size than oxygen. In contrast, sulfur does not participate in hydrogen bonding like oxygen, thus this substitution results in the loss of important interactions in enzyme binding pockets (Paulsen, 1966). While numerous analogues were synthesized by Secrist et al. (Messini et al., 1999;Elzagheid et al., 1999) and others (Paulsen, 1966;Inoue et al., 2005;Crnugelj et al., 2002) none led to a marketable drug.

(p8.1) Many years later, Jeong et al. developed the analogous selenonucleosides, however, none showed meaningful anticancer or antiviral activity, most likely due to lack of recognition by cellular kinases, as they were not phosphorylated (Fig. 17). (Sahu et al., 2014;Yu et al., 2013) Extension of the methylene group at the 5′ position of these compounds however, resulted in potent anti-HSV-1 activity with EC 50 values as low as 2.3 μM since these analogues were able to be phosphorylated by cellular kinases (Sahu et al., 2014;Yu et al., 2013).

(p8.2) Another modification that proved to be highly successful is the use of the nitrogen-containing imino sugar found in the immucillins (Fig. 18) developed by Schramm et al. (Kicska et al., 2001;Schramm and Tyler, 2003), however those will be discussed below in the C-nucleoside section of this review.
