# ALGORITHM FOR THE TREATMENT OF SQUAMOUS NSCLC, Daaboul et al. Algorithm for the treatment of advanced or metastatic squamous non-small-cell lung cancer: an evidence-based overview

CorpusID: 49272755 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33f31cfab774504467901beeebdbabb3f9499c38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/33f31cfab774504467901beeebdbabb3f9499c38)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Initial Chemotherapy
(p2.0) Doublet chemotherapy, which must include a platinum agent (cisplatin or carboplatin) and which is given for 4-6 cycles, is a standard of care in first-line treatment of scc of the lung. In a large meta-analysis, two-drug regimens (compared with single-agent chemotherapy) were associated with significantly increased rates of response and overall survival (os) 3 . Such regimens are generally offered to patients with a good performance status, and randomized studies comparing those regimens with best supportive care have shown a benefit in terms of survival and quality of life 4 . A variety of drugs can be paired with platinum, the most common being paclitaxel, gemcitabine, or vinorelbine. Prolonged administration of this initial chemotherapy is not recommended; although chemotherapy use can have an effect on progression-free survival (pfs), its effect on survival has not been formally demonstrated 5 .

(p2.1) No particular platinum-based doublet regimen has been proved to confer a clinically significant advantage over the others 6 . The choice is often based on safety profile and convenience of administration. Treatment intensification by adding a third chemotherapy agent has also not yielded positive outcomes. Response rates were increased, but did not translate into increased survival rates 7 . Histology offers insight into chemotherapy selection, but personalizing chemotherapy in scc of the lung is not yet achievable. Molecular biomarkers such as ERCC1 and RRM1 have not helped to identify potential responders in a clinical setting, despite encouraging preclinical data 8,9 .

(p2.2) Notably, pemetrexed is not indicated in scc of the lung, whether in the first or subsequent lines of treatment. In a large phase iii study comparing cisplatin-gemcitabine with cisplatin-pemetrexed in nsclc 10 , the survival benefit observed in the cisplatin-pemetrexed arm introduced pemetrexed as an attractive treatment choice for lung adenocarcinoma, especially given its better tolerability. In contrast, the cisplatin-gemcitabine doublet was associated with better survival in scc. A detrimental effect on survival of cisplatin-pemetrexed was also observed in patients who had received prior chemotherapy. A possible explanation for pemetrexed resistance could be higher expression of one of its targets, thymidylate synthase, in squamous tumours 11 .
## (s4) Immune checkpoint inhibitors
(p4.0) Nivolumab PD-1 Autoimmune side effects including fatigue, infusion reaction, rash, gastrointestinal symptoms (diarrhea, colitis), endocrinopathies (dysthyroidism, adrenal insufficiency), increased liver enzymes, pneumonitis Pembrolizumab PD-1 VEGF = vascular endothelial growth factor; VEGFR2 = vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2; EGFR = epidermal growth factor receptor (also known as HER1 or ErbB1); HER2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (also known as ErbB2/neu); ALK = anaplastic lymphoma kinase; MET = hepatocyte growth factor receptor; Flt-3 = fms-related tyrosine kinase; FGFR1 = fibroblast growth factor receptor 1; PDGFR = platelet-derived growth factor receptor; mTOR = mechanistic target of rapamycin. Various maintenance strategies using cytotoxic chemotherapy have been studied, including docetaxel 12 , gemcitabine, and pemetrexed. Those agents have not been adopted as effective maintenance strategies in scc. For example, with gemcitabine, a longer pfs was noted without an effect on os 13 . The most widely used maintenance chemotherapy in nsclc is pemetrexed 14 , but that approach does not apply in scc. In the jmen study, patients with nonsquamous histology experienced a 3.2-month significant survival advantage. In contrast, patients with scc derived no benefit from maintenance pemetrexed [hazard ratio (hr): 1.03; p = 0.896] 15 .
## (s6) Chemotherapy at Progression
(p6.0) Upon disease progression after platinum doublet chemotherapy, patients deemed fit for treatment would, until recently, be offered single-agent docetaxel 19 . This taxane derivative has been proved effective when compared with best supportive care. Treatment with docetaxel is associated with significant prolongation of survival (7.0 months vs. 4.6 months; p = 0.047), with the benefits of therapy outweighing toxicity 20 . Compared with best supportive care, docetaxel is also associated with less deterioration in quality of life 21 .

(p6.1) For many years, single-agent docetaxel was thus considered the standard second-line treatment at progression. That situation has changed with data now showing that immuno-oncolog y therapies are more effective than docetaxel in this setting. Docetaxel is now considered a possible treatment after progression on immunotherapy. Notably, docetaxel has not been compared with best supportive care in a third-line setting after immunotherapy failure.
## (s7) IMMUNOTHERAPY
(p7.0) Immunotherapy has changed the treatment paradigm for nsclc, especially in patients with no driver mutations. It has introduced a new treatment modality for scc of the lung, for which proven and available treatments are not as diverse as they are for adenocarcinoma.

(p7.1) Immuno-oncology therapies include various immune checkpoint inhibitors such as antibodies directed against ctla-4, PD-1, and PD-L1. The fundamental mechanism of those drugs is to stimulate a patient's T-cell immune response to recognize and destroy cancer cells 22 . Carrying a high mutational burden can increase the likelihood of responding to immuno-oncology agents, and sccbecause it is related to smoking and exposure to a multitude of carcinogens-is a tumour that ranks among those with the highest mutational burden 23 . Immunotherapy has a toxicity profile different from that of cytotoxic chemotherapy, and it seems to be better tolerated overall.
## (s9) Immunotherapy at Progression
(p9.0) Nivolumab was the first immuno-oncology agent approved for the treatment of lung cancer. More specifically with respect to scc, the phase iii CheckMate 017 trial randomly assigned 272 patients with stage iv scc progressing during or after platinum-based chemotherapy to nivolumab or docetaxel. Median os was improved in the nivolumab group (9.2 months vs. 6.0 months; p < 0.001; hr: 0.59; 1-year os: 42% vs. 24%).

(p9.1) The immunotherapy response rate is fairly low (<20%); however, it seems that a subset of patients can derive longterm benefit from immunotherapy. In CheckMate 017, efficacy was independent of PD-L1 tumour expression 28 , a result that differed from that in CheckMate 057, in which PD-L1 expression was predictive in a population having nonsquamous nsclc 29 . Additionally, in the keynote-010 study, which enrolled 1034 patients, participants experienced a longer os with pembrolizumab than with docetaxel. In that study, PD-L1 tumour expression had to be at least 1%. The median os was 10.4 months with pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg and 8.5 months with docetaxel (p = 0.0008). The survival advantage was demonstrated for all histology subtypes, including the scc subset (hr: 0.74; 95% ci: 0.50 to 1.09). The difference was more marked in patients with PD-L1 expression exceeding 50% (approximately 40% of patients), which further validated PD-L1 selection. In such patients, os was significantly longer with pembrolizumab (median: 14.9 months vs. 8.2 months; p = 0.0002) 30 .
## (s10) Combination Immunotherapy With or Without Chemotherapy
(p10.0) Studies have demonstrated that specific chemotherapies commonly used in lung cancer can enhance the immunologic response to cancers 34 . That observation has led to research into combinations of immunotherapy and chemotherapy. Adding chemotherapy might add benefit for patients. It can be associated with higher response rates and more durable responses. It could also make combination therapy a treatment of choice for a broader population 35 .

(p10.1) Combination immunotherapy could include giving an anti-ctla-4 agent with a PD-1 or PD-L1 inhibitor. Such agents could be given together with or without standard chemotherapy. Early-phase trials are looking at various combination strategies. For example, in Canada, the Canadian Cancer Trials Group br.34 trial (NCT03057106 at http://ClinicalTrials.gov) is looking at durvalumabtremelimumab given with or without chemotherapy in patients with metastatic nsclc. Another trial, keynote-021 (NCT02039674), is studying pembrolizumab in combination with chemotherapy or immunotherapy in participants with metastatic nsclc. Based on a cohort in keynote-021, pembrolizumab given with carboplatin-pemetrexed was recently approved by the fda for the first-line treatment of adenocarcinoma. Many combination trials are under way, and more details are expected in the future.
## (s11) ANTIANGIOGENESIS AGENTS
(p11.0) Blocking neovascularization and tumour proliferation can theoretically reduce tumour growth. Bevacizumab is the most commonly studied antiangiogenesis agent in nsclc. It targets the vascular endothelial growth factor pathway by inhibiting vascular endothelial growth factor A.

(p11.1) Bevacizumab has shown efficacy in nsclc. It can also cause massive pulmonary hemorrhage, sometimes fatally so, as reported in earlier trials testing the combination of chemotherapy and bevacizumab 36 . Those events occurred more frequently in scc, which led to the early exclusion of patients with scc from the pivotal bevacizumab trials 37,38 , including the randomized trial showing an os improvement of 2 months for paclitaxel-carboplatin plus bevacizumab compared with chemotherapy alone. Squamous-cell histology and the presence of hemoptysis are therefore contraindications to the administration of bevacizumab in nsclc.

(p11.2) Other antiangiogenic agents have also been tested in nsclc 39 . Ramucirumab, which binds directly to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, demonstrated modest activity in nsclc. Although patients with squamous histology could participate in the related trials, patients with major invasion of airway or blood vessels, a cavitating lesion, or a recent history of hemoptysis were notably excluded. The phase iii revel trial assigned 1253 patients to docetaxel with or without ramucirumab after progression on a platinum doublet 40 . A small but statistically significant difference favoured the combination. The os, pfs, and response rate were all improved. For the squamous-cell subgroup (25% of patients), outcomes were similar but nonsignificant (os: 9.5 months vs. 8.2 months; hr: 0.88; 95% ci: 0.69 to 1.12; p = 0.319). Ramucirumab is the only antiangiogenesis drug that has an indication in scc. It has been approved by the fda 41 , but not by Health Canada. An approach using ramucirumab has not been widely accepted because the cost-benefit ratio of the combination seems marginal 42 .
## (s14) FGFR1
(p14.0) Amplification of fgfr1 occurs in approximately 20% of patients with scc of the lung 57 . The fgfr pathway plays a key role in signal transduction in lung cancer. Activation is responsible for igniting the pi3k/akt and Ras/mapk pathways that stimulate growth and angiogenesis in several cancers, including scc 58 . Amplification of fgfr is associated with smoking and confers a worse prognosis 59,60 .

(p14.1) Inhibitors of fgfr include nintedanib, pazopanib, and ponatinib, which target multiple tyrosine kinases 61 . Originally, fgfr was thought to be a very promising target because some inhibitors showed activity in preclinical models. However, clinical trials in lung cancer have shown only minimal activity of such inhibitors at the cost of increased toxicities, which include hypertension, gastrointestinal side effects, and rash 62 . For example, results with pazopanib have been disappointing. A clinical trial comparing maintenance pazopanib with placebo after platinum doublet chemotherapy in patients with nsclc was terminated at the futility interim analysis 63 .

(p14.2) The phase iii lume-Lung 1 study, in which nintedanib was combined with docetaxel, assessed the efficacy and safety of the combination as second-line therapy for nsclc without any molecular selection. In the nintedanib arm, os was improved only for the adenocarcinoma histology subgroup, but not for the overall cohort (median: 10.1 months vs. 9.1 months; hr: 0.94; 95% ci: 0.83 to 1.05; p = 0.2720) 64 . Studies with nintedanib (NCT01346540 and NCT01948141 at http://ClinicalTrials.gov) are continuing in a molecularly selected population with fgfr1 amplification. Other fgfr inhibitors are also in development and remain in the investigational phase 65,66 .
## (s16) c-Met
(p16.0) In nsclc, multiple mechanisms of MET activation have been described. In the recently published phase iii metlung study, patients with nsclc were randomized to onartuzumab, an anti-met antibody, plus erlotinib or to erlotinib alone. Increased expression of the met protein was not associated with improved pfs or os in patients who received both agents 72 .
