# Acute care and emergency general surgery in patients with chronic liver disease: how can we optimize perioperative care? A review of the literature

CorpusID: 51704154 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b95065baddb53592d5701d8d45180c17076bce21)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Background
(p0.0) Approximately one in every ten patients with chronic liver disease requires surgery in the final 2 years of life [1]. This commonly quoted estimation was originally reported over four decades ago, and it does not account for the expanding surgical eligibility of cirrhotic patients due to advances in both perioperative care and operative techniques for non-hepatic and hepatic operations (i.e., resection of hepatocellular carcinoma and liver transplantation). In the greater context, non-hepatic surgery is far more common and typically presents within the everyday scope of acute care surgery.

(p0.1) Chronic liver disease, however, imposes a significantly increased risk of postoperative morbi-mortality, largely due to sepsis and hepatic failure. In a systematic review conducted by de Goede et al., the overall risk of perioperative morbidity and mortality were 30.1 and 11.6% respectively and the coexistence of portal hypertension was found to be associated with a twofold increase in mortality [2]. In another study identifying 772 cirrhotic patients, the severity of hepatic dysfunction and emergency surgery were both major risk factors for postoperative mortality [3]. An analysis of Nationwide Inpatient Sample data describing over 22,000 patients with cirrhosis also showed an increase in adjusted mortality rates in a stepwise manner with the severity of hepatic dysfunction [4]. This was observed even for elective procedures and in the absence of portal hypertension.

(p0.2) Assessment and management of chronic liver disease in operative patients thus represent a relevant topic for general surgeons. More specifically, understanding the pathophysiology and clinical aspects of hepatic dysfunction and portal hypertension has a direct impact in the perioperative care of this patient population. The goal of this study is therefore to provide an updated review of relevant aspects of cirrhosis for the acute care surgeon.

(p0.3) A brief description of pertinent pathophysiology provides the basis of this review upon which surgical topics are expanded to include state-of-the art evidence, where available. The literature search was limited to English publications from two databases (EMBASE and PubMed) and manual search of additional references. A narrative format was utilized to better accommodate a broad comprehensive coverage of major topics of interest for the general surgeon. Our literature search was not limited to a specific question or strategy.
## (s1) Pathophysiology
(p1.0) Chronic hepatocyte injury is characterized by inflammation, fibrosis, and ultimately cirrhosis. Cirrhosis thus results from distortion of hepatic architecture and increased resistance to portal venous flow secondary to progressive fibrotic replacement of hepatocytes. Portal hypertension and loss of metabolic functions are the main factors that determine the clinical manifestations of cirrhosis.

(p1.1) The most important clinical manifestations of portal hypertension are varices and ascites. An increased pressure gradient from the post-hepatic venous system opens collateral portosystemic shunts in the esophagogastric and anorectal regions, umbilical vein, and retroperitoneum. As this process advances, visceral congestion increases, ascites accumulates, varices enlarge, and portal venous flow decelerates, or even reverses. Diminished delivery of hepatotrophic factors further impairs hepatic function via ongoing hepatocyte loss.

(p1.2) In surgical patient, hepatic dysfunction translates into an increased risk of infection, hemorrhage, thrombosis, and a prolonged half-life of numerous drugs (e.g., opioids and benzodiazepines). The associated imbalance of neuroendocrine mediators (e.g., vasopressin, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and nitric oxide) also potentiates sodium and fluid retention, resulting in a background hyperdynamic circulation with splanchnic venous congestion and systemic vasodilation [5].

(p1.3) In emergency surgery, stress response to the underlying condition, anesthesia, and surgical trauma increase the risk of hepatic decompensation and associated multi-system failure. Changes in hepatic perfusion with shock and fluid shifts further compromise hepatocellular synthetic and excretory functions. In addition, endotoxemia from gram-negative sepsis potentiates platelet aggregation and creates a state of low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation [6].
## (s2) Renal system
(p2.0) Activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system with hypersecretion of vasopressin acts as compensatory mechanisms to preserve arterial pressure and replenish effective circulating volume when blood is pooled in the splanchnic territory. With the progression of cirrhosis, avidity for water and sodium increases, and dilutional hyponatremia results from water retention. In advanced cases, exacerbation of these abnormalities leads to hepatorenal syndrome (HRS). HRS is characterized by rapid decline in renal function with low urinary excretion of sodium due to severe renal vasoconstriction and diminished or absent cortical perfusion. This syndrome is potentially reversible, but carries an extremely poor prognosis [7].
## (s5) Central nervous system
(p5.0) Hepatic encephalopathy is a reversible neurological condition associated with hepatic failure and portal hypertension that may present with varying degrees of cognitive impairment, ranging from minimal changes to deep coma. This pathophysiology is driven by cerebral edema and an increased passage of ammonia through the blood-brain barrier [8]. Ammonia is produced via glutamine metabolism by enterocytes, and urea breakdown by gut flora. With impaired hepatocellular function and portosystemic shunting, ammonia is less likely to be converted to urea and therefore accumulates within the bloodstream. It eventually crosses the blood-brain barrier where it contributes to cerebral edema and other pathological processes [9].
## (s7) Preoperative assessment and management
(p7.0) Hypovolemia, coagulopathy, and thrombocytopenia are the major concerns during preoperative assessment and resuscitation. Goal-directed fluid administration and use of blood products (Table 1) should be guided, where possible, by hemodynamic monitoring [10]. Low urine output should be interpreted with caution. Oliguria from hormonal and inflammatory changes associated with cirrhosis and the underlying emergency might mislead the clinician to volume overload the patient. Excessive crystalloid and blood product infusion, in turn, can precipitate respiratory failure and variceal hemorrhage.
## (s9) Imaging exams
(p9.0) Morphologic findings of early cirrhosis include hepatomegaly, as well as widening of the porta hepatis, umbilical fissure, and pericholecystic space. As cirrhosis advances, hepatomegaly evolves into the typical nodular shrunken liver with atrophy of segment 4 and the right lobe, as well as hypertrophy of segments 2 and 3 and the caudate lobe. Bright and coarse nodular texture with surface nodularity (most commonly noticed on the undersurface of the liver) can be demonstrated on bedside ultrasonography [25]. Dysplastic and regenerative nodules are difficult to appreciate on CT due to their small size and isointensity. However, the identification of nodules, particularly if they are hyper-enhancing, on the arterial phase, should raise suspicion for an incidental hepatocellular carcinoma [26].

(p9.1) Vascular manifestations of cirrhosis include signs of hepatic perfusion abnormalities and portal hypertension. Progressive hepatic fibrosis increases resistance to both arterial and venous inflow. While the portal venous system may decompress through portosystemic collaterals, there is no equivalent alternative for hepatic arterial inflow. Intra-hepatic vascular communications thus develop in the hepatic sinusoids, vasa vasorum of portal vein, and peribiliary capillaries to shunt arterial blood into the portal venous system [27]. These changes present on cross-sectional imaging as heterogeneous delayed enhancement of hepatic parenchyma, sometimes mixed with geographic areas of arterialization. Evidence of overt portal hypertension can also be found on imaging (esophageal, gastric, and umbilical varices, prominent left gastric vein and tributaries, splenomegaly, and ascites).
## (s10) Intraoperative considerations
(p10.0) Surgical access (open or laparoscopic) and placement of retractors should be planned to avoid engorged abdominal wall veins and to optimize surgical exposure in anticipation to the most critical operative steps. Despite the lack of definitive evidence [28], the authors believe that bipolar and ultrasonic energy devices, mechanical vascular staplers, and topical hemostatics are useful adjuncts in attempting to decrease both operating time and blood loss. This seems particularly true for the surgeon coming through the abdominal wall with associated dilated veins. Use of a concurrent ligating and cutting energy instrument in a careful and cautious manner can help prevent undue blood loss. Postoperative coagulopathy can easily facilitate bleeding from initially minor sources, so extra attention to hemostasis is required.

(p10.1) Utilization of intra-abdominal drains to help control postoperative ascites and prevent surgical wound complications is a controversial topic. While a more restrict policy for placement of surgical abdominal drains has gained growing support in the literature [29], its safety in the context of cirrhosis yet remains poorly explored. Better control of postoperative ascites and potential associated surgical wound complications presents a compelling rationale for prophylactic drainage, but the risk of contamination of ascites and increased postoperative fluid shifts should be taken into account. In fact, increased morbidity due to wound complications was demonstrated in cirrhotic patients randomized to prophylactic drainage after liver resection in a small clinical trial conducted in the early 2000s [30]. It is the opinion of the authors of this review that routine use of surgical drains should be avoided in cirrhotic patients, and if indicated, early removal should be aggressively pursued.

(p10.2) As a general rule, the most expeditious and least invasive operation should be utilized, including a laparoscopic approach where feasible and safe. The safety of laparoscopy in cirrhotic patients has been historically challenged due to the theoretical risks of hemorrhage from abdominal wall varices during port placement, detrimental effects of pneumoperitoneum on hepatic perfusion, and technical limitations to approaching intraoperative hemorrhage. These concerns, however, have been vastly mitigated over the years, with multiple reports now attesting to the safety of laparoscopy, as well as suggesting some useful technical tips ( Table 2).

(p10.3) The superiority of laparoscopic over open cholecystectomy in cirrhotic patients has been demonstrated in terms of operative blood loss, surgical time, postoperative pain, morbidity, and hospital length of stay [31,32]. Technical difficulties must be expected in retracting the liver and identifying anatomic landmarks due to hepatic distortion.

(p10.4) In cirrhotic patients, an increased risk of intraoperative hemorrhage should be expected. In laparoscopic surgery, utilization of additional ports and meticulous operative technique assist in preventing iatrogenic injuries. Venous hemorrhage can be temporized by brief increases in pneumoperitoneum pressure and compression with sponges. If application of electrocautery is contemplated for gallbladder bed bleeding, a high setting (100 units on spray) and precise contact to the site of bleeding is recommended. In cases where this technique does not arrest ongoing bleeding, placement of a clip immediately beside the site of hemorrhage (i.e., into the liver in a perpendicular manner) can be helpful as an ignition tool for cauterization.

(p10.5) Laparoscopy has also been recommended for cirrhotic patients with appendicitis. Tsugawa and colleagues compared open (25 patients) to laparoscopic appendectomy (15 patients) in a retrospective series. Laparoscopy compared favorably with open surgery with respect to blood loss, ascites formation, wound complications, hospital length of stay, postoperative pain, and liver function [33].

(p10.6) Ascites predisposes patients with chronic liver disease to ventral hernias. Up to 20% of all patients with cirrhotic ascites develop umbilical hernias [34]. Surgical indications are debatable in non-complicated cases due to the high risk of postoperative morbidity and recurrence (60%) in patients with persistent ascites [35]. Conservative management, however, imposes a risk of hernia strangulation and rupture of overlying skin, with even Table 2 Laparoscopic strategies in advanced liver disease Port placement As a general rule, an open Hasson technique is recommended for entry into the peritoneal cavity [31]. To avoid abdominal wall varices from the umbilical vein and falciform ligament, several authors have recommended port placement to the right of the midline, especially the subxiphoid port in laparoscopic cholecystectomy [32,33].

(p10.7) Pneumoperitoneum Blunting of the hepatic arterial buffer response is a theoretical risk. There is no report in the literature of liver failure related to pneumoperitoneum in a cirrhotic patient [34,35]. Some authors reduce their intra-abdominal pressure in cirrhotic patients [36].

(p10.8) Bleeding risk There are few reports of bleeding during laparoscopic procedures in cirrhotic patients. Cobb et al. describes an 8% transfusion rate, with only one patient requiring transfusion for bleeding [37]. In a retrospective study of 68 patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy, only one patient received a blood transfusion [35]. Laparoscopic hemostatic devices such as ultrasound knife, ligasure, and harmonic scalpel can significantly improve hemostasis and are recommended by many authors [32,36].
## (s14) Hepatic encephalopathy
(p14.0) Other possible etiologies of global neurologic decline should be investigated (e.g., hypoxia, hypercapnia, hypoglycemia, uremia, medications, delirium tremens, hypoactive delirium, seizures, intracranial hemorrhage). Elevated blood ammonia level (found in over 90% of cases) corroborates the clinical diagnosis, but correlation with the actual disease severity is poor. It should also be noted that monitoring blood ammonia levels is inferior to clinical assessment, and it is not recommended in asymptomatic patients [37]. Benzodiazepines should be avoided and replaced with haloperidol when chemical restraint is indicated. The classic protein-restricted diet does not find support in the current literature [38] because most patients do not tolerate high-food/calorie intake. Furthermore, malnutrition is a much more significant concern.

(p14.1) Despite ongoing debate, branched amino acid supplementation may also be beneficial [39]. Other adjuncts, such as cathartics and oral antibiotics, are recommended in an attempt to decrease the intestinal production of ammonia due to bacterial overgrowth.

(p14.2) Lactulose, a non-absorbable sugar that causes osmotic diarrhea, has been traditionally used to treat hepatic encephalopathy. It acidifies the colon and promotes the conversion of ammonia to ammonium, which is not reabsorbed [40]. Lactulose dosing should be titrated to two to three bowel movements per day. Known side effects of this therapy include electrolyte imbalances, nausea, and bloating.

(p14.3) Rifaximin, a semisynthetic drug derivative of rifampin, was originally employed as a second-line treatment for hepatic encephalopathy. In 2012, a meta-analysis of 12 randomized controlled trials stated that rifaximin had similar effectiveness compared to lactulose, with fewer side effects [41]. A more recent, larger meta-analysis has also further supported its use [42], although the dominant limitation remains its high cost when compared to lactulose.
## (s15) Hepatorenal syndrome
(p15.0) Euvolemia and electrolyte homeostasis should be maintained under strict clinical and laboratory monitoring. Acute kidney injury in the absence of hemodynamic instability, use of nephrotoxic drugs, or parenchymal renal disease suggests the diagnosis of hepatorenal syndrome. Additional diagnostic criteria include no improvement in renal function after volume expansion with albumin and diuretic withdrawal. Treatment of hepatorenal syndrome requires the use of splanchnic vasoconstrictors (terlipressin, noradrenalin, or midodrine) and albumin infusion. Improved renal function has been demonstrated with medical treatment [10], but a mortality benefit is only ultimately achieved with liver transplantation. TIPS placement and renal and hepatic replacement therapies can be indicated as bridging strategies.
## (s16) Variceal hemorrhage
(p16.0) Perioperative volume overload can increase portal pressure and precipitate bleeding from esophageal varices. Other possible contributing factors include postoperative hepatic dysfunction and portal venous thrombosis. Variceal hemorrhage represents a medical emergency to be managed in the intensive care unit [43].

(p16.1) Resuscitative measures to preserve the respiratory and circulatory systems should be promptly initiated. A restrictive transfusion strategy aiming at hemoglobin levels of 7-9 g/dl has been associated with decreased re-bleeding and mortality rates [44]. Antibiotic prophylaxis with ceftriaxone for up to 7 days is indicated to address the increased risk of bacterial infections and also to decrease the risk of re-bleeding and mortality [45]. Infusion of vasoactive agents (somatostatin, terlipressin, and octreotide) for 2 to 5 days has been associated with lower mortality and transfusion requirements [46].

(p16.2) An urgent endoscopy should be completed no longer than 12 h from presentation [43]. Elastic band ligation represents the first-line endoscopic intervention for esophageal varices, but sclerotherapy is an excellent alternative for difficult cases [47]. Elastic band ligation has proven more effective than sclerotherapy in terms of the number of required sessions, as well as re-bleeding and mortality rates [48,49]. A non-specific beta-blocker (propranolol or nadolol) is indicated after the vasoactive infusion is discontinued.

(p16.3) Balloon tamponade is reserved for temporary control of ongoing variceal bleeding while definitive therapy is being arranged. TIPS should be considered pre-emptively in high-risk patients, or in refractory or recurrent hemorrhage, as improved mortality rates have been observed [50]. Table 3 summarizes current recommendations for the management of hemorrhage from esophageal varices.
