# Effectiveness of drug interventions to prevent sudden cardiac death in patients with heart failure and reduced ejection fraction: an overview of systematic reviews

CorpusID: 51863426 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bccc6bf799e71ccbbaf0fb8cf6d7926cb039a2f6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bccc6bf799e71ccbbaf0fb8cf6d7926cb039a2f6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) statistical analysis and data synthesis
(p4.0) We provided a narrative synthesis of the findings of the included reviews and if multiple reviews existed for the same intervention. However, in the case of ARBs, we updated the evidence and meta-analysed the data using random effects and fixed effects model with Mantel-Haenszel methods 13 and reported random effects model to account for heterogeneity. Meanwhile, we evaluated each intervention against our outcomes of interest and synthesised the evidence taking into account heterogeneity and inconsistencies between reviews. As a rule of thumb, I 2 (I-square) values of 25%, 50% and 75% correspond to low, moderate and high levels of heterogeneity, respectively. 14 For the purpose of our overview, we categorised the evidence of the included interventions into three categories: (1) effective interventions; (2) ineffective interventions; and (3) uncertain evidence (conflicting or inconclusive evidence). We used odds ratios (OR) and relative effect or risk ratio (RR) as a summary statistic from the most recent or largest published systematic reviews, and confidence intervals (CIs) of 95% with a significance level determined at two-sided alpha less than 5%.
## (s13) Angiotensin receptor blockers
(p13.0) As shown in figures 2 and 3, we updated a Cochrane review 27 by including more eligible primary studies such as SUPPORT trial. 56 2). In addition, the funnel plot for all-cause mortality outcome showed no evidence of publication bias (figure 4). No estimation of publication bias and no funnel plot was drawn for SCD as only five studies reported this outcome.
## (s21) Open access
(p21.0) with a high quality of evidence. Only one retrieved meta-analysis 23 supported the effectiveness of combined ARB/neprilysin inhibitor. The authors acknowledged the limitation of their meta-analysis, which was not based on a systematic review, but merely pooling three well-known trials published in high impact journals (ie, IMPRESS, 61 OVERTURE 62 and PARADIGM-HF). 5 The quality of the evidence is, however, moderate for SCD and high for all-cause mortality, although our inability to assess any presence of a class effect or a potential publication bias.
