# IJLM keywords young People, the Internet, and Civic Participation: An overview of key Findings from the Civicweb Project Banaji and Buckingham / young People, the Internet, and Civic Participation 15

CorpusID: 51522244 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a378a9cf2d0a3ee47975885ca77853d1bdf14f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/50a378a9cf2d0a3ee47975885ca77853d1bdf14f)

Fields: Sociology, Computer Science, Political Science

## (s1) Toward empowerment?
(p1.0) In general, our research supports the view that young people are mostly alienated, or at least disconnected, from traditional forms of politics and civic participation. Most of the focus group respondents across all our national samples said they saw politicians as corrupt, boring, or hard to understand; working only for their own interests; and far removed from the everyday needs and realities of common citizens. A large proportion of respondents felt that things needed to change, and they spoke, often at length, about such issues as inequality; corruption; lack of housing and job opportunities; high prices; religious, ethnic, or regional discrimination; police harassment of civil protest; and government censorship of the media. Respondents generally felt that they themselves were unable to change these things. This perceived lack of efficacy was often related to their general feelings about the unresponsiveness, untrustworthiness, and distance of politicians. However, the feeling also derived from respondents' actual experiences of having participated (e.g., in school councils, e-petitions, or demonstrations) and of not having been listened to or not managing to change anything. In some instances, their feeling also related to fears about how active participation or political critique might impact them as individuals and make them targets of the state, the police, or aggressive citizens with opposing views.

(p1.1) For many of the Web producers we interviewed, this perceived lack of efficacy was the central problem. The rhetoric of "youth empowerment" and "youth voice" was particularly prominent here. These discourses typically see young people as lacking a voice, or at least the skills to make their voices heard: when they are given a voice online, the argument goes, they will be empowered to express their own concerns in a safe environment, and this empowerment can then be transferred offline to provide them with greater control of their own lives. While some producers saw this as a more-or-less spontaneous consequence of gaining access to technology, many working within activist and/or charitable organizations felt that young people should have more opportunities and training to help them develop the skills necessary for making their voices heard in the public sphere. Ironically, however, many of these producers were aware that their users tended to be mostly those youth who were already engaged or skilled in civic participation. The challenge for all concerned was to find ways of reaching "hard to reach" and disadvantaged young people, those most at risk of exclusion from civil society and politics. The Internet has, thus far, not been found to be a particularly good means of doing this, and traditional offline approaches involving youth workers and local youth groups are still the main points of contact for economically and socially disadvantaged young people.

(p1.2) These perceptions were reinforced by the findings of our research with young people. Unsurprisingly, we found that social factors such as class, ethnicity, age, and religion significantly affected the ways in which young people approached and used the Internet. In our survey, the interest in civic and political websites appeared to be stronger among older respondents (19-to 25-year-olds rather than 15-to 18-year-olds), those not living with their parents, youth who identified as religious, and girls and young women. This contradicts some commonly held perceptions-for instance, that girls and young women are less motivated to participate politically than are boys and young men. However, the factor showing the clearest patterns in relation to Internet use and civic participation across most of the countries was that of socioeconomic class. We found evidence of a continuing digital divide along socioeconomic lines, both in the quality and extent of access to technology and in the extent of civic engagement.

(p1.3) The Internet appeared to be an important tool for young people who were already engaged in civic or political activities offline. In focus groups with young people who were active in global or local political, religious, or identity-based groups, the Internet was consistently presented as a major hub for political activities. This appeared to be the case for groups as diverse as political parties' youth organizations, various kinds of established activist networks, and communities of civic interest. The Internet was also an important resource for minorities-political, sexual, ethnic, regional, or religious-and, in some notable instances, seemed to offer young people from such communities a space to question and enact identity, to question notions of tradition, to discuss the meaning of culture and citizenship, or to debate methods of participation and protest (see Szak치cs and Bogn치r 2010 in this issue of IJLM).

(p1.4) However, the content and loci of the discussions that do take place online should not be homogenized. The respondents to our survey were overwhelmingly interested in websites on entertainment and lifestyle issues: only a small proportion (around 10 percent) reported having visited civic or political sites. This does not necessarily mean that they have not participated in civic discussions online, however, because evidence suggests that such discussions (between people of all ages) may be found in the forums of entertainment and social networking sites of various kinds. Furthermore, not all young people who are civically active offline participate in such discussions online, and the ones who do participate online may do so only sporadically.
## (s2) Using the Internet
(p2.0) The Internet seems to be regarded by a number of civic and political organizations as an inexpensive and effective method of disseminating information and making contact with young people. However, our research suggests that this strategy is by no means always inexpensive or as effective as offline mobilization. Several producers pointed out that for a site to be known, considerable thought must be given to marketing and publicity. Most civic website producers have neither the time nor the money to publicize their sites adequately, and hence the core of users remains relatively small. Indeed, a majority of the websites surveyed across the project functioned with a combination of one or two part-time paid employees and several volunteer staff. Some sites went for months without being updated because initial grants funded only the building of the site and not its maintenance, which is crucial to success. We found high turnover rates among volunteer staff at the real or virtual offices of many of the civic websites surveyed, and turnover sometimes led to the closure of a site. The sites themselves thus have a high attrition rate, and the picture for any one site can change rapidly from one year to the next.

(p2.1) Despite the availability of more-or-less interactive applications such as blogs, wikis, message boards, forums, video uploading, podcasts, and so on, static websites composed primarily of written text and a few visual images still appear to be the norm. Of ten interactive applications we chose to look for, most youth civic websites in our larger survey offered only an average of 2.5 (and most commonly these included photographic content and embedded YouTube videos). The possibility for young people to post their own content or to question content on the sites was rare. However, the issue of interactivity on youth civic sites is not straightforward. Some funders appear to think that complex and more expensive sites are always and automatically better than their simpler counterparts. However, our interviews with producers and with young people suggest this is by no means always the case. Offering interactive facilities does not automatically mean that young people will participate. We found several instances of websites that have forums, user content upload facilities, and message boards on general themes (relating to European or more global issues) that were underused or full of spam.

(p2.2) Claims about the Internet being a completely safe and equal space for participation were also challenged by a number of responses from both producers and users of civic websites. Several producers were aware that dealing with controversial issues of social justice could provoke strong and negative responses from some members of the public. Some young people described being "attacked" online, a phenomenon that was particularly apparent with sites concerned with sexuality and, in the case of Sweden, gender. In the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, young first-and second-generation immigrants are forming civic organizations online to challenge prejudice both within and outside their communities. Many of these immigrants are subjected to fierce and sometimes racist online critique and flaming, often by organized right-wing groups. In Hungary, Roma sites attempt to avoid this situation by having closed membership or by censoring posts from racist users (see Szak치cs and Bogn치r 2010).

(p2.3) Forums, user-generated content, and other interactive applications have to be carefully explained, encouraged, motivated, and managed. Young people are sometimes as intimidated by what they view as a "requirement" to contribute original content as they are disappointed by the lack of possibilities for commenting or interacting online. Specialized jargon has to be avoided or explained. The skills for using applications such as RSS feeds, videocasts, or podcasts have to be taught rather than being taken for granted. This requires planning, time, and money for personnelresources that most of the youth civic organizations surveyed simply do not have. Several of the producers we interviewed felt that a clear, helpful, but static site that allowed youth to email the organization was better than offering potentially off-putting or even damaging opportunities for "interaction."

(p2.4) Yet paradoxes remain, as Fabbro's (2010) study in this issue of IJLM suggests. Although most producers still see the importance of promoting their organization or activities through traditional media channels (TV, newspapers, radio), a sizable minority of producers view the Internet as a challenge to the gate-keeping of old media and say their users come to their sites for an alternative and more open perspective. However, this view needs to be balanced against the experiences of a number of young people and findings from our survey of sites, which suggest that a large number of civic websites for youth still maintain a strong gate-keeping function, albeit sometimes with different agendas (e.g., quality control, safeguarding users) and with a more diverse set of content producers than mainstream media.

(p2.5) Our research suggests that producers of political and civic websites need to give much more thought to how they spend their money. Significant amounts of funding are sometimes allocated to website designand especially to interactive features-without a clear conception of their function. While such features might make the organization look good, a large and complex site is not necessarily better for users. As some of the young people in our research suggested, it is important that sites are "fit to purpose." This means looking beyond the latest gimmicks and beyond some politically correct sense that an organization lives or dies by its website.
## (s3) Motivating Civic and Political Participation
(p3.0) We found few cases in our interviews of attractive website design or the latest interactive features motivating civic engagement and participation in themselves. This counters a familiar and entrenched view that by amusing and entertaining young people (on the Internet and elsewhere) one can attract their attention and encourage them to become engaged in civic initiatives. The most significant characteristic of the civic and political engagement we found among the focus groups, as discussed by Gerodimos (2008Gerodimos ( , 2009) and by Miegel and Olsson (2010) in this issue of IJLM, is that it tends to focus predominantly on issues of immediate proximity for the participants. Individual and group identities, a sense of discrimination, and/or current life situation are key.

(p3.1) Thus, civic and political interests are related, in a number of cases, to having a family and/or close community of relatives or friends interested in the same issues and concerns. In a number of cases, local civic achievements-such as the experiences of group solidarity and of being active together and the feeling of having organized an event or campaign and received some positive feedback from peers or older adultsseem to generate a sense of efficacy that encourages and motivates further participation (whether online or offline). On the other hand, the results of offline active citizenship were frequently called into doubt by young people who had experienced governments' failure to respond-for example, when they had demonstrated in large numbers against university tuition fees and for better housing provision, or against the war in Iraq. Although such seemingly "unsuccessful" protests might sap the motivation to participate, for some the resulting anger led to further participation. In most of our focus groups, when young people were involved in civic activities that were related to their immediate contexts (both on-and offline), they seemed to feel more confident in their capacity to bring about change.
## (s4) Understanding Context
(p4.0) Inevitably for a cross-national study, we identified issues that were particularly acute or took on different forms at particular historical moments in different countries. For example, the sphere of politics is generally seen as dirty and corrupt in both Hungary and Slovenia, where respondents showed a clear predisposition toward detaching civic organizations from politics. This means that voting is not generally encouraged by youth civic sites in these countries and that even party sites attempt to steer clear of connections with politics.

(p4.1) Crucially for those interested in European civic identity (see Tuzzi, Padovani, and Nesti 2007), the notion of European citizenship and belonging is viewed in hugely different ways by young people in, for instance, Turkey, Slovenia, and the United Kingdom, where civic websites addressing European youth issues, travel, and integration are found more or less appealing. In the United Kingdom, for example, findings from focus groups with young people suggest that European identity is not at all valued or highly developed, except among a small minority of politically left-wing and antiauthoritarian youth who see it as a positive identity that supersedes the national one, which is seen as retrograde. In Slovenia, on the contrary, our research found some degree of positive feeling toward the idea of European citizenship among a wider range of youth. Most focus group participants displayed either a lack of knowledge of European politics or a sense of distrust about them. Many interviewees also seemed to lose any sense of motivation and affiliation toward politics and the civic sphere (which we could sometimes sense at the national levels and which was even clearer at the local and regional levels) when discussing Europe.

(p4.2) Most of the civic or political participation and engagement-sustained engagement in particulardescribed and identified across the focus groups appeared to begin and end offline in real communities or communities of interest and identity, even if the Internet explicitly provided a space, tool, or focal point for aspects of this engagement. Some civic sites may be set up as a short-term solution to a problem rather than being integrated into other activities-for instance, to prevent the demolition of a skate park or to inform young people about their voting rights. Such sites are often not heavily used over an extended period of time and are thus unlike those sites that have more diffuse motivations, such as gathering together a community of young people who are linked by common bonds. Websites formed by "specialist" groups (based on religious, cultural or subcultural identity, or locality) for highly specific audiences among young people and produced by members of that specific group (particularly by young members of the group) tend to support a stronger sense of belonging and community and are more likely to be used by members of the target group.
## (s5) New Politics online?
(p5.0) Although these points might seem to suggest that the forms of politics taking place online include nothing new, the evidence shows that, to the contrary, civic websites for young people are tapping into newer forms of civic and political participation. This is most apparent in the case of so-called ethical consumption or socially conscious shopping, which plays on the Internet's qualities as a medium of shopping and marketing par excellence (see Hirzalla and Van Zoonen 2010 in this issue of IJLM). Questions remain, however, about whether and how such activities are linked to traditional or more activist forms of political participation (Banaji and Buckingham 2009). We have found further interesting exceptions where the Internet does seem to make a clear difference to individuals or groups of young people in terms of engagement with the wider, interlinked civic and political spheres. For example, in a number of our partner countries the Internet was used by groups of young people as an alternative to mainstream media, as a means of accessing perspectives and information not found in traditional press or broadcasting. How this relates to action is still an open question, but the significance of having a freer flow of information and a less rigid hierarchy dictating who can express and broadcast political ideas online should not be downplayed. In countries where the authorities have begun to censor and regulate the online sphere-such as Turkey-the loss of this freedom highlights its importance still further.

(p5.1) We have also found evidence that the Internet can enable young people to take on and refine their role as monitorial citizens-for instance, by tracking elections; keeping abreast of privacy issues; discussing, photographing, and publicizing police behavior; debating civil liberties; and getting behind the scenes in conflict situations. As highlighted by Miegel and Olsson (2010), in special cases such as file-sharing and the free downloading of music, the Internet itself can be the focus of and reason for civic action. Young people who take part in such civic actions are not always from among those already or necessarily active in civic or political campaigns offline.
