# A Review on Cardiovascular Outcome Studies of Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitors

CorpusID: 52923138 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b21908591824d928961d6d58b4e2d09adcf2cf5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b21908591824d928961d6d58b4e2d09adcf2cf5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) cuRRent status on caRdIovasculaR safety of dPP-4 InhIBItoRs
(p2.0) SAVOR-TIMI 53 was the first CV outcome study for DPP-4 inhibitors to be published after implementation of USFDA regulatory mandate (2008) for CV safety assessment of glucose lowering agents in patients with T2DM. The study reported that saxagliptin did not increase or decrease the rate of ischemic events compared to placebo arm. It was associated with significantly improved glycemic control and reduced the development and progression of microalbuminuria. Another interesting finding was higher hypoglycemic events in saxagliptin group compared to the placebo. [21] Moreover, the risk of secondary event such as hospitalization due to heart failure (hHF) was augmented irrespective of age category, being highest among patients with elevated levels of NT-pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP), previous heart failure, or chronic kidney disease (glomerular filtration rate <60 ml/min). An independent review was presented as oral presentation at EASD 2013 by Dr. Naveed Sattar from University of Glasgow, where it was pointed out that the baseline blood levels of NT-pro-BNP were significantly higher in this subgroup (333 pg/ml). Also, 13% of the patients had been diagnosed with heart failure at baseline. It is therefore required to be further analyzed if only seen in patients with heart failure.
## (s3) cuRRent evIdence Related to occuRRence of heaRt faIluRe of dPP-4
(p3.0) One recent observational study [30] was conducted to compare a risk of hospitalization for CVDs between gliptins with glimepiride using database of Korean National Health Insurance Service of 19,951 in cohort. This study reported that risk of hospitalization for CVDs was found to be decreased among patients with a history of visit for CVDs in the DPP-4 inhibitors versus glimepiride group.

(p3.1) Similarly, one real world data [31] using a US insurance claims database, including 218,556 patients, investigated the comparative safety of DPP-4 inhibitors with other agents and saxagliptin and sitagliptin for the first time. There was no association between treatment with a DPP-4 inhibitors and rate of hHF relative to SU for patients with baseline CVD and treatment with saxagliptin relative to sitagliptin.

(p3.2) Another study reviewed pooled data [32] from five trials and 12 observation studies, of which one cohort and nested casecontrol study showed that there is nonsignificant increased risk of hospital admission of heart failure in sitagliptin group compared to no use.

(p3.3) Likewise, in a meta-analysis of 94 trials, 31 treatments with DPP-4 inhibitors did not affect CV mortality and incidence of stroke. Interestingly though, the risk of myocardial infarction was reduced with DPP-4 inhibitors in the short, but not in the long term (duration of treatment ≥29 weeks). [33] Finally, updated meta-analyses of individual DPP-4 inhibitors also support that neither vildagliptin (RR 0.82; 95% CI 0.61-1.11) [34] nor linagliptin (HR 0.78; 95% CI 0.55-1.12) [35] are associated with an increased risk for a composite outcome of adjudicated MACE relative to comparators. Moreover, the event rates for new onset of HF or hospitalization for its aggravation were relatively low (0.4%) and similar in both vildagliptin and its comparator groups.

(p3.4) A recent assessment on the results of the EXAMINE trial [36] points out that the rate of HF was increased in patients on alogliptin who had no previous history of this disorder [hazards ratio (HR) 1.76; 95% CI 1.07-2.90; P = 0.026].

(p3.5) While one analysis of pooled data from 20 clinical trials comprising over 9000 patients with T2DM confirmed that the saxagliptin arm was not associated with an increased risk for ischemic events, [37] other trials reported an increased rate of hHF. The risk of HF hospitalization was augmented irrespective of age category, [38] being highest among patients with elevated levels of natriuretic peptides, previous HF, or chronic kidney disease. [39] What aRe the conceRns WIth cv safety data of dPP-4 InhIBItoRs?
