# A Review of Blood Vessel Segmentation Techniques

CorpusID: 52115954 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ff2c923b63b766b6911d987759f03ccb83947ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6ff2c923b63b766b6911d987759f03ccb83947ea)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s3) Parametric Model
(p3.0) In this approach, a part of a vessel is segmented by fitting the model to the image data within a 3-D Region of interest. Different schemes are applied in order to extract a full vasculature [17] [31] [32] [33]. For example, in the incremental scheme, parameters are selected basing on previous segmentation process which leads to inaccurate model fitting results due to wrong parameter setting especially in low contrast and noisy images [31] [32] [33]. Several attempts have been made to find accurate parameters for model fitting such as [20] proposed the use multiscale analysis and cylindrical elliptical model in finding of parameters for model fitting, however the method cannot detect edges of vessels at the crossing point. Although elliptic parametric model can approximate healthy vessels and unhealthy vessels (such as vessels with stenosis), it cannot model vessel bifurcations. Worz et al., [17] proposed the use of the kalman filter in finding the parameters for model fitting, the method can only detect the circular shaped vessels and cannot detect thin vessels. Model fitting results on both parameters and models [17]. Worz et al., [17] used Gaussian smoothed cylinder model to detect vessels of particular shapes, however this cannot detect some abnormalities in vessels (such as detection of stenosis, tortuosity). Although cylindrical elliptical model, is capable of detecting healthy vessels and some abnormalities in vessels (such as narrowness in vessels), it doesnot detect vessels at the vessel junctions and tangent vessels.
## (s9) B. Tracking Based Segmentation Method
(p9.0) In this approach, vessel centerline is either chosen manually or automatically. In this research, we look at automated methods. Automated algorithms that fall under this approach include a logic that enable the vessel tracker respond to the end points and the branching points. A function that estimates next vessel direction. Before the tracking process begin, one is required to choose the seed points on the edges, then vessel tracking process begins provided the location and direction of the vessel is known. The vessel tracker looks for closer vessel edge or centerline or both. An estimate of vessel direction is made and new step is made in a specified direction until the whole vessel tree is extracted. Several methods have been employed for-example [21], employed the two phase in the extraction vessels through using the balloon segmentation and snake segmentation during the first stage and second stage respectively. In this method, an initialization point in each of the slices is set before the tracking process to begin. The user also marks the beginning of the balloon segmentation (points in which segmentation start from). During the segmentation, initial points in all other slices are automatically obtained using the average position of a snake points only if the contour exceeds the number of iterations accepted for balloon. In cases where the contour exceeds the number of iterations, the initial point of the next slice is computed using the last regular snake. Segmentation is repeated for missed slices. The method does not detect small vessels and vessels placed parallel to the scan plane and it involve human intervention during parameter setting and adjustment. Manniesing et al., [29], tracked the vessel axis using level set evolution. The evolution of the surface is guided by analyzing its skeleton topology during evolution, and imposing shape constraints on the topology to represent a single segment, a bifurcation or complex topology. The evolving surface is then reinitialized with the new topology. The new topology is obtained through analysing the previous results. After reinitialization a gradient based speed function is optimized to determine the strength of boundaries and how hard the evolving surface is pushing against the boundaries for better segmentation results. However the method involves human intervention in setting the start and end point and it is computationally expensive.The next section presents some of the available pattern recognition based segmentation techniques.
## (s12) Global thresholding
(p12.0) Global thresholding technique is a popular method used during segmentation because of its simplicity. However the method works well on pre-processed images or images whose pixel intensity is consistent. Inconsistency in the image pixels intensity may be as a result of noise, variation in illumination. Among the global thresholding methods, Otsu thresholding is a popular method because of its satisfactory results and easy of computation [14].
## (s16) Adaptive thresholding
(p16.0) Adaptive thresholding technique is used when images are captured under unknown lighting condition and it is required to segment a lighter foreground object from its background or whenever the background gray level is not constant and object contrast varies, within an image. This technique allows the threshold value T to change based on the slowly varying function of position in the image or on local neighbouring hood statistics. Threshold T depends on the spatial coordinated (x, y) themselves.Although the method is capable of identifying object region from background region very effectively in the boundary region, it still faces difficulty in obtaining a correct threshold value in images with the flat region [74].
## (s17) Local adaptive thresholding
(p17.0) This segments the image with the assumption that all small regions have uniform illumination. In this method, adaptive thresholding is used to separate desirable foreground image objects from the background basing on the difference in the pixel intensities of each region in the image. The method is capable of retaining edges of the big vessels as compared to other sizes of vessels [88] [89].
