# A Review of Planar PIV Systems and Image Processing Tools for Lab-On-Chip Microfluidics

CorpusID: 52278595 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4f647afd5a6538a01b715b6a99119add16147f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e4f647afd5a6538a01b715b6a99119add16147f3)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s1) Particle Image Velocimetry Systems for Microfluidics
(p1.0) Planar µPIV systems are used to acquire the results presented in this work. The planar (two-dimensional, 2D) µPIV systems are available in two versions; one that measures 2C velocity fields (U and V), and the other that measures all 3C velocity fields (U, V and W). In the remainder of this paper we will refer to these systems as 2D2CµPIV and 2D3CµPIV respectively. A good review of the planar µPIV systems is provided in Wereley and Meinhart [34], and a brief description of the system configurations used here are provided below.
## (s4) Three-Component Measurements
(p4.0) A 2D3CµPIV system [35] uses two cameras ( Figure 3) to achieve the stereoscopic viewing principle and therefore is often called Stereo-µPIV system in the literature. The schematic of a 2D3CµPIV measurement system in a fluorescence back-scatter illumination mode is shown in Figure 3a. In this illumination mode, the high light intensity of a laser is often required. The laser light reflects from a 45 • mirror, and is focused in the microchannel by the microscope objective (Figure 3a). The flow is seeded with fluorescent particles that are typically coated with a Rhodamine dye that absorbs green wavelengths produced by the second harmonics of the Nd:YAG (λ = 532 nm) or Nd:YLF lasers (λ = 527 nm) and produce a broadband emission in the orange-red spectrum. The fluorescence emission and the Mie scattering are collected by the same objective, and relayed to the two cameras positioned off-center above the microscope objective. Band-pass optical filters are installed in each beam path to block the green Mie scattering from the particles and surfaces, which improves the signal quality. The off-center positioning of the cameras produce a translational stereoscopic imaging configuration [49], where the measurement plane, objective plane and the image plane are parallel. The 3C velocity field for a translational stereoscopic imaging system can be estimated using [49]:

(p4.1) where ∆X 1,2 and ∆Y 1,2 are the displacements in individual camera views, S is the distance between beam paths at the lens plane, and d o is the object distance. In Equation (2) the U and W components can be calculated purely based on ∆X 1,2 and ∆Y 1,2 information, since the cameras are separated in the x-direction. The out-of-plane velocity component, W, can be used to compute V accurately. The interframe time (∆t) of the experiment should be small enough to make sure that the out-of-plane particle displacement stays within the measurement thickness. The measurement thickness of volume illuminated µPIV systems (both for 2D2CµPIV and for 2D3CµPIV) are often defined by the correlation depth, z corr , the thickness where the seeding particles contribute to the correlation function, even though they are out of focus [47]:

(p4.2) here, ε is the threshold image intensity ratio, i.e., the intensity where the out-of-focus particles begin to contribute to the correlation function divided by the in-focus particle image intensity, d p is the particle diameter, n is the fluid refractive index, and NA is the numerical aperture of the objective. 
## (s5) Three-Component Measurements
(p5.0) A 2D3CµPIV system [35] uses two cameras ( Figure 3) to achieve the stereoscopic viewing principle and therefore is often called Stereo-µPIV system in the literature. The schematic of a 2D3CµPIV measurement system in a fluorescence back-scatter illumination mode is shown in Figure  3a. In this illumination mode, the high light intensity of a laser is often required. The laser light reflects from a 45° mirror, and is focused in the microchannel by the microscope objective ( Figure 3a). The flow is seeded with fluorescent particles that are typically coated with a Rhodamine dye that absorbs green wavelengths produced by the second harmonics of the Nd:YAG (λ = 532 nm) or Nd:YLF lasers (λ = 527 nm) and produce a broadband emission in the orange-red spectrum. The fluorescence emission and the Mie scattering are collected by the same objective, and relayed to the two cameras positioned off-center above the microscope objective. Band-pass optical filters are installed in each beam path to block the green Mie scattering from the particles and surfaces, which improves the signal quality. The off-center positioning of the cameras produce a translational stereoscopic imaging configuration [49], where the measurement plane, objective plane and the image plane are parallel. The 3C velocity field for a translational stereoscopic imaging system can be estimated using [49]:

(p5.1) where ΔX1,2 and ΔY1,2 are the displacements in individual camera views, S is the distance between beam paths at the lens plane, and do is the object distance. In Equation (2) the U and W components can be calculated purely based on ΔX1,2 and ΔY1,2 information, since the cameras are separated in the x-direction. The out-of-plane velocity component, W, can be used to compute V accurately. The interframe time (Δt) of the experiment should be small enough to make sure that the out-of-plane particle displacement stays within the measurement thickness. The measurement thickness of volume illuminated µPIV systems (both for 2D2CµPIV and for 2D3CµPIV) are often defined by the correlation depth, zcorr, the thickness where the seeding particles contribute to the correlation function, even though they are out of focus [47]:

(p5.2) here, ε is the threshold image intensity ratio, i.e., the intensity where the out-of-focus particles begin to contribute to the correlation function divided by the in-focus particle image intensity, dp is the particle diameter, n is the fluid refractive index, and NA is the numerical aperture of the objective.

(p5.3) (a) (b)  The 2D3CµPIV system in Figure 3b was used for the omega micromixer experiment [18], the serpentine micromixer experiment, and the spinning micro-rafts experiment [50]. The 2D3CµPIV system contains an upright fluorescence stereoscopic microscope, a pair of FlowSense EO4MP dual-frame PIV cameras, a DualPower 65-15 dual-cavity PIV laser and a stereoscopic image calibration kit manufactured by Dantec Dynamics. The stereo image calibration kit (Figure 4a) is used for the camera calibration, which is subsequently used for the reconstruction of the displacements in 3D space using the 2D displacements recorded by each camera.
## (s8) Overview of Application Examples
(p8.0) The results presented here are obtained from seven different experiments the authors collaborated on previously. The applications include micro-droplet generation [12], micromixers [18,21,22,42], microbiological swimmers [44,48,55], and spinning micro-rafts [50]. Multiple quantities were measured for each application, different subsets of the following: 2C and 3C flow fields, concentration fields, interface location, object position, object speed, and object rotation. The experiment setups and measured variables for each case are summarized in Table 1.

(p8.1) Different challenges were observed in each application and a number of tools were applied to overcome these challenges. Low seeding density regions, low Signal-Noise Ratio (SNR) in acquired images, contrast variations, complex morphology changes in two-phase flows, less-than ideal calibration images during stereoscopic image calibration, and Brownian motion are to name a few. Different sets of background subtraction, image enhancement, masking strategies, object/marker detection and object/marker tracking were applied to overcome these challenges. Several statistical and modal analyses were also applied in the post-processing phase, such as Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and Oscillating Pattern Decomposition (OPD). These are summarized for each case in Table 2.  
## (s15) Passive Micromixers
(p15.0) Mixing is often enhanced in the presence of 3D flow structures, such as vortices. In micro scales the initiation of such 3D microstructures is often suppressed, because of the low Reynolds number inherent to micro scale flows. Passive zig-zag shaped serpentine micromixers (Figure 10a), and omega-shaped micromixers [18] (Figure 11a), are known to induce 3D vortices around sharp corners and thereby enhance mixing efficiency. The aim of this section is to summarize the challenges and proper tools in identification and characterization of such vortices. The next two examples are from passive micromixers where 3C flow field information was obtained using a 2D3CµPIV system. Both passive micromixer experiments are performed at 5× total system magnification, producing a Field of View (FoV) of 3 mm × 3 mm. The results were obtained at the center depth of each microchannel, with slight variations in the experimental setup. These variations are listed in Table 4. Although both experiments are performed using the same total system magnification, the out-of-plane to in-plane velocity uncertainty ratio [49], and the correlation depth are quite different. The former is due to the choice of the objective working distance. The latter is due to the choice of the seeding particle diameter and the aperture of the optics. The depth of field is adjusted by closing the aperture of the zoom optics of the stereomicroscope. In short, it is quite important to select the right components for the setup already in the design stage of the experiment.
## (s20) Breast-Stroke Micro Swimmer
(p20.0) Acartia Tonsa (Figure 15a) is known to pull double-breaststrokes using the first two pairs of its appendages during the early stage of their life cycle [29]. In an experiment performed at DTU [29,44], a long-distance 2CµPIV system was used to take measurements around a~220-µm-long individual. A low-power, continuous-wave infrared laser (Oxford Lasers Ltd., Didcot, UK, 808 nm wavelength) was used for illumination. Sheet forming optics was assembled to produce a 150 µm thick light sheet, defining the measurement depth of the experiments. TiO 2 seeding particles smaller than 2 µm were introduced in small quantities until a sufficient seeding density was achieved. The particle images were recorded on a high-speed CMOS detector (Phantom v210, Vision Research Inc., Wayne, NJ, USA) at a frame rate of 2000 fps and at a resolution of 1280 × 800 pixels. The images were acquired with 11.65× magnification producing a 2.2 mm × 1.4 mm FoV. Since the full frame FoV was only approximately 3 mm 2 , the images were stored in a ring buffer and a manual trigger stopped the acquisition after the organism had passed through the FoV. The first frame of the image ensemble is shown in Figure 15b, where a 0.2 mm tall Acartia Tonsa is visible. From this instance, Acartia Tonsa propels itself upwards through filtered seawater (Figure 15c,d) by pulling three breaststrokes, covering a distance of approximately 650µm. It is observed that Acartia Tonsa moves in an almost-vertical straight line (Figure 15e) and its angular orientation does not change significantly. The flow field around E. Gracilis reveals that the fluid is drawn towards the organism upstream and downstream, and fluid is expelled from the organism on the sides (Figure 14). The upstream flow field is produced by the flagellum pulling a stroke, the main source of propulsion. The downstream flow field can be explained as the wake in the aft of the swimmer. Due to continuity around the organism, the fluid is expelled outwards from the sides. This type of flow field produces four stagnant flow regions, one at each corner of the organism, i.e., due Southwest, Southeast, Northwest and Northeast of the organism.
## (s21) Breast-Stroke Micro Swimmer
(p21.0) Acartia Tonsa (Figure 15a) is known to pull double-breaststrokes using the first two pairs of its appendages during the early stage of their life cycle [29]. In an experiment performed at DTU [29,44], a long-distance 2CµPIV system was used to take measurements around a ~220-µm-long individual. A low-power, continuous-wave infrared laser (Oxford Lasers Ltd., Didcot, UK, 808 nm wavelength) was used for illumination. Sheet forming optics was assembled to produce a 150 µm thick light sheet, defining the measurement depth of the experiments. TiO2 seeding particles smaller than 2 µm were introduced in small quantities until a sufficient seeding density was achieved. The particle images were recorded on a high-speed CMOS detector (Phantom v210, Vision Research Inc., Wayne, NJ, USA) at a frame rate of 2000 fps and at a resolution of 1280 × 800 pixels. The images were acquired with 11.65× magnification producing a 2.2 mm × 1.4 mm FoV. Since the full frame FoV was only approximately 3 mm 2 , the images were stored in a ring buffer and a manual trigger stopped the acquisition after the organism had passed through the FoV. The first frame of the image ensemble is shown in Figure 15b, where a 0.2 mm tall Acartia Tonsa is visible. From this instance, Acartia Tonsa propels itself upwards through filtered seawater (Figure 15c,d) by pulling three breaststrokes, covering a distance of approximately 650µm. It is observed that Acartia Tonsa moves in an almostvertical straight line ( Figure 15e) and its angular orientation does not change significantly. The position of the micro-swimmer is recorded by using rigid object tracking and stabilization [38]. The rigid object tracking is based on a cross-correlation routine with sub-pixel accuracy. The basic principle is producing a sub-image that contains the object to be tracked (in this case the A. Tonsa's torso without the appendages), and then correlating this sub-image in the full-frame images of the ensemble. The peak of the cross-correlation function reveals the position of the object with subpixel accuracy, and the cross-correlation results for the first, middle and last frames in the ensemble are shown in Figure 15b-d respectively. Integrating the cross-correlation result in time reveals A. Tonsa's nearly linear and nearly vertical trajectory (Figure 15e).

(p21.1) The object's linear speed can be calculated based on the objects position history, and acceleration information can be derived from the speed history (not shown). A. Tonsa has a very periodic vertical swim velocity (Figure 16a), and therefore phase-locked averaging techniques can be used during flow field measurements [44]. Once the position of the tracked object is established, a suitable ROI is extracted around the organism, fixing the tracked object in the new frame of reference (rigid object stabilization) [38]. This operation is essentially moving from a global coordinate system to an object- The position of the micro-swimmer is recorded by using rigid object tracking and stabilization [38]. The rigid object tracking is based on a cross-correlation routine with sub-pixel accuracy. The basic principle is producing a sub-image that contains the object to be tracked (in this case the A. Tonsa's torso without the appendages), and then correlating this sub-image in the full-frame images of the ensemble. The peak of the cross-correlation function reveals the position of the object with sub-pixel accuracy, and the cross-correlation results for the first, middle and last frames in the ensemble are shown in Figure 15b-d respectively. Integrating the cross-correlation result in time reveals A. Tonsa's nearly linear and nearly vertical trajectory (Figure 15e).

(p21.2) The object's linear speed can be calculated based on the objects position history, and acceleration information can be derived from the speed history (not shown). A. Tonsa has a very periodic vertical swim velocity (Figure 16a), and therefore phase-locked averaging techniques can be used during flow field measurements [44]. Once the position of the tracked object is established, a suitable ROI is extracted around the organism, fixing the tracked object in the new frame of reference (rigid object stabilization) [38]. This operation is essentially moving from a global coordinate system to an object-fixed coordinate system. The next step is performing a static masking operation in the object-fixed frame, which is in fact a dynamic masking operation in the global coordinate system. The flow field around the organism is calculated using an Adaptive PIV algorithm throughout the three breaststroke cycles, and phase-locked averaging is performed to get flow field information in a typical swim cycle. There are two velocity maxima and a velocity minimum in a typical swim cycle, corresponding to two power strokes and a recovery stroke (Figure 16a). The phase-locked average flow field results during the second power stroke is shown in Figure 16b. The flow field shown in Figure 16b is the average of velocity maps obtained at three red dots shown in Figure 16a. The flow field around A. Tonsa reveal the liquid pulled behind the organism and the downwash of the fluid on both sides as a result of the power stroke. fixed coordinate system. The next step is performing a static masking operation in the object-fixed frame, which is in fact a dynamic masking operation in the global coordinate system. The flow field around the organism is calculated using an Adaptive PIV algorithm throughout the three breaststroke cycles, and phase-locked averaging is performed to get flow field information in a typical swim cycle. There are two velocity maxima and a velocity minimum in a typical swim cycle, corresponding to two power strokes and a recovery stroke (Figure 16a). The phase-locked average flow field results during the second power stroke is shown in Figure 16b. The flow field shown in Figure 16b is the average of velocity maps obtained at three red dots shown in Figure 16a. The flow field around A. Tonsa reveal the liquid pulled behind the organism and the downwash of the fluid on both sides as a result of the power stroke. 
## (s22) Magnetically Driven Micro-Rafts
(p22.0) The final application example is related to a pair of spinning micro-rafts from a self-assembling micro-systems study [28]. Time-resolved 2D3CµPIV experiments were performed to measure the free surface motion created, due to a pair of spinning micro-rafts [50]. The 100 µm-diameter cylindrical magnetic rafts were spun in the clockwise direction with a spin rate of 2500 rpm using an external magnetic mixer (Figure 17a). The rafts not only spun on their own axis, but also around each other drawing characteristic circular geometric pattern known as trochoid. One raft moved in a larger radius drawing smaller circles, whereas the other moved in a shorter radius drawing larger circles (Figure 17b). The micro-raft positions were obtained by tracking the center of the dynamic masks using a HT-based masking strategy. The outline of the dynamic mask at t = 0.13 ms is shown in Figure 17b. The 3D motion of the free water surface was measured by tracking the floating 5 µmfluorescent seeding particles. There were differences in the reflected light intensity, since some of the particles coagulated on the free surface. Interestingly, some of the seeding particles coagulated on the rafts' sidewalls, acting as micro-vanes. In the vicinity of the micro-rafts, large seeding particles were pushed away from the micro-rafts, due to the centrifugal effect and a low seeding concentration region was formed. Local contrast normalization was performed to homogenize the light reflection intensities and recover particle images in the low-seeding density regions (red circles in Figure 17a,c). The stereo image calibration was performed using a 900 µm-wide, square checkerboard calibration target. A calibration refinement process followed to correct for severe camera misalignment between calibration and experiments. Since the rafts were spun in the same rotation direction, a severe shear layer formed between them, where most spurious vectors were computed. These were replaced using a Universal Outlier Detection [60] scheme. The spinning micro-raft pair produced a distinct, 8-shaped vector field rotating around itself in the clockwise direction at a constant speed (Figure 17d). 
## (s23) Magnetically Driven Micro-Rafts
(p23.0) The final application example is related to a pair of spinning micro-rafts from a self-assembling micro-systems study [28]. Time-resolved 2D3CµPIV experiments were performed to measure the free surface motion created, due to a pair of spinning micro-rafts [50]. The 100 µm-diameter cylindrical magnetic rafts were spun in the clockwise direction with a spin rate of 2500 rpm using an external magnetic mixer (Figure 17a). The rafts not only spun on their own axis, but also around each other drawing characteristic circular geometric pattern known as trochoid. One raft moved in a larger radius drawing smaller circles, whereas the other moved in a shorter radius drawing larger circles (Figure 17b). The micro-raft positions were obtained by tracking the center of the dynamic masks using a HT-based masking strategy. The outline of the dynamic mask at t = 0.13 ms is shown in Figure 17b. The 3D motion of the free water surface was measured by tracking the floating 5 µm-fluorescent seeding particles. There were differences in the reflected light intensity, since some of the particles coagulated on the free surface. Interestingly, some of the seeding particles coagulated on the rafts' sidewalls, acting as micro-vanes. In the vicinity of the micro-rafts, large seeding particles were pushed away from the micro-rafts, due to the centrifugal effect and a low seeding concentration region was formed. Local contrast normalization was performed to homogenize the light reflection intensities and recover particle images in the low-seeding density regions (red circles in Figure 17a,c). The stereo image calibration was performed using a 900 µm-wide, square checkerboard calibration target. A calibration refinement process followed to correct for severe camera misalignment between calibration and experiments. Since the rafts were spun in the same rotation direction, a severe shear layer formed between them, where most spurious vectors were computed. These were replaced using a Universal Outlier Detection [60] scheme. The spinning micro-raft pair produced a distinct, 8-shaped vector field rotating around itself in the clockwise direction at a constant speed (Figure 17d). The flow disturbances created by the spinning micro-rafts produce a periodic sloshing motion in the far field (Figure 18a). The frequency of the out-of-plane velocity component is measured as ~42 Hz, which is in perfect agreement with the excitation frequency ( Figure 18b).
