# A SHORT SURVEY OF TOPOLOGICAL DATA ANALYSIS IN TIME SERIES AND SYSTEMS ANALYSIS A PREPRINT

CorpusID: 52894928 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56af47d2ad14b5ab2778e3efd7ba9565b92fb10b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/56af47d2ad14b5ab2778e3efd7ba9565b92fb10b)

Fields: Engineering, Mathematics, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The main target in Topological Data Analysis (TDA) is to find the shape or the underlying structure of shapes in data. In its recent contribution, TDA is often considered to deal with a huge number of discrete points in high-dimensional space., i.e., a data cloud. A simple way to show that how a large number of data points can represent the whole space is to construct the Voronoi Diagram [1]. Voronoi diagram partitions the space to convex sub-regions (e.g., polygons, polyhedrons, etc) and each sub-region covers the area in which a site (i.e., a particular data point) is the closest data point. TDA methods usually introduce a similar intuition, but follow more complex methodologies. While the geometry (as offered by Voronoi Diagrams) depends on distances to study shapes, topology benefits from homeomorphisms that are closed with respect to stretching or shrinking. Therefore, TDA methods are much less sensitive to the choice of metric [2]. This will allow us to use TDA for a wide family of problems in which the shape of data matters. We will follow some recent developments in TDA and will focus on a widely used topological tool called Persistent Homology.
## (s3) TDA in Systems Engineering and Signal Processing
(p3.0) Skraba et al. in [25] showed that persistent homology can be used in time delay embedding models. Time delay embeddings translate a 1-dimensional time series to a d-dimensional time series in which the current value at each time with (d − 1) lags coordinate [26,27]. Skraba et al. developed a framework of analyzing dynamic systems based on topological data analysis that requires almost no prior information of the underlying structure. Instead, a discrete sample of data point is being studied in periodic, quasi-periodic and recurrent systems. The same approach have been considered frequently in the later works on different applications of time series. The authors suggested that clustering d-dimensional delay embedding of a time series in some subspaces of R d can easily reveal recurrent nature of the system on appeared loops and returning paths. The next step is to utilize persistent homology or more precisely the persistence diagram or Betti numbers to measure these loops. Note that these loops in delay-coordinate embedding do not necessarily exist in the samples of the initial time-series. This is one of the reasons that the authors preferred to work on delay embedding R d field. In addition, tuning the time delay parameter will result in a more robust model. Based on Vietoris-Rips or any similar filtration, one can construct the persistence diagram of the delay embedding.

(p3.1) As the results, a periodic system will end up with the Betti numbers (or equivalently persistence diagram) of a circle. Similarly, a quasi-periodic system with n periods will end up with the persistent Betti number of an n-dimensional torus. For example when n = 2 the system will have the Betti numbers of the torus in Table 1. Finally, the persistence diagram of a recurrent system will look like that of a bouquet of circles. Note that in the first two cases, after extraction of persistence diagrams there exist many easy ways to retrieve the time periods explicitly. The road map is simple. Each time period is reflected in the sizes of loops or holes in the space of delay embedding, where persistence homology has an easy job to measure them. Thus, in addition to the system type identification or counting the loops (equivalently the number of periods), this approach is capable of measuring the specification of periods.

(p3.2) Perea and Harer in [28] also worked on the same problem, using the topology of sliding window to measure the strength of persistent homology in periodic signals. The authors showed more precisely how persistent homology can be used to detect periodic behavior of signals. They used 1-dimensional persistence diagrams of sliding window on periodic noisy signals to discover periodicity and showed how their approach can comparably perform as the state of the art. Perea in [29] extended the theories in [28] to the quasi-periodic functions (i.e., linear summation of periodic functions with irrelevant frequencies). The author proved the way to obtain the optimal choice of time delay and window size for for sliding window embedding of such functions and then calculated the upperbound and lowerbound for persistent homology of sliding window.
