# Sexual Risk Factors for HIV Infection in Early and Advanced HIV Epidemics in Sub-Saharan Africa: Systematic Overview of 68 Epidemiological Studies

CorpusID: 52867965 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/260e7b3de3d3aa5c877df96474f973db0f9f017b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/260e7b3de3d3aa5c877df96474f973db0f9f017b)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s7) RESULTS
(p7.0) Our computerized search generated 1,204 hits, which after a single reading by one of two investigators (LC, BS or TD) yielded 550 abstracts. Independent reading by two investigators yielded 110 papers [11-113] meeting these criteria. Of these 110 papers, a further 36  were excluded for various reasons, such as non-pertinent partnerships (discordant couples [110][111][112] or other irrelevant partnerships [50,82,109]). To avoid unstable estimates and minimize publication bias, 8 studies that provided less than 60 people overall or less than 20 cases or controls were excluded: five of paid sex: [106][107][108][109][110]; five of STI [84,[108][109][110][111]; and one of HSV-2 [50]. In total 68 studies (from 67 papers) from 18 countries with a total population of 17,000 HIV positive adults and 73,000 controls were included: 62 studies used cross-sectional or casecontrol design and 6 used longitudinal designs. Table S1 provides the characteristics of the studies, including sample size, year, study design, and by source of controls (general population or high-risk).  (as a proxy for background prevalence). While the analyses used a 20% prevalence to delineate the comparison groups, the actual mean background prevalence varied as shown. For women, there were no significant differences in risk of HIV infection with 3 or more sex partners versus 0-2 between lower (OR = 3.65) and higher (OR = 3.63) background HIV prevalence. Similarly, there were few differences in risk of HIV with STI history between lower (OR = 2.35) and higher (OR = 2.41) background HIV prevalence. Finally, there was no major difference in risk of HIV with HSV-2 infection between lower (OR = 4.27) and higher (OR = 5.97) background HIV prevalence, although the comparisons are limited because only two heterogeneous studies were included in higher prevalence settings.

(p7.1) Our computerized search generated 1,204 hits, which after a single reading by one of two investigators (LC, BS or TD) yielded 550 abstracts. Independent reading by two investigators yielded 110 papers [11-113] meeting these criteria. Of these 110 papers, a further 36  were excluded for various reasons, such as non-pertinent partnerships (discordant couples [110][111][112] or other irrelevant partnerships [50,82,109]). To avoid unstable estimates and minimize publication bias, 8 studies that provided less than 60 people overall or less than 20 cases or controls were excluded: five of paid sex: [106][107][108][109][110]; five of STI [84,[108][109][110][111]; and one of HSV-2 [50]. In total 68 studies (from 67 papers) from 18 countries with a total population of 17,000 HIV positive adults and 73,000 controls were included: 62 studies used cross-sectional or casecontrol design and 6 used longitudinal designs. Table S1 provides the characteristics of the studies, including sample size, year, study design, and by source of controls (general population or high-risk).  (as a proxy for background prevalence). While the analyses used a 20% prevalence to delineate the comparison groups, the actual mean background prevalence varied as shown. For women, there were no significant differences in risk of HIV infection with 3 or more sex partners versus 0-2 between lower (OR = 3.65) and higher (OR = 3.63) background HIV prevalence. Similarly, there were few differences in risk of HIV with STI history between lower (OR = 2.35) and higher (OR = 2.41) background HIV prevalence. Finally, there was no major difference in risk of HIV with HSV-2 infection between lower (OR = 4.27) and higher (OR = 5.97) background HIV prevalence, although the comparisons are limited because only two heterogeneous studies were included in higher prevalence settings.
## (s13) Key risk factors
(p13.0) This meta-analysis confirms that the key sexual risk factors for HIV infection in sub-Saharan African are a high number of lifetime sexual partners, engaging in paid sex, and having an STImost notably HSV-2. We observed an approximately linear relationship between number of partners and HIV risk for both men and women. Indeed, one study [95] of male truck drivers found that risk was continuously increasing with numbers of sex partners even within the extreme 'tail'' of sexual behavior, with an OR of 4.0 in men reporting 10 or more partners (versus 1-9). Among HIV uninfected controls, the proportion of men reporting 3 or more sex partners (versus 0-2) was 40% vs. 18% among women (Table 1). Indeed, the prevalence of multi-partner sex among control women is larger than that that reported by women in general population surveys [119], suggesting that the control populations enrolled here were somewhat selected for higher risk. This would suggest that the true contribution of a high number of sexual partners to HIV risk might be greater than implied by the estimates shown here. Women tend to under-report ever having sold sex, and men may under-report paying for it [120]. Such misclassification would lead to our observed risks underestimating true risks. Finally, although we calculated crude risks, significant excess risks, especially for HSV-2, persisted in a sub-set of studies that adjusted for potentially confounding variables ( Table 2).

(p13.1) This meta-analysis confirms that the key sexual risk factors for HIV infection in sub-Saharan African are a high number of lifetime sexual partners, engaging in paid sex, and having an STImost notably HSV-2. We observed an approximately linear relationship between number of partners and HIV risk for both men and women. Indeed, one study [95] of male truck drivers found that risk was continuously increasing with numbers of sex partners even within the extreme 'tail'' of sexual behavior, with an OR of 4.0 in men reporting 10 or more partners (versus 1-9). Among HIV uninfected controls, the proportion of men reporting 3 or more sex partners (versus 0-2) was 40% vs. 18% among women (Table 1). Indeed, the prevalence of multi-partner sex among control women is larger than that that reported by women in general population surveys [119], suggesting that the control populations enrolled here were somewhat selected for higher risk. This would suggest that the true contribution of a high number of sexual partners to HIV risk might be greater than implied by the estimates shown here. Women tend to under-report ever having sold sex, and men may under-report paying for it [120]. Such misclassification would lead to our observed risks underestimating true risks. Finally, although we calculated crude risks, significant excess risks, especially for HSV-2, persisted in a sub-set of studies that adjusted for potentially confounding variables ( Table 2).
## (s15) Risk Factor and Gender
(p15.0) General Population High-risk Groups  First, male-female differences in multi-partner sex and paid sex were more extreme in higher prevalence than in lower prevalence settings (Figure 7). This is consistent with the idea that male sexual behavior (most significantly from paid sex) is important even in advanced epidemics. An earlier review [119] suggests that discrepancies between male and female reported partners in Africa arise, in part, from age mixing (i.e. older men having sex with younger women). If so, age mixing as a determinant of HIV transmission might be more extreme in higher prevalence settings than in lower prevalence settings, and deserves further study.
## (s40) RESULTS
(p40.0) Our computerized search generated 1,204 hits, which after a single reading by one of two investigators (LC, BS or TD) yielded 550 abstracts. Independent reading by two investigators yielded 110 papers [11-113] meeting these criteria. Of these 110 papers, a further 36  were excluded for various reasons, such as non-pertinent partnerships (discordant couples [110][111][112] or other irrelevant partnerships [50,82,109]). To avoid unstable estimates and minimize publication bias, 8 studies that provided less than 60 people overall or less than 20 cases or controls were excluded: five of paid sex: [106][107][108][109][110]; five of STI [84,[108][109][110][111]; and one of HSV-2 [50]. In total 68 studies (from 67 papers) from 18 countries with a total population of 17,000 HIV positive adults and 73,000 controls were included: 62 studies used cross-sectional or casecontrol design and 6 used longitudinal designs. Table S1 provides the characteristics of the studies, including sample size, year, study design, and by source of controls (general population or high-risk).  (as a proxy for background prevalence). While the analyses used a 20% prevalence to delineate the comparison groups, the actual mean background prevalence varied as shown. For women, there were no significant differences in risk of HIV infection with 3 or more sex partners versus 0-2 between lower (OR = 3.65) and higher (OR = 3.63) background HIV prevalence. Similarly, there were few differences in risk of HIV with STI history between lower (OR = 2.35) and higher (OR = 2.41) background HIV prevalence. Finally, there was no major difference in risk of HIV with HSV-2 infection between lower (OR = 4.27) and higher (OR = 5.97) background HIV prevalence, although the comparisons are limited because only two heterogeneous studies were included in higher prevalence settings.

(p40.1) Our computerized search generated 1,204 hits, which after a single reading by one of two investigators (LC, BS or TD) yielded 550 abstracts. Independent reading by two investigators yielded 110 papers [11-113] meeting these criteria. Of these 110 papers, a further 36  were excluded for various reasons, such as non-pertinent partnerships (discordant couples [110][111][112] or other irrelevant partnerships [50,82,109]). To avoid unstable estimates and minimize publication bias, 8 studies that provided less than 60 people overall or less than 20 cases or controls were excluded: five of paid sex: [106][107][108][109][110]; five of STI [84,[108][109][110][111]; and one of HSV-2 [50]. In total 68 studies (from 67 papers) from 18 countries with a total population of 17,000 HIV positive adults and 73,000 controls were included: 62 studies used cross-sectional or casecontrol design and 6 used longitudinal designs. Table S1 provides the characteristics of the studies, including sample size, year, study design, and by source of controls (general population or high-risk).  (as a proxy for background prevalence). While the analyses used a 20% prevalence to delineate the comparison groups, the actual mean background prevalence varied as shown. For women, there were no significant differences in risk of HIV infection with 3 or more sex partners versus 0-2 between lower (OR = 3.65) and higher (OR = 3.63) background HIV prevalence. Similarly, there were few differences in risk of HIV with STI history between lower (OR = 2.35) and higher (OR = 2.41) background HIV prevalence. Finally, there was no major difference in risk of HIV with HSV-2 infection between lower (OR = 4.27) and higher (OR = 5.97) background HIV prevalence, although the comparisons are limited because only two heterogeneous studies were included in higher prevalence settings.
## (s46) Key risk factors
(p46.0) This meta-analysis confirms that the key sexual risk factors for HIV infection in sub-Saharan African are a high number of lifetime sexual partners, engaging in paid sex, and having an STImost notably HSV-2. We observed an approximately linear relationship between number of partners and HIV risk for both men and women. Indeed, one study [95] of male truck drivers found that risk was continuously increasing with numbers of sex partners even within the extreme 'tail'' of sexual behavior, with an OR of 4.0 in men reporting 10 or more partners (versus 1-9). Among HIV uninfected controls, the proportion of men reporting 3 or more sex partners (versus 0-2) was 40% vs. 18% among women (Table 1). Indeed, the prevalence of multi-partner sex among control women is larger than that that reported by women in general population surveys [119], suggesting that the control populations enrolled here were somewhat selected for higher risk. This would suggest that the true contribution of a high number of sexual partners to HIV risk might be greater than implied by the estimates shown here. Women tend to under-report ever having sold sex, and men may under-report paying for it [120]. Such misclassification would lead to our observed risks underestimating true risks. Finally, although we calculated crude risks, significant excess risks, especially for HSV-2, persisted in a sub-set of studies that adjusted for potentially confounding variables ( Table 2).

(p46.1) This meta-analysis confirms that the key sexual risk factors for HIV infection in sub-Saharan African are a high number of lifetime sexual partners, engaging in paid sex, and having an STImost notably HSV-2. We observed an approximately linear relationship between number of partners and HIV risk for both men and women. Indeed, one study [95] of male truck drivers found that risk was continuously increasing with numbers of sex partners even within the extreme 'tail'' of sexual behavior, with an OR of 4.0 in men reporting 10 or more partners (versus 1-9). Among HIV uninfected controls, the proportion of men reporting 3 or more sex partners (versus 0-2) was 40% vs. 18% among women (Table 1). Indeed, the prevalence of multi-partner sex among control women is larger than that that reported by women in general population surveys [119], suggesting that the control populations enrolled here were somewhat selected for higher risk. This would suggest that the true contribution of a high number of sexual partners to HIV risk might be greater than implied by the estimates shown here. Women tend to under-report ever having sold sex, and men may under-report paying for it [120]. Such misclassification would lead to our observed risks underestimating true risks. Finally, although we calculated crude risks, significant excess risks, especially for HSV-2, persisted in a sub-set of studies that adjusted for potentially confounding variables ( Table 2).
## (s48) Risk Factor and Gender
(p48.0) General Population High-risk Groups  First, male-female differences in multi-partner sex and paid sex were more extreme in higher prevalence than in lower prevalence settings (Figure 7). This is consistent with the idea that male sexual behavior (most significantly from paid sex) is important even in advanced epidemics. An earlier review [119] suggests that discrepancies between male and female reported partners in Africa arise, in part, from age mixing (i.e. older men having sex with younger women). If so, age mixing as a determinant of HIV transmission might be more extreme in higher prevalence settings than in lower prevalence settings, and deserves further study.
