# Natural Phytotherapeutic Antioxidants in the Treatment of Mercury Intoxication-A Review

CorpusID: 52890219 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b7e9a0f02716398be83008a9ad2c5c20c01f8f47)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s1) ROS (Reactive Oxygen species)
(p1.0) Free radicals are highly active atoms or molecules that can be produced in many physiological and pathological processes, carrying one or more unpaired electrons in their orbit. These highly unstable atoms or molecules tend to react with molecules in their environment and to share these electrons. 57,58 Free radicals can be positively charged, negatively charged, or neutral and are most often formed by electron transfer in biological systems. The most important free radicals in biological systems are the oxygen radicals. In addition, another source of free radicals is the nitrogen molecule. There is no toxic effect of O2, but it becomes free oxygen radicals during aerobic cell metabolism. By partial reduction of O2, OH and O2are formed. [58][59][60] Superoxide Radical (O2 •-) Superoxide is the first radical to appear in living organisms. In almost all aerobic cells, reduction of oxygen by an electron takes place. 61 The superoxide radical plays an important role in the formation of other reactive oxygen species, such as H2O2, HO2or 1 O2. 58,62 The superoxide radical is produced either directly in mitochondria during oxidation or enzymatically by xanthine oxidase (XO), cytochrome p450 and other oxidases. Superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme or in H2O2 is spontaneously inactivated. 63,64 Combined with superoxide (O2 •-) and the free radical NO -, comes the reactive nitrogen derivative ONOO . (Peroxynitrite). ONOO-has harmful effects on direct proteins. 65
## (s3) Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2)
(p3.0) There is no unpaired electron in the hydrogen peroxide molecule, and so it is not a radical. Hydrogen peroxide can be generated through a dismutation reaction from superoxide anion by superoxide dismutase (SOD). 58,62,63 Enzymes such as amino acid oxidase (AAO) and xanthine oxidase (XO) also produce hydrogen peroxide from the superoxide anion. H2O2 is the least reactive molecule among ROS and is stable under physiological pH and temperature in the lack of metal ions. H2O2 can produce singlet oxygen thanks to react with superoxide anion or with HOCl or chloramines in living systems. 62,68 Free radical species (ROS) affect all important structures of cells such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, DNA and enzymes. 58,69 Effects of ROS on lipids and proteins Free radicals have to cross the cell membrane in order to interact with the cell components. Inasmuch as cell membranes are rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) and cholesterol, they are easily affected by oxidant radicals. 70 Free radicals move away the hydrogen atom from the fatty acid chain. Lipid peroxidation is oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty plural form with free radicals. The main primary products of lipid peroxidation are lipid hydroperoxides (LOOH). This peroxidation results in products such as MDA, 4-hydroxynoneal (HNA), 8-iso-prostaglandin F2α (8-iso-PGF2α), alcohols, ethane and pentane. MDA is mutagenic since DNA can react with nitrogen bases. 58,71 Additionally it is genotoxic and carcinogenic on cell cultures. Membrane damage caused by lipid peroxidation is irreversible. MDA is the most mutagenic product of lipid peroxidation. 4-HNE is the most toxic. 4-HNE is considered as the second toxic messengers of free radicals, one of the major generators of oxidative stress and a major lipid peroxidation product. 58,70,72 8-Iso-prostaglandin F2α (8-iso-PGF2α), a major F2-isoprostane, is biosynthesized in vivo through nonenzymatic free radical-catalysed peroxidation of arachidonic acid. 21,22,58,70,73,74 Proteins are defined as the major targets of oxidative damage. The products of cellular metabolism or environmental induced ROS changes in the amino acids of proteins and cause loss of activity of protein function / enzymatic activity as well. 75,76 Oxidative protein modifications may take place in different ways. ROS directly interacts with protein or Interaction of compounds such as carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids with ROS can interact with proteins with the resulting products. 77 In this way, reactive and non-protein compounds react with proteins to form a wide array of structures. 78,79 Protein oxidation reactions are usually divided into modifying the protein construct and modifying the amino acid side chains. 80,81 In addition to the modification of the protein in proteins, amino acid side chains are target for ROS. Sulfide containing amino acids in the structure are highly sensitive to cysteine and methionine. 82 Aromatic structures are also the main targets for ROS. The oxidatively modified tyrosine, phenylalanine and tryptophan are usually oxidative damage a demonstration. 76 Oxidation of lysine, arginine, proline or threonine may result in the formation of carbonyl derivatives. 83,84 Protein carbonyls are among the most commonly used products for determination of the proteins of the oxides. 58,85 Protein carbonyl levels area well-used marker for oxidative stress. The toxic effects of mercury can be prevented by antioxidant defense mechanisms to a certain extent.
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) Plants are an exogenous source of antioxidants taken in the diet. It is believed that two thirds of the plant species in the world have medical prescription, and almost all of them have excellent antioxidant potential. 125 Increased exogenous antioxidant supplementation or endogenous antioxidant defense has been found to be effective in combating undesirable effects of oxidative stress. 126 The main natural antioxidants present in vitamins and protecting the human body from harmful free radicals are mainly vitamins (C, E and A vitamins), flavonoids, carotenoids and polyphenols. 127 Phenolic compounds exhibit physiological properties such as anti-allergic, anti-atherogenic, antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, anticancer, antithrombotic, cardiovascular and vasodilatory effects. [128][129][130] In addition, Fruits, spices and many medicinal herbs are rich sources of pharmacological properties. These agents have antioxidants, free radical scavengers and anti-toxic properties. 16,23,[131][132] As shown in Table 2, many natural antioxidants against mercury poisoning have been tested for detoxification. 
