# 06+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES 8 Electroless and Electrochemical Deposition of Metallic Coatings on Magnesium Alloys Critical Literature Review

CorpusID: 53609552 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea486955859cfaa0b621baa06225c055ed22b33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea486955859cfaa0b621baa06225c055ed22b33)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s1) www.intechopen.com
(p1.0) Before the electroless plating or the electrodeposition on magnesium alloys, a copper strike layer, usually cyanide bath, is electrodeposited on zinc layer in order to provide a uniform coverage. Yu studied the deposition (displacement + electrodepositon) of copper from a pyrophosphate solution over a zinc transition layer deposited from pyrophosphate solution (Yu et al., 2005). In another study, a protective copper film on AZ31 magnesium alloy, without zinc pretreatment, was proposed. The aqueous solution containing 0.4M Na 4 P 2 O 7 + 0.08M Cu 2 P 2 O 7 + 0.24M CuSO 4 + 0.05M NaF was used. A galvanic displacement reaction occurrs between copper and magnesium, then copper film is formed on magnesium substrate. After that, electroplating is carried out applying direct current and pulse current using the same copper solution. Yang proposed a procedure in which a copper layer is deposited onto AZ91D, by immersion plating, before EN plating. The solution was optimized in term of temperature, pH and fluoride content by searching the maximum coverage (Yang et al., 2005(Yang et al., , 2005b(Yang et al., , and 2006. Ultrasonication was found effective in improving the copper immersion coating process, particularly during extended deposition times, beyond the initial stages (Yang et al., 2005c). Higher coverage of magnesium alloy surface (> 80%) by copper immersion coating were also achieved by using an alkaline bath. The procedure proposed by Yang is schematically represented in Fig. 3 (Yang et al., 2006). Fig. 3. Flowchart of the procedure for copper immersion coating on the AZ91D magnesium alloy (Yang et al., 2006).
## (s2) Substrate morphology
(p2.0) The effect of the magnesium alloy AZ91 microstructure and roughness on the nucleation, deposition rate, coating microstructure, and mechanical properties of the EN coatings was recently investigated (Liu & Gao, 2006). Experimental results show that surface sandblasting pre-treatment (R a = 0.05 µm) enhances the nucleation and coalescence of nickel crystallites.
## (s4) Porosity
(p4.0) The nickel/magnesium system is a typical example of a "cathodic coating on an anodic substrate". Therefore, the nickel layer provides only a physical barrier against the corrosion attack of magnesium substrate and, for this reason, it must be uniform, adherent and pore free. The assessment of the porosity in a coating deposited onto a magnesium alloy is a major issue in determining the quality of a protective layer. A study on the porosity in EN on AZ91D alloy was recently published . The coated samples are dipped in corrodkote solution (5 ml HCl and 6 g NaCl in 100 ml H 2 O) for 5 min, than they are immersed into an indicator solution for 3 min. The conclusion of the study is that eriochrome black T indicator offers more readable color point on filter paper than using magneson and sodium alizarin sulfonate indicators. The optimized solution composition for EN deposition, in relation to porosity assessment, contains sodium hypophosphite and nickel carbonate with a mass ratio equal to 1.75, 25 g/l of fluorides, 1.5 mg/l of thiourea, and 20 g/l of buffering chemicals (sodium acetate or sodium carbonate). Zou described a way to seal the micropores of EN on magnesium by means of a posttreatment with fluoropolymers. The hardness of the coating reached 600 HV, the coefficient of friction of the coating was less than 0.15 suitable for to dry lubrication. The corrosion resistance was also excellent to endure 5% neutral salt spray test for 500 hours (Zou et al., 2005).
## (s6) www.intechopen.com
(p6.0) Jiang fabricated a composite coating on AZ91 by combining a PEO treatment and electroless copper plating passivated with benzotriazole (Jiang et al., 2010). In the paper the operating conditions are not specified, and it is shown that the composite coating has a positive corrosion potential shift in 5% NaCl solution of 300 mV, and no corrosion pits are visible after 168h of neutral salt spray test. The electroless copper layer adheres to the PEO oxide by mechanical interlocking of the metal in the oxide pores.
## (s7) Ternary electroless coatings
(p7.0) The traditional nickel-plating baths are acidic with sulphate being the main salt. However, magnesium is readily corroded in acid solutions. For this reason Zhang investigated an alkaline bath for the deposition of Ni-W-P coatings. (Zhang et al., 2007b). After grinding with 2000 SiC paper, the magnesium substrate was cleaned in 10% sodium hydroxide solution for 15 min to remove soils or greases on the surface and thoroughly rinsed with water to remove alkaline compounds. Then, the magnesium alloy sample was treated for 2 min in a bath where H 3 PO 4 and Mn(H 2 PO 4 ) 2 are the main ingredients to obtain a conversion film. The bath composition and operation parameters for the electroless Ni-W-P deposition are listed in Fig. 12.  
## (s8) www.intechopen.com
(p8.0) Codeposition of the tungsten resulted in ternary Ni-W-P coating with phosphorus content of 4.9 wt.% and tungsten content of 4.5 wt.%. The hardness of the as-deposited Ni-W-P coating is about 660 VHN, which is higher than that of the as-deposited Ni-P coating with similar phosphorus (5.6 wt.%) content on magnesium alloy (approximately 580 HV) and far higher than that of the AZ91D magnesium alloy substrate (about 100 HV). The porosity test, acid immersion test and electrochemical measurements (Table 3) reveal that the presence of tungsten and the dense and pore-free microstructure make the coating suitable for corrosion resistance applications. The same researchers published a paper on electroless ternary Ni-Sn-P (Zhang et al., 2008).

(p8.1) Fig. 14. Electroless Ni-Sn-P bath composition and operating conditions (Zhang et al., 2008).  Table 3. Electrochemical parameters of magnesium substrate, with Ni-W-P, Ni-Sn-P and Ni-P coating (in 3% NaCl) (Zhang et al., 2007 and.
## (s12) www.intechopen.com
(p12.0) The authors of a recent paper consider electrodeposition on magnesium alloys more advantageous compared with electroless nickel plating, in term of lower production cost, higher coatings thickness, lower porosity, better corrosion resistance and higher production efficiency (Lei et al., 2010). Pretreatment and pre-plating stages are critical for a protective coating system and in their paper they describe three pre-plating processes, i.e. Ni-P alloy, Ni and Cu as interlayers on industrial components (AZ91D engine shell and AM60B wheel hub) of magnesium alloys using different pretreatments before electrodeposition of Cu/Ni/Cr coatings from cyanide free solutions. Before any pre-plating stage, the following process sequence was used: alkaline cleaning, pickling, activation and zinc immersion. Fig. 21 shows the solutions composition and the operating conditions for the above mentioned pretreatment processes. Among the different possibilities to pretreat the magnesium alloys before electroless Ni-P deposition, the authors suggest the following sequence: alkaline cleaning, acid pickling A, activation A, electroless nickel plating (Fig. 22). Electrodeposited nickel can be used as intermediate layer instead of EN. The pretreatment before Ni electrodeposition consists of: alkaline cleaning, acid pickling B, activation B, zinc immersion, Ni electrodeposition (Fig.  22). A third pleplating procedure was proposed by the authors: alkaline cleaning, acid pickling activation C, zinc immersion, Cu electrodeposition from pyrophosphate solution (Fig. 22). Because of the good adhesion and enhanced corrosion resistance, these coatings play a role of improved protection for these substrates.
## (s15) Dual coatings
(p15.0) Gu (Gu et al., 2005 and proposed a combination of a nickel electroless intermediate layer plus an electrodeposited layer of nanocrystalline nickel to obtain high corrosion resistance with good wear resistance on magnesium AZ91D (Fig.23).

(p15.1) To date only zinc and nickel have been directly plated onto magnesium and have been used as intermediate layer before the subsequent metal deposition. Cu-Ni-Cr plating is useful for many applications in indoor and in mild outdoor. The pretreatments currently used for magnesium alloys are zinc immersion and electroless nickel plating from a fluoride containing bath. A zinc layer by galvanic displacement is usually deposited onto magnesium alloys before a strike of copper from cyanide bath and multilayer electrodeposited coatings, typically Cu-Ni-Cr. In the papers and patents about this process, it is stressed that magnesium alloys with an aluminium content greater than 6-7% are difficult to treat and the deposit is not satisfactory. Nickel electroless plating has been proposed instead of zinc immersion treatment for AZ91 alloy. It was found that electroless nickel coating shows a good adherence on AZ91D magnesium alloy after pre-treatment and excellent properties including corrosion resistance and conductivity, therefore it's an excellent interlayer for electrodeposition (Jia et al., 2007). Recently, a galvanostatic etching followed by copper electrodeposition from the same alkaline bath has been proposed as a pretreatment of AZ31 alloy surface . After a mechanical grinding of the surface, the alloy is anodically etched at 25 mA cm -2 for 500 s in the bath used for copper electrodeposition, i.e. an alkaline solution of copper sulfate. The layer of copper was deposited at constant plating charge of 24 C cm -2 . As shown in Fig. 24 the copper layer is quite uniform and the coverage of the alloy is complete. The interface between the copper layer and the magnesium alloy is dense and pore-free, and free of any oxide or hydroxide-rich interlayer. Such pre-treatment was used as basis for depositing multilayer coatings on magnesium alloys such as those shown in Fig. 25  . Zhu proposed a protective multilayer coating process on AZ91D alloy schematized in the flowsheet in Fig. 26 (Zhu et al., 2006). In this process a final thermal treatment in air is performed in order to improve the adhesion of the coating to the substrate. After thermal treatment, tin diffused through the zinc layer and reached the magnesium alloy, where it formed the compound Mg 2 Sn.
## (s17) Non-aqueous electroplating
(p17.0) Magnesium alloys are sensitive to aqueous environment and thus non-aqueous processes have been proposed for metal plating on magnesium alloys. The electrodeposition of zinc onto magnesium alloys from two types of ionic liquid, stable in air and in the presence of water, was recently proposed (Bakkar and Neubert, 2007). One type of ionic liquid is obtained by mixing (ratio 1:2) choline chloride (ChCl), as amine salt (HOC 2 H 4 N(CH 3 ) 3 + Cl -), with a hydrogen bond donor such as urea (NH 2 CONH 2 ), ethylene glycol (HOCH 2 CH 2 OH), malonic acid (HOOCCH 2 COOH), or glycerol (HOCH 2 CH(OH)CH 2 OH). The other type is formed by mixing ChCl with a metal halide. The water content in the ionic liquid was in the range 3.5-7.2%. The electrodeposition solutions were prepared by dissolving 0.5 M of ZnCl 2 in the ionic liquid at 90°C. The magnesium substrates used for electrodeposition were: cp Mg, AZ31, AZ61, AZ91, AS41, AE42, WE43-T6, QE22, MgGd5Sc1 and MgY4Sc1.

(p17.1) The electrochemical tests showed that magnesium has the best corrosion resistance behavior in ChCl/urea 1:2 and therefore ionic liquids were suggested to test the possibility of electroplating magnesium alloys. Successful electrodeposition of metallic zinc layers onto Mg-RE alloys free of Al was obtained while the other ionic liquids produced either powdery deposits or corrosion of the substrate. Pulsed current produced uniform, shiny and dense deposits free of defects (Fig. 32). Potentiodynamic polarisation tests in 0.1M NaCl showed that the zinc deposited by pulsed current densities exhibits a corrosion behaviour similar to that of pure zinc (Table 9).   Table 9. Electrochemical parameters of zinc sheet, WE43 alloy and Zn coating on the magnesium alloy (0.1 M NaCl) (Bakkar and Neubert, 2007).

(p17.2) Several papers on Al (Chang et al., 2007(Chang et al., , 2008(Chang et al., and 2008b and Al-Zn (Pan et al., 2010) electrodeposition from EMIC (1-ethyl-methylimidazolium chloride) has been recently published.

(p17.3) In the electrodeposition of aluminium on AZ91D, a solution of AlCl 3 -EMIC (1.5:1) was prepared and handled in a glove box under nitrogen atmosphere, in which the moisture and oxygen content were maintained below 1 ppm. Before electrodeposition, each sample was ground with SiC paper to 1000 grit. Electrodeposition tests were carried out both at constant potential (-0.2 V and -0.4 V vs Al wire) (Chang et al., 2007) and at constant current density (Chang et al., 2008). The surface and cross-section morphologies of the sample produced at -0.2 V are shown in Fig. 33. On the contrary, samples deposited at -0.4 V were less compact, with nodular microstructure and cracks. Fig. 33. SEM surface (left) and cross section (right) micrographs of electrodeposited Al onto AZ91D alloy from AlCl 3 -EMIC at -0.2 V vs Al wire for 2550 s (5 C) at 25°C (Chang et al., 2007).
