# Posterior Subaxial Cervical Spine Screw Fixation: A Review of Techniques

CorpusID: 53433206 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2d4f3e87f63ab37c5e42d4c8924a4516b74a72a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e2d4f3e87f63ab37c5e42d4c8924a4516b74a72a)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s8) C7 Intralaminar Screw Fixation
(p8.0) Another option of screw fixation at C7 is translaminar screws. This can be a very helpful bailout technique when C7 fixation is need and the lateral mass/pedicle screw fixation is not possible. The freehand technique for C7 translaminar screw is described as following 25,26 :

(p8.1) 1. A small initial hole is made about 4 mm at the caudal aspect of the spinolaminar junction, whereas the second hole is made in the rostral aspect of the spinolaminar junction on the other side. 2. A hand drill is then used aimed the opposite lamina with slightly increments, checking violation of the cortical with a ball trip probe. Screws of about 3.5 Â 24 mm are then inserted. 25 Figure 9 illustrates the surgical technique.

(p8.2) Ilgenfritz et al 12 performed a radiographical and biomechanical study to evaluate the use of C7 laminar screws. Seventy-two patients had a CT scan to measure the thickness, length and spinolaminar angle of the lamina. 12 Additionally, 13 cadaveric specimens were obtained and received C2 bilateral intralaminar screws, C7 bilateral intralaminar screws and bilateral C7 pedicular screws (3.5 mm diameter and 20 mm long were considered universally accepted in all specimens). Each specimen was cyclically loaded for 5000 cycles with axial screws pullout tests performed. The mean laminar thickness and length of C7 was 5.67 + 1 mm (range from 7.5 to 18 mm) and 25.49 + 2.73 mm (range from 18.5 to 32.2 mm), respectively. The mean spinolaminar angle was 51.26 + 3.57 . There was no Entry point: 1 mm medial to the center of the lateral mass Lateral angulation: 10 from the sagittal plane statistical difference between the pullout strength between C7 translaminar and C7 pedicle screws (P ¼ .06).
## (s9) Transfacet Screw Fixation
(p9.0) Transfacet screw fixation in the cervical spine was first described by Roy-Camille et al in 1972 in the setting of lateral mass fractures. 27 Even though not as widely used as lateral mass screws, several biomechanical studies have shown that transfacet screws have similar mechanical stability and superior screw pull-out strength compared with lateral mass screws. 27,28 Klekamp et al 10 compared biomechanically the pull-out strength of lateral mass screws and screws placed across the facet joints in 10 fresh human cadaveric cervical spines. They reported that cervical transfacet screws (539 N) had a comparable (if not greater than) pull-out resistance to cervical lateral mass screws (379 N) after biomechanical analysis (P ¼ .042). Transfacet screw can be used as either a primary fixation technique or a valuable bailout technique when lateral mass screw and lateral mass screws are not possible. Takayasu et al 28 reported the clinical results of 81 screws inserted in the middle and lower cervical spine of 25 patients with age from 15 to 84 years. They reported that screw placement, according to their technique described below, was successful and uncomplicated in all cases, without screw backout or loosening during a follow-up ranging from 3 months to 5 years, with fusion achieved in all cases. The techniques described below reported by DalCanto et al, 29 Klekamp et al, 10 
