# Time synchronization in vehicular ad-hoc networks: A survey on theory and practice

CorpusID: 53287311 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ade6c0bfcad79ebd909c0bccb9ed4207d5695a16](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ade6c0bfcad79ebd909c0bccb9ed4207d5695a16)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s6) Clock offset, skew and drift
(p6.0) A free-running clock is influenced by a number of factors as described in Equation (3). It fluctuates and deviates from the actual time due to the clock drift. Theoretically, software clocks are similar to hardware clocks, as software clock algorithms follow the system clocks, which depend on hardware clocks. Thus, the accuracy of software clocks relies on the accuracy of hardware clocks.

(p6.1) The accuracy of a clock as defined above pertains to the overall degree of clock uncertainties relative to a reference standard time. Clock uncertainties can be further described through Offset, Skew and Drift [13]. Clock Offset is defined as the time differences between a clock time and the standard true time. It is |C p (t) − t| for node N p . It is seen from Equation (5) that the clock accuracy is the absolute value of the clock offset. The relative clock offset between two nodes N p and N q at time t is expressed as
## (s9) Types of clock synchronization
(p9.0) Several parameters such as the source of the reference clock, the required accuracy of the synchronization, the communication medium between nodes and the supported applications can all impact on the method of clock synchronization used. Therefore, depending on the variation of methods and their applications, clock synchronization can be classified differently.

(p9.1) For example, when a system maintains synchronization with a standard reference clock time, it is known as absolute clock synchronization. When the nodes in a network are synchronized with each other with respect to time, the method is known as relative clock synchronization [18]. From the variation of the synchronization protocols, we can classify time synchronization differently. Some time synchronization protocols commonly differ from each other in some aspects but sometimes resemble each other in some other aspects [13]. For instance, consider deterministic and probabilistic clock synchronization. Deterministic protocols stipulate a strict upper bound on the offset error certainty compared to probabilistic synchronization where it uses fewer message transfers and, therefore, less processing overhead [19,20].

(p9.2) However, the most popular way of classifying clock synchronization methods is based on the time references system that is used. According to the time scale, clock synchronization in dis-tributed network can be classified into two main types: synchronization with internal time-scale and synchronization with external time-scale. In ad-hoc networks such as Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) and VANET, time synchronization can be implemented locally with an internally consistent time-scale. However, VANETs are outdoor wireless ad-hoc networks. Therefore, it is also possible to deploy global time synchronization with an external time scale.

(p9.3) Synchronization methods with an internal time-scale is realized through a set of operations and message exchanges between nodes. This requires estimating both offset and skew of the local clocks relative to each other. Hence, synchronization with internal timescale maintains a relative time notion with respect to each other. Such relative synchronization is the basis of most indoor networks such as indoor wireless sensor networks and Wi-Fi.
## (s11) Revisiting time synchronization in wireless sensor networks
(p11.0) As a VANET is a type of mobile ad-hoc wireless networks, it is worth examining the existing synchronization techniques for other types of MANETs. The most straightforward one is WSNs, for which considerable research efforts have been directed to time synchronization. Five main WSN synchronization techniques are to be discussed below: time-stamp synchronization (TSS), referencebroadcast synchronization (RBS), lightweight time synchronization (LTS), a timing-sync protocol for sensor networks (TPSN), and flooding time synchronization protocol (FTSP).

(p11.1) Time-stamp Synchronization (TSS) is a WSN time synchronization method based on internal synchronization on demand [25]. TSS does not use specific synchronization messages for time synchronization. Instead, it uses timestamps embedded in other packets to perform synchronization post-facto. The time offset is estimated through calculation of the round-trip delay between the transmitters and receivers. For single-hop WSNs, the average uncertainty of TSS is recorded as 200 μs. In multi-hop networks, the maximum uncertainty of 3 ms is achieved in 5 hops.

(p11.2) Reference-Broadcast Synchronization (RBS) uses beacon broadcast for time synchronization. In RBS, any nodes in a basic single-hop network can send a beacon to broadcast its time reference. A node compares its local reference time with the reference times received from other neighbour nodes and adjusts its clock accordingly. RBS performs both offset and rate corrections when updating the clock.
## (s14) Performance-oriented requirements
(p14.0) Better spectrum utilization is considered as one of the key targets in wireless communication. VANETs use a limited spectrum, for instance, 75 MHz at the 5.9 GHz band. Better use of this spectrum enables to increase the capability of network bandwidth and throughput. In VANET protocol stack "Wireless Access for Vehicular Environment (WAVE)", the available bandwidth is divided into service and control channels, as shown in Fig. 5 [44][45][46].

(p14.1) For efficient channel coordination, communicating nodes need to be synchronized. In practical operations, the clocks of all nodes are delayed for many reasons and may tend to lose their synchronization. To accommodate the time differences among the nodes, a Guard Interval, which is also known as a Guard Band, is used in communication design. As shown in Fig. 1(b), a guard Interval is a period of time for separation of two consecutive and distinct data transmissions from different users in a time slotted mechanism or from the same users in a frequency slotted mechanism.
