# Biogenic Hydrocarbons in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer: A Review

CorpusID: 53965765 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b7c8c23589a9a48fea379b39943bab64ae7644c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7b7c8c23589a9a48fea379b39943bab64ae7644c)

Fields: Chemistry, Environmental Science

## (s3) 1) ISOPRENE
(p3.0) The biosynthetic pathways of the common biogenic hydrocarbons, isoprene, and monoterpenes share a common precursor compound, dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAPP, Fig. 1). This precursor and its isomer isopentenyl pyrophosphate are also precursors for important biological molecules such as carotenoids and cholesterol ). This last step in isoprene synthesis is catalyzed by the enzyme isoprene synthase (Fig. 1). Progress has been made recently in understanding the controls acting on isoprene synthase. It appears to be a membrane-bound, lightactivated enzyme that catalyzes the elimination of pyrophosphate from DMAPP (Silver and Fall 1991;Wildermuth and Fall 1996). Changes in activity of isoprene synthase are correlated with changes in isoprene emission (Kuzma and Fall 1993).

(p3.1) Isoprene emission rates are affected by the rate at which the precursor becomes available. It had been assumed that the pathway for DMAPP synthesis for isoprene was the same as used for cholesterol synthesis. However, Zeidler et al. (1997) provide evidence that an alternative pathway is used. Given the large amount of isoprene emitted from plants, this novel pathway may handle more carbon for isoprene synthesis than any other compound. While this discovery may eventually lead to a better understanding of what controls the rate of terpenoid biosynthesis, there is no way yet to measure the activity of this pathway; isoprene emission could end up being a useful tool to study this putative new pathway. The chloroplast localized pathway begins with glyceraldehyde 3phosphate and a 2-carbon fragment attached to thiamine pyrophosphate. Enzymes that catalyze this transketolase reaction have recently been described and these are the first enzymes known in this new pathway. As more information becomes known about how this pathway is regulated it may be possible to improve the mechanistic aspects of isoprene emission models.
## (s4) 3) SESQUITERPENES
(p4.0) The biosynthesis of these compounds can be envisioned as a further addition of an isoprene unit to the monoterpene compounds. Condensation of DMAPP and IPP to form geranyl pyrophosphate is the key step for their formation. Sesquiterpenes are present in many plants that synthesize other isoprenoids. But they are not detected due to sampling or analysis procedures or slower detection methods than reaction rates because of their relatively low vapor pressures and/or their high reactivity of sesquiterpenes toward ozone. Sesquiterpene emissions have been documented in plants growing in southern California ) and southern and central Europe (Seufert et al. 1997). Identified plant species to emit sesquiterpenes include orange and tobacco. Because no specific determinations have been made on the sesquiterpene leaf content, it is not known in which compartment of plant tissue they accumulate.
## (s5) 4) OXYGENATED HYDROCARBONS
(p5.0) In addition to isoprene and monoterpenes, several oxygenated volatile organic compounds are emitted by plants. All plants studied to date emit methanol when their leaves are expanding (Nemecek-Marshall et al. 1995). The mechanism for this emission is not known, but MacDonald and Fall (1993a) suggest that methanol is produced when cell walls expand (Fig. 2), a process during which pectin is demethylated. Many conifers emit large amounts of acetone from their buds (MacDonald and Fall 1993b).
## (s14) 3) LANDSCAPE-LEVEL FLUXES
(p14.0) The main goal of deriving hydrocarbon fluxes is to provide emissions for regions. Thus, hydrocarbon concentration measurements at several altitudes using tethered balloon systems provide contextual information to derive hydrocarbon fluxes canvasing spatial scales extending from the canopy top to well into the convective boundary layer. The mass balance approach provides the basis to derive hydrocarbon fluxes at the landscape level. As noted in (8), if the mean horizontal flow (u) is aligned with the west-to-east axis (x) this method requires knowledge of spatial (∂χ/∂x) and vertical (∂χ/∂z) changes in hydrocarbon concentrations, and flux changes (∂F χ /∂z) within the atmospheric mixed layer to obtain hydrocarbon fluxes (Guenther et al. 1996;Zimmerman et al. 1988
## (s18) b. Hydroxyl radicals in the troposphere
(p18.0) Photolysis of O 3 present in the troposphere at wavelengths > 290 nm leads, in part, to the formation of the electronically excited oxygen atom, O( 1 D), which is seen either deactivated to groundstate oxygen, O( 3 P) atoms, or reacts with water vapor to generate OH radicals :

(p18.1) The photolysis of O 3 results in the formation of OH radicals only during daylight hours, and OH radical concentrations therefore exhibit a pronounced diurnal profile with the concentration peaking at around solar noon for clear-sky conditions (Tanner et al. 1997). Peak daytime OH radical concentrations are ∼(2-10) × 10 6 molecule cm −3 for measurements carried out at midlatitude Northern Hemisphere sites (Brauers et al. 1996;Mount et al. 1997;Tanner et al. 1997). A diurnally, seasonally, and annually averaged global tropospheric OH radical concentration of 1.0 × 10 6 molecule cm −3 (24-h average) has been estimated from the emissions, atmospheric concentrations, and atmospheric chemistry of methyl chloroform (Prinn et al. 1995;Hein et al. 1997).

(p18.2) In polluted air masses OH radicals are also formed during daylight hours from the photolysis of nitrous acid (HONO) (generated from the heterogeneous hydrolysis of NO 2 ) and indirectly from the photolysis of HCHO, and during both daytime and nighttime from the reactions of O 3 with alkenes (including biogenic alkenes such as isoprene and monoterpenes) (Paulson and Orlando 1996). Paulson and Orlando (1996) have postulated from model calculations that in both polluted and rural air masses the O 3 + alkene reactions can be a major source of OH radicals during both daytime and nighttime.
## (s22) 2) REACTION MECHANISMS AND PRODUCTS
(p22.0) The initial reactions of OH radicals, NO 3 radicals, and O 3 with NMOCs (including biogenic NMOC) have been elucidated over the past three decades (see, e.g., Atkinson and Arey 1998;Atkinson 2000). For the majority of biogenic NMOCs there are two general re-The atmospheric reactions of the alkyl or substitutedalkyl radicals formed after H-atom abstraction from C-H bonds or after OH or NO 3 radical addition to the carbon atoms of >C=C< bonds are shown schematically in reaction scheme 1, with the reactions proceeding through the intermediary of organic peroxy (RO 2 ) and alkoxy (RO) radicals (Atkinson 1994(Atkinson , 1997. In the atmosphere, alkoxy radicals can react with O 2 , unimolecularly decompose, or isomerize by a 1,5-H shift through a six-membered transition state, as shown below for the CH 3 CH 2 CH 2 CH(OH)CH 2 O radical formed subsequent to OH radical addition to the internal carbon atom in 1-pentene:
