# bioengineering A Review on Bioconversion of Agro-Industrial Wastes to Industrially Important Enzymes

CorpusID: 53114284 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b14b288b30a63c6c94ac967d57ff3ac0e7c3982e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b14b288b30a63c6c94ac967d57ff3ac0e7c3982e)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) The food and agriculture (F&A) industry is growing at a rapid pace. The rapidly growing population, along with improving economic growth, has attracted significant investments in the F&A industry, amounting to $75 billion in 2017. With increasing industrialization of the agricultural sector, the resulting waste generation represents a significant environmental challenge. Five million metric tonnes of biomass are produced annually from agriculture [1]. Most of the wastes generated by agro-based food industries are high in nutrients and can form breeding grounds for disease-causing microbes if left unprocessed and inadequately treated. Interestingly, these wastes can serve as raw materials for the production of value-added products or as a source of renewable energy.

(p0.1) New directives by the European Union emphasize the concepts of the 'Bioeconomy' and 'Biorefinery', whereby the wastes of one industry can serve as the raw material for another [2]. Many wastes generated by agro-industries are lignocellulosic in nature; they are generally high in polysaccharides such as cellulose and hemicellulose and, lignin (an aromatic polymer), in addition to containing other nutrients such as proteins, lipids, pectin and polyphenols. Food waste from households is the most readily available form of waste and there are systems in place for its effective disposal. However, due to its highly heterogeneous nature, the effective utilization of household 
## (s2) Agro-Industry Wastes as Substrate
(p2.0) Recent studies involving enzyme production using agro-industry wastes have primarily investigated the effect of pre-treatment measures in influencing the yield. Pre-treatments are techniques widely used in production processes involving lignocellulose-based raw material where the complex plant structure is disrupted by physical, chemical or a combination of methods to improve digestibility [19,20]. An interesting study conducted by Salim, et al. (2017) deployed a new strain of Bacillus to study the production of four enzymes (α-amylase, protease, cellulase and pectinase) using different agricultural residues as growth substrates (soybean meal, sunflower meal, maize bran, maize pericarp, olive oil cake and wheat bran) [21]. Each residue was subjected to different pre-treatment measures (acid/alkali, ultrasound and microwave treatments) to determine their effect on enzyme production. Chemical pre-treatments were found to be superior over other techniques, with highest yields of protease and amylase achieved using alkali -treated corn pericarp. Another study conducted by Leite et al. (2016) studied the application of ultrasonication as a potential pre-treatment for olive pomace to improve enzyme yield using solid-state fermentation [15]. The authors reported a 3-fold increase in xylanase activity and a 1.2-fold increase in cellulase activity employing Aspergillus niger as the producer microbe.
## (s6) Cellulase
(p6.0) The depolymerisation of cellulose into component glucose molecules requires a combined hydrolysis by three key enzymes: endoglucanase (E.C. 3 [37]. Cellulases are enzymes of great commercial importance, especially because of the key role they play in bioethanol production [38]. In addition to biofuels, cellulases find application in industries ranging bread, brewing, textiles, detergents, paper and pulp sectors [39]. A wide range of bacterial and fungal species produce cellulase enzymes. Commercial fungal cellulases most commonly are produced by improved strains of Trichoderma reesei [40]. Examples of other fungal organisms that produce cellulases are Schizophyllum commune, Melanocarpus sp., Aspergillus sp., Penicillium sp., and Fusarium sp. [37]. In bacteria, cellulases are found in the form of large, extracellular aggregates which are called cellulosomes [41]. Some of the bacterial species which produce cellulosomes include Clostridium thermocellum, Bacillus circulans, Proteus vulgaris, Klebsiella pneumonia, Escherichia coli and Cellulomonas sp. [42].

(p6.1) Owing to its influence on the economics of bioethanol production, the development of cheaper methods to produce cellulases has been a key focus of researchers over the past two decades [43]. Several studies have been conducted to test the efficacy of lignocellulosic food waste as a suitable carbon source for cellulase production. Sun et al. (2011) evaluated the feasibility of using banana peel for cellulase production by Trichoderma viride GIM 3.0010 in solid-state fermentation [44]. They reported that banana peel provided the nutrients necessary for cell growth and cellulase synthesis (Carboxy methyl cellulase sodium activity (CMCase) obtained was 10.31 U/gds, respectively; When banana peel was used (the moisture content of 65%) with the inoculum size of 1.5 × 109 spore/flask and incubated at 30 • C for 144 h). In another study, an optimized media was formulated using mango peel as carbon source for cellulase production by Trichoderma reesei [45]. Trichoderma reesei QM9414 was used as the enzyme producer in a study involving brewer's spent grain as the substrate [46]. The effectiveness of apple pomace as a carbon source for the production of cellulase was evaluated by Dhillon et al. (2012) [14]. Lactose was added as an additional carbon source. After 48 h of fermentation a high carboxymethyl cellulase activity of 172.31 IU per g of dry substrate was observed.
## (s7) Xylanase
(p7.0) Xylanases (E. C. 3.2.1.8, 1,4-β-xylanxylanohydrolase) are enzymes that break down xylan which is an integral part of plant polysaccharide. Xylan is a complex polysaccharide made of a xylose-residue backbone, with each subunit linked by a β-1,4-glycosidic bond. The xylan backbone can be branched with D-glucuronic acid or D-arabinofuranoside [47]. Xylanases are produced by several bacterial and fungal species. Filamentous fungi that synthesise this enzyme are of particular interest because they secrete it into the media in large quantities in comparison to bacteria [48]. Xylan, being a complex polysaccharide, requires a consortium of enzymes for total hydrolysis. This enzyme system consists of endoxylanases, β-xylosidases, ferulic acid esterase, p-coumaric acid esterase, acetylxylan esterase and α-glucuronidase. Endoxylanases and β-xylosidases are the most extensively studied components of this system [49]. Xylanases have wide applications in industries as diverse as food, biomedical, animal feed and bioethanol [47,50,51].

(p7.1) The suitability of lignocellulosic food waste as a carbon source for the production of commercial xylanases has been studied by many researchers. Lowe et al. (1987) investigated wheat straw as a viable carbon source for the production of a xylanase derived from an anaerobic rumen fungus and achieved high levels of activity (0.507 IU/mL) [52]. A. niger and A. terreus strains were employed on moistened wheat bran by Gawande and Kamat (1999) to attain 74.5 IU mL-1 of xylanase activity [53]. In another study, grape pomace was used as the substrate for the production of xylanase using A. awamori as the enzyme producer [54]. Highest xylanase activity (40 U/g) was achieved after 24 h of incubation time. Addition of 6% glucose as an additional carbon source increased xylanase production significantly. Apple pomace, melon peel and hazelnut shell were used by Seyis and Aksoz (2005) for xylanase production from Trichoderma harzianum 1073 D3, achieving a maximum activity of 26.5 U/mg [55].
## (s9) Hemicellulases
(p9.0) Hemicellulases are a group of enzymes that attacks the β-1,4-glycosidic bonds which forms the backbone of hemicellulose in lignocellulosic biomass. Hemicellulose is a complex polymeric fraction forming a key component in lignocellulose. Unlike cellulose it is inherently amorphous in nature and is made by a heterogenous group of component sugars which include but are not limited to glucose, xylose, mannose, arabinose and galactose. The component sugars in hemicellulose may vary depending upon the source of the plant biomass [19]. Additionally, sugar acids such as ferulic acid also forms the components of hemicellulose [64]. Hemicellulases are equipped with functional modules that are capable of digesting glycosidic bonds as well as esterified side chain groups. Acetyl and feruloyl esterases hydrolyse acetate or ferulic acid side groups in the plant cell wall structure. Some of the most common hemicellulases that act upon glycosidic bonds include α-glucuronidases, α-arabinofuranosidases, α-d-galactosidases, and mannanases [65].
## (s10) Mannanase
(p10.0) Mannanases are a group of enzymes that degrade mannan, which is an integral part of the plant cell wall. Mannan is a representive of hemicellulose which is found in plants [66]. Three major enzymes are involved in the degradation of linear mannans: 1,4-β-D mannohydrolases or β-mannanases (EC 3.2.1.78), 1,4-β-D mannopyranoside hydrolases or β-mannosidases (EC 3.2.1.25) and 1,4-β-D glucoside glucohydrolases or β-glucosidases (EC 3.2.1.21) [67]. β-mannanases demonstrate endo-hydrolysis activity by cleaving the internal glycosidic bonds, resulting in the release of short chain β-1,4-manno-oligosaccharides [68]. On the other hand, β-mannosidases possess exo-hydrolase activity, attacking the mannan polymer at the non-reducing terminal and degrading mannobiose to individual mannose units [69]. β-glucosidase activity results in the excision of β1,4-glucopyranose units from the non-reducing terminal ends of oligomers released from glucomannan and galactoglucomannan hydrolysis [70]. Several Bacillus spp., including different B. subtitlis strains, have been reported to produce several mannan-degrading enzymes. Among fungal organisms, many Aspergillus spp. have been found to produce mannanase [71]. Other bacterial and fungal species such as Clostridium spp., Pencillium spp. and Sterptomyces spp. have also been known to synthesise mannanase [67].
## (s12) β-glucanase
(p12.0) 1,3-1,4-β-glucans are polysaccharides made up of glucose units that are found in endosperm cell walls of cereals such as barley, rye, sorghum and oats [92]. Endo-1,3-1,4-β-glucanases are enzymes that can hydrolyse the β-1,4 glycosidic linkages at the non-reducing ends of glucans to release cellobiosyl-D-glucose and 3-O-β-D-cellotriosyl-D-glucose. This enzyme is particularly important in the brewing industry. β-glucanases, along with a consortium of xylanase and cellulose, facilitate the reduction of viscosity in fluids with higher solids content. This leads to less water consumption during production processes, saves energy and eliminates the need for several raw materials [93]. β-glucanases also find application in the wine industry, along with pectinases, by facilitating a smooth and fast filtration process, and also increasing the quality of the product [94].

(p12.1) Several microorganisms have been tried and tested for the production of β-glucanase using lignocellulosic industry waste as substrate. Rhizomucor miehei CAU432 was grown under solid-state fermentation conditions using oat meal as the sole carbon source to obtain a β-1,3-1,4-glucanase activity of 20,025 U g-1 dry substrate, which was the highest ever reported [95]. Irshad et al. (2012) reported the characterization of exo 1,4-β glucanase from Tricoderma viride MBL by culturing the organism in solid-state fermentation using orange peel waste as substrate [96]. Fusarium oxysporum, Bacillus subtilis, Penicillium echinulatum, Sclerotium rolfsii have also been reported to produce high levels of endo and exoglucanase when grown on biomass sources [93,[97][98][99].

(p12.2) Invertase Invertase, technically known as β-fructofuranosidase (EC.3.2.1.26), is a glycoprotein which catalyses the hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose (dextrose) and fructose. Invertase exhibits optimum activity at a pH of 4.5 and temperature of 55 • C. Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the chief microbe used in the production of invertase enzyme in industry [100]. Invertase is used for the production of invert sugar, which was previously performed by acid hydrolysis. Acid hydrolysis of sucrose results in the 50% conversion of sucrose to invert sugar. Moreover, the acid hydrolysis product also contains impurities whose formation cannot be controlled during inversion. The use of invertase results in 100% inversion of sucrose without the formation of impurities [101]. Since invertase is a commercially expensive enzyme, many researchers have attempted to use cheap carbon sources for its production. Hang and Woodams (1995) tested the efficacy of apple pomace as a potential carbon source for the production of invertase from Aspergillus foetidus NRRL 337 [102]. Rashad and Nooman (2009) used red carrot jam processing residue as a medium for solid-state fermentation to characterise invertase synthesised by S. cerevisiae NRRL Y-12632 [103]. Bagasse waste, wheat bran and peel waste from orange, pineapple and pomegranate have all been tested and found to be excellent carbon source substitutes for invertase production employing different microbial species [8,104,105].
## (s16) Other Industrially Important Enzymes
(p16.0) Lipases Lipases find a wide variety of applications owing to the type of reactions they can catalyse. In a living system, lipases facilitate the breakdown and mobilization of lipids within the cells. Within the spectrum of reactions, lipases catalyse some of the industrially interesting processes, including hydrolysis, transesterification, alcoholysis, acidolysis, aminolysis and esterification. They can hydrolyse fats into fatty acids and glycerol at the water-lipid interface and can catalyse the reverse reaction in non-aqueous media. All of these features make lipases a widely sought out enzyme in industries such as detergents, oil, dairy, pharmaceutical, bakery, biopolymer synthesis, biodiesel production and the treatment of fat-containing waste effluents [129]. Lipases from two species viz. Thermomyces lanuginosus and Rhizomucor miehei are extensively used for various industrial purposes in soluble as well as immobilized form, the latter owing to low stability and difficulty in enzyme-product separation [130,131]. However, other microbial species such as Bacillus, Serratia, Psuedomonas and Staphylococcus have also been reported to produce lipases [132].

(p16.1) Lipases can easily be produced by using lignocellulose and waste derived from other sources using different microbes. A study investigated A. niger as the enzyme producer for lipase synthesis using peanut cake as substrate along with 1.0% (v/w) Tween-80, 0.35% (w/w) (NH4) 2 SO 4 and 0.40% (w/w) Na 2 HPO 4 [133]. An enzyme yield of 49.37 U/g was obtained. Furthermore, using sheanut cake for lipase production reduced the inherent tannin and saponin content, rendering it fit for use as animal feed. Coconut oil cake was used in another study for the optimization of production of two lipolytic isolates (COM-4A and COM-6B) from Staphylococcus pasteuri. The newly isolated enzyme COM-4A showed optimum activity at pH of 9.0 and temperature of 50 • C and could be considered for applications in detergent formulations and in biodiesel production [134].
## (s18) Laccase
(p18.0) Laccases (EC 1.10.3.2) are classified in the multi-copper oxidase family, and catalyse the oxidation of phenolic compounds with the help of molecular oxygen [141]. They were first isolated from the lacquer tree Toxicodendron vernicifluum and have since been found in over 20 bacterial species [142]. However, fungal laccases are more abundant in nature, and wood rotting fungi in particular. While bacterial laccases are periplasmic in nature, fungal laccases are extracellular. Three kinds of fungal organisms produce laccase enzyme viz. white rot fungi, brown rot fungi and soft rot fungi [143]. Out of the three, white rot fungi have been found to be the most efficient lignin-degrading microbes [144]. Laccases are commercially important enzymes due to their ability to degrade phenolic and non-phenolic lignin along with recalcitrant pollutants. They are used for the decolourisation and synthesis of dyes, bio-bleaching, baking, bio-pulping, degradation of xenobiotics and effluent treatment [145].

(p18.1) Glucose, fructose, mannose, lactose and maltose are the commonly used carbon sources for the production of laccase. The excess of monosaccharides has a detrimental effect on laccase production n and thus a polymeric substrate like cellulose is a necessary media component [146]. The addition of lignocellulose to culture media has resulted in the increase in laccase activity by several fold. Laccase production employing the white rot fungi, Trametes versicolor (CBS100.29), and using barley bran resulted in a maximum enzyme activity of 639 U/L, which was ten times higher than that observed in cultures without lignocellulose [147]. Using ground nut seeds for laccase production also resulted in similar increases in enzyme activity [148]. Other lignocellulosic biomass which has been reported as suitable carbon sources for laccase production include banana skin, ground nut shell, spent coffee ground, rice straw and wheat bran flakes [141,144,149].
## (s19) Cellulosomes: The Future Prospect of Cellulytic Enzymes
(p19.0) Many aerobic microorganisms rely on endoglucanases, exoglucanases and ancillary enzymes to digest lignocellulosic plant biomass in a synergistic manner. However, anaerobic microbial species (both bacteria and fungi) have evolved a different mechanism which consists of a scaffolding protein and many bound cellulytic enzymes. This large enzyme complex, known as cellulosomes, is extracellular in nature. Cellulosomes are multi-enzyme complexes consisting of various catalytic domains, carbohydrate binding modules and scaffolding units that enable them to form multiple enzyme-substrate complexes. The multiple enzyme embedded model works synergistically to depolymerize cellulosic material [41].

(p19.1) Enzymes in cellulosomes are spatially arranged in a manner that facilitates the efficient conversion of substrates in a sequential manner. This systematic organization is very distinct and increases the overall efficiency of the hydrolysis process by ensuring that the cascading enzyme reactions channel intermediates between consecutive enzymes thereby avoiding competition with other reactions taking place in the cell [150]. Typical cellulosomes consist of a cohesin-dockerin system of arrangement: cohesins (type 1) are structural scaffold protein that take part in specific, affinity-based interactions with dockerin (type I) which is bound to an assembly of multiple enzymes in a spatially compatible manner. The cohesin-dockerin complex is linked to a scaffolding which typically consist of 26 different cellulosomal units which typically forms the carbohydrate binding module. This unit is connected to the surface of the cell by means of a type II cohesin-dockerin interaction. This makes this enzyme-complex system as effective as crucial cellular biosynthesis models such as Kreb's cycle [65].
## (s20) Control of a Fermentation Processes
(p20.0) Along with advances in fermentation technologies, studies have been conducted at lab-pilot scales employing different bacterial and fungal strains to determine the efficacy of enzyme production using lignocellulosic biomass [152]. Several studies have shown a rejuvenated interest in solid-state fermentation for the production of various enzymes. Many of the attributes of agro-industrial residues are especially suited to this form of culture and can yield significant benefits in terms of sustainability. The latter include environmental friendliness and significant reduction in production costs. Mass and energy balances are crucial parameters related to the control of a fermentation processes [153]. The complexity associated with the heat and mass transfer during solid-state fermentation is a major hurdle that has restricted its application in industrial processes [154]. However, recent advances made in this technology by Zhang et al. (2017) suggests that a factor termed the mechanical index (Imp) can be used as an aid to characterize the physical properties of the medium, permitting informed culture medium development and imparting a higher level of process control to the fermentation [154]. Imp is a product of physical attributes of the solid medium such as resilience, cohesiveness, and springiness. During various stages of the fermentation Imp can be correlated (positively and negatively) with thermal conductivity, water retention, gas permeability, thermal diffusivity and biomass content, all of which varies throughout the fermentation process. These physical properties directly influence the heat and mass transfer, which in turn determines the efficiency of the fermentation. Imp could thus be useful in the determination of physical properties of the medium, as well as permitting tighter control of solid-state culture.
