# An Overview on Current Non-invasive Diagnostic Devices in Oral Oncology

CorpusID: 53086247 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfbed99e74a6de5b232b4939d94f91011c3a8aa6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfbed99e74a6de5b232b4939d94f91011c3a8aa6)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the most common head and neck malignancy and the sixth most common tumour worldwide (Warnakulasuriya, 2009). Despite advances in therapies, the overall 5-year survival rate has remained unchanged during the past decades, mainly due to delayed diagnosis (Gomez et al., 2009). OSCC is typically preceded by potentially malignant disorders (PMD), a group of clinically suspicious lesions. Although the majority of PMD do not progress to OSCC, distinguishing high-risk PMD from low-risk PMD is challenging for dental practitioners (Yang et al., 2018). Furthermore, patients treated for OSCC are at risk of developing recurrences and secondary primary tumours, due to field cancerization and/or incomplete surgery (Day and Blot, 1992). Currently, conventional oral examination (COE), consisting in visual and tactile assessment of accessible oral structures, followed by tissue biopsy still constitutes the gold standard for diagnosis of PMD and OSCC. However, there are some limitations of this procedure, such as sampling bias that can lead to underdiagnosis or misdiagnosis, particularly in multifocal lesions (Yang et al., 2018).

(p0.1) The possibility of making an early diagnosis is crucial for reducing high mortality rate and morbidity of OSCC patients. In the last years, several light-based detection systems (LBDS), based on optical properties of biological tissues, have emerged with claims of enhancing oral mucosal examinations and facilitating the detection of PMD and OSCC.

(p0.2) Furthermore, the recent evolution of nanotechnology may provide new opportunities to detect PMD and OSCC at an early stage (El-Sayed et al., 2005). Several preclinical studies showed the potential to enhance diagnostic accuracy of optical diagnostic technologies (e.g., Raman spectroscopy) or imaging techniques (e.g., Magnetic resonance imaging) (Chen et al., 2018). Among the latter techniques, reflectance confocal microscopy seems to improve the evaluation of oral lesions, by detecting backscattered light from illuminated tissue, producing high resolution tissue map. However, several technological limitations need to be resolved to validate diagnostic accuracy (Lucchese et al., 2016). LBDS showed several advantages compared to the aforementioned approaches, such as low cost and ease of use. For these reasons, it is fundamental to conduct studies to evaluate the efficacy of nanotechnology implementation in LBDS.

(p0.3) The aim of this article is to review the literature on LBDS currently on the market (Tables 1, 2), providing clinicians with a better understanding of their advantages and limits, and possible future applications of nanotechnologies.
## (s1) ViziLite R
(p1.0) ViziLite R (Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, AZ, United States) is a chemiluminescence-based detection device designed to facilitate the early identification of PMD and OSCC. In 2002 ViziLite R became the first device approved by FDA for this purpose (Oh and Laskin, 2007). This is a disposable capsule formed by an outer shell of flexible plastic containing acetyl salicylic acid and an inner glass vial containing hydrogen peroxide. To activate it, the capsule is bent to break the inner glass vial, triggering the reaction of the chemicals contained in the two compartments. Consequently, a bluish-white light (430-580 nm) is produced,  lasting for 10 min (Liu et al., 2016). A modified version (ViziLite R PLUS) consists of a combination of chemiluminescence and toluidine blue (TB) marking system, an acidophilic dye that selectively stains acidic substances such as DNA. Furthermore, an accessory eyewear has been developed, to allow better isolation of chemiluminescent light (Sambandham et al., 2013). Its clinical use requires a 1-min rinse of 1% acetic acid solution, to desiccate oral tissues, followed by oral examination with 430-580 nm wavelength light. The altered epithelial cells, due to higher nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, reflect the light and cause the appearance of an "aceto-white" lesion, whereas normal cells appear blue (Nagi et al., 2016). The first studies regarding ViziLite R , published in 2004-2007, were conducted on subjects with different clinical conditions, ranging from normal mucosa to diagnosed OSCC, with the aim to explore the diagnostic utility of chemiluminescence-based strategies ( Table 2). In the first reported study, ViziLite R identified a subclinical lesion, suggesting its utility in identifying occult epithelial abnormalities (Huber et al., 2004). In a small cohort of patients with oral lesions, ViziLite R appears to be a better diagnostic tool than TB in detection of OSCC and PMD (Ram and Siar, 2005). Another study highlights the ability of ViziLite R to show brighter and better demarcated lesions than using incandescent light, aiming to enhance the identification of lesions that could be biopsied . Unfortunately, these results have not been confirmed, which failed to demonstrate significant improvement in identification and evaluation of oral lesions (Farah and McCullough, 2007;Oh and Laskin, 2007). Interestingly, a cross-sectional study compared ViziLite R and VELscope R to evaluate their clinical utility in diagnosing oral lesions, but the authors failed to demonstrate any superiority to COE (Mehrotra et al., 2010).

(p1.1) For this reason, a new version of this device has been developed (ViziLite R PLUS), aiming to improve the diagnostic power of TB marking system. First results were encouraging, showing that TB reduced the number of false positive cases leaving the false negative rate unchanged . On the contrary, ViziLite R PLUS does not seems to be useful to detect malignancies in patients with clearly visible lesions (Mojsa et al., 2012). In fact, some authors described the better diagnostic accuracy of ViziLite R with respect to TB staining alone (Rajmohan et al., 2012;Vashisht et al., 2014), justifying the combined use of these two techniques.

(p1.2) Recently, the results of a clinical study suggested that, although the adjunct of TB to ViziLite R reduced the false positive cases without increasing the number of false negatives, there are little benefits in using this device in general dental practise (Chaudhry et al., 2016).

(p1.3) In conclusion, despite the fact that ViziLite R facilitates the identification of hyperkeratotic areas and may increase the visibility of mucosal lesions, the main limitation is currently the high proportion of false positive and false negative tests, regarding the identification of dysplastic areas rather than hyperkeratosis (Chhabra et al., 2015).
## (s2) VELscope R
(p2.0) VELscope R (LED Medical Diagnostics, White Rock, BC, Canada) is a hand-held non-magnifying device for direct visualisation of oral mucosa autofluorescence that became commercially available after FDA approval in 2006 (Ayoub et al., 2015). No need of technical measures, such as the use of dimmed light, pre-rinse or lesion-marking solutions, make VELscope R easy to use. It uses a 120 W arc-lamp and a series of philtres and reflectors optimised for producing 400-460 nm wavelength light. The light emitted reaches oral mucosa and excites endogenous autofluorescence substances, called fluorophores (Yamamoto et al., 2017). Preliminary studies, regarding small groups of patients, gave encouraging results ( Table 1). In the first reported study, 44 patients with confirmed oral dysplasia or OSCC were evaluated with both COE and VELscope R . The results showed that the device can differentiate PMD and OSCC from normal oral mucosa, with high sensitivity and specificity levels (Lane et al., 2006). These results were confirmed in a small OSCC cohort study, in which the use of autofluorescence-guided examination was able to identify subclinical high-risk fields with cancerous changes . In a study conducted on 60 patients using a semi-quantitative grading system for autofluorescence, VELscope R demonstrate good sensitivity and a better ability to recognise high-grade lesions than COE (Jayaprakash et al., 2009). Another study evaluated 65 subjects with VELscope R , using a specific algorithm based on the ratio of red-to-green fluorescence. The authors found that 405 nm wavelength light was able to discriminate neoplastic and non-neoplastic tissue with high sensitivity and specificity (Roblyer et al., 2009).
## (s3) Identafi R
(p3.0) Identafi R (StarDental -DentalEZ, Lancaster, PA, United States) is a probe-like device designed for multispectral screening of PMD, approved by FDA in 2009 as oral screening device (Vigneswaran et al., 2009). Identafi R has three light sources of different wavelengths: white, violet (405 nm), and green-amber (545 nm) lights, that can be sequentially used in oral examination. While white light provides classical visualisation of oral mucosa, violet light excites endogen fluorophores, enabling the assessment of mucosa autofluorescence, like VELscope R . Green-amber light, through the reflectance spectroscopy, excites haemoglobin molecules in the blood, with the aim to visualise the vasculature (Messadi et al., 2014). A mirror is attached to the probe to help visualise relatively obscure areas in oral cavity.

(p3.1) The first clinical trial with Identafi R was conducted on 88 patients who were treated previously for OSCC ( Table 2). Screening results with white, violet, and green lights were compared to each other, showing limited benefits of tissue reflectance and autofluorescence in detecting high-risk lesions (Sweeny et al., 2011). In 2012, was reported a case series of PMD patients with the aim to evaluate the efficacy of Identafi R . Although the results are not clearly described, this device seems to be helpful in identifying characteristics not otherwise visible to the COE (Lane et al., 2012).

(p3.2) In a pilot study, Identafi R was used to evaluate tissue vascularity of PMD and to compare with the histological grading of the lesions using a vascular marker (CD34). The results found a correlation between tissue reflectance and histological assessment of vascular structure, in both OSCC and non-cancerous lesions (Messadi et al., 2014).

(p3.3) Two studies on the effectiveness of Identafi R were conducted on Australian population. In the first one, 342 urban Indigenous community members were screened for oral lesions using reflectance spectroscopy and autofluorescence imaging. Identafi R improved the visibility of oral cavity lesions and was capable to find new lesions not seen during COE, although the prevalence of oral pigmentation in this community could hamper the use of autofluorescence screening systems (Lalla et al., 2015). In the second study, 88 patients were evaluated with Identafi R , showing good specificity, negative predictive value, and accuracy (Lalla et al., 2016).

(p3.4) Taken together, the use of Identafi provide the clinician with more data than COE. Unfortunately, the results interpretation requires high level of experience and clinical training in oral pathology, suggesting that its usage should be limited to reference centres for oral pathology (Lalla et al., 2016).
## (s4) OTHER DEVICES
(p4.0) Microlux/DL TM (AdDent Inc., Danbury, CT, United States) is a chemiluminescence-based device which became commercially available after FDA approval in 2005. This device has a diffused blue-white LED light source and a fibre optic light guide (McIntosh et al., 2009). It uses the same principles of ViziLite R : after 1-min rinse with 1% acetic acid, oral examination is performed with 460-555 nm wavelength light. Altered epithelial cells cause the appearance of "aceto-white" lesions, and LED light source makes the lesion more easily recognisable. Furthermore, the use of TB can be used in conjunction with Microlux/DL TM , to enhance the visualisation of dysplastic areas (Ibrahim et al., 2014). In 2009 was conducted a study on 50 patients with oral white lesions to evaluate the efficacy of Microlux/DL TM . The results showed that this device can enhance visualisation of oral mucosa, but no clinical improvement was observed, due to poor ability to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions (McIntosh et al., 2009). Another trial that evaluated the effectiveness of Microlux/DL TM was carried out in 2014. 599 patients were examined with COE and Microlux/DL TM with and without TB, showing high sensitivity but low specificity, indicating that this device is not effective to distinguish between benign and malignant lesions, although seems to be a promising screening test for oral lesions (Ibrahim et al., 2014).
## (s5) CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
(p5.0) The diagnostic techniques presented here showed great potential for screening and monitoring oral lesions (Liu et al., 2016). Unfortunately, to date several factors hinder an extensive use of these devices: (1) data do not demonstrate clear superiority of these methods compared to COE; (2) there remains the need for well-designed multicentre prospective studies; (3) these devices exhibit a not-negligible interobserver variability, limiting their use to clinicians with significant experience in oral pathology (Patton et al., 2008;Carreras-Torras and Gay-Escoda, 2015).
