# An Overview of Crypto-Compressive Based on Selective Coding 1 2

CorpusID: 53417677 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c6a4724dd46da3d94fce7f03d3e0dc1792a74dd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8c6a4724dd46da3d94fce7f03d3e0dc1792a74dd)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Image Encryption
(p1.0) Image encryption is the technique through which we can reserve the image data from eavesdroppers during transmission and storage. Encryption can beaccomplished by encrypting the image data so that they can't be understood. The main goal is to make the image data not comprehensible to any unauthorized access that might intercept them. Perceptual security in image encryption is not the only concern but also concentrate on accomplishing it with achieving a high cryptographic security(comparative study). Image encryption was not studied as normal encryption or visual encryption. It was used to encode digital media (images) to provide confidentiality and intellectual property fortification against unauthorized access. Information confidentiality is an essential aspect of image encryption. The confidentiality of the encrypted data with a parity in time and cost effectiveness of the encryption technique is the obstacle still faced in image encryption [23].
## (s2) 1) Full Image Encryption
(p2.0) Full image encryption is the procedure of encrypting the sequence forming the image data. This type of image encryption is robust and entirely secures the contents of the image and preserves the perceptual security by keeping the image quality as fair as possible [24] hence the processing time is fatal in applications requires real time processing and also the extensive computations required to encrypt each and every last bits in the processed image.
## (s5) a) Compression followed by Encryption (CE)
(p5.0) In this category an intruder have fewer clues about how to access the image data but encryption may again increase the size. Aninnovative approach proposed called "partial encryption"to reduce encryption and decryption time in image and video communication and processing. In this approach, onlyportion of the compressed data is encrypted. This approach is suitable for the JPEG and MPEG compression algorithms. As well as, partial encryption schemes such as quad-tree and wavelet image compression, and an extension for video compression. Partial encryption permits the encryption and decryption time to be significantly minimized without affecting the compression operation of the underlying compression algorithm. It will likely be shown that though a large portion of the compressed data is left unencrypted, it is hard to recover the original data without descrambling the scrambled part. Applications using low bit rate compression algorithms would outcome in smaller portions to be scrambled, making the partial encryption approach even more reasonable andappealing. The results on video compression are similar. Thus, a substantial reduction in encryption and decryption time is achieved. [26] 
