# Acute postoperative pain after arthroscopic rotator cuff surgery: A review of methods of pain assessment

CorpusID: 53719351 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4fb8449bc469f8f66148d4419413662f58ee2b2f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4fb8449bc469f8f66148d4419413662f58ee2b2f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Pain assessment is fundamental in orthopedic surgery to evaluate disease severity as well as postoperative improvement. When evaluating new surgical interventions and analgesic methods, clinical trials often use acute postoperative pain as an outcome. Recent quality improvement guidelines of acute postoperative pain from the American Pain Society [1], a review [2] and a study protocol [3] of acute postoperative pain after shoulder surgery have defined outcomes to be included in postoperative pain trials, such as "pain intensity" [4,5]. However, recommendations for outcome measurements and recordings are lacking [6]. For example, pain intensity may be reported through various pain rating scales. As a result, trials have assessed postoperative pain in a wide variety of ways [2,7,8].

(p0.1) A standardized, validated method of assessing acute postoperative pain would improve the quality of clinical studies and facilitate future systematic reviews and metaanalyses. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate the methods used in recent literature, focusing on ratings of pain intensity, time points and number of measurements, analgesic consumption, and time to first analgesic request or first pain.
## (s9) Number of measurements and time points
(p9.0) The total number of pain recordings within the first seven PODs was extracted from 45 studies ( Figure 3); two studies did not report the total number of recordings [15,54]. The mean number of recordings within the first postoperative week was 6.3 (0-21).

(p9.1) The distribution of recordings during the first seven PODs could be extracted from 45 studies ( Figure 4). The majority of pain recordings were made on POD1, totaling 60% of cumulated number of recordings within the first postoperative week, equivalent to a mean of 5.1 (0-11) recordings. The number of pain recordings decreased from POD2 to POD6 with a small increase in POD7. 
## (s10) Analgesic consumption
(p10.0) In the 34 studies reporting analgesic consumption, different methods were used. Some studies used more than one method due to variations in analgesic protocols, such as different scheduled analgesics and rescue analgesics. In most cases, only the rescue analgesics were recorded (in mg  [12,13,47] or cumulated amount of all analgesics [10,15] during a specific period of time.
## (s12) Discussion
(p12.0) When screening the 711 abstracts for the current study, many of the first discarded 558 studies were found to use questionnaires with joint-specific or health-related quality of life composite scores (such as DASH score, American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) score, Oxford shoulder score, and Western Ontario Rotator Cuff Index).

(p12.1) Since data on pain assessment could not be extracted from these composite scores, these studies were unsuitable for further analysis of postoperative pain. Currently this issue is being investigated by others, for example Gagnier et al. [3] who has published a study protocol with the purpose of creating a core outcome set for clinical trials of people with shoulder pain as the lack of uniformity in outcome measures across clinical trials limits interstudy comparison and the ability to pool data for meta-analyses.
