# A survey on dynamic and stochastic vehicle routing problems

CorpusID: 53761338 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5e08e1cf9ca7c04103b56a579447e753ec766ff1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5e08e1cf9ca7c04103b56a579447e753ec766ff1)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s6) Preprocessed decision support
(p6.0) In order to handle uncertainty and real-time information about travel times efficiently, travel times are analysed and modelled appropriately and incorporated into the algorithms. Usually, this is modelled as a MDP and it is popular to model the stochastic information about travel times via probabilities of congestion on links. The aim is to calculate an optimal routing policy in advance which can then be applied to the vehicle en route. Note that all the possible decisions are calculated and evaluated before the vehicle starts its route. One shortcoming is the dimension of the problems. So for every possible state regarding time, location and traffic information an optimal routing policy must be determined and stored. The computational effort can be demonstrated by the rather small test networks used in the literature. Interesting work which considers stochastic time-dependent travel times and which performs (optimal) routing decisions in advance is presented in Fu (2001), Miller-Hooks (2001, Kim, Lewis, and White (2005), Gao and Chabini (2006), Gao and Huang (2012) and Güner, Murat, and Chinnam (2012). Recently, Toriello, Haskell, and Poremba (2014) propose an approximated linear programming (ALP) approach for the dynamic TSP with stochastic arc costs. The authors also investigate a rollout policy, where the expected costs at any state biased by the optimal value of the LP relaxation of a shortest Hamiltonian path are considered.
## (s7) Online decision-making
(p7.0) Here, the focus is on DVRPs with stochastic and time-dependent travel times where the decisions for adapting the route are not preprocessed but calculated online. In Taniguchi and Shimamoto (2004) and Potvin, Xu, and Benyahia (2006), the routes are updated according to estimated travel times whenever a vehicle arrives a customer location. In the former work, the travel times are obtained by a dynamic traffic simulation based on a macroscopic approach and the results show the benefit of using the reactive algorithm compared to the static counterpart for test scenarios where a link is blocked for an hour at different times. In the latter case, travel times are obtained by a short-term forecast and dynamic perturbation model and a tolerance level, which is an allowed waiting time in the case of lateness, before a reassignment action, is initiated. Results show that a good strategy is to accept lateness in the case of small deviations in travel times, but react on events of a large magnitude. Yan, Lin, and Lai (2013) deal with the planning of courier routes and introduce a time-space network including several arcs associated with travel times and a probability. A stochastic planning model, incorporating unanticipated lateness penalty costs and a stochastic real-time adjustment model, which handles dynamic requests and aims for little route adjustment, are introduced. The results show that the model with route adjustment yields better results. Another essential work is presented by Schilde, Doerner, and Hartl (2014), using stochastic deviations from time-dependent travel speeds which are deduced from historical accident data. The positive effect of using such data instead of average time-dependent travel speeds is tested on different stochastic metaheuristic concepts: dynamic stochastic variable neighbourhood search (DSVNS) which is based on Gutjahr, Katzensteiner, and Reiter (2007) and multiple scenario approach (MSA) introduced in Bent and Van Hentenryck (2004). The results are compared to the corresponding myopic approaches: a dynamic VNS (DVNS) and a multiple plan approach (MPA). In contrast to the work above, the true travel speed is revealed in each iteration of the algorithm. In general, the DSVNS performs best, but the solution quality highly depends on the DOD in so far as for highly and non-dynamic instances, the DVNS works better. However, the MSA turns out to be unsuitable for this problem setting and, on average, obtains no improvements.
## (s9) DVRP with stochastic demand
(p9.0) Another intensively studied problem class is the VRP with stochastic demand (VRPSD), where uncertainty in the customer demands is given. The location of the customer is known in advance, but the actual demand is revealed when arriving at the customer location. It occurs that the required demand cannot be met and the vehicle has to return to the depot for replenishment before serving the customer. Therefore, the objective of VRPSD is to minimise the total expected travel costs needed to serve all customer demands. Typical applications for the VRPSD are the supply of gas stations or garbage collection. Usually, an a-priori solution which incorporates stochastic demand information is constructed and the customers are visited according to the plan without any route updates during the operation. Whenever the customer demand is not met, a so-called route failure occurs and a defined recourse actions (e.g. replenishment at the depot) must be applied. Typically, a two-stage approach is applied as proposed in Bertsimas (1992) and Gendreau, Laporte, and Sguin (1996). The most common concepts are chance constraint programming and stochastic programming with recourse. An excellent review on VRPSD is given in Campbell and Thomas (2008) and recent research on this topic is presented in Mendoza et al. (2010), Erera, Morales, and Savelsbergh (2010) and Juan et al. (2011Juan et al. ( , 2013. Anticipatory insertion (AI), discussed in Thomas and White III (2004), is another concept for exploiting future information about customer demand. While a-priori solution approaches are intensively studied, advanced planning technology has also facilitated another approach where routing or replenishment decisions are made dynamically, often called re-optimisation approach. This novel problem class is called DVRP with stochastic demand (DVRPSD). This section presents work on DVRPSDs which implies that VRPSDs are extended with the possibility of route adaption during the plan execution phase whenever new data are revealed. Additionally, the benefit of this novel combination is investigated.
## (s10) Preprocessed decision support
(p10.0) A popular method for solving a DVRPSD is to consider all states (e.g. all possible demand realisations) in advance and the value of each state according to its performance. Such an approach performs the evaluation of the states before the vehicle starts the tour and enables an accurate decision-making based on these values during the plan execution phase. From the point of computational effort, it might be very expensive to determine all the predefined values, but it comes with the advantage that dynamic decisions can be provided quite fast. This is usually formulated as a multi-stage stochastic dynamic programming model and with the assumption that states and decisions are discrete and the value evaluation can be done by Bellman's equation. To overcome the curse of dimensionality, the exact value function can be replaced by an approximation. This formulation can either be implemented as an ALP as in Toriello, Haskell, and Poremba (2014) or as an approximated dynamic programming (ADP) discussed in Powell (2007).
## (s17) Conclusion
(p17.0) This section clearly shows that most research has been done on the DVRPSC for both categories. First, the potential of approaches based on VFA and the successful application of ADP algorithms for various problem structures are shown. Nevertheless, the main challenges are an accurate state formulation, the aggregation of data and the generation of scenarios to perform an extensive training phase. All of the presented work is tested on different real-world instances, which makes an objective comparison of the results difficult. However, the benefit of approaches belonging to this section, which is the improvements of considering stochastic information about customers compared to myopic algorithms, is depicted in Figure 4 on the left side. The average improvement of the most successful method for every work is depicted in respect to the instance size (number of customers). Note that the instance size in Simão et al. (2009) is 6000 but has been depicted at 600 for the sake of illustration.

(p17.1) Second, the research on online decision procedures distinguishes between non-sampling and sampling-based approaches. Both methodologies demonstrate the benefit with up to 60% improvement of incorporating stochastic information about future customer requests into the solution algorithms as illustrated in Figure 4 on the right side. Mainly, the algorithms are tested on adapted benchmark instances (Solomon 1987) or self-generated instances and in fact, all papers focus on the comparison of their own myopic and anticipating approaches than comparing the results to other results in the literature. Note, almost all sampling-based approaches are examined considering different levels of the DOD, except for Larsen, Madsen, and Solomon (2004) who present results for a non-sampling approach regarding the DOD. According to the advance of information and communication technologies, future research for both groups will be performed. However, it is assumed that sampling-based approaches obtain more attention because of the advantage of not depending on an accurate probability distribution.
## (s19) Production and routing interface
(p19.0) A recent trend in this research field is the combination of production and transportation problems and their simultaneously optimisation. The inventory routing problem (IRP) is a combination of vehicle routing and inventory management problems, where a supplier has to delivery products to a set of customers. Solutions for the IRP are obtained by simultaneously optimising vehicle routing, inventory management and delivery scheduling. Coelho, Cordeau, and Laporte (2014) provide a comprehensive literature review on IRPs and classify the problems with respect to their structural variants and the availability of customer demand information. Another problem class is the production routing problem (PRP) which combines the vehicle routing and lot-sizing problem. It is solved by optimising inventory, distribution, routing and production decisions simultaneously and is thus a generalisation of the IRP. An excellent survey on PRPs is given in Adulyasak, Cordeau, and Jans (2015), where different formulations and algorithmic issues and performance for PRPs are discussed. The review from Chen (2010) addresses the problem that for time-sensitive or make-to-order product distribution, the production process and the distribution of the products must be linked and scheduled jointly.
