# Towards the Internet of Flying Robots: A Survey

CorpusID: 53749112 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b1ef47025063aadf4cecab3a974a96611152e59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9b1ef47025063aadf4cecab3a974a96611152e59)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Computer Science, Medicine

## (s5) Camera Coverage
(p5.0) In the application of target tracking, FRs are usually equipped with cameras facing the ground [13,22,23]. In general, the cameras have a fixed angle of vision θ, see Figure 2. Then, when a FR is at altitude h, the corresponding coverage area is a circular area with the radius:

(p5.1) If a target is within the range of r max to the projection of a FR, this target is covered by the FR [7,22,24,25]. It is clear that the coverage radius relates to the altitude of the FR, and increasing the altitude enlarges the coverage area. An implied assumption is that the target has the Line-of-Sight (LoS) with the FR. If there is any obstacle between the two parts, the former cannot be observed by the latter, although the above condition holds. 
## (s7) Communication Coverage I
(p7.0) In the applications of providing wireless communication service to cellular users, the coverage of a user by a FR can be determined by the signal pathloss (PL). Beyond the LoS assumption, references [29,30] consider that the links between FRs and ground users can have two cases: LoS and Non-LoS (NLoS). The authors of [30] propose a model for the probability of having LoS link between the two parts (P LoS ), which depends on the elevation angle, and some environmental parameters:

(p7.1) where ϕ is the elevation angle (see Figure 2), and a and b are environment dependent parameters. As pointed out by [30], a and b depend on environmental parameters including the ratio of built-up land area to the total land area, the mean number of buildings per unit area and a scale parameter that describes the buildings' heights distribution according to Rayleigh probability density function. The probability of NLoS link is P NLoS = 1 − P LoS . Furthermore, the pathloss is modelled with two parts: free space pathloss and excessive pathloss η ξ , where ξ ∈ {LoS, NLoS}. Free space pathloss depends on the distance between the FR and the ground user, while excessive pathloss depends on the type of link between the two parts. Thus, the average pathloss from the FR to the ground user is the sum of the LoS pathloss and NLoS pathloss [30]:

(p7.2) where PL ξ = 20 log( 4π f d c ) + η ξ , d is the Euclidean distance between the FR and the ground user, f is the carrier frequency and c is the speed of light. Furthermore, by setting a maximum allowed pathloss, one can compute the largest coverage radius for a given altitude. Furthermore, the optimal altitude, which corresponds to the global largest coverage radius, can also be obtained [30].
## (s8) Communication Coverage II
(p8.0) One implied assumption of the communication coverage model I is that only one FR is used to serve ground users, or multiple FRs use different wireless channels. Regarding this, a more practical communication coverage model should take interference into account. In the communication coverage model I, the coverage of a user or the association of it with an FR is determined by the maximum allowed pathloss or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). When interference is accounted, the coverage or association should be determined by signal-to-interference-and-noise ratio (SINR). Following the average pathloss model [30], it can be seen that the received signal from the nearest FR is always the largest. Thus, by assuming that the association of a user and a FR is determined by SINR, a user is always associated with the nearest FR [31]. Obviously, the area of interest can be separated into several Voronoi cells given the positions of FRs, see Figure 3. To briefly sum up, although the first three coverage models may be suitable to varying scenarios, the common feature of them is that the coverage area is a disk, which is independent of the position of the FR. Conversly, the coverage area of the last model depends on the relative positions of nearby FRs.
## (s9) Connectivity
(p9.0) Many applications involving FRs require that they form a connected network. For example, in the application of data collection from wireless nodes using FRs, the connectivity of FRs with the central data sink guarantees that sensory data can be delivered to the data sink quickly, which makes it possible that end users take necessary actions timely. The case is the same in data dissemination. Another application is using FRs to provide communication service to ground cellular users. The connectivity of FRs with ground SBSs ensures that every FR has a wireless backhaul link so that any request from users can be transmitted to the core networks instantly and the response can also be returned to the user shortly. The connectivity requirement significantly influences the deployment of FRs, especially in disaster areas. In such areas, all or most of the existing SBSs may be destroyed by the disaster, thus, the FRs need to construct a new communication system and connect themselves to the remote working SBSs.

(p9.1) To this end, one simple model to characterize the connectivity requirement has been proposed in [32]. Consider a communication system consisting of n FRs and m SBSs, and the FRs are working at the same altitude. Let P 1 , P 2 , . . . , P n be the coordinates of FRs on the horizontal plane and Q 1 , Q 2 , . . . , Q m be the fixed locations of SBSs. The connectivity of such a communication system can be described by a communication graph G [32]. In the given communication graph G, there are n + m vertices and any robot vertex should be connected to an SBS vertex. The connectivity of two robot vertices and one robot vertex and one SBS vertex can be described by:
## (s10) Energy Consumption
(p10.0) It is clear that many current commercial FRs are powered by onboard batteries, which means that their working time is limited. Some publications focus on flight control to improve energy efficiency and increase working time [35,36]. One model describing energy consumption of a FR is as follows [7,26]:

(p10.1) where E is the energy consumption during the period of t, β is the minimum power needed to hover just over the ground, α is a motor speed multiplier, s is the lifting speed, and P max (h/s) is the energy spent for lifting the robot to altitude h with the speed s. A similar model has been discussed in [23]. Superior to [7,26], the model for recharging FRs is also presented in [23], but the idea is similar. Another model characterizing the energy consumption for flying is given in [37] and such a model simply assumes that the energy consumption for flying is proportional to the flying distance.
## (s12) Maximizing the Number of Covered Targets
(p12.0) For the case with a given number of FRs, if they are not sufficient to cover all the targets, one common objective is to maximize the number of covered targets. In general, the problems of maximizing the number of covered targets can be classified into two categories based on the input information about the users: exact location and general distribution.

(p12.1) Assuming the availability of targets' locations, a few publications provide some formulations for the deployment of a single FR [38,39]. Specifically, an energy-efficient deployment approach for covering the maximum number of targets is presented in [38]. It first sets the vertical position of the FR at the altitude providing the maximal coverage and then optimizes the horizontal position to maximize the number of covered targets while using minimum transmitting power. Instead of decoupling the deployment, reference [39] formulates a mixed-integer non-linear problems involving both the horizontal coordinates and the altitude as variables, to maximize the number of served targets. Under the assumption of knowing targets' locations, the case of multiple FRs has also been studied [40]. FRs are used to serve the maximum number of targets, subject to that each robot has a capacity of service. The authors propose a K-mean clustering base algorithm. The reference [41] considers FR deployment problem with the objective of maximizing target coverage and minimizing the moving distance of FRs when they need to change positions. A heuristic algorithm and a linear programming-based method are proposed.

(p12.2) For the case of multiple FRs, another type of input information is the general distribution of targets [6,32,42]. It is worth mentioning that such a distribution differs from the long-term traffic behavior, which is usually used for the deployment of SBSs. The distribution considered here is for occasional events, such as sports games and concerts. The concept of target density is usually used to describe the distribution. Let ρ(p) denote the target density of the location p ∈ S, where S is the area having targets to be covered by FRs. Following the communication coverage model I, the total coverage area of the set of FRs can be represented by C(P 1 , . . . , P n ) ∈ S. Therefore, the maximization of the number of covered targets can be formulated as follows: max P 1 ,...,P n p∈C(P 1 ,...,P n ) ρ(p)dp.

(p12.3) In particular, reference [32] considers two objectives: the maximum covered number of targets and the energy consumption by FRs for data transmission, together with the connectivity of FRs with SBSs. Reference [6] follows the framework of [32] to address another optimization problem. The first goal is the maximization of the number of covered targets. The authors also consider the recharging of FRs as well as interference management. Since this reference is based on the assumption of a street graph, the result is somewhat restrictive in practice.
## (s13) Minimizing Robot-User Distance
(p13.0) Another commonly considered optimization problem is to minimize the average robot-target distance [31]. To formulate this problem, the communication coverage model II is often used. Let D min (p) denote the distance from point p ∈ S to the nearest FR, which can be computed by [31]:

(p13.1) Different from the communication coverage model I used in [32], the association of a target with an FR in [31] is based on distance. Then, the objective to minimize the average robot-target distance can be formulated as follows: min P 1 ,...,P n p∈S ρ(p)D 2 min (p)dp. (9) where ρ(p) is the target density at position p ∈ S as mentioned above.
## (s14) Minimizing the Number of Flying Robots
(p14.0) The above approaches are about the deployment of a given number of FRs. A different objective is to figure out the minimum number of required FRs to provide a high quality of communication service or target coverage, which relates to the system investment. In [25], the authors deploy the FRs at the same altitude to cover a set of targets, given their locations. Based on the disk coverage model, they formulate a Geometric Disk Cover problem with the objective of using the minimum number of robots to cover all the targets. To address the problem, a centralized heuristic algorithm is proposed. Beyond the 2D situation considered in [25], the authors of [50] consider the case of deploying FRs in 3D space with the same objective and a PSO-based heuristic algorithm is proposed. Reference [51] studies the similar problem and an elitist non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm is used to find the optimal positions for FRs from a given set of candidates.

(p14.1) Besides the application of supporting wireless communication using FRs, the minimization of FR number has also been considered in other applications such as wireless charging sensor nodes [26] and target tracking [7,24,37]. Publications [7,24] study the continuous camera coverage problem. The objectives are to minimize the number of FRs and energy consumption. Reference [7] formulates a mixed-integer non-linear optimization model and presents a mixed-integer programming-based heuristic algorithm. Paper [24] considers the similar case as [7] and the authors further propose a localized heuristic algorithm beyond the centralized one in [7]. It is worth mentioning that the advantages of [7,24] include the consideration of the energy limitation of FRs. Paper [37] integrates the recharging requirements into the continuous coverage problem and examines the minimum number of FRs for covering multiple subareas. The authors partition the coverage graph into cycles that start from the charging depot and the number of FRs required depends on the charging time, the traveling time, and the number of subareas to be covered by the cycle.
## (s15) Minimizing Energy Consumption
(p15.0) Since many FRs are powered by the onboard batteries, minimizing energy consumption improves operating lifetime. Also, when the serving object of FRs is a WSN, the energy consumption of sensor nodes is often considered as a key point to ensure a long enough network lifetime.

(p15.1) Reference [52] considers the energy-efficient deployment of a FR to provide wireless communication to targets. The received power at a target from a FR is modelled as a function of the horizontal distance between the target and the FR, and the altitude of the FR [52]. Then, paper [52] decouples the optimal position in the horizontal and vertical dimensions. The horizontal position is taken as the center of the smallest circle covering the given set of targets, and then the vertical position is obtained such that the minimum transmitting power is used to cover that circle. Publication [23] focuses on the application of area monitoring. With a given set of FRs and a charging depot on the ground, the authors consider the problem of how to schedule the FRs to execute either monitoring task or recharging task, such that the network lifetime is maximized. They follow the camera coverage model and the energy consumption model therein is similar to Equation (6). Another recent publication using a single FR is to prolong the network lifetime of a WSN [53]. Instead of minimizing the energy consumption of the FR, the main points here are scheduling the wake-up time of sensor nodes and planning the trajectory of the FR, such that the maximum energy consumption of sensor nodes is minimized.
## (s16) Other Optimization Problems
(p16.0) Wireless charging sensor nodes in WSNs is a promising way to improve the lifetime of WSNs. Recent survey [54] reviews the related approaches using ground mobile robots as wireless chargers. In this subsection, some typical approaches using FRs for wireless charging sensor nodes are reviewed.

(p16.1) Reference [55] presents some fundamental results related to charging sensor nodes using FRs. A simple scenario where a single FR is used, and it can charge a single sensor at any time. With the objective of maximizing network lifetime, the authors aim at selecting appropriate nodes to recharge as well as the best sink node selection for data collection. Beyond this, the case where a FR can recharge multiple sensor nodes has also been considered. Reference [56] considers the scenario of using a set of FRs to collect data from a set of sensors and recharge them simultaneously. An optimization problem with the objective of maximizing data collection utility is proposed. A one-side-matching algorithm and a greedy algorithm are proposed to address the problem. Publication [57] moves beyond [56] by considering the varying energy consumption rates of sensors. A dynamic charging strategy is presented for a single FR with the objective of minimizing overall packet loss rate. Paper [58] focuses on the joint scheduling of charging routes and sensor association for multiple FRs. The authors formulate a bounded route association problem and an approximation algorithm is proposed. The authors of [26] formulate a set cover problem to figure out the 3D positions of FRs, with the objective of minimizing the FR number such that all the sensor nodes can operate without time limitation.
## (s20) Target Search
(p20.0) After disasters, the first task is to search for victims needing rescue. Considering that the areas may still have potential risks, autonomous robots have been widely used in this operation. Ground robots were first used to search targets in unknown environments [71] where the tasks of the ground robot included simultaneous localization and mapping. Furthermore, the ground robot team explored and performed target-searching operation [72][73][74]. Compared to ground robots, FRs are agile and fast. The growing recognition of the potential of using FRs for search-and-rescue operations is supported by an increasing number of approaches in image recognition for victim detection [75][76][77]. A key factor to be considered in image recognition is the quality of sensory data [78]: the probability of false negative, i.e., the probability of missing a victim, should remain low; and the probability of false positive, i.e., the probability of recognizing a non-victim object, should also be low. Furthermore, when a team of FRs is used, data sharing influences the efficiency of searching. Data fusion is necessary to generate a complete picture of the environment; and the connectivity of FRs with ground rescue team is also necessary to be considered as a trade-off with the wideness of the search area. Obviously, always requiring connectivity will narrow the searching range of FRs.
## (s22) Integrated Systems
(p22.0) Some research groups have also focused on integrated flying-ground robotic systems, combining two entities to improve overall system performance. By making use of their advantages and shortening their disadvantages, the capabilities that every single robot is unable to achieve can be obtained [62,89,90]. In the flying-ground robotic system of [62], the FRs are regarded as the backup entity and they are used only in the case of areas invisible to ground robots. The authors of [89,90] present a system consisting of a ground robot and a FR for search-and-rescue missions in unknown environments.

(p22.1) In the system of [89], the FR first surveys the environment in a lawn-mower fashion and searches the target. Then, it sends the position of the target back to the ground robot. After that, the FR returns to the starting point and signals the ground robot to move towards the target following a collision-free trajectory generated by a LiDAR. While the ground robot is heading towards the target by following the trajectory, the FR follows the former autonomously and keeps it within the camera view, so that the remote human operator can detect a hazardous situation in time and take control of the system in case of an emergency, which cannot be handled by flying-ground robotic systems autonomously. Thus, such a system is an autonomous one except for the participation of humans in an emergency.

(p22.2) In the system of [90], the remote operator participates in the target search task. Once the target is found, the FR engages in autonomous vision-guided flight to a series of waypoints that are actively chosen. For each waypoint, 3D reconstruction and ground robot path are computed, and the next waypoint is chosen in a way that minimizes the estimated response time (including aerial exploration and ground path traversal time). This system uses an "on-the-spot training" approach to classify terrains [91] and REMODE for 3D reconstruction [92]. Then, the traversing time to move to the next waypoint can be estimated, based on the information of terrain type and the elevation gradient (both of which influence the actual speed of the ground robot).
## (s24) Localization of Flying Robots
(p24.0) A typical example is that FRs are used to monitor key plants in the indoor factory environment, such as nuclear power stations, which is safer, more efficient, and more economical than human patrol. There are several challenges to be addressed about the navigation of FRs. In indoor environments, GPS may not work, which makes localizing FRs a challenge, as well as navigation. Although a camera can to be equipped on the FRs, it will lead to a heavy computing load because of image processing, which may be impossible for micro FRs with low computing performance [97]. To this end, WSNs can be used to localize FRs in indoor environments using the extended Kalman filter and time difference of arrival (TDOA) measurements of radio signal [98].
## (s25) Navigation of Flying Robots
(p25.0) In WSNs, replacing a failed sensor node is a typical operation. To achieve this by FRs, the capability to navigate a FR towards a sensor node is required. One approach is based on received signal strength indication (RSSI) [99,100]. Specifically, in reference [99], the target sensor node periodically sends out beacons, and the FR can measure RSSI to determine the moving direction. Under the similar setting, reference [100] presents a reduced particle filtering method, which is well suited for devices with limited computational power and energy resources.

(p25.1) The authors of [101] propose another system for navigating FRs. Here, the destination of a FR may not be a specific sensor node, but some other places in the industrial environment. The system consists of: (1) a set of sensor nodes, equipped with 3D range-finder sensors, to detect the dynamic obstacles such as vehicles and walking people, (2) micro FRs, equipped with tracking controller only, and (3) a central controller. The micro FRs should measure their positions and directions and send such information to the central controller. The sensor nodes should also send their measuring data to the central controller. Based on the two types of information, a safe path is generated for each FR by the central controller. Then, the FRs, equipped with a simple tracking controller, track those paths to their destinations.

(p25.2) A similar publication to [101] is [102], where a team of FRs perform surveillance without possessing sensors with automated target recognition capability, and thus rely on communicating with unattended ground sensors placed on roads to detect and image potential intruders. The authors focus on the path-planning problem with the objective of maximizing the likelihood of a FR and an intruder being at the same location.
## (s29) Connectivity Consideration
(p29.0) As mentioned above, when multiple robots are used, each robot needs to have a valid wireless backhaul link at any time, to guarantee the delay of response, or form a connected backbone to transmit the collected sensory data to SBSs. References [31][32][33] have addressed this issue by requiring each robot to be connected to an SBS either directly or via another for relay, but the issues related to the data flow have not been covered in them. Under this model, the system will work as long as the connectivity is set up. However, the data rates at the one-hop robots are different from those with two hops when serving users [13]. Therefore, such connectivity is not guaranteed to provide satisfactory service. One possible solution is inspired by the uneven clustering problem in WSNs [103,104], i.e., setting different serving numbers for the FRs with different hops, i.e., an unequal association between users and robots. In this way, the one-hop robots can serve a smaller number of users than the robots with two or more hops. Then, the one-hop robots can have more resources to relay the requests from the robots which are connected to it.

(p29.1) Another drawback of [31,32] is that they all fix the topology at first and then find optimal positions for FRs satisfying this topology. It is clear that the topology of robots can also be optimized to achieve no worse performance of coverage. References [13,33] consider finding a subset of positions for the FRs from a set of candidates. It is easy to understand that this method can generate different topologies of connected graphs, which is superior to [31,32].
## (s30) Optimal Deployment in 3D Space
(p30.0) Among the discussed approaches, some are based on grids [7,24]. Although discretization simplifies the problem, the performance of the solution depends highly on the resolution of grids. The higher resolution makes the solution closer to the optimal one, but it increases the computing load, while the lower resolution makes the searching computational efficient, but the solution may be far from the optimal. Furthermore, there are some approaches based on the formulation of mixed-integer programming, such as [13,22,33,105]. One common feature of them is the assumption that the possible positions of FRs are given by a set of candidates. These candidates can be regarded as a special set of grids.
## (s32) Navigation with Collision Avoidance
(p32.0) In the application of search and rescue, navigation with collision avoidance is important for both ground and FRs. Approaches such as [81,83,84,106] and some others such as [107][108][109][110] have proposed various path planning and reactive navigation algorithms. Although some of them are designed for FRs, such as [107][108][109], a fixed altitude is assumed; while few papers studied the much more difficult case of collision-free 3D navigation [111][112][113][114][115]. With this regard, there is a necessity to extend the available 2D methods to the 3D scenario. Furthermore, 3D risk-aware navigation is more preferred to avoid no-flight areas, such as populated areas and those with chemical plants [107][108][109]. Risk-aware navigation especially suits urban environments, where a relatively larger number of obstacles and no-flight areas exist. Another important direction for future research is to obtain some 3D versions of barrier and sweep coverage problems [116] for monitoring and surveillance applications.
