# Protein Molecular Structures, Protein SubFractions, and Protein Availability Affected by Heat Processing: A Review

CorpusID: 54660459 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30ccfde46a5316ed8f3ec1dcbcb9892f6bf6c804](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/30ccfde46a5316ed8f3ec1dcbcb9892f6bf6c804)

Fields: Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s3) Methodology of Advanced Synchrotron-Based FTIR Technique
(p3.0) Tissue Preparation and Synchrotron Transmission and Reflection FTIR Microspectroscopy: Tissues were cut into thin cross sections (ca. 5 to 10 µm thickness). The unstained cross-sections of the tissues rapidly transferred to BaF 2 windows (size: 13×1 mm disk; Spectral Systems, NY) for transmission mode in synchrotron transmission FTIR microspectroscopic work. The unstained cross-sections were dry mounted onto Low-e IR microscope slides (Kevley Technologies, Chesterland, OH) for reflectance mode in synchrotron reflection FTIR microspectroscopic work [42,43] .
## (s9) Determination of the Internal Protein Secondary Structure Changes (α-Helix and β-Sheet and their ratios) of Raw and Heat Treated Brown and Golden Flaxseeds and Relation to Nutritive Value of Protein:
(p9.0) The objectives of the study [10] were to use the S-FTIRM to: 1) reveal ultra-structural chemical features of protein secondary structures of flaxseed tissues affected by varieties (brown and golden) and heating processing (raw and roasting) within intact tissues at a cellular level, in relation to protein nutritive value, utilization and availability and 2) quantify protein secondary structures using Gaussian and Lorentzian methods of multi-component peak modeling. The experiment was performed at the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) in Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL, US Dept of Energy, New York).

(p9.1) This study [10] showed that with the S-FTIRM, the structural-chemical makeup of the flaxseed tissues could be revealed at ultra-spatial resolution within cellular dimensions. The protein secondary structure differed between the golden and brown flaxseed tissues in terms of proportions and ratios of αhelix and β-sheet. By using multi-component peaks modeling at protein amide I region of 1700-1620 cm -1 , the results show that the golden contained relatively higher proportions of model-fitted α-helix (47 vs. 37%), lower proportion of model-fitted β-sheet (37 vs. 46%) and higher ratio of α-helix to β-sheet (1.3 vs. 0.8), indicating potential high protein value, high nutrient utilization and availability in the golden flaxseeds.

(p9.2) The roasting reduced proportions of α-helix (from 47 to 36), increased proportions of β-sheet (from 37 to 50%) and reduced α-helix to β-sheet ratio (1.3 to 0.7) of the golden flaxseed tissues. However, the roasting did not affect percentage and ratio of α-helix and β-sheet in the brown flaxseed tissue. These results indicated different sensitivities of protein secondary structure to the heat processing between the flaxseed varieties and that the roasting may affect protein value, nutrient utilization and availability in the golden seeds but not in the brown.

(p9.3) In this study [10], multivariate statistical analyses were also used to discriminate and classify inherent protein structures of the raw and roasted brown and golden flaxseed tissues. Although the cluster analysis [60] showed that the four flaxseed (F1 to F4) cannot be fully distinguished, however, when combined brown and golden flaxseed together and emphasized on the raw and roasting effects, the PCA analysis [60] could almost fully distinguish between the raw and roasted flaxseeds in protein amide I FSD spectrum at the region of 1700-1620 cm -1 and the raw and roasted can be grouped in separate ellipses. The first three PCs explain 36.7, 19.4, and 16.5% of the variations in the protein amide FSD spectrum data set.

(p9.4) These results demonstrate the potential of highly spatially resolved synchrotron FTIR microspectroscopy to localize relatively "pure" protein body in the tissues and reveal protein secondary structures at a cellular level without destruction of the inherent structure of the tissue and eliminate other components such as carbohydrate scattering effect on the protein spectrum. The results indicated relative differences in protein secondary structures between flaxseed varieties and differences in sensitivities of protein secondary structure to the heat processing. The further study is needed to quantify the relationship between protein secondary structures and protein nutrient availability of various varieties of flaxseeds and to answer a question whether the changes in the relative amounts of protein secondary structures are primarily responsible for differences in protein availability or utilization or at what magnitudes of changes result in substantially nutritive value changes.
## (s12) STUDY PROTEIN SUBFRACTIONS AFFECTED BY HEAT PROCESSING IN RELATION TO BIODEGRADATION CHARACTERISTICS USING THE CNCPS SYSTEM
(p12.0) To detect features and characteristics of rumen degradation of protein, another method is to use the CNCPS system [16] to partition protein fractions. According to protein subfractions, we are able to predict the rumen degradation behavior of proteins. When proteins are treated physically, chemically and biologically (eg heat processing), the protein fraction profiles are also changed. With the CNCPS system, it is able to detect and identify such structural changes in relation to protein rumen degradation characteristics and utilization on the quantitative base.
## (s13) Principle of Partitioning Protein Fractions:
(p13.0) The protein fraction can be partitioned according to the CNCPS system [16] . The characterizations of the CP fractions as applied in this system are as follows: Fraction PA is non-protein N, fraction PB is true protein, and fraction PC is unavailable protein. Fraction PB is further divided into three fractions (PB1, PB2, and PB3) that are believed to have different rates of degradation in the rumen. Buffer-insoluble protein minus fraction PB3 is used to estimate fraction PB2. Fraction PB2 is insoluble in buffer but soluble in neutral detergent, while fraction PB3 is insoluble in both buffer and neutral detergent, but is soluble in acid detergent.

(p13.1) Fraction PB2 is fermented in the rumen at a lower rate than buffer-soluble fractions, and some of the PB2 fraction escapes to the lower gut. Fraction PB3 is believed to be more slowly degraded in the rumen than fractions PB1 and PB2 because of its association with the plant cell wall; a large proportion of PB3 is thus believed to escape the rumen. Fraction PC is the acid detergent insoluble N, which is highly resistant to breakdown by microbial and mammalian enzymes, and it is assumed to be unavailable for the animal [16] . The relative rumen degradation rates of the five protein fractions have been described by Sniffen et al. [16] as follows: Fractions PA is assumed to be infinity, fraction PB1 is 1.20-4.00 /h, fraction PB2 is 0.03-0.16/h, fraction PB3 is 0.0006-0.0055/h. Fraction PC is considered to be undegradable.

(p13.2) In models designed to assess utilization of protein by ruminants, it is assumed that most of the soluble protein (PA and PB1) is completely and fast degraded in the rumen and varying proportions of the insoluble fractions (PB2, PB3, and PC) escape ruminal degradation depending on the interactive effects of digestion and passage [16] . Because various protein fractions differ in rate and extent of ruminal degradation, the proportions of these different protein fractions are believed to influence the amounts of ruminally degraded and escape protein consumed by animals [69] .
## (s15) Effect of Roasting on Protein Subfractions of Brown and Yellow Flaxseed and Relation to Biodegradation Behavior:
(p15.0) In the recent studies [10,12] , the S-FTIRM was used as a novel approach to reveal molecular chemistry of protein in the seed tissues affected by roasting and variety (brown and yellow) and relatively estimate protein structures, in relation to rumen protein digestive behaviors and nutritive value, estimated using the CNCPS system [16] . The study [10,12] showed that the S-FTIRM revealed that the secondary structure of protein differed between the raw and roasted golden flaxseeds in terms of the proportions and ratios of αhelix and β-sheet within cellular dimensions. The roasting reduced percentage of model-fitted α-helix, increased percentage of model-fitted β-sheet and reduced α-helix to β-sheet ratio in the golden flaxseeds, which indicated that a negative effect of the roasting on protein values, utilization and availability. These results were proved by the CNCPS system which also revealed that the roasting increased protein bound to lignin, and Maillard reaction protein, which are poorly used by the ruminants and increased indigestible and undegradable protein.

(p15.1) Comparing the raw and the roasted, the raw was higher in PA (43 vs. 21 g/kg DM) and PB1 (255 vs. 64 g/kg DM), but lower in PB2 (41 vs. 243 g/kg DM), PB3 (41 vs. 243g/kg DM) and PC (12 vs. 16 g/kg DM), indicating large and potential differences in rumen protein degradation characteristics between the raw and the roasted golden flaxseed. Higher PA and PB1 content in the raw indicated that roasting processing reduced soluble protein (PA+PB1) which are fast degraded in the rumen. Lower PB2 and PB3 fractions associated with the cell wall in the raw indicated that the roasting processing increased slowly degradable and intermediately degradable proportions. Fraction PC consists of protein bound to lignin and Maillard reaction protein. From the nutritive point of view, this fraction appears to be essentially indigestible and the amount apparently digested is poorly used by animals [16,70,71] . In this study, the roasted flaxseed had a higher PC fraction than the raw flaxseed, which indicated that the roasting increased undegradable and undigestive protein fractions, which may be an indication of overprocessing and reduction of protein nutritive value.
## (s16) Effect of Barely Variety (Harrington and Valier) and Processing Methods (Coarse and Fine) on Protein Subfractions in Relation to Biodegradation
(p16.0) Kinetics : The objectives of this study [62] were to compare protein and carbohydrate fractions, digestive behavior between malting-type barley (cv. Harrington) and feed-type barley (cv. Valier), which were affected by coarse (Roller miller, 0.533 mm gap) and fine (Hammer mill, 2 mm screen) processings using the CNCPS protein fraction system. These results indicated that Valier barley contained lower amounts of rapidly degradable soluble sugars, a higher intermediately degradable fraction (such as pectin), a lower slowly degradable fraction associated with the plant cell wall but available depending on the rate of rumen turnover, and a higher undegradable cell wall. Using the coarse processing, Valier barley was lower in rumen degradability of DM (472 vs. 631 g/kg) and CP (459 vs. 617 g/kg), but not different in rumen degradability of starch (average 619 g/kg). However, using the fine processing, the significant differences on rumen degradation characteristics completely disappeared between two barley varieties except of degradation rate of CP. In conclusion, Valier barley had different chemical and nutritional characterization compared with Harrington barley. However, the nutritional characterization (in terms of rumen digestive behaviors and potential nutrient supply) was highly associated with the processing methods.

(p16.1) We also used the S-FTIRM to study inherent barley endosperm structure and found that, as mentioned before, the greater association of the protein matrix with the starch granules in the endosperm tissue of Valier barley might be a reason to limit access of ruminal microorganisms to the starch granules and thus reduce the rate and extent of degradation relative to that of Harrington barley. This study may explain why Valier exhibits a lower extent and rate of rumen degradation than Harrington barley.
## (s18) PRINCIPLES AND METHODOLOGY OF MODELING PROTEIN SUPPLY
(p18.0) The Concepts of the DVE/OEB System: The detailed concepts and formulas of the DVE/OEB system are provided by Tamminga et al. [18] . The following is a brief explanation in order to understand how to calculate and predict protein supply to the small intestine of dairy cows as a result of feeding protein feeds affected by the heat processing.
## (s19) Microbial Protein Synthesis in the Rumen:
(p19.0) Microbial protein synthesized in the rumen (MCP FOM ) was estimated as 15% of the rumen fermented organic matter (FOM) [MCP FOM =0.15×FOM]. The factor 0.15 means that per kg FOM, 150 g of microbial protein CP is assumed to be synthesized [18] .

(p19.1) Of the microbial protein, 75% was added to the undegraded feed protein (RUP DEV ) to estimate the true protein supplied to the small intestine (TPSI) [TPSI=RUP DEV +0.75×MCP FOM ]. The factor 0.75 means that 75% of microbial N is present in amino acids. The remaining 25% represented N in nucleic acids.
## (s22) Truly Digested and Absorbed Protein in the Small
(p22.0) Intestine: Truly digested and absorbed protein in the small intestine (DVE value) are contributed by 1) feed protein escaping rumen degradation (RUP DVE ), 2) microbial protein synthesized in the rumen (MCP FOM ), and 3) a correction for endogenous protein losses in the digestive tract (ENDP). Therefore the DVE value was estimated as: DVE=ARUP DVE +AMCP DVE -ENDP.

(p22.1) Degraded Protein Balance: The degraded protein balance (DPB OEB ) is the balance between microbial protein synthesis from rumen degradable protein and that from the energy extracted during anaerobic fermentation in the rumen. Therefore the DPB OEB value was estimated as: MCP RDP DVE -MCP FOM , where, MCP RDP DVE =CP-1.11×RUP. When the degraded protein balance is positive, it indicates the potential loss of N from the rumen. When negative, microbial protein synthesis may be impaired, because of a shortage of N in the rumen. The optimum value of the degraded protein balance in a ration is therefore zero or slightly above [18] .
## (s29) Comparison of Predictions of Nutrient Supply to Dairy Cows between the Two Models:
(p29.0) The studies [82] did comparison of the DVE/OEB system and the NRC-2001 model in the prediction of potential protein supply to dairy cows from concentrates, which showed that the predicted values from the DVE/OEB system and the NRC-2001 model had significant correlations. Using the DVE/OEB system, the mean supply of microbial protein based on available energy and total absorbed protein in the small intestine were lower by 9.4 and 12.9 g/kg DM, respectively. However, the mean supply of microbial protein based on ruminally degraded protein and the degraded protein balance value were higher by 21.6 and 17.4 g/kg DM, respectively, in comparison to that predicted by the NRC-2001 model for the concentrate feedstuffs. In this study [82], using the DVE/OEB system, the overall average microbial protein supply based on available energy from rumen fermented OM was 10% lower, microbial protein supply based on ruminally degraded feed protein was 10% higher, and the truly absorbed protein in the small intestine was 8% lower than that predicted by the NRC-2001 model. However, the correlation of the predicted values from the two models were high (R>0.90) except of potential microbial protein supply based on energy.

(p29.1) The most important outputs (net results), the DVE in the DVE/OEB system vs. the MP in the NRC-2001 model, were 9.7 g/kg DM difference on average. The relationship of the predicted protein values between the DVE/OEB system and the NRC-2001 model were reported.
## (s30) Differences between the NRC-2001 Model and DVE/OEB System:
(p30.0) Input data generated by the both models (the DVE/OEB system and NRC-2001 model), though of significance in the dairy cows, are best regarded as characteristics of the test feed materials. These two models consider the strong elements of other recently developed protein evaluation systems and they also introduce new elements. Although the principles of these two models are similar, some of the factors used in quantifying calculations and some concepts differ [82] .
## (s31) Differences in Prediction of Endogenous Protein:
(p31.0) Both models consider endogenous protein, however, the concepts and definitions are different. In the DVE/OEB system [18] , calculation of the DVE value requires a correction for endogenous protein losses in the small intestine, which are affected by undigested DM. According to the DVE/OEB system, 75 g of absorbed protein per kg undigested DM in fecal excretion is required to compensate for the endogenous losses. In the NRC-2001 model, calculation of the MP value considers rumen endogenous protein passed on to the small intestine. It contributes to the total MP value. The rumen endogenous protein is associated with DM content. However, the NRC-2001 model does consider the endogenous protein losses in the small intestine, but it is added to requirements rather than subtracted from supply. This is a big difference.
## (s32) Differences in Prediction of Ruminally Undegraded Feed Protein:
(p32.0) The two models also differ in predicted ruminally undegraded feed protein. In the DVE/OEB system [18], the ruminally undegraded feed protein was calculated as: 1.11×CP×RUP. The factor 1.11 represents the regression coefficient of in vivo on in situ degradation data. However, using the NRC-2001 model, the ruminally undegraded feed CP was calculated as: CP×RUP. No correction is made for the difference between in vivo and in situ results.
## (s33) Differences in Prediction of Microbial Protein Supply Based on Ruminally Degraded Feed Protein:
(p33.0) In the prediction of microbial protein availability and supply based on ruminally degraded feed protein, the two models are also different. In the DVE/OEB system [18], it is assumed that 100% ruminally degraded feed protein could be potentially converted to microbial protein if enough energy is provided. However, in the NRC-2001 model, it is assumed that only 85% of ruminally degraded feed protein could be potentially converted to microbial protein.
## (s40) Using the NRC-2001 Model and the DVE/OEB System to Predict Nutrient Availability of Harrington (Malting-Type) and Valier (Feed-Type)
(p40.0) Barley Affected by Grinding Processing: Yu et al. [62] used the DVE/OEB system and NRC-2001 mode to compare chemical characterization, rumen digestive kinetics of each feed component, and potential nutrient availability to ruminant animals between the maltingtype barley (cv. Harrington) and feed-type barley (cv. Valier), which were affected by coarse (Roller miller, 0.533 mm gap) and fine (Hammer mill, 2 mm screen) processing.

(p40.1) Using the DVE/OEB system to predict the potential nutrient availability found that using the coarse processing, Valier barley had significantly lower in truly absorbed microbial protein (AMCP: 35 vs. 53 g/kg DM), but higher in truly absorbed rumen undegraded feed protein (ARUP: 69 vs. 47 g/kg DM) and endogenous protein (ENDP: 25 vs. 15 g/kg DM) in the small intestine. However, total truly digested protein value (DVE) in the small intestine between two varieties was not significantly different (average of 83 g/kg DM). Prediction results by the NRC 2001 model showed that using the coarse processing, Valier barley had significantly lower in AMCP (34 vs. 44 g/kg DM), but higher in ARUP and similar in rumen endogenous protein (ECP: average 11 g/kg DM), which resulting in a higher total metabolizable protein value (107 vs. 95 g/kg DM) in Valier barley. Again when using the fine processing, all the predicted different effects disappeared. In conclusion, the study showed that Valier barley differed in chemical characterization and protein and carbohydrate fractions, but was similar in the estimated energy values in comparison with Harrington barley. Both varieties had negative protein degradation balance, indicating the potential imbalance between microbial protein synthesis from available rumen degradable CP and potential energy from anaerobic fermentation in the rumen. The nutritional characterization of Valier and Harrington barley were highly associated with processing method. In this study, using the coarse processing, Valier barley was significantly lower in rumen degradability of DM and CP and higher total MP value than Harrington barley. However, when using the fine processing, all the nutritive differences between the two varieties disappeared.
