# Survey on Design and Implementation of Indoor Environment Monitoring and control system

CorpusID: 54200759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/80778eb8f5f7293c21ce58be4a927203bb8cda98](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/80778eb8f5f7293c21ce58be4a927203bb8cda98)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science, Environmental Science

## (s4) Wireless Sensor Network
(p4.0) The indoor environment monitoring system detects the temperature, humidity, concentration of formaldehyde and benzene. This system is designed to figure out the quality of indoor environment with the help of multi-sensor data fusion algorithm [5]. ARM11 processor S3C6410 and embedded Linux operating system is used along with the two level fusion algorithm. The benefit is that it provides good accuracy and reliability for evaluation and control of indoor environment. This system can be able to provide long distance data communication. The system has small volume and less power consumption. This system is apt for the environment monitoring.

(p4.1) Smart homes have become a major part in the intelligent building and life. With the advancement of technology along with computers, mobile phones and other communication devices the modern smart homes have been developed. For instance it allows people to control their home equipments even if they are not within the vicinity of their home by just making a hit on the phone gently. The smart home can do various other jobs like detecting the power usage within the home, operating the air conditioner, detecting for any gas leakage, etc. Other than that it also notifies if any intruder is detected to avoid theft and other security risks. The design is done using the ZigBee wireless sensor networks and PLC combination of information transmission. A hybrid network of ZigBee is used inorder to provide flexibility and to blow away the traditional cable complexity. These all are achieved by using mobile phones remote control. This system also uses a double power supply design ideas for stability and reliability.
## (s5) Design and Implementation of smart home based on IoT
(p5.0) A smart home security monitoring system using the wireless mode has become a major research topic. The existing applications of wireless communication technologies in smart homes are: Infrared, ZigBee, Bluetooth technologies. Infrared technology is short range, half duplex and it uses point to point communication, but it has high error rate so it cannot be used in home networking. Bluetooth is costly and has only limited network capacity so it cannot be used in home networking, whereas ZigBee has average transmission distance, greater security and a large networking capacity. A hybrid network design combining ZigBee-based wireless sensor networks and power line carrier network is used in implementation of smart homes [6]. GSM module is used to communicate with the user by notifying the user through sms about any anonymous situation.
## (s6) Design and Implementation of Smart home using Raspberry Pi
(p6.0) The design of the indoor environment monitoring system is composed of two parts: hardware and software. The major role of hardware (sensors) is to collect the indoor environmental informations which includes the temperature, humidity, carbon dioxide, etc and sent it to the software as parameters. The software is the user interface that receives and analyzes the collected parameters and according to that controls the hardware to how to respond. Inorder to meet the real time requirements hardware is connected to server using a socket connection and software maintains an http connection. The users register the WeChat and they fill the WiFi account and password thus keeping a socket connection between the Raspberry Pi and server after that they get all services provided by the intelligent indoor environment monitoring and control system [7].
