# M P RA "Middle Income Trap"; the position of Algerian economy: a comparative analysis overview "Middle-Income Trap"; the position of Algerian economy: a comparative analysis overview

CorpusID: 54552006 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/968e6e4844dd3f5f88c29de3b6164fefdedb4bc5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/968e6e4844dd3f5f88c29de3b6164fefdedb4bc5)

Fields: Economics

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Most of the economies across the globe tend to attain sustained growth rate and eventually catch up with high developed countries, yet many of them fail to do so. For many different factors, it can oblige these countries to seek decades in "low economic" situation, or it has "low income" level, from the point view of income (GDP) as a principal measuring indicator.

(p0.1) Most of under developing nations in most case suffering from low income level, which has gone through a war, political turmoil, socialist planning, and severe economic mismanagement is usually characterized by a fragile economic structure (i.e.: Vietnam, Philippines…etc.) Kenichi Ohno (2009). But some of them have found or tried to find a successful way out to their situation like the Asian and Therefore, from a point of comparison between MENA countries economic situation. So what is the position of the Algerian economy among MENA countries?

(p0.2) Our paper aims to give an overview about the concept of "low, middle, & upper income trap", and specifically we will take the case of Algerian economy with a comparative analysis against selected countries from MENA region. Moreover, the study analysis based on World Bank Database, that represents the GDP/capita of Algerian economy and other countries, for fifteen last years .

(p0.3) This paper is organized in three main sections; the first section contains a theoretical criteria & concepts that are related to the "Middle income trap", along with literature review based on this study. In the second section, we will give an analysis about the position of the Algerian economy in comparison with other MENA countries. The last section shows the different aspects, reasons, and effects of "Middle-income trap" in the Algerian case. Finally, recommended policies and appropriate remedies will be suggested as a way out from this trap.
