# PATHOPHYSIOLOGY, MECHANISM AND MANAGEMENT OF OVERACTIVE BLADDER SYNDROME-A REVIEW Review Article

CorpusID: 54590075 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/130677733909948e064d3b47f6a1001b0fb1eda7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/130677733909948e064d3b47f6a1001b0fb1eda7)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Since the last two decades, people suffering from OAB syndrome/ symptom has increased enormously worldwide and is anticipated that it will cross 546 million populations by 2018. The annual worldwide healthcare cost for OAB is enhanced from €1.4 trillion to € 3.2 trillion by 2018. Though the percentage of both male and female patients is most similar it is slightly more in women population [1]. In the initial phase of OAB syndrome, individual may not understand the indication of urine urgency which may occure due to the large volume of liquid intake, any physical exertion, stress-induced or any other defect occurred in the body functioning. At the initial stage, it is very difficult for both patient and physician to identify the symptoms of OAB [2]. Thus, making a note on the diary with date and time with respect to fluid intake, voiding and urine leakage will help to identify the symptoms of OAB. For physicians, it is necessary to evaluate the basic and clinical impact and get a detailed patient history to diagnose OAB. In clinical practice, the syndrome of OAB can be defined as a condition which is characterized by urinary urgency, with or without urge incontinence, usually with urinary frequency and nocturia [3]. Debbie Kinsey and colleagues revealed that the patients suffered from OAB are psychologically very disturbed and lived a lower quality of life than normal people [4]. This review article provides an insight of the neural control, bladder physiology, regulation of micturition in a normal individual and also disrupt the mechanism of micturition in OAB patients along with the risk factors, prevalence, assessment, management and future perspective of OAB. For this review article, an extensive literature survey was carried out on search engines including Pubmed, Science Direct, Google scholar by referring keywords as subsections mentioned in this article and collect the information available tentatively from year 1980.
## (s3) Factors responsible for risk of OAB
(p3.0) Problems associated with urinary tract infections may lead to impermanent bladder symptoms, which are recoverable. Progressive age is a prominent factor which is more likely to contribute in OAB symptoms. Other reasons for OAB are neurological changes; the drag of gravity or weight may cause pelvic base organs to prolapse and susceptible to urinary tract infection because of the weaker immune system [34][35][36]. In women, a significant drop in estrogen level observed after menopause, which results in thinner and drier tissues of bladder, urethra, and pelvic muscle atrophy may be the cause that leads to urgency and frequency of urination [37]. Some conditions like pregnancy and childbirth, disease of the nervous system, bladder cancer, pelvic surgery, enlargement of the prostate, urinary tract infection, overweight, medications like diuretics, sedatives, antidepressants, certain occupations like teaching, nursing, police officers, truck/bus driving, etc. may cause the risk of OAB.
## (s4) Prevalence of OAB
(p4.0) Progressive age is a primary cause for the increase in the prevalence of OAB [36,38,39]. As per Milsom, OAB symptoms are more prevalent in European countries like France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Sweden and UK using a random and stratified approach [36]. In this study, the general population of men and women aged over and equal to 40 y were selected and younger women showed more OAB signs than men whereas the reverse condition was observed in the aged population. There was no significant difference in the overall prevalence reported in women and men of 16.9% and 16.0% respectively when compared the complete population of both. In these six European countries total 22 million people will be suffered from OAB if extrapolated to the total population of above 40 y of age. Irwin conducted a separate study which estimates globally and specific area of a base number of people suffered from OAB in 2008 and predicted for 2018 with the support of their own EPIC study [1]. EPIC study was a telephonic survey of 19,165 men and women in 5 regions [38]. According to this study in 2008, 455 million people experienced OAB worldwide and an anticipated increase to 546 million (20.1%) till 2018. In 2008, the global prevalence was more in women (11.6%) than men (9.7%) and also anticipated the similar way in 2018 (11.9% vs 10.0%). Asia is the most OAB affected region than Europe followed by Africa, North America and South America. From 2008 to 2018, there will be an increase in OAB patients in Asia, South America and Africa as 22.1%, 22.4% and 31.1% respectively. Based on the published economic model [40], it was extrapolated that the normal global yearly treatment cost of OAB will be €1.4 trillion to € 3.2 trillion by 2018 [1]. Other than EPIC and Milsom study, some other studies were also conducted by some agencies on the prevalence of OAB like National Overactive Bladder Evaluation study and The Epidemiology of Lower Urinary Tract symptoms [35].
## (s5) Evaluation and diagnosis
(p5.0) The patient's history is of prime importance to elicit the symptoms of OAB. The physician considers the LUTS, any medical condition related to OAB, dietary habits, bladder storage and emptying associated with OAB, ongoing medication, current or past surgical problem, any radiation treatment for lower body cancer, physical examination (Body mass index, abdomen, genitalia, relevant pelvic examination, neurologic, mental status), urine analysis, urodynamic testing, post-void residual (PVR) measurement with an ultrasound bladder scanner, urine cytology, cystoscopy etc. There must be check on the of observable urinary tract disease. In normal healthy patients the range of frequency is four to eight voids per 24 h, thus additional voids may be significant to assess OAB. The information to be received from the patient through questionnaire should include number of voids in a day divided as daytime and nighttime, amount of urine over 24 h, utmost discharged urine amount, average and highest urine amount, and night-time urine amount. An evaluation of lack of voluntary control over urination in terms of seepage episodes and usage of can also be obtained. The overall history, monitoring, test outputs will help to a physician for the evaluation of OAB and accordingly set the treatment approaches [2,35,[41][42][43][44].
## (s7) Lifestyle intervention, behavioral treatments, bladder training
(p7.0) After receiving the information from the patient through questionnaire and the regular monitoring activities through the bladder diary, the physician may initiate the treatment based on the intensity and the cause of OAB. The lifestyle intervention includes altering fluid intake, smoking termination, avoid bladder irritants like organic and carbonated beverages, coffee, body weight reduction, adapting bowel role to avoid constipation and spraining during bowel movements and sleeping time [35,41,42]. In behavioral treatment, the patient has to be trained in improving the control to restrain or disrupt detrusor tightening. To manage the seepage of urine, a deliberated pelvic floor muscle tightening should be practiced which makes possible to get better stress within the urethra and hinder the detrusor tapering. In the elderly population after the physical examination training for two seconds as mentioned above with fifteen replication has to be scheduled and this should be followed thrice a day. The patient should progressively increase this practice by almost one second every week, till they attain ten second tightening and relaxations. Gradually the patient is trained to uphold the urination in such a way that, whenever he/she feels the urgency, rather than running to the washroom, individual waits and calms down and squeezes the pelvic floor muscles exclusively until the pressure is gone. The practice of walking towards the washroom at regular speed should be repeated whenever the sense of urgency arises. Trained professional shall instruct the patient for at least 3 mo to see the benefits of these instructions [41,42,44,45]. In the bladder training program after reviewing the bladder diary of a patient, the physician has scheduled the longest comfortable interval between voiding the bladder in object to reduce its frequency. The patient is trained to empty the bladder after awakening, then at a pre-scheduled time of the whole day and finally before going to bed. In case if the sense of urgency occurs between prefix intervals, the patient is trained to tighten the pelvic floor muscles until the schedule voiding time have been reached. After 1-2 w, the patient is trained for gradually increasing time distance between the urination. During this training the patients are encouraged to sit down in urgency, take slow, deep breaths and concentrate on breathing instead of bladder sensation [42,46]. For the above mentioned programs, the exercises must be completed daily with motivation to patience. If these measures fail to control the symptoms, then anticholinergic medications are added [33,38,43].
## (s8) Anticholinergic or antimuscarinics drug
(p8.0) As described in the first section of this review, the parasympathetic postganglionic nerves, releases neurotransmitter acetylcholine, this binds to the muscarinic receptor M3 on the detrusor muscle which results to the contraction of the bladder [9,18]. In OAB patient, during the bladder filling, the anticholinergic drugs competitively inhibit acetylcholine binding to M3 receptor as shown in fig. 1 and avoid instinctive tightening of the bladder. Secondly, anticholinergic drugs inhibit potentially urothelial sensory receptors and decrease afferent nerve activity, i.e. sensory inputs from the bladder [41,42,[47][48][49][50][51]. These drugs enhance the capacity of the bladder at the first automatic contraction response [2,47,52]. Since the anticholinergic drugs act competitively, the immense discharge of acetylcholine during urination will curtail the active moiety consequence and detrusor muscle squeezes [42]. The selective anticholinergic drugs have more affinity for the M3 receptor and therefore may reduce the side effects associated with these drugs [35].
## (s9) β3-adrenergic agonist drug
(p9.0) During the urine storage phase in the bladder, the sympathetic nerves release norepinephrine (noradrenaline) which binds to the β3-adrenergic receptors on the detrusor muscle. It also provides inhibitory action resulted in a relaxation of the bladder [5,8,9]. The single and only approved drug mirabegron acts as a potent and selective β3
## (s10) Neuromodulator implants
(p10.0) Sacral neuromodulation is an operative treatment for individuals with refractory OAB. Tanagho and Schmidt are the pioneers of this surgery in which an electrode is to be implanted in the S3-S4 sacral foramen to create persistent electric sacral nerves activation and reinstate normality for emptying behavior [77]. Basically, this surgery is divided into two stages, in the first phase the efficacy of implantation has been demonstrated and then second phase follows permanent implantation. A tinned quadripolar lead is inserted through the skin into the S3 foramen using bony landmarks and fluoroscopic guidance. The nerve core is stimulated electrically to judge the position. To evaluate the correct placement of quadripolar lead there are some responses to be observed in the toes, rectum, labia, penis and vagina. An external pulsate maker is coupled to the quadripolar lead after positioning in S3 foramen which has the ability to alter the activation force, frequency and pulse width. Fifty percent or more cure in OAB condition is the criteria for device or it should be removed if no improvement is observed [78,79]. Although the considerable use of sacral neuromodulator is observed in past decades, the exact mechanism remains feebly illuminated. Leng and Chancellor have stated that the automatic urination is caused due to the activation of the unmyelinated C fibers and alpha-myelinated afferent fibers in pelvic and pudendal nerve roots [80]. Electric stimulations produced by sacral neuromodulator stimulate the pacemaker of the bladder and are capable of restraining the neural reflexes [81]. According to the additional mechanism, the sacral neuromodulator imparts straight hindering efforts to the bladder, which repress OAB and develops urinary withholding [82]. There are number of complications noted due to the neuromodulator implants which need surgical correction involves the relocation of the device due to pain. The most commonly observed side effects are pain at stimulator site, pain due to misplacement of lead, temporary electric shock [83]. It is used in pregnancy, but remains unclear and undetermined whether associated with teratogenic effect. Overall, this is a complicated treatment and adverse events are dependent on the type of complication [79].
## (s14) Desmopressin acetate
(p14.0) It is a synthetic analogue of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) vasopressin which is formed by the hypothalamus and preserved in the posterior pituitary gland [2,64]. The primary role of ADH is to control extracellular fluid volume in the body. Desmopressin acts on the kidneys by reducing the amount of urine produced at night and also responsible for re-absorption of water by kidney [65,66]. Desmopressin acts by imitating the ADH role. Due to hyponatremia, the nasal dosage form is no more indicated for primary enuresis [2,65,67]. As such desmopressin is a safe medicine with less side effects such as a headache, stomach ache and occasional emotional disturbance [68].
## (s15) Tricyclic antidepressants
(p15.0) Imipramine and amitriptyline have been used for OAB treatment due to their multiple actions as an anticholinergic as well as an alpha-agonist action [2,69,70]. Their antimuscarinic activity is feebler than the others of the same category. There is a limitation of imipramine use amongst the old aged patients for OAB syndrome [70]. However, it has been mentioned that due to the central effect of the automatic emptiness, imipramine has been suggested to combine with the urge-stress incontinence especially in older women [34]. The side effects observed are vast including dry mouth, constipation, stomach pain, nausea, cardiac arrhythmias, urinary retention and drowsiness [35].
