# A Review on the Pharmacology of Holostemma ada-kodien - A Vulnerable Medicinal Plant

CorpusID: 54578297 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/657b8d1d80512db9ef0ab8ea87ed5eb6bd89d261](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/657b8d1d80512db9ef0ab8ea87ed5eb6bd89d261)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s9) Antioxidant activity
(p9.0) This study was carried out to evaluate antioxidant activity of hexane, ethyl acetate and methanolic extracts of H. ada kodien root tubers. The above extracts exhibited a dose dependent scavenging activity against 2, 2'diphenly-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radicals, Superoxide radicals, and Nitric oxide radicals. Further, the methanolic and ethanolic extracts showed relatively higher reducing power compare to that of butylated hydroxytoluene. TLC of the above extracts using the DPPH as a spraying reagent revealed yellow spots against purple background indicating the presence of potent antioxidant compounds (Mallikarjuna et al.,2011).
## (s12) Hepatoprotective activity
(p12.0) Junapudi Sunil et al., (2015) studied on Hepatoprotective Activity of H. ada kodien they found that Pre-treatment of the rats with alcoholic extract prior to paracetamol (PCM) administration caused a significant reduction in the values of aspartate amino transferase (AST), alanine amino transferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and serum bilirubin (SB) (p<0.01) approximately comparable to the hepatoprotective of standard drug was silymarin. From this study showed that the alcoholic extract of H. ada kodien possesses the hepatoprotective effect against paracetamol (PCM) induced liver damage in rats. In the present review, we have tried to summarize about Phytochemistry, Pharmacological activities of H. ada-kodien Schult. The plant contains of flavonoids; tannins, saponines, anthocyanins, steroids, alkaloids and phenols. There is no report regarding isolation of single chemical compounds and secondary metabolites. In review reported antipyretic, antioxidant, antidiabetic, hepatoprotective, antibacterial, and anthelmintic activity of H. ada-kodien.
