# A review on automatic extraction and classification of non-functional requirements

CorpusID: 54991767 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f4cd98aa59cd9d09b59f43bdff42055cac2706f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f4cd98aa59cd9d09b59f43bdff42055cac2706f)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s2) Literature review
(p2.0) In this section literature review of existing techniques for automatic identification, classification and analysis of NFRs is conducted. Casamayor et al. (2010) proposed a semisupervised text categorization technique for identifying NFRs from a textual document, the supervised text categorization technique proposed earlier lot of pre categorize requirements are required to train a classifier before finding an accurate NFRs, with supervised technique it required manually categorization of numerous requirements by the analyst. This study has tried to automate this process. The learning method in the classification process used reduce number of categorize requirements as compared to the supervised approach. The benefit of this approach is that it is successfully used during the requirement analysis process and reduced the effort needed for manual identification and classification. The semi-supervised approach shows accuracy results that are above 70% which is higher than the supervised learning results using the same standards for the collection of documents. Rahimi et al. (2014) proposed a data mining technique for extracting non-functional requirements. The proposed technique captures the quality concerns such as usability, performance and security of the system from the document .A hierarchy is developed which helps the extracted NFRs to model them according to the quality concerns. The proposed data mining technique is helpful in extracting the quality attributes in automatic extraction of non-functional requirements. Sequence of machine learning and data mining techniques are used in the paper to automatically detect different quality concerns from the document. A meaningful hierarchy is proposed to organize these quality concern, some are related to each other so at different stages of the hierarchy some relevant attributes are neglected to improve the performance of the model. Slankas and Williams (2013) developed a tool based approach called NFR Locater. The proposed tool helps the analyst in extracting non-functional requirements effectively from natural language documents. This tool is used to identify different NFRs according to their categories from available natural language documents. A k-NN classifier is used to identify the similar types of sentences in documents. Classification of the sentences is made on the basis of different categories of NFRs. It helps the analyst to extract those non-functional requirements that are relevant. Multiple types of classifiers are used in the paper and it is resulted that k-NN classifier achieve the maximum result in identifying non-functional requirements. Ramadhani et al. (2015) proposed an automated system for the identification of NFRs taking account of an algorithm FSKNN (Fuzzy similarity based Knearest neighbor) a requirement sentences-based classification algorithm. In FSKNN algorithm semantic factors and semantic relatedness measurement are not considered. The propose system classify different non-functional requirements from text documents. The system works on labeling of training data, classification of the data, measure the semantic relatedness between different classes and used terms. Automated process of labeling training data save the time than labeling the data manually. HSO method is used for measuring the semantic relatedness between the words. The method checks the semantic relatedness between every class and the term that is processed. The result show that with the addition of semantic factors improves the accuracy by 43.7% comparing to the Fuzzy similarity based K-nearest neighbor algorithm which is 41.4%. Slankas and Williams (2013) proposed a tool assisted process security discoverer to identify the security requirements and classify the requirement sentences according to their relevant security objectives. A set of categories for security objective are created that requirement engineer consider during requirement engineering process. A tool is used to identify security related sentences in terms of security objectives. Context specific template is used in the paper which identify which are the requirements that meet their security objectives, k-NN and naïve Bayes classifiers are used and the study reported 82% prediction and 79% identification of security attributes from the document has been achieved. Classification approach identifies high precision of security objectives from classified sentences. Sharma et al. (2014) proposed a framework for identifying and analyzing different non-functional requirements from the text document. A textual pattern identification technique is propose to identify terms that are related to non-functional requirements attributes from a natural language text and on the basis of applying different set of rules it identify different categories of NFRs. The proposed rule based approach for detecting and classifying different NFRs in natural language uses rules instead of identifying keywords approach like other machine language techniques. Developed approach is analyzed against different manual categorize approaches for identifying non-functional requirements from the sentences. Rahman and Ripon (2014) proposed a UML model on the basis of a questionnaire technique to elicit non-functional requirements in software development at early stages. UML use case is used to represent functional requirements, that are gathered and integrate through a questionnaire to extract NFRs on the basis of answers taken from list of questions include in the questionnaire. Stakeholder contribution is important in answering different questions to elicit non-functional requirements from functional requirements. The case study is applied on a Point of Sale (PoS) system. The proposed approach categorized the set of elicit non-functional requirements into a set of categories of well-defined non-functional requirements which is useful for tracking these non-functional requirements at different stages of the software development process. A tabular form representation is given to track the different NFRs at different levels to help the developers and customers in a cost effective purpose. Gazi et al. (2015) proposed a classification scheme of NFRs for Information systems (IS). Many classification schemes are proposed for NFRs but they do not classify requirements for IS, web base system, real time system. A tree like structure is proposed for classifying NFRs. In this classification scheme, similar NFRs are identified for both real systems and web based systems. It is important that the NFRs that are included in classification scheme for IS are included in the software requirements specification document. Reliability and availability are two important NFRs for information system. In the classification scheme reliability requirement is further decomposed into accuracy, maturity, completeness. Identification of different NFRs in this paper are based on their similarity, accuracy and confidentiality are those non-functional requirements that are similar in IS as well as real time systems, interoperability and privacy are those non-functional requirements that are similar in web base systems and information systems, security, performance and usability requirements are similar in real time systems and web base systems.

(p2.1) Mahmoud and Williams (2016) used a multi-step unsupervised approach for detecting and classifying the non-functional requirements. The early methods used for classification and detection of nonfunctional requirements use manually classified data to train the model, classifier needs large training data set but for achieving high accuracy large data is not always available. A technique is used for extracting natural language content of source code to support NFRs traceability. Words semantic similarity methods are used in context to software requirements. Cluster configuration is used to generate the most logical clusters of requirements words. The proposed approach shows a modest complexity that helps it to scale it on larger systems without wearing issues of time and space requirements.

(p2.2) The proposed approach is unsupervised so it cannot require any data set so it can operate with minimum adjustment. The paper highlights long term benefit for software development process. Sadiq et al. (2011) proposed a mechanism to identify NFRs in service oriented systems. NFRs such as availability, security and usability are not focused in service oriented systems. A quality model is proposed based on software quality standards. Different high priority NFRs are selected for service oriented systems domain. Quality requirements are gathered early and verified through quality model. Quality model are linked with Service Level Agreement (SLA) help customers to specify quality requirement. The evaluation model helps the developers and the customers to check the quality requirement at any time during service is in operation. Proposed model can be applied on different software development paradigms. Nonfunctional requirements are categorized and subcategorized according to their different attributes. With quality and evaluation process almost all analyzed requirements are found to be correct which also reduce the time and cost in the phase of requirement engineering.

(p2.3) Mahmoud and Niu (2015) performed an experimental analysis to evaluate the performance of different semantic Information Retrieval (IR) methods for automated requirement tracing and investigate the potential of natural language semantics in automated tracing. Objective behind this research is to get an insight of different operations of IR methods for the identification of NFRs and provide a guideline for the effective requirement tracing techniques and their management tools. A systematic analysis is performed on information retrieval methods on the basis of identifying functional and non-functional requirements in software systems. Semantic augmented methods and their sub categorize thesaurus support (VSMT) and vector space model with Part-of-Speech tagging (VSM-POS) are explain in information retrieval method.

(p2.4) An experimental analysis is conducted on the performance of different IR methods that includes the methods of latent semantic, semantic relatedness and segmented-augmented methods. The result shows that higher semantic relation is not necessary in improving the performance of retrieval process whereas a focused explicit semantic in domain specific thesaurus able to achieve a higher performance. Meth et al. (2013) proposed a framework to capture the current state of the art in automated requirements elicitation and extract different future research directions by identifying the possible gaps in the existing domains and through relating existing works. A systematic method is use to literature how different automation elicitation processes are performed by different requirement elicitation techniques.

(p2.5) Identified works are than categorized using an analysis framework that compares tool categories, evaluation approaches and technological concepts. The authors intend to contribute to the body of knowledge from requirement engineering as conceptualizing an analysis framework that works in the area of automated requirements elicitation.

(p2.6) The authors propose future research to different areas include comparison of different types of knowledge on elicitation process results. The proposed work in this paper helps in classifying the different tools in state of the art in automation requirement process on the basis of degree of tool automation, knowledge reused and evaluation of concepts.

(p2.7) Mizouni and Salah (2010) proposed a framework to estimate the system non-functional requirements on behavior model. NFRs are not handled properly in behavior models at early stages cause in failure of the system. A framework proposed that handles nonfunctional requirements in behavior model that helps analysts in non-functional requirements verification and also generate accurate estimation to enhance the success rate of the system.

(p2.8) It resolves different NFRs conflicts to reduce the factor of incorrect estimation and prevent the system from failure in the development phase. The approach is helpful for understanding and extracting the most beneficial non-functional requirements and providing the base for the better model selection. Ouchani and Debbabi (2015) analyze the state of the art related to security requirement specification of software systems that are modeled upon UML languages the related work is in state of the art for security requirements at different design levels are compared. The approaches used for verification of security requirements include model checking, theorem proving. Authors review different techniques used for specification of security and verification techniques use for security of modelbased systems and proposed different research areas on the basis of different comparison of automatic techniques in security requirements. The benefit of propose work is to avoid security experts from lengthy process of writing requirements manually.

(p2.9) Thakurta (2013) proposed a framework which decides that which NFRs should be considered for the project at early stages. The objective of this research is to produce a quantitative framework in order to effectively decide which NFRs to be considered in software development process. The assessment process has high control on the cost of the project, framework identify quality requirements early and helps organizations in reducing the cost of the project. The work differentiates from others by explicitly considering the dependencies among different NFRs in the evaluation process. The final results are expected to be valuable for the business and the project organization point of view by identifying NFRs than implementing the desired NFRs that contribute to the business value in a costeffective manner. The proposed framework helps in clarity of business objectives, and also improves the understanding about NFRs and reduces the association among NFRs.
## (s3) Critical evaluation
(p3.0) Based on the literature review describe in section 2, we critically analyzed the merits and demerits of the various NFR identification and analysis techniques. We also describe the suggestive improvements for each technique proposed in the reviewed literature.

(p3.1) The critical analysis is described in Table 2. To identify comparison criterion among different extraction and classification techniques for nonfunctional requirements, we have studied the existing techniques and found characteristics considered to be important with respect to tool/technique used for non-functional requirements extraction, source of document, method use for the classification, data set used, validation of parameters, model validation method and accuracy achieved in that technique. Evaluation criteria for Table 2 is define as follows. Automatic technique to explore security requirements (Thakurta, 2013) Prioritizing NFRs in a software
