# Survey on Access Control Mechanisms in Cloud Computing

CorpusID: 55363340 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca03d25c9d518b383a7792e6121dc402898ad675](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ca03d25c9d518b383a7792e6121dc402898ad675)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Access control systems have various attributes in order to perform access control principles. The largest advantage of these systems is having user features, which are functions that are appropriate for the procedures performed, methods, and administration characteristics rather than individually performing the procedures in different fields. Thus, the priorities of the systems can be easily determined [1,2]. In addition, the procedures of performing or denying the determined priorities according to a set of rules can be performed. These rules are set in access control policies. These policies also need to be in accord with the priorities. When evaluating prioritization of access control, five different entities must be considered [3,4].
## (s1) Cloud Computing Service Models
(p1.0) Cloud computing provides developers the ability to focus on what is important. As cloud computing has grown, different models and strategies have developed for user needs. Each type of these services provides different levels of control [1,7,8]. The following are the types of strategies to use the cloud computing service models:

(p1.1) Private Cloud: Cloud providers cannot be hosted from the outside for security reasons. It is mainly executed by the organization itself or by another third party company. Since the Private Cloud is a personally constructed building, all the information is at the user's disposal. For example, an international company can maintain the information processing needs of its branches in all world countries on a single cloud.

(p1.2) Public Cloud: Cloud services are available for public use for everyone and are generally owned by large companies. These services are free or priced by usage. Generally, public cloud providers like Microsoft, Google, etc., process their own infrastructure resources and access is only provided via the Internet.
## (s3) Cloud Computing Limitations and Disadvantages
(p3.0) Cloud computing has many benefits for users and enterprises like reducing costs, increasing flexibility, and providing easy handling. However, in addition to the advantages of cloud computing, it also provides the following risks [7]:

(p3.1) Security and privacy: The ease in providing and accessing cloud services can give malicious users the ability to detect and exploit vulnerabilities. In multi-tenant cloud architecture, an attacker might try to break into the other users.

(p3.2) Downtime: Cloud computing makes applications dependent on the Internet connection. When network service is down, the application is down as well. If Internet service is slow or inconsistent, cloud computing may not be suitable for an application.
## (s7) Attribute Based Access Control
(p7.0) Unlike RBAC, the user controls (access permissions) are ensured with attributes and not roles. Thus, in the usage of Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC), the user attributes play an important role. These attributes can access the general characteristics of the user such as age, height, personal characteristics, and can be altered again according to this information [37][38][39][40]. The determination of the attributes is performed according to the topics. As the attributes are related to the information entered, they can be grouped into the following three categories: subject attributes (such as personal information), Resource attributes (information about the outcomes), and environment attributes (information about the environment) [41]. In this manner, the complexities that are rising in the growing and complicated systems are solved. Similar to RBAC, ABAC calls the permissions and limitations to action when they are needed. Additionally, logical comparisons, and controls are important features [37,42,43]. The set of user attributes will be preserved separately as shown in Figure 2.
## (s9) Mandatory Access Control
(p9.0) Mandatory Access Control (MAC) surfaced when the experts decided that DAC is not efficient in terms of security since it is not being able to control every piece of information, which the Working model of the MAC scheme is shown in Figure 4. The decisions in MAC are not made by an owner but a central system [11,12]. In this way, more powerful processes are performed in security models [57,64,65]. The wholeness and privacy of the system are the most important features after security. Thus, it can increase the security to the highest level in a whole system. Its flexibility is really low [63]. The reason for that is the system security, however, even this does not ensure the absolute privacy. It is used in government and military system improvements as a result of these features [66][67][68][69]. Also SElinux has a MAC mechanism that enables the security protocol to reduce the level of control over objects [70].
