# Trends in postpartum hemorrhage in high resource countries: a review and recommendations from the International Postpartum Hemorrhage Collaborative Group

CorpusID: 5541274 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e5c341c6b1bb170e3a8a73e632c00703f7d859a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8e5c341c6b1bb170e3a8a73e632c00703f7d859a)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Canada
(p3.0) As described elsewhere [5], information for Canadian trends was based on all hospital deliveries as documented in the Discharge Abstract Database of the Canadian Institute for Health Information from 1991 to 2005. All medical diagnoses were coded using the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-9 up to 2000, and increasingly in ICD-10 from 2001 onwards), while procedures were coded using the Canadian Classification of Diagnostic, Therapeutic and Surgical Procedures (CCP) and the Canadian Classification of Interventions (CCI). PPH was coded if blood loss after childbirth exceeded 500 ml after a vaginal delivery and 1,000 ml after a caesarean delivery or if the physician made a notation of PPH in the medical chart. Data from Quebec, Manitoba and Nova Scotia were excluded because complete data for these provinces were not available for the entire study period.

(p3.1) Cases of postpartum hemorrhage were identified using ICD-9 codes 666.0, 666.1, 666.2 and 666.3 and ICD-10 codes O720, O721, O722 and O723 for postpartum hemorrhage due to retained placenta (third stage hemorrhage), uterine atony (immediate postpartum hemorrhage, within the first 24 hours following delivery of placenta), delayed and secondary postpartum hemorrhage (after the first 24 hours following delivery) and postpartum hemorrhage due to coagulation defects, respectively.

(p3.2) Women whose deliveries were complicated by postpartum hemorrhage and who additionally had an abdominal hysterectomy were identified using the relevant CCP and CCI codes. Blood transfusions were identified using a specific code introduced in the database in 1994 (blood transfusion rates were thus unavailable for 1991 to 1993).
## (s24) Diagnosis and management of PPH
(p24.0) Many of the trials and interventions in the management of postpartum hemorrhage have concentrated on the implementation of drills and treatments [63]. However, the diagnosis of hemorrhage is of primary concern and the importance of the accurate estimation of blood loss is paramount to allowing the appropriate intervention by warning of impending hemorrhagic shock. Estimates of blood loss by paramedics [64], surgeons [65] and obstetricians and midwives [66] are often inaccurate and vary widely. Studies following vaginal [67] and abdominal delivery [68] show visual estimation of blood loss to be of limited clinical use.

(p24.1) Bose et al [66], demonstrated a marked discrepancy between estimated and actual blood loss at varying volumes confirming the clinical difficulty in accurately estimating blood loss, particularly in obstetric scenarios. They developed a simple algorithm to facilitate visual estimation and felt that these along with clinical reconstructions provided a popular and useful learning tool to facilitate the visual estimation of blood loss. This has been confirmed [69].

(p24.2) In the post partum period, particularly after caesarean section, the blood loss may not be visible and accurate estimation of the hemodynamic state is important. The adoption of Early Warning Systems [70] to obstetric practice (Modified Obstetric Early Warning Scoring System -MOEWS), which allows easy assessment of trends in hemodynamic assessments and impending shock, is now widespread. These take various forms but utilize colored blocks to signify worrying trends in pulse, blood pressure or temperature measurements. This should lead to earlier intervention but full evaluation is awaited.
