# Visible and Near-Infrared Reflectance Spectroscopy for Investigating Soil Mineralogy: A Review

CorpusID: 55519533 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741c9af1568d87d2faa7142e0a547b3b9e985dd3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/741c9af1568d87d2faa7142e0a547b3b9e985dd3)

Fields: Environmental Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Soils are open, complex, and dynamic systems as well as fundamental natural environments for animals, plants, microorganisms, and human interaction [1]. Mineral composition is the most fundamental property of a soil, and soil minerals account generally for half the soil volume [2]. According to Churchman [3], clay minerals in the soil context are "secondary inorganic compounds of <2 μm size" including Fe, Al, and Mn oxides (hydroxides and oxyhydroxides), as well as noncrystalline phases. Importantly, they are the most reactive and important inorganic components in soils, and they occur commonly in close association with the most reactive organic matter [4,5]. Clays influence soil function through both their bulk properties and their associations with their huge outer/inner surfaces (e.g., cation exchange capacity [6]). e effort involved in comprehensive understanding of the nature of soil minerals is of particular importance as they may help us explain and predict how different soil types function [7].

(p0.1) However, soil mineralogy (mainly clay mineralogy) is still a minor topic in soil sciences. is may be due partly to the unjustified assumption that a given soil mineral will have the same properties as those of its better-crystallized counterpart that formed in a more "geologic" context (e.g., sedimentary kaolinite will have the same properties as pedogenic kaolinite) [4]. Revisiting soil mineralogy has been gradually important, for instance, in terms of the manner by which soil minerals are de ned and investigated [8].
## (s1) Fundamentals of VNIR
(p1.0) e VNIR part of the electromagnetic spectrum includes both the visible (350-780 nm) and near-infrared (780-2500 nm) ranges, which overlaps with the optical radiation range (100-1000 nm; Figure 1). Sometimes, the 350-1000 wavelength range is referred as VNIR (visible-near-infrared), and the 1000-2500 range is referred as the SWIR (short-wave infrared) in remote sensing literature [25]. e human eyes and brain can process spectral information from the visible region and see color, while modern spectroscopy can observe precise details over a much broader wavelength range.
## (s6) Spectral Preprocessing.
(p6.0) e raw spectra are usually preprocessed through various approaches to accentuate features and remove signal noise [32]. e processed soil spectra facilitate mineral identi cation, and the accuracy of soil mineral prediction is greatly improved through the use of various preprocessing methods [33]. e following 2 Journal of Spectroscopy preprocessing methods for spectra have been used in previous soil mineralogic studies.
## (s7) Continuum Removal
(p7.0) Approaches. e continuum removal approach aims to remove background noise and isolate particular absorption features for identi cation and analysis [34]. e continuum is usually determined using local maxima to generate a hull of boundary points (Figure 2(a)) [22]. All the boundary points are tted by straight-line segments, and then, the continuum removal is calculated by removing the original re ectance intensities from corresponding intensities of the continuum (Figure 2(b)) [23]. Continuum removal analysis is a particularly robust tool for detecting and predicting iron oxides and phyllosilicate minerals. us, it is feasible to substitute a statistical method to apply to soil mineralogy studies [10,20,22,24].

(p7.1) Absorption bands in the VNIR region can be described by geometrical parameters derived from the continuum removal curve (Figure 2(b)). Four parameters are directly displayed in Figure 2(b), which include position (P), width (W), depth (D), and full width at half maximum (FWHM, abbreviated to "F"). e parameter asymmetry (AS) is calculated as follows:
## (s8) Smoothing Techniques.
(p8.0) Smoothing techniques are used to extract the maximum amount of information from each spectrum possibly by minimizing the in uence of background noise [32]. Commonly used smoothing techniques include the Savitzky-Golay transform (SG [35]), Norris smoothing lter (NG [36]), and averaging spectra [37]. SG smoothing eliminates the in uences of ground interference noise and baseline oat, thus enhancing the signal-to-noise ratio. NG smoothing removes the e ects of particle-size variation when the soil samples vary in texture, moisture, and grain size [32].
## (s9) Derivative Algorithms.
(p9.0) Derivative algorithms can rapidly identify characteristic positions of spectral minimum, maximum, and in ection point values [32]. Additionally, the e ect of variation in optical setup and sample grinding is eliminated after derivative transformation [38]. Because the spectral noise tends to amplify with derivative transform, a smoothing technique is often used before the derivative algorithm [37]. e spectral curve after the rst derivative, for example, is better at discriminating goethite and hematite and estimating their abundance, with two peaks at 435 and 535 nm for goethite and a single absorption at ∼570 nm for hematite ( Figure 3) [39].
## (s12) Clay Minerals.
(p12.0) Clay minerals are frequently used as climatic indicators since their nature is directly in uenced by the temperature and amount of precipitation at the site during pedogenesis [9,48]. As climate conditions shift from cool/dry to warm/moist, the dominant clay minerals go from chlorite/illite → vermiculite → montmorillonite → kaolinite [24,49]. e dominant clays in soils show diagnostic absorptions in the SWIR domain [39]. ese absorption bands are caused by vibrational transitions and commonly display sharp and narrow features ( Figure 4). e diagnostic bands are mainly focused on ∼1400 nm (overtones caused by OH), ∼1900 nm (overtones caused by molecular water), and ∼2200 nm (combination tones caused by Al-OH [50,51]).

(p12.1) Additionally, some weak absorption bands in the 2300-2500 nm region are related to the presence of Fe-OH and/or Mg-OH in the clay minerals [24].   e spectral characteristics of some clay minerals are showed in Figure 4 and Table 1. Chlorites are a group of clay minerals containing specific octahedral cations such as Fe, Mg, and Al [52]. eir reflectance spectra exhibit a weak absorption band at approximately 1400 nm and triple absorption features near 2300 nm. e bands at 2250 and 2350 nm are related to Fe-OH and Mg-OH, respectively [53]. Illite is characterized by three prominent absorptions at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm. Two secondary diagnostic Al-OH absorption peaks close to 2344 and 2445 nm are modified by Fe and Mg tschermak cation exchange [24,31]. Vermiculite has two broad absorptions at 1400 and 1900 nm and two weak absorptions near 2200 and 2300 nm [39]. Montmorillonite has three strong and sharp absorption bands at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm, which are similar to but generally stronger than illite.

(p12.2) Additionally, the combination bands produced by the vibrations of absorbed water cause weak shoulders near 1468 nm and 1970 nm for montmorillonite spectra [37]. Kaolinite is featured by two spectral doublets: one is near 1400 nm (1390 and 1410 nm), and the other is near 2200 nm (2160 and 2210 nm).
## (s13) Carbonates.
(p13.0) In soils, carbonates are leached from the surface with time and accumulate in the subsoil at a certain depth [54]. e presence of carbonate is widely used as a basic soil characteristic to describe soil types and quantify soil erosion [22]. Carbonates are characterized by several absorptions in the VNIR domain, caused by overtones and combinations of fundamental vibrations of the CO 3 2− ion ( Figure 5) [31,37]. A strong absorption band at ∼2350 nm and three weak absorption bands at ∼1900, ∼2000, and ∼2160 nm were reported by Hunt and Salisbury [55] for carbonates in the NIR region, with the ∼2350 nm absorption showing obvious double-band structures ( Figure 5).
## (s14) Prediction from the Continuum Removal Spectra.
(p14.0) As discussed in Section 3.1.1, several geometrical features of the absorption bands can be extracted through the continuum removal method. ose parameters (e.g., P, D, and AS) from the continuum removal spectra are key to characterizing and predicting mineral compositions in soils. Viscarra Rossel et al. [23] quantitatively estimated the mineral composition by using the continuum removal method. Compositions of soil minerals such as kaolinite, illite, Al-smectite, goethite, and hematite are considered in this study, and the parameter  D is selected for prediction. e spectroscopic predictions are generally in consistence with those interpreted by XRD analysis. According to Dufrechou et al. [20], the parameter D at ∼1400, ∼1900, and ∼2200 nm was strongly affected by the amounts of kaolinite, illite, and montmorillonite in soil mixtures. Additionally, the estimation of montmorillonite abundance shows reliability when compared with XRD results. Five parameters (P, D, W, F, and AS) were used in the work by Zhao et al. [24] for assessing the utility of the continuum removal method. We compared these parameters with the results from both XRD and DRS analyses and found that some of the parameters are good at mineral content prediction. Furthermore, some parameters (e.g., AS at ∼2200 nm) are confirmed as reliable proxies for soil weathering and paleoclimate reconstruction.
## (s18) Linear Regression Models.
(p18.0) Both PLSR and PCR can deal with predictors that are highly collinear and are effective in situations where the number of predictors is far beyond the number of available samples [37]. Furthermore, PLSR and PCR are closely related and share similar prediction errors in most situations [61]. Regardless, the PLSR algorithm is usually preferred in spectral pedology analysis because (1) it maximizes covariance between response variables and predictors so that the model is more interpretable, and (2) it is a faster algorithm [45].
## (s22) Comparison between Spectral Measurement and Multivariate Calibration
(p22.0) e relative abundance of minerals in a soil sample can be predicted either by spectral analyses (e.g., continuum removal) or chemometric methods (e.g., PLSR and NN) [20,24,45,47]. Although both types of methods correlate the spectral signal with information about the soil minerals, they differ in many ways, including their focused spectral bands, complexity, and how they are applied.
## (s24) Focused Spectral Bands.
(p24.0) Spectral analyses focus on specific absorption bands representative of the corresponding soil minerals, while the multivariable regression algorithms commonly use the signals from the whole 350-2500 nm region. In some cases, the 350-400 nm and 2450-2500 nm ranges with low instrumental signal-to-noise ratios are removed [59,79]. erefore, a multivariable regression model deals with over 1000 spectral bands-many more than the number of focused bands in a continuum removal study. Moreover, several geometric parameters can be extracted from each band in a spectral measurement, including P, W, D, F, and AS, whereas only the information of depth for each band can be gleaned from a chemometric study. Note that some algorithms intrinsically provide a feature selection method (e.g., SMLR and PLSR), and it has been shown that the most important features selected by a regression model are the ones that we should pay the most attention to in a spectral measurement study [22].
## (s25) Complexity.
(p25.0) eoretically, multivariate calibration is very complicated because it involves a larger number of algorithms and because different algorithms have the potential to be combined into better predictive models, depending on the situation [45,70,79]. However, in practice, multivariate modeling and prediction is not that complicated. anks to the development of executable and fast running software such as ParLeS and Unscrambler [75,80], the difficult calculation process can be done much more easily. On the other hand, spectral measurement studies cost more time because we must (1) identify a soil mineral based on the spectral features, (2) extract parameters from the bands, and (3) relate those parameters with the information about the soil mineral.
