# An Overview on Data Security in Cloud Computing

CorpusID: 56657839 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0dc49573fcb42dc3d462ce154fba9fa911a263d4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0dc49573fcb42dc3d462ce154fba9fa911a263d4)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Nowadays, sales of digital devices (smartphones, and tablets) have exploded. These connected and increasingly mobile devices allow users to access their data and applications from anywhere and anytime. The traditional IT infrastructure is no longer suitable for ubiquitous access to data. It becomes costly and difficult to manage. The rapid increase in global internet usage requires a new way to manage the size, variety and availability of data, which is CLOUD COMPUTING [27].

(p0.1) Cloud Computing introduces a new way of providing resources to users "as a service accessible via the internet". Unlike traditional approach that is based on hardware ownership where data is stored, Cloud Computing users no longer own the infrastructure that is totally controlled by these service providers. The transfer of infrastructure control to the service providers involves the transfer of responsibility associated with data security [1,4,14,19,31,34]. Therefore, data security and privacy concerns raise.

(p0.2) Cloud Computing domain is so wide that it is impossible to deal with all of its aspects. In this paper, we focus on aspects related to Cloud Computing security and more particularly, we are interested in the security of data hosted on Cloud infrastructures. As more and more information from individuals and organizations are placed on the Cloud, the issue regarding data security and user privacy becomes an important concern, especially when data is sensitive. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 discuss the data security issue according to three dimensions-cloud characteristics, data life cycle and data security attributes. We identify in Sect. 3 common solutions to data security issues in cloud according to data security attributes. Section 4 concludes this paper.
## (s12) Data-in-transit
(p12.0) Data-in-transit security refers to the security of data transmissions in the Cloud. It ensures that the data will not be intercepted, altered or replaced. data-in-transit can be very sensitive like user names and passwords. Data-in-transit may be more at risk than data-at-rest, as they travel from one place to another [16].
## (s13) Data-in-use
(p13.0) Data-in-use refers to any reading or processing (creation, transformation or deletion) of data. When processing take place in the Cloud, the risks of misuse increase, due to the large number of users involved in Cloud [22].

(p13.1) In a traditional environment, the user holds, and manages his data. However, in Cloud Computing a user's data can be generated and handled by a third party. The problem for the owner is to keep control over his data created by another. For personal and private information, the owner must know what personal information is collected, and in some cases, stop collecting and using of this information. Furthermore, Owners of data need to ensure that the use of their data is consistent with the purposes of the collection and that private information is not disclosed to third parties [11,22].

(p13.2) Data deletion in another problem concerning data processing in the Cloud. Due to the physical characteristics of the storage devices, the deleted data may still exist and can be restored. This problem is called data remanence. It was emphasize by numerous works [14,18,22,28,33]. This problem arises when data residues are present on the storage media after deletion operation. Data remanence is a serious threat to data privacy, whereby confidential data can be revealed, especially when this data is in an uncontrolled environment such as the Cloud. The question that arises is how can a user ensure the effective deletion of his data when he does not have physical control over the storage media? There is currently no way to prove this, because it is in the first place a problem of trust. This concern increases that there may be multiple copies of the data, potentially held by several entities. There is, therefore, a high risk of data exposure for a user if the physical resources are reused by another user.
## (s15) Confidentiality
(p15.0) Confidentiality refers to data protection from unauthorized access. This problem occurs when sensitive data is outsourced to the Cloud server. In a decentralized Computing context, the issues of confidentiality are much more important since the server hosting the data does not necessarily belong to the user. Confidentiality in Cloud systems is a major barrier to his adoption. Currently, Cloud offers are mainly public and therefore exposed to more attacks, compared to those hosted on private data centers.

(p15.1) Data privacy is another problem often associated with confidentiality. Privacy concerns personal information that must be hidden from unauthorized persons. The user privacy is associated with the collection, use, communication, storage and destruction of personal data. This concern arises when the reasons for use of personal data and the way in which they are used are not clear [11].
## (s16) Integrity
(p16.0) Integrity refers to data protection from unauthorized changes, whether intentional or accidental. These changes include creating, deleting, and writing. Data integrity is one of the critical elements in most information systems. It can be simple to perform in a centralized system, but becomes a complex task in a distributed environment such as Cloud Computing.

(p16.1) An important process is the verification of data integrity. To do this, the backup of the original data is generally compared to the current data in the Cloud. However, this method involves downloading data from the Cloud, which can be complex and costly [2]. Today, there are other techniques that do not involve downloading data to check their integrity.

(p16.2) Availability Data availability means that information must be available when authorized persons need it. Data availability is one of the biggest concerns of service providers. If for some reason a Cloud service is interrupted, many clients will be affected. Service providers contractually Undertake to ensure an availability level of 99.9%. In addition, the duplication of data and physical resources and their distribution on different locations increases the level of availability.

(p16.3) There are many risks that could affect the availability of data in the Cloud such as storage reliability, dependence on internet connection and technical failures. Generally, data availability in Cloud is more reliable than on a traditional infrastructure as large suppliers like Google, Amazon and Microsoft are better equipped to manage these risks than a simple individual or a company.
