# Techniques of Fabrication of Provisional Restoration: An Overview

CorpusID: 5688496 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/274a16ca25c17c2d34d96c6df2c5749d7a8c5052](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/274a16ca25c17c2d34d96c6df2c5749d7a8c5052)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Fabrication of provisional restorations is an important procedure in fixed prosthodontics. Provisional restorations must satisfy the requirements of pulpal protection, positional stability, occlusal function, ability to be cleansed, margin accuracy, wear resistance, strength, and esthetics. They serve the critical function of providing a template for the final restorations once they have been evaluated intraorally [1].

(p0.1) Provisional restorations in fixed prosthodontic rehabilitation are important treatment procedures, particularly if the restorations are expected to function for extended periods of time or when additional therapy is required before completion of the rehabilitation [2].

(p0.2) Interim procedures also must be efficiently performed, because they are done while the patient is in the operatory and during the same appointment that the teeth are prepared. Costly chair side time must not be wasted, but the dentist must produce an acceptable restoration. Failure to do so results in the eventual loss of more time than was initially thought saved.

(p0.3) A well-made provisional fixed partial denture should provide a preview of the future prosthesis and enhance the health of the abutments and periodontium. The theories and techniques of fabrication for numerous types of provisional restorations abound in the dental literature [3].

(p0.4) Many procedures involving a wide variety of materials are available to make satisfactory interim restorations. As new materials are introduced, associated techniques are reported, and thus, there is even more variety. It is helpful principle that all the procedures have in common the formation of a mold cavity into which a plastic material is poured or packed.

(p0.5) Provisional restorations may be made directly on prepared teeth [4,5] with the use of a matrix or indirectly by making an impression of the prepared teeth [6,7]. A combination indirect-direct [8] technique is also possible which has evolved as a sequential application of these that involves fabrication of a preformed shell that is relined intraorally.

(p0.6) Fabrication of provisional restorations is an important procedure in fixed prosthodontics. Provisional restorations must satisfy the requirements of pulpal protection, positional stability, occlusal function, ability to be cleansed, margin accuracy, wear resistance, strength, and esthetics. They serve the critical function of providing a template for the final restorations once they have been evaluated intraorally [1].

(p0.7) Provisional restorations in fixed prosthodontic rehabilitation are important treatment procedures, particularly if the restorations are expected to function for extended periods of time or when additional therapy is required before completion of the rehabilitation [2].

(p0.8) Interim procedures also must be efficiently performed, because they are done while the patient is in the operatory and during the same appointment that the teeth are prepared. Costly chair side time must not be wasted, but the dentist must produce an acceptable restoration. Failure to do so results in the eventual loss of more time than was initially thought saved.

(p0.9) A well-made provisional fixed partial denture should provide a preview of the future prosthesis and enhance the health of the abutments and periodontium. The theories and techniques of fabrication for numerous types of provisional restorations abound in the dental literature [3].

(p0.10) Many procedures involving a wide variety of materials are available to make satisfactory interim restorations. As new materials are introduced, associated techniques are reported, and thus, there is even more variety. It is helpful principle that all the procedures have in common the formation of a mold cavity into which a plastic material is poured or packed.

(p0.11) Provisional restorations may be made directly on prepared teeth [4,5] with the use of a matrix or indirectly by making an impression of the prepared teeth [6,7]. A combination indirect-direct [8] technique is also possible which has evolved as a sequential application of these that involves fabrication of a preformed shell that is relined intraorally.
## (s1) Search Strategy
(p1.0) A PubMed search of English literature was conducted up to January 2010 using the terms: provisional restorations, fixed partial denture, treatment restorations. Additionally, the bibliographies of 5 previous reviews as well as articles published in journal of prosthodontics, journal of prosthetic dentistry, general dentistry, and journal of american dental association were manually searched. 2.1. Indirect Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique involves fabrication of the interim restoration outside the mouth. Fabrication of provisional restorations using the indirect technique eliminates the problems associated with the direct technique and also has the advantage that it can be partially delegated to auxiliary personnel [6]. Fisher et al. describes the use of an indirect technique for provisional fabrication that uses a fast-setting plaster. The technique has several advantages over the direct procedures. There is no contact of free monomer with the prepared teeth or gingival which might cause tissue damage and an allergic reaction or sensitization. The technique avoids subjecting prepared tooth to the heat evolved from the polymerizing resin. Indirect technique produces restoration with a superior marginal fit and as an auxiliary is involved in fabricating the restoration in the lab, it frees the patient and dentist for considerable amount of time [1,9].

(p1.1) When compared to direct technique, it has fewer demerits. Principal disadvantage of the technique includes increased chair side time and increased number of intermediate steps. It is a tedious task to perform if there is inadequacy of assistants or the laboratory facilities. In addition, the technique involves use and possible damage of diagnostic casts [10].

(p1.2) A PubMed search of English literature was conducted up to January 2010 using the terms: provisional restorations, fixed partial denture, treatment restorations. Additionally, the bibliographies of 5 previous reviews as well as articles published in journal of prosthodontics, journal of prosthetic dentistry, general dentistry, and journal of american dental association were manually searched. 2.1. Indirect Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique involves fabrication of the interim restoration outside the mouth. Fabrication of provisional restorations using the indirect technique eliminates the problems associated with the direct technique and also has the advantage that it can be partially delegated to auxiliary personnel [6]. Fisher et al. describes the use of an indirect technique for provisional fabrication that uses a fast-setting plaster. The technique has several advantages over the direct procedures. There is no contact of free monomer with the prepared teeth or gingival which might cause tissue damage and an allergic reaction or sensitization. The technique avoids subjecting prepared tooth to the heat evolved from the polymerizing resin. Indirect technique produces restoration with a superior marginal fit and as an auxiliary is involved in fabricating the restoration in the lab, it frees the patient and dentist for considerable amount of time [1,9].

(p1.3) When compared to direct technique, it has fewer demerits. Principal disadvantage of the technique includes increased chair side time and increased number of intermediate steps. It is a tedious task to perform if there is inadequacy of assistants or the laboratory facilities. In addition, the technique involves use and possible damage of diagnostic casts [10].
## (s3) Indirect-Direct
(p3.0) Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique produces a custom made preformed external surface form of the restoration but the internal tissue surface form if formed by the underprepared diagnostic casts. This indirect-direct procedure has several advantages. With the combination indirect-direct technique, chair time can be reduced, since the provisional shell is fabricated before the patient's appointment. Enhanced control over restoration contours minimizes the time required for chair side adjustments. In addition, a smaller amount of acrylic resin will polymerize in contact with the prepared abutment, resulting in decreased heat generation, chemical exposure, and polymerization shrinkage compared to the direct technique [1]. Another advantage is that contact between resin monomer and soft tissues is reduced and less chances of allergic reactions.

(p3.1) The disadvantage of this procedure is the potential need of a laboratory phase before tooth preparation and the adjustments that are frequently needed to seat the shell completely on the prepared tooth.

(p3.2) Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique produces a custom made preformed external surface form of the restoration but the internal tissue surface form if formed by the underprepared diagnostic casts. This indirect-direct procedure has several advantages. With the combination indirect-direct technique, chair time can be reduced, since the provisional shell is fabricated before the patient's appointment. Enhanced control over restoration contours minimizes the time required for chair side adjustments. In addition, a smaller amount of acrylic resin will polymerize in contact with the prepared abutment, resulting in decreased heat generation, chemical exposure, and polymerization shrinkage compared to the direct technique [1]. Another advantage is that contact between resin monomer and soft tissues is reduced and less chances of allergic reactions.

(p3.3) The disadvantage of this procedure is the potential need of a laboratory phase before tooth preparation and the adjustments that are frequently needed to seat the shell completely on the prepared tooth.
## (s11) Introduction
(p11.0) Fabrication of provisional restorations is an important procedure in fixed prosthodontics. Provisional restorations must satisfy the requirements of pulpal protection, positional stability, occlusal function, ability to be cleansed, margin accuracy, wear resistance, strength, and esthetics. They serve the critical function of providing a template for the final restorations once they have been evaluated intraorally [1].

(p11.1) Provisional restorations in fixed prosthodontic rehabilitation are important treatment procedures, particularly if the restorations are expected to function for extended periods of time or when additional therapy is required before completion of the rehabilitation [2].

(p11.2) Interim procedures also must be efficiently performed, because they are done while the patient is in the operatory and during the same appointment that the teeth are prepared. Costly chair side time must not be wasted, but the dentist must produce an acceptable restoration. Failure to do so results in the eventual loss of more time than was initially thought saved.

(p11.3) A well-made provisional fixed partial denture should provide a preview of the future prosthesis and enhance the health of the abutments and periodontium. The theories and techniques of fabrication for numerous types of provisional restorations abound in the dental literature [3].

(p11.4) Many procedures involving a wide variety of materials are available to make satisfactory interim restorations. As new materials are introduced, associated techniques are reported, and thus, there is even more variety. It is helpful principle that all the procedures have in common the formation of a mold cavity into which a plastic material is poured or packed.

(p11.5) Provisional restorations may be made directly on prepared teeth [4,5] with the use of a matrix or indirectly by making an impression of the prepared teeth [6,7]. A combination indirect-direct [8] technique is also possible which has evolved as a sequential application of these that involves fabrication of a preformed shell that is relined intraorally.

(p11.6) Fabrication of provisional restorations is an important procedure in fixed prosthodontics. Provisional restorations must satisfy the requirements of pulpal protection, positional stability, occlusal function, ability to be cleansed, margin accuracy, wear resistance, strength, and esthetics. They serve the critical function of providing a template for the final restorations once they have been evaluated intraorally [1].

(p11.7) Provisional restorations in fixed prosthodontic rehabilitation are important treatment procedures, particularly if the restorations are expected to function for extended periods of time or when additional therapy is required before completion of the rehabilitation [2].

(p11.8) Interim procedures also must be efficiently performed, because they are done while the patient is in the operatory and during the same appointment that the teeth are prepared. Costly chair side time must not be wasted, but the dentist must produce an acceptable restoration. Failure to do so results in the eventual loss of more time than was initially thought saved.

(p11.9) A well-made provisional fixed partial denture should provide a preview of the future prosthesis and enhance the health of the abutments and periodontium. The theories and techniques of fabrication for numerous types of provisional restorations abound in the dental literature [3].

(p11.10) Many procedures involving a wide variety of materials are available to make satisfactory interim restorations. As new materials are introduced, associated techniques are reported, and thus, there is even more variety. It is helpful principle that all the procedures have in common the formation of a mold cavity into which a plastic material is poured or packed.

(p11.11) Provisional restorations may be made directly on prepared teeth [4,5] with the use of a matrix or indirectly by making an impression of the prepared teeth [6,7]. A combination indirect-direct [8] technique is also possible which has evolved as a sequential application of these that involves fabrication of a preformed shell that is relined intraorally.
## (s12) Search Strategy
(p12.0) A PubMed search of English literature was conducted up to January 2010 using the terms: provisional restorations, fixed partial denture, treatment restorations. Additionally, the bibliographies of 5 previous reviews as well as articles published in journal of prosthodontics, journal of prosthetic dentistry, general dentistry, and journal of american dental association were manually searched. 2.1. Indirect Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique involves fabrication of the interim restoration outside the mouth. Fabrication of provisional restorations using the indirect technique eliminates the problems associated with the direct technique and also has the advantage that it can be partially delegated to auxiliary personnel [6]. Fisher et al. describes the use of an indirect technique for provisional fabrication that uses a fast-setting plaster. The technique has several advantages over the direct procedures. There is no contact of free monomer with the prepared teeth or gingival which might cause tissue damage and an allergic reaction or sensitization. The technique avoids subjecting prepared tooth to the heat evolved from the polymerizing resin. Indirect technique produces restoration with a superior marginal fit and as an auxiliary is involved in fabricating the restoration in the lab, it frees the patient and dentist for considerable amount of time [1,9].

(p12.1) When compared to direct technique, it has fewer demerits. Principal disadvantage of the technique includes increased chair side time and increased number of intermediate steps. It is a tedious task to perform if there is inadequacy of assistants or the laboratory facilities. In addition, the technique involves use and possible damage of diagnostic casts [10].

(p12.2) A PubMed search of English literature was conducted up to January 2010 using the terms: provisional restorations, fixed partial denture, treatment restorations. Additionally, the bibliographies of 5 previous reviews as well as articles published in journal of prosthodontics, journal of prosthetic dentistry, general dentistry, and journal of american dental association were manually searched. 2.1. Indirect Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique involves fabrication of the interim restoration outside the mouth. Fabrication of provisional restorations using the indirect technique eliminates the problems associated with the direct technique and also has the advantage that it can be partially delegated to auxiliary personnel [6]. Fisher et al. describes the use of an indirect technique for provisional fabrication that uses a fast-setting plaster. The technique has several advantages over the direct procedures. There is no contact of free monomer with the prepared teeth or gingival which might cause tissue damage and an allergic reaction or sensitization. The technique avoids subjecting prepared tooth to the heat evolved from the polymerizing resin. Indirect technique produces restoration with a superior marginal fit and as an auxiliary is involved in fabricating the restoration in the lab, it frees the patient and dentist for considerable amount of time [1,9].

(p12.3) When compared to direct technique, it has fewer demerits. Principal disadvantage of the technique includes increased chair side time and increased number of intermediate steps. It is a tedious task to perform if there is inadequacy of assistants or the laboratory facilities. In addition, the technique involves use and possible damage of diagnostic casts [10].
## (s14) Indirect-Direct
(p14.0) Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique produces a custom made preformed external surface form of the restoration but the internal tissue surface form if formed by the underprepared diagnostic casts. This indirect-direct procedure has several advantages. With the combination indirect-direct technique, chair time can be reduced, since the provisional shell is fabricated before the patient's appointment. Enhanced control over restoration contours minimizes the time required for chair side adjustments. In addition, a smaller amount of acrylic resin will polymerize in contact with the prepared abutment, resulting in decreased heat generation, chemical exposure, and polymerization shrinkage compared to the direct technique [1]. Another advantage is that contact between resin monomer and soft tissues is reduced and less chances of allergic reactions.

(p14.1) The disadvantage of this procedure is the potential need of a laboratory phase before tooth preparation and the adjustments that are frequently needed to seat the shell completely on the prepared tooth.

(p14.2) Provisional Fixed Partial Denture. The technique produces a custom made preformed external surface form of the restoration but the internal tissue surface form if formed by the underprepared diagnostic casts. This indirect-direct procedure has several advantages. With the combination indirect-direct technique, chair time can be reduced, since the provisional shell is fabricated before the patient's appointment. Enhanced control over restoration contours minimizes the time required for chair side adjustments. In addition, a smaller amount of acrylic resin will polymerize in contact with the prepared abutment, resulting in decreased heat generation, chemical exposure, and polymerization shrinkage compared to the direct technique [1]. Another advantage is that contact between resin monomer and soft tissues is reduced and less chances of allergic reactions.

(p14.3) The disadvantage of this procedure is the potential need of a laboratory phase before tooth preparation and the adjustments that are frequently needed to seat the shell completely on the prepared tooth.
