# A Review on Automatic Mammographic Density and Parenchymal Segmentation

CorpusID: 5776759 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b89642fb857478bf3fb82566c6d880e45727987](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3b89642fb857478bf3fb82566c6d880e45727987)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Breast cancer is the most common cause of death in female cancer sufferers in both developed and developing countries [1]. The exact cause(s) of the majority of breast cancers still remains unknown [2]. By far the most effective way to tackle the disease is through early detection, precise identification of women at risk, and applying preventative measures. Within screening mammography, both mammographic density and parenchymal pattern have been established as image-based risk factors [2]. Current studies suggest that mammographic density is a major risk factor, even though it adds only little to the Gail model [3], and it is still not clear how to incorporate the factors as biomarkers into the risk prediction models [4].
## (s5) Correlations between Different Schemes.
(p5.0) Muhimmah et al. [24] investigated the (Spearman's) correlations ( ) between the four different schemes (i.e., Wolfe, Boyd, BI-RADS, and Tabár) using the MIAS (Mammographic Image Analysis Society) database [93], which is a publicly available, digitised database. Results indicate risk classification mappings between the four schemes as follows. (iii) Wolfe → Tabár: N1 → T II , P1 → T III , P2 → T IV , and DY → T V ; = 0.93 excluding T I due to the weak correlation with any of the Wolfe patterns [24]; this is in line with results in [22,23];

(p5.1) ; a recent study [94] indicated a strong direct correlation between these two schemes with T I taken into account, where B 1 → T II/III , B 2 → T I , B 3 → T IV , and B 4 → T V ; = 0.92; note that Tabár's T II and T III have the same tissue composition; see Section 2.2.

(p5.2) Strong correlations were established between Wolfe, Boyd, and BI-RADS categories [24] but the correlations with Tabár categories are less straight forward due to Tabár's T I . According to the literature, these correlations have not been investigated using other mammographic modalities (e.g., digital mammography and tomosynthesis), with the exception of one study [94] which investigated the correlation between BI-RADS and Tabár categories using a private digital mammography database. Mammographic parenchymal pattern and percentage density (PD) have shown being strongly associated with breast cancer risk in the literature [95][96][97]. However, Brisson et al. [91] suggested that PD provides more information on breast cancer risk than Wolfe's parenchymal patterns. Once PD is taken into account (e.g., using BI-RADS scheme), parenchymal pattern information is redundant. Tabár's scheme seems to capture something more than just density assessment, which could be useful in temporal analysis of breast parenchymal changes. However, it is still unclear whether this additional information from Tabár's scheme is related to breast cancer risk [23]; therefore further investigations are warranted. Example mammographic images assessed based on Tabár and BI-RADS are shown in Figures  1 and 2, respectively.
## (s6) Screen Mammography
(p6.0) Early detection through breast screening programmes is by far the most effective way to improve survival rate [98]. There are multiple breast imaging modalities; mammography, ultrasound, thermography, PET (positron emission tomography), MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), CT (computed tomography), scintimammography, optical imaging, and electrical impedance tomography (EIT) based imaging have all been used for different purposes. The clinical role for nonmammographic modalities is often to provide additional information when the results of mammograms are indeterminate or of limited utility [99]. This review focuses on evaluation of density using (X-ray related) mammographic modalities, and other modalities are outside the current scope. The reader is referred to [98] for a detailed overview and [100] for a comparison of breast imaging modalities, and the associated biomarkers used for early detection can be found in [101].

(p6.1) Mammography is the gold standard method in detection of early stage breast cancer before lesions become clinically palpable. The most criticised aspect of screening mammography is that, for women with dense breasts, the sensitivity of mammography is significantly reduced leading to concerns over unnecessary biopsies and treatment [102,103]. This may lead to another harm to the patient (e.g., physical, emotional, financial, and/or psychological) [104]. Despite these limitations, mammography as an initial examination can have very good sensitivity and specificity when compared to other modalities (e.g., PET, CT, and MRI). However, the reading and assessment of mammogram densities can be highly subjective with only moderate agreement among radiologists [24,105,106]. Note that modalities such as ultrasound and MRI can have better sensitivity in some cases but with a corresponding loss of specificity. Clinically these modalities are most often used as an adjunct to mammography, whether 2D or 3D, and as follow-up examination to investigate specific mammographic findings. Mammography is a low cost simple procedure, which is affordable for all population screening [98]. Therefore, there is a huge incentive to develop computer aided mammographic analysis approaches, in order to deliver objective and accurate results in an effective and cost-effective way and to facilitate early detection and precise identification in a clinical environment.
## (s12) Clustering.
(p12.0) Clustering techniques have been widely used for mammographic density segmentation. The principle is to segment the breast tissue based on pixels with similar tissue appearance. Three groups can be identified, general (hard clustering), fuzzy (soft) clustering, and EM hierarchical clustering. A summary of representative studies using clustering techniques can be found in Table 2.

(p12.1) General Clustering. Oliver et al. [38] employed the -means algorithm [120] for mammographic density segmentation, and breast density was categorised into fatty, glandular, and dense tissue. A set of morphological and cooccurrence matrix [121] based texture features were extracted from the segmented areas; these features were used for mammographic risk classification based on a leave-one-(image) out methodology. Results indicated that the risk classification accuracies decreased dramatically when including the glandular class; as dense breast area increases, more variations appear between the tissue clusters. This suggested that the -means clustering based segmentation may be limited in dealing with inter-(density) class variation. Other texture and/or intensity based features can also be used in such a clustering based mammographic tissue segmentation; however, computational efficiency may decrease as the number of (combined) features increases. Dimensionality reduction can be used to remove redundant features. Strange et al. [39] used a manifold learning technique to preserve certain manifold properties using a large scale Kernel Principal Components Analysis (PCA) [122], as a means of reducing the data dimensionality prior to a clustering based mammographic tissue segmentation. -means clustering was used to assign either fatty or dense tissue class to each image pixel based on the nearest cluster in low-dimensional manifold space. Results suggested that such a manifold learning was good for BI-RADS category 4 but less satisfactory for the other BI-RADS density categories.
## (s15) Collective Multiple Measurements.
(p15.0) According to the literature, different approaches to breast density estimation can be performed equally well. However, manual/semiautomatic segmentation can remain superior despite some of the inherited limitations (e.g., losing accuracy due to fatigue and time consuming process). It may be that a human observer is able to combine context, morphology, and textural information, whereas many automated methods only focus on one of these characteristics [67]. Therefore, it is conceivable to utilise various principles for mammographic tissue segmentation. A summary of representative studies using collective multiple measurements can be found in Table 4.

(p15.1) Kallenberg et al. [67] developed a breast density segmentation method based on pixel classification, in which different approaches known in the literature to segment breast density are integrated and extended. The features used include, for example, location of clustered high density tissue in relation to the skin line and nipple, dense tissue intensity information, Gaussian derivatives, cooccurrence matrix based Haralick texture features, and global context features calculated from the whole image. A neural network classifier was trained based on segmentations obtained using the Cumulus. The sequential floating forward selection (SFFS) algorithm [147] was applied to select the optimal subset from a large pool of features, which removed irrelevant and redundant features from the data, and a threshold was defined for the classifier output to obtain a dense tissue segmentation. The PD results show a high correlation ( = 0.9) between the automatic measurements and the Cumulus results. It was concluded that a combination of segmentation strategies outperforms the application of single segmentation techniques.

(p15.2) Li et al. [68] investigated image-processing software based on ImageJ [148] for automated analysis of mammographic density and penalised regression to construct a measure that mimics the Cumulus. A set of automated thresholding methods were applied to separate the dense breast tissue, and these vary according to the type of pixel intensity information (e.g., histogram shape, clustering, and entropy). A watershed algorithm was employed to subdivide dense tissue areas into smaller objects from which a variety of measurements were obtained for the breast as a whole, as well as for the "objects" of dense tissue. A total of 1008 measurements were obtained as output from ImageJ, but only 772 variables were informative. The feature dimensionality was further reduced to 123 using PCA. To compare breast density as measured by the Cumulus, a large dataset containing cases (having condition/disease) and controls (not having condition/disease) was used for the evaluation. Results indicated that the mammographic density measurement has a correlation equal to = 0.875 which was similar to that reported by Kallenberg et al. [67] ( = 0.895) and substantially higher than the work done by Heine et al. [60] ( = 0.70). Note that generalisation of the developed method is currently limited to MLO images. So far, this study provided the strongest evidence that mammographic images contain additional information to percentage density which improves the ability to discriminate between breast cancer disease statuses.
## (s16) Other Methods.
(p16.0) There are some methods in the literature which have not been widely adopted, most conducted as proof of concept or feasibility studies. Although no quantitative and qualitative evaluations were performed with respect to mammographic tissue segmentation, some of the ideas are worth noting which may inspire further improvements and investigations. A summary of representative studies can be found in Table 4.

(p16.1) Lao and Huo [149] developed a hierarchical approach to segment breast dense tissue from mammographic images based on unsupervised learning and multiple levels of detail. The method initially segments the breast based on entropy maximum thresholding. Next, the resultant dense and fatty tissue segmentation was used to facilitate FCM membership function initialisation, followed by clustering based segmentation. Finally, the grouped dense tissue was used to generate dense tissue intensity and homogeneity features; a pixel based thresholding technique was used to produce the final dense breast segmentation. Chen et al. [70] developed a mammographic tissue segmentation method using topographic maps of breast regions at multiple intensity levels that represent both topological and geometrical structures of different dense breast tissue. A topographic map is a morphological and multiscale decomposition of an image relying on the connected components of level sets. The topological and geometric structures are represented by a shape tree, from which dense tissue regions are detected by analysing the saliency and independency of the shapes. This is an unsupervised method as it does not require a learning stage or prior knowledge. The analysis is based on components of the topographic map instead of the image pixels, which could significantly reduce the dimensionality of the data to be analysed. Postprocessing is required to compute geometric moments of the level sets in order to remove incorrect dense regions. Visual assessment indicated that the derived segmentation resembled the results obtained using threshold based methods; however, segmentation seems to omit anatomical structures which do not appear as dense as they should be.
## (s24) 3D Reconstruction Based Volumetric Approaches.
(p24.0) A limited number of studies exist regarding mammographic tissue segmentation using 3D DBT; so far there are few investigations in the literature which lead to developing "true" 3D dense tissue segmentation algorithms for estimating volumetric breast density.

(p24.1) Kontos et al. [181] conducted a feasibility study to distinguish dense and fatty tissue in DBT using texture features (e.g., skewness, coarseness, contrast, energy, homogeneity, and fractal dimension). The selected texture features have been used in previous mammographic tissue segmentation studies (e.g., [44]) and indicated that these features tend to correlate to breast density when computed from DBT images [182]. When computing grey-level texture statistics, the conventional 2D texture descriptors were extended to 3D by considering 3D voxel neighbourhoods rather than 2D pixel neighbourhoods. The study concluded that the fractal dimension was superior in DBT, while contrast was best in 2D projections. It was suggested that for 2D tomographic separation of the breast tissue layers in DBT, the dominant contribution to the grey-level values in the images is the Xray attenuation at the specific voxel in the breast volume. This indicated that volumetric parenchymal properties such as self-similarity reflected by fractal dimension could be more accurately estimated by the corresponding DBT texture features. Recent improvements on Kontos's method have led to fully automated 3D fibroglandular tissue segmentation and VBD estimation from DBT images, and the study showed strong agreement with existing volumetric techniques based on FFDM and MRI images [183]. The updated algorithm exploits the geometry of the acquisition of DBT sequences as well as the relationship between image intensity and tissue density; 3D segmentation of the fibroglandular tissue is achieved by analysing both 2D projection images and reconstructed DBT slices. Results indicated that VBD estimations were highly correlated for DBT and FFDM ( = 0.88), DBT and MRI ( = 0.76), and FFDM and MRI ( = 0.73). In terms of clinical relevance, such a fully automated quantitative VBD estimation from DBT could result into more accurate measures of the fibroglandular tissue in the breast which may lead to more accurate measure of breast cancer risk.

(p24.2) Shafer et al. [184,185] conducted a multimodality study which utilised a 3D hidden-Markov model (HMM) based breast tissue modelling technique for DBT segmentation of adipose and glandular tissue. Much work has been done previously using 2D HMRF to estimate density and other features from mammograms [61,186]. Glandular segmented MRI were used in training a 3D HMM; the model was validated and used to segment DBT breast volumes. The breast density for DBT images is calculated as the ratio of glandular voxels to all voxels in the breast volume. All MR and DBT images were processed to optimise the available range of values for the breast tissue segmentation task. It was also assumed that the possible tissue type of each DBT voxel is either adipose or glandular. The evaluation showed mixed results; some are encouraging and others are dissatisfactory. This indicated that the cross-modality training and testing scheme using HMM needs to be further investigated to refine the process and increase accuracy and reliability for breast DBT segmentation.
## (s25) Discussion
(p25.0) This review covers mammographic tissue segmentation existing in the literature covering the period from 1992 to 2014, focusing on automatic approaches, and excluding manual and semiautomatic approaches. Only a fully automatic approach can deliver consistent, standardised, fully reproducible, and comparable measurements for high-throughput breast screening programmes across sites. Figure 7 shows the distribution of various mammographic tissue segmentation approaches, and Figure 8 shows the trend lines for area and volumetric based mammographic density/parenchymal segmentation approaches. This indicates a decline in the number of studies using 2D projection and an increase in the number of studies in 3D volumetric segmentation. Without automation and accurate estimation of breast density/parenchymal patterns, mammographic segmentation developed in a research environment is unlikely to become useful in clinical practices for assessing mammographic risk or in clinical trials evaluating the influence of different variables (drugs) on breast tissue [187]. Eng et al. [10] concluded that fully automated methods are valid alternatives to the labour intensive "gold standard" Cumulus for quantifying density. However, the choice of a particular method will depend on the aims and settings, and it is essential that the same density assessments approach is required for a research design or survey in which the same subjects are observed repeatedly over a period of time. Despite various methodology issues related to the developed techniques as reviewed in Section 4, there are several other obstacles for most of the developed approaches to demonstrate that imagebased risk prediction can be incorporated in the current nonimage-based risk prediction models (e.g., the Gail and the Tyrer-Cuzick models). A developed mammographic tissue segmentation may work well for one database but not necessarily for other databases; a tuning process may be required to adapt the approach for a different database [189]. As a result, it is difficult to determine the robustness and reliability of a segmentation approach without quantitative and qualitative analysis using mammographic images obtained from different manufactures and perhaps digitised differently. Note that digitised SFM lacks the linearity of the characteristic curve of film, which in combination with the lack of uniformity of thickness of breast tissue during compression can influence the accuracy of the relationship,  Figure 8: Polynomial based trend lines for both area and volumetric based mammographic density/parenchymal segmentation approaches from 1992 to 2014. Note that the (blue) 2D trend line shows harmonic (e.g., interval peaks) behaviour which may be because a surge of manuscripts was submitted for publication at the same years (e.g., biannual) as the major breast imaging related conferences.

(p25.1) between mammographic findings of apparently dense breast tissue and the X-ray attenuation of breast tissue [190]. Based on this review and within the scope of automatic mammographic tissue segmentation, ∼73% of the studies used digitised SFM, ∼25% used FFDM, and <2% used DBT. For the evaluation or validation, about ∼35% of the studies used publicly available databases with the rest using private datasets, size varying from a handful of images to in excess of a thousand images.
## (s26) Imaging Modality.
(p26.0) There are doubts about the relationship between mammographically determined breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk [155]. One of the inherent limitations for area based measurements is that they do not take thickness of dense tissue into account. It is biologically more plausible that breast cancer risk is related to the volume of dense tissue in the breast rather than to its projection. Conventional 2D mammography is affected by tissue superimposition, whilst volumetric analysis of breast tissue through emerging tomographic breast imaging modalities has been suggested as necessary to advance breast cancer risk modelling [155]. It should be noted that all the mammographic risk/density schemes as discussed in Section 2 were established based on digitised SFM. Although some image-based models like the BI-RADS scheme are reviewed in a clinical environment, there are no updates in the literature to indicate that when using FFDM or DBT, the relationship between breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk is the same as that established for SFM. To date, all the studies presume the relationship between breast density/parenchymal patterns of different modalities and breast cancer risk is the same, with no clinical evidence or proof. Previously unknown relationships between breast density/parenchymal patterns and breast cancer risk may be discovered by using more advanced breast imaging techniques and modalities, especially when FFDM is likely to 24 International Journal of Breast Cancer replace standard SFM and DBT is fundamentally different to SFM and FFDM.
## (s28) Study Population Matters.
(p28.0) During evaluations, many studies only used a small amount of data from the general populations of western developed countries, and few studies subgrouped data based on different criteria. Although it is well established that density measurements are associated with breast cancer risk, still several aspects are questioned [87]. For example, hormone therapy is known to increase breast density; certain regimes are known to relate to breast cancer risk [191], but the degree to which density and risk are related during hormone therapy is not known [192,193]. Several studies [96,97,194,195] on the assessment of breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women showed no clear correlation between the disease and tissue density, and the magnitude of the association varied. Therefore studies involving all ranges and subgroups of the populations based on age, body mass, ethnic background, and so forth could be beneficial in providing additional evidence and linking breast density/parenchymal patterns with other breast cancer risk factors established in non-image-based risk prediction models.
## (s29) Segmentation Schemes.
(p29.0) The vast majority of mammographic tissue segmentation approaches are focused on the well-established density as biomarker. However, some of the studies use BI-RADS density categories and others may use the SCC or Wolfe scheme. The relation between breast cancer risk and density is at best hypothesised [87], and the optimal approach to derive information from mammograms relating to risk of breast cancer is still argued [196,197]. Various classification/categorisation mappings between different schemes have been studied [24,90,94], which is beneficial for experimental comparison when using different imagebased breast cancer risk prediction models. Recent studies have indicated that not just density but also heterogeneity in mammograms can be associated with risk [196,198,199]. This suggested that mammographic tissue segmentation based on Tabár's parenchymal patterns (i.e., mammographic building blocks) could be more useful than density based approaches. 5.6. Evaluation. Clinically obtained "ground truth" is often used in algorithm evaluation and validation. Many studies have shown issues of large interobserver variations in breast tissue annotated by radiologists with different mammogram reading experiences. This makes area overlapping based evaluation unreliable. Such variations also exist for mammographic risk assessment by radiologists, as manual mammographic risk assessment is intrinsically subjective, and there is substantial inter-and intraobserver variability [119,200]. This subjectiveness includes visual assessment. Therefore, inconsistent results could be obtained if a different group of radiologists is used to obtain "ground truth" for evaluation or validation, even when the methodology remains the same. There is no easy solution to overcome this, but using consensus data is probably by far the best way to deal with this issue.
