# Mediterranean Jellyfish Venoms: A Review on Scyphomedusae

CorpusID: 5795497 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd54a9f4974801ec8bf89e5fe2be1c79dac8349a](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/fd54a9f4974801ec8bf89e5fe2be1c79dac8349a)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s14) Conclusions
(p14.0) Plants and animals are a source of extracts providing therapeutic activity from which several organic substances have been isolated and some of them currently have application as compounds of biomedical interest such as drugs, pigments, insecticides, etc. or were used to synthesize biologically active molecules. The biotoxins are included among these compounds and can have different pharmacological properties when used at sublethal doses.

(p14.1) The study of natural compounds and of venoms and associated biotoxins have had an impressive advance during the last decades and a number of marine organisms, such as marine Cnidaria, have been recognized as a potential and promising source of bioactive compounds useful for several purposes. As a matter of fact, some representative species of this phylum are to date considered as producers of substances that could have an application in human pathology.

(p14.2) In the Mediterranean countries, studies concerning the biology and the ecology, as well as the toxicology, of Cnidarian jellyfish, have noticeably increased during the last decades as a result of the blooms that happened in several coastal and pelagic areas. These phenomena, and the sanitary and economic implications they caused, outshined the previous disinterest for the study of the poisonousness of Mediterranean Cnidaria owing to the generalized weak harmfulness of most of species living in this area. This is to date a current topic because of large swarmings and strandings of jellyfish, particularly Aurelia aurita and Pelagia noctiluca, occurring recently in several Mediterranean coastal waters as, for example, into the Gulf of La Spezia (Eastern Ligurian Sea) as reported by professional fishermen.

(p14.3) The better knowledge of these organisms has also allowed to identify new aspects about the functioning of their morphological structures and the activity of compounds extracted from their nematocysts and tissues. The emphasis of these studies is justified also by the needing of innovative systems able to counter the activity of venoms. The applicative research led to the production of tools for the management and the protection from the damage they could exert, such as the making of sunlight protection products simultaneously protecting from Cnidarian stinging, containing appropriate components isolated from clown fish, which are, as a matter of common knowledge, not injured by nematocysts [193,194]; the inhibitor of stings is hydrophobic, thus counters notably the contact of nematocysts with the skin, contains glycosaminoglycans similar to those of jellyfish bell, activates the self-recognition system of the jellyfish and, through calcium and magnesium it includes, blocks the transmembrane signaling channels of jellyfish and reduces the osmotic forces needing for nematocyst firing [193]. Also compounds such as lanthanum sulfate were indicated to provide with protection in vitro against jellyfish venoms [195] and were shown to block the venom-induced 45Ca uptake [196].

(p14.4) In conclusion, all species of jellyfish in the Mediterranean are capable of some minor injury, however, most are relatively harmless. Pelagia noctiluca and Chrysaora hysoscella, as well as the lessepsian Rhopilema nomadica, are considered the most venomous; however, considering the widespread abundance of Pelagia noctiluca, it is by far the biggest cause of jellyfish stings in the Mediterranean. Thus, the study of not-highly-poisonous jellyfish, such as the Mediterranean species, could be important to develop research models and to detect compounds which could have an application as bioactive substances. Further research is needed to probe the effective possibilities of Mediterranean jellyfish in this field.
