# Sequencing Overview of Ewing Sarcoma: A Journey across Genomic, Epigenomic and Transcriptomic Landscapes

CorpusID: 5776686 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1df3138d7e87f50e9caa848e207e7d2c35dd8294](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1df3138d7e87f50e9caa848e207e7d2c35dd8294)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Relation between EWSR1-ETS and the Cell of Origin of EWS
(p1.0) There is an ongoing debate on the identification of the cell of origin of EWS. Expression of the fusion protein leads to more stem cell-like phenotypes and expressions of neuro-ectodermal markers [13]. In addition, EWSR1 is expressed in many tissues, its function is poorly understood and the EWSR1 gene is involved in translocations in multiple other tumors [14][15][16][17]. Multiple cells of origin have been suggested, such as mesenchymal stem and neural crest cells [13,18,19]. In order to shed some light on this debate, the effect of induced expression of the chimeric protein in non-tumorigenic cells was investigated. It was expected that the translocation had a large impact on cell homeostasis and interfered at multiple levels in endogenous processes. To study the impact of this gene chimera, primary human fibroblasts were transfected with an EWSR1-FLI1 construct and that led to a TP53 dependent growth arrest. This points towards the need of additional (secondary) changes to be able to transform [20]. Likewise, in other studies, which used EWSR1-ETS transfected adult human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), an additional mutation was needed for the cells to form tumors; while transformation was possible using unmodified pediatric MSCs [18,21,22]. Animal models containing inducible EWSR1-FLI1 constructs led to phenotypically varying tumors from malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors to myeloid/erythroid leukemia [23,24]. These observations directed towards a hypothesis that certain epigenetic changes might be needed to result in an EWSR1-ETS driven tumor and that this partly dictates the phenotype of the tumor. The presently hypothesized cells of origin are MSCs and neural crest cells. This is based on their capability to endure expression of EWSR1-ETS gene chimera without additional mutations, and the finding that transient EWSR1-ETS expression leads to a tumor similar to EWS at the level of expressed cellular markers and micro-array expression data [22,25]. Recently, a new mouse model has been created to mimic EWS using specific selected cells of the embryonic superficial zone of the long bones. In these animals, EWS-like tumors developed without any additional gene modifications. This might be a leap forward in creating a mouse model for EWS [19]. To gain further insight into the tumor specific genetic changes multiple massive parallel sequencing studies were performed at the genome, the transcriptome and the epigenome level (Table 1). By combining the results of these studies, researchers may identify landscape marks in the EWS OMIC atlas explaining some of the mechanisms behind the behavior of Ewing sarcoma with the aim to identify new, targeted therapeutic targets These targets can be validated by combining functional studies and testing In addition, this might shed light on the cell of origin and secondary events necessary for tumor formation and changes that are related to a more therapy resistant or more aggressive phenotype. 
## (s2) Genome Map
(p2.0) To identify possible secondary genetic and genomic alterations related to the development of EWS and its biology, several groups performed genome-wide studies such as: whole genome sequencing (WGS), whole exome sequencing (WES) and whole transcriptome sequencing (WTS) [26][27][28]. These three types of studies included WGS of 123 tumor samples in parallel with the normal tissue derived germline controls, WES of 92 tumors of which 26 with paired normal control and 11 cell lines and WTS of 92 tumors and 42 cell lines resulting in data about structural rearrangements and variations, somatic mutations and expression profiles.

(p2.1) For a long time, EWS was known as a genetically stable tumor with rarely occurring additional mutations. Only a few genomic changes such as TP53 mutations or CDKN2A/CDKN2B deletions were observed in a minority of samples in retrospective studies and they were reported to be associated with an inferior outcome in a multivariate analysis [41,42]. The search for secondary mutations that provide a permissive genetic background, and might explain how the EWSR1-ETS chimera protein transforms cells, remained unsuccessful for over twenty years after the initial identification of the EWSR1-FLI1 fusion gene [43]. The goal of the genome sequencing studies was to identify the missing link in this area. Both WGS and WES studies detected only a very low number of somatic mutations (0.65-0.15 per Mb) although different statistics for analysis were used [27,28]. Similarly, the low number of single nucleotide variations (SNV) in EWS has been reported in an earlier study and was, when compared to other tumors, one of the lowest [29]. Possible causes for the low number of SNVs could be related to the pathognomonic gene fusion acting as a direct tumor driver, and to the young age of onset of the tumor with possible fewer gained environmental mutations. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) consists of both fusion gene positive and negative subtypes and the fusion positive subtype contained significant less mutations compared to the fusion negative subtype [44]. The number of mutations detected in fusion positive RMS was similar to EWS. The number of additional mutations correlated with age in both the RMS and EWS, confirming an age related factor [28,44]. Another retrospective study confirmed that the increased number of somatic mutations was in a univariate analysis correlated to shorter survival time [27]. This might partly explain why an increased age is correlated with inferior prognosis in EWS, but it could also be due decreased tolerance to chemotherapy [45,46]. In biopsies, the most common kind of mutation detected was a C to T transition, which was linked to the common event of deamination of methylated cytosines [28]. The number of mutations was, as expected, increased in post-chemotherapy samples and an association between the increased numbers of novel mutations with a poor patient outcome was observed [28]. In theory, these clones might already have been present but remained undetected due to tumor heterogeneity. Alternatively, these mutations were caused by the treatment resulting in a drug resistance phenotype. This would be very interesting for understanding treatment response prediction. Overall, EWS is from a global genomic perspective a relatively stable tumor with low number of somatic mutations, implying a functional mutation recognition and repair mechanism.
## (s3) Structural and Copy Number Variant Map
(p3.0) All bona fide EWS contained an EWSR1-ETS translocation and these were detected in all tumors and cell lines tested [26][27][28]. In the study by Brohl et al. [26], however, seven cases were identified with cellular phenotype similarly to EWS but without an EWSR1-ETS translocation, supported by the fact that these samples cluster separately based on RNA expression profile. This observation supports the notion of the existence of a Ewing-like tumor with clinical-and histo-morphological appearances similarly to EWS but carrying other, specific translocations such as, BCOR-CCNB3, EWSR1-NFATc2, FUS-NFATc2 and CIC-FOXO4 and CIC-DUX4 [3][4][5]. As these entities are rare, follow-up studies have to show if these groups should be further stratified based on the genes involved or might be lumped as one clinical entity, Ewing-like sarcoma. None of the sequenced EWS samples detected an additional, commonly occurring translocation co-existing with EWSR1-ETS.
## (s4) Mutation Map
(p4.0) Although EWS contains few SNVs, their distribution over the genome is quite specific. The most commonly affected genes found in the genomic landscape studies were STAG2 and TP53 with an occurrence in patients of respectively 9%-21.5% and 5.2% to 7% and both were in a retrospective study in a univariate analysis associated with poor prognosis [26,27,72]. The most commonly mutated gene STAG2 was only recently reported for the first time in EWS [73]. The distribution of the mutations is striking, with a quarter of the cases having a mutation at R216X, which is a possible CpG site and might be linked to a STAG2-DNA methylation pattern (see Figure 1A). The mutated STAG2 status correlated only with an increase in structural variants and no other of the tested parameters [27,28]. This observation may be related to the function of STAG2, as it is a subunit of the cohesin complex and involved in chromatin modeling, chromatin cohesion, repair of stalled replication forks and double-strand breaks (DSBs) [74][75][76][77]. STAG2 or other mutations in the cohesion complex were observed also in other tumors, including glioblastoma, myeloid malignancies, colon cancer and bladder cancer [72,73,78,79]. In colon cancer and glioblastoma, cohesin complex mutations were associated, like in EWS, with an increase in structural variants and aneuploidy [73,79]. In contrast, in myeloid malignancies this was not observed and in bladder cancer an inverse association was reported [80,81]. However, in myeloid malignancies, like in EWS, cohesin mutations were associated with poor prognosis [78]. In addition, when one of the cohesin complex genes was mutated in myeloid leukemia cell lines, less cohesin was bound to the chromatin [80]. Since cohesin is a key regulator of the chromatin structure and consequently influences gene expression, a reduction in the cohesin bound to the chromatin could affect the global gene expression [74,80,82]. TP53 is the second most common mutated gene in EWS and is one of the most common mutated genes in all tumors [83]. The frequency of TP53 mutations is slightly lower compared to earlier reports with an average of 10%. The two most frequent detected TP53 mutations were the p.C176F and p.R273X of which p.R273X has been reported earlier [84]. In the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) database, p.R273X is, like in EWS, a hot spot mutation. Yet, the most frequent TP53 mutation in EWS p.C176F is remarkably not listed as a hot spot in the IARC database. In addition, the IARC database hot spot mutation p.R248Q is detected in only one tumor sample and only in one cell line, although it has been reported more frequent in earlier studies. This suggests that more samples are needed for a clear TP53 mutation pattern (see Figure 1B) [26][27][28]83,85]. Mutations of STAG2 and TP53 showed a trend for co-occurrence with a synergistic negative effect on prognosis when both mutations were present. They are both involved in the checkpoint and repair processes, which may be further abrogated when both genes are mutated [27]. A trend for mutual exclusivity of TP53 mutation and the loss of CDKN2A with only a few exceptions were present. Moreover, CDKN2A loss and STAG2 mutation were mutual exclusive [27,28]. This indicates that CDKN2A and STAG2 may be involved in complementary essential processes such as cell cycle and chromatin remodeling. Having a mutation in both genes may be lethal or redundant for EWS tumors [27,28,41,42,86,87]. To correct errors that may be caused by the relatively low numbers of cases analyzed, validation of these data in a bigger study is necessary. Other somatic gene mutations in EWS, described in three large genomic studies, were low and not recurrent. All three studies reported a different process to be most influenced by these somatic mutations. Tirode et al. [27] found mutations in several epigenetic regulators with EZH2 as the most frequent mutated gene (3/112 cases), whereas Crompton et al. [28] reported mutations in other ETS transcription factors, including ERF (3/46 cases). Brohl et al. [26] reported mutations in the DNA repair pathway, in specific, with the deleterious polymorphism K3326X in BRCA2 (4/55 cases) and a mutation in RAD51 (1/55 case). An earlier study identified only four mutations in 75 EWS tumors with a hotspot array of 275 recurrent mutations across 29 genes which were not reported by these large genomic studies [88]. A recent study in chemotherapy-treated EWS tumors observed mutations which had implications for further targeted therapy response, such as KRAS [30].

(p4.1) Genome-wide sequencing of EWS was expected to show a common secondary event that would help to understand and model Ewing sarcoma and its onset. However, no common secondary event was identified. Overall, EWS was found to be a relatively stable tumor with a low frequency of mutations, which were scattered across the genome and acted dominantly on cell cycle processes. This suggests that these mutations occur during tumor progression and may be used as a marker for tumor progression but are not associated with the onset of EWS. Consequently, this may indicate the involvement of other factors in the onset of EWS pointing to disturbances at the epigenetic level as potential candidate.
## (s8) DNA Damage Response and Repair: Systemic and Targeted Therapy
(p8.0) Chemotherapy is an essential part in the treatment of EWS [154,158]. Over the past decades, the combination of chemotherapeutics, dosage and administration protocol has been adjusted to improve tumor response and reduce toxicity [155,159,160]. The present standard treatment protocol for EWS is based on combination of vincristine, doxorubicin, ifosfamide or cyclophosphamide and etoposide [2,159]. Most of these are DNA damaging drugs. As EWS contains a limited number of secondary mutations, it is likely that these tumors have an intact DNA damage response mechanism. Alkylating and double strand break causing agents consequently activate this mechanism leading to growth arrest and apoptosis of EWS cells. The hypothesis of an intact DNA damage response mechanism correlates with the chemotherapeutic resistance of TP53 mutated EWS tumors, a key gene in this mechanism, since these tumors do not have an intact DNA damage response mechanism [41]. Fusion positive RMS has a limited number of mutations, similarly to EWS, but it is less sensitive to chemotherapy compared to translocation negative RMS [44]. This implies that downstream EWSR1-ETS effects may partly be responsible for the chemotherapy and radiotherapy sensitivity. In accordance, EWSR1-ETS associated DSBs have been identified and radiation induced damage turnover in EWS was reduced compared to osteosarcoma [161,162]. This makes the damage repair pathway a promising candidate to target. Compromising the DNA damage repair pathway via inhibition of poly (ADP ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) did indeed lead to inhibited proliferation in EWS cell lines and potentiated the response to temozolomide and irinotecan [19,[161][162][163]. However, in EWS xenografts and patients treated with a PARP1 inhibitor, only the combination with temozolomide or irinotecan was effective [162,164]. In colon cancer xenografts this effect was observed as well [165]. The sensitivity of colon cancer to PARP1 inhibition is hypothesized to be related to a less functional homologous recombination due to cohesin complex aberrancy [75,77,166]. In glioblastoma cells, a correlation between PARP1 sensitivity and the presence or absence of the cohesin complex gene STAG2 was demonstrated [167]. In the EWS PARP1 inhibition studies both STAG2 wild type and mutant cell lines were sensitive to PARP1 inhibition in combination with chemotherapy [163,168]. A specific role for STAG2 in this is therefore unlikely in EWS. Overall, it seems EWSR1-ETS interferes in the DNA damage repair pathway by a yet unexplainable way based on data obtained from genome and transcriptome sequencing studies leading to chemotherapy sensitivity. Identifying the TP53 independent DNA damage response and repair pathway could open novel therapeutic options.
## (s9) Targeting Chromatin Remodeling; EWSR1-ETS and Its Binding Partners
(p9.0) As mentioned, EWSR1-ETS intervenes in chromatin remodeling in multiple ways and the chromatin state around GGAA microsatellites might be related to the oncogenic capacity of EWSR1-ETS. Hence, chromatin remodeling is a good target. Understanding the action of EWSR1-ETS fusion protein in this could be used to design novel therapeutic agents that either occupies its GGAA microsatellite binding sites, targets the chromatin remodeling or blocks binding of its partners in transcription.

(p9.1) Chemotherapeutic drugs induce DNA damage by binding to the DNA, but the same binding can interfere with the binding of EWSR1-ETS to the DNA. Between these DNA binding chemotherapeutic agents, there is a difference in binding specificity, where Cisplatin and Doxorubicin are suggested to be less specific than Actinomycin D for removal of EWSR1-ETS from the DNA [169]. However, due to the heavy systemic side effects Actinomycin D is no longer used to treat Ewing sarcoma patients in the U.S. [170]. Trabectedin, a toxin from the sea squirt Ecteinascidia turbinate, is believed to be more specific against EWSR1-ETS DNA binding sites. In vitro studies in EWS and myxoid liposarcoma, another fusion gene holding tumor demonstrated a high efficacy and showed interference with the activity of EWSR1-ETS and EWSR1-CHOP fusion protein, respectively [158,171]. In a clinical trial, however, trabectedin alone did not show a significant effect on overall survival in EWS [172].
## (s10) Targeting EWSR1-ETS Influenced Extracellular Signaling, Transcriptome Mapping as a Lead
(p10.0) At the transcriptome level, EWSR1-ETS influences various pathways involved in intracellular processes and tumor microenvironmental processes that are needed for EWS development and maintenance. Both these processes are vital according to the processes collectively described as the hallmarks of cancer by Hanahan and Weinberg [180]. Major pathways by EWSR1-ETS affected are involved in extracellular signaling and membrane protein signaling. At a histo-morphological level, this is reflected by a stem-cell like tumor with high vascularization and a clinically observed high metastatic potential. Involved EWSR1-ETS key target pathways responsible for these features might be identified by transcriptome sequencing.
## (s11) Targeting EWS with Immunotherapy
(p11.0) Immunotherapy is based on the use of two general mechanisms: (1) activating the native immune system (2) priming natural killer (NK) cells or cytotoxic T-cells for antigens specifically overexpressed in the tumor to treat. The performed OMIC studies in EWS can be of value in both cases. Expression of antigen presenting and NK cell ligands in EWS samples can be determined retrospectively and EWS specific antigens can be identified.

(p11.1) Determination of the tumor-associated leukocytes in pediatric tumors showed an increase in macrophages and almost lack of dendritic compare to adult tumors as a common feature the almost lack of dendritic cells [212]. The determination of the presence of intratumoral leukocytes is particularly important since high numbers of CD8+ T-cells have retrospectively been found to be associated with improved survival in an univariate analysis [198]. Indirect attraction of these CD8+ T-cells to EWS may be enhanced by the IFN-ƴ therapy, since it upregulates pro-inflammatory chemokine expression levels [198]. Activation and attraction of the T-cells is presently not tested in a clinical trial but activation of endogenous or donor NK cells has been shown to be effective in EWS and phase I and II clinical trials and are currently open for enrollment (NCT01287104, NCT02100891) [213,214]. The efficacy of recognition may in fact be increased by combining this with the earlier mentioned chromatin remodeler inhibitors. In vitro HDAC inhibitor enhanced the NKGD ligands expression in EWS cell lines, which are essential for NK mediated lysis [215]. For improved long-term NK activation and to overcome tumor mediated downregulation of NKGD, prolonged ex vivo activation or antibody dependent cytolysis is needed [216]. From a preclinical perspective, allografting may be a beneficial adjuvant therapy in combination with either EWSR1-ETS blocking therapy or standard chemotherapy.

(p11.2) The second general method of priming cytotoxic T-cells for tumor specific membrane proteins overexpressed by EWS or unique HLA presented peptides has been investigated. Proposed targets are the tumor specific membrane proteins like PRAME, GPR64 and STEAP1 [217][218][219]. However, ex vivo priming of T-cells for antigens like PRAME and STEAP1 could not yet induce a prolonged antitumor immune response in preclinical studies. T-cells could not interact with the endogenous presented antigens at EWS cell lines or the T-cells which did recognize the presented antigens were classified as exhausted T-cells according to high PD1 expression [220,221]. The EWSR1-ETS upregulated proteins EZH2 and CHM1 were successfully used to prime allo-restricted T-cells but these are proteins expressed in many other tissues and could have serious side effects and lead to non-tumor specific targeting [221]. The ideal antigen to prime T-cells for would be EWSR1-ETS itself. The potential of this hypothesis was tested and a EWSR1-FLI1 specific antigen was identified and verified as an activating antigen for cytotoxic T-cells, but no follow-up study has been presented [222]. A possible cause for the less effective recognition demonstrated in EWS cell lines, and the potential clinical limiting factor, is the loss of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I and class II, which are needed for a proper immune response [223]. Genetic engineering of T-cells with chimeric antigen receptors directed to overexpressed surface markers is independent of the MHC class system. These can be designed against proteins and even phosphoglycolipids [224]. The singular tested surface marker with this method is the neural ganglioside GD2 which was expressed in all 10 EWS cell lines tested and 12 of 14 analyzed patients [225]. A follow-up xenograft study was successful showing a reduction in tumor growth and number of tumors but effect on total survival was not significantly different [224]. For further research, antigens should be selected for EWS specific surface markers to prevent non-tumor cells to be targeted, like stem cells which do not express MHC class II complex but do express certain surface markers [226]. For example, the aforementioned GD2 is also expressed in neural crest cells and mesenchymal stem cells [227].

(p11.3) Overall, immunotherapy can be promising in combination with systemic or targeted therapy. Both NK-cell and T-cell related therapies have potential, especially the antibody targeted NK-cells and genetically modified T-cells. Genetically modified T-cell therapy in EWS is just starting and all membrane proteins and potential tumor specific splice variants of membrane proteins could be targets for these T-cells. In addition, the ability to target glycolipid structures opens a complete new set of possibilities, but these cannot be identified by sequencing.
## (s12) Conclusions
(p12.0) By sequencing EWS at the genome, epigenome and transcriptome level, an atlas can be created which would help to fundamentally understand EWS and help to identify important nodes as therapeutic candidates. The EWSR1-ETS translocation is the characteristic pathognomonic alteration found in all tumors so far. The fusion protein act as a strong transforming oncogene and, in experimental conditions, the transfection of cells with normal cellular backgrounds rather leads to oncogene-induced apoptosis than to transformation. Recent studies, however, showed that stem cells from young individuals with the necessary permissive background did form tumors, pointing towards the importance of epigenetic controlling in cellular/tissue differentiation in providing the necessary niche for the transformation [19,22,25,38]. Therefore, mapping these genomic and functional genomic alterations can lead to identification of the cell of origin, improvements in prediction of clinical outcome, and discovery of novel therapeutic targets. These prospects have led to numerous, independent investigations using various approaches related to OMICs.

(p12.1) As a result, several novel findings and confirmations of earlier observations were collected. For example, some secondary structural alterations can be detected in a subset of the tumors that can identify a patient with unfavorable prognosis. Despite huge efforts to identify secondary mutations that provide a permissive background to transform cells with the pathognomonic EWSR1-ETS translocation, only a limited number of secondary point mutations were detected in EWS. Of these, STAG2 and TP53 were the most frequently mutated genes and mutations in these genes were associated with inferior prognosis. The value of these mutations as prognostic markers has to be validated in a prospective study. Transcriptome sequencing projects excluded the possibility of recurrent co-occurring fusion genes that would be responsible for the transformation to endure the fusion protein. Based on these massive sequencing efforts, it is likely that the EWSR1-ETS fusion can propagate transformation in cells with less differentiated features and the epigenetic landscape of these primitive cells form a permissive niche for oncogenic transformation. EWSR1-ETS is, both at the transcriptome and epigenome level, the most dominant actor both by activation and repression transcription and needs cooperation of binding partner proteins like chromatin remodelers. The identified key pathways in Ewing sarcoma and the EWSR1-ETS chromatin remodeling binding partners include promising candidate targets. This needs to be validated with in functional studies in combination with the epigenome and transcriptome analyses.

(p12.2) The advantage of the genomic stability of EWS is that the endogenous pathways controlling DNA damage recognition and apoptosis are still intact and could potentially be activated when targeted specifically and especially together with agents acting on the basis of the EWSR1-ETS network of epigenomic and transcriptomic changes. For example, blocking the interaction with its binding proteins could be a very efficient combination therapy. By deciphering this network for both targeted therapy as well as immunotherapy, novel key target candidates can be identified. In the future, hopefully these therapies could, together with conventional chemotherapy, improve the outcome of these young patients.
