# Physiologically based mathematical models of nanomaterials for regulatory toxicology: A review

CorpusID: 57666310 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc516d70754fd0a396b2ddd4329f31669e619a04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc516d70754fd0a396b2ddd4329f31669e619a04)

Fields: Medicine, Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s7) Results of the analysis of available TD models
(p7.0) TD refers to the quantitative description of a toxicant's effects on a biological system at different levels (from the molecular level, to higher levels such as cells, tissues, organ systems). In the model inventory, four TD models are reported; some details are extracted in Table 2.

(p7.1) Shelley et al. [41] developed a model to simulate the cell population dynamics (including toxic effects and functional viability along time) of rat alveolar macrophages under exposure to nano-Al (size: 80 nm). A system of differential equations was derived based on the macrophage  Fig. 3. Summary of the type of MN, animal species, exposure routes and compartments used in the TK models for MNs. Information derived from [9,12,[28][29][30][31][32][33][34][35][36][37]14,17,[22][23][24][25][26][27]. The numbers represent the times that each specific parameter has been identified. MPS: mononuclear phagocyte system; RES: reticuloendothelial system.
## (s11) Results of the analysis of available in vitro dosimetry models
(p11.0) Commonly, in vitro dosimetry models are based on mathematical approaches that describe the dynamics of particles in liquids. The most relevant parameters in the characterisation of the respiratory tract dosimetry models are summarised in Fig. 5.

(p11.1) Agglomeration plays an important role in in vitro dosimetry, influenced by MN concentration, surface chemistry and zeta potential, and affects MNs diffusion and gravitational settling [52]. Surprisingly, agglomeration is recorded only for one model reported in the inventory. Nonetheless, sedimentation (or gravitational settling) is reported in three models in the inventory, according to Fig. 5, as it is an essential process in the fate of MNs [52].
## (s12) Kinetic processes in in vitro dosimetry models applicable to MN
(p12.0) Kinetic processes such as diffusion (based on the Stokes-Einstein equation), sedimentation (based on Stokes law) and advection (transfer by motion of the fluid) are some of the processes that are considered in these models (e.g. In vitro Sedimentation, Diffusion and Dosimetry model -ISDD -by Hinderliter et al. [53]). Mukherjee et al. [45] also includes in their agglomeration-diffusion-sedimentation-reaction model (ADSRM), dynamic transformation processes important for MNs, specifically dissolution. Neither the ISDD nor ADSRM models consider the interaction of MNs with molecules present in the test system media. To overcome this limitation in the ASDRM model, the authors [54] extended the ADSRM model to consider the interaction of MNs with various fractions of lipids and surfactant proteins in the model. Another enhancement worth mentioning is the semi-analytical solution for the ISDD model developed by Mahnama et al. [55]. Based on a generalised integral transform technique (GITT) the predictions concerning the advection-diffusion processes were improved, and consequently the accuracy of the ISDD model. The above-mentioned models are mainly designed for in vitro supporting systems such as tubes or cell culture well plates.

(p12.1) A different approach was developed to predict the distribution of MNs in the extracellular phase after injection [56]. Interactions of the MNs with the surrounding media were also considered. To this end, van der Waals interactions, electrostatic forces and attachment of MNs to solid structures is taken into consideration as relevant processes in the model.
## (s16) Model inputs and outputs
(p16.0) The most common input parameters in the TK models reported in the inventory are physiological parameters (e.g. body weight, organ weight, blood flow, organ and tissue volumes, blood flow to organs) that are non-dependent on the nanoform. Only one model in the inventory has a size-related input parameter (diameter) [22] that is applied in the calculation of the MPS uptake rate of MNs from blood circulation. Other physicochemical properties such as surface area, specific surface area, density and agglomeration state are not extensively considered as input parameters in the collected models. These physicochemical properties are well known to affect the TK of MNs. However, most available TK models were developed and parameterised on the basis of experimental data for a single MN, and their goal was not to predict TK for other MNs. As other computational kinetic models, the estimation of the concentration in tissues, time-dependent concentration in organs or other specific compartments is the main predicted model outcome of the collected TK models.
## (s18) Conclusions
(p18.0) A number of PB models have been developed and applied to MNs. Particle size is not a required input in all model types: respiratory tract dosimetry models usually have a more detailed consideration of particle behaviour in the airways compared to TK models, which in many cases do not consider any size-related parameter [13,17,31,36]. Regarding the structure of the available PBK models, the assumptions made for the model structure are similar to those made for chemicals (e.g. airway architecture, homogeneous compartments, same blood partitioning coefficients for different organs) [23,33,46,72]. On the other hand, parameters that are specific to MNs like the influence of their physicochemical properties, such as size, on their biokinetics and reversibility of processes like agglomeration and sedimentation are typically neglected as models usually assume that MNs do not agglomerate, and that when inhalation is considered as an exposure pathway, there is no overload effect in the lungs.
