# Automatic Compilation of Travel Information from Texts: A Survey Automatic Compilation of Travel Information from Texts: A Survey

CorpusID: 58789753 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/222e128a140e5a6cd180e79280928150cd6d782e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/222e128a140e5a6cd180e79280928150cd6d782e)

Fields: Computer Science, Geography

## (s2) Automatic identification of travel blog entries
(p2.0) Travel blogs 1 are defined as travel journals written by bloggers in diary form. Travel blogs are considered useful for obtaining travel information, because many bloggers' travel experiences are written in this form.

(p2.1) There are various portal sites for travel blogs, which we will describe in Section 6. At these sites, travel blogs are manually registered by bloggers themselves, and the blogs are classified according to travel destination. However, there are many more travel blogs in the blogosphere, beyond these portal sites. In an attempt to construct an exhaustive database of travel blogs, Nanba et al. [25] identified travel blog entries written in Japanese in a blog database. 2 Blog entries that contain cue phrases, such as "travel", "sightseeing", or "tour", have a high degree of probability of being travel blogs. However, not every travel blog contains such cue phrases. For example, if a blogger describes his/her journey to Norway in multiple blog entries, the blog might state "We traveled to Norway" in the first entry, while only writing "We ate wild sheep!" in the second entry. In this case, because the second entry does not contain any expressions related to travel, it is difficult to identify it as a travel blog entry. Therefore, Nanba et al. focused not only on each blog entry but also on the surrounding entries for the identification of travel blog entries. They formulated the identification of travel blog entries as a sequence-labeling problem, and solved it using machine learning. For the machine learning method, they examined the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) method [20]; its empirical success has been reported recently in the field of natural language processing. The CRF-based method identifies the tag 3 of each entry. Features and tags are given in the CRF method as follows: (1) k tags occur before a target entry; (2) k features occur before a target entry; and (3) k features follow a target entry (see Figure 1). They used the value of k = 4, which was determined in a pilot study. Here, they used the following features for machine learning: whether an entry contains any of 416 cue phrases, such as "ÅL (travel)", "Ä¢ü (tour)", and "úz (departure)", and the number of location names in each entry.

(p2.2) Using the above method, Nanba et al. identified 17,268 travel blog entries from 1,100,000 blog entries, and constructed a system that plotted travel blog entries on a Google map (see Figure 2). 4 In this figure, travel blog entries are shown as icons. If the user clicks an icon, the corresponding blog entry is shown in a pop-up window.

(p2.3) Travel blogs 1 are defined as travel journals written by bloggers in diary form. Travel blogs are considered useful for obtaining travel information, because many bloggers' travel experiences are written in this form.

(p2.4) There are various portal sites for travel blogs, which we will describe in Section 6. At these sites, travel blogs are manually registered by bloggers themselves, and the blogs are classified according to travel destination. However, there are many more travel blogs in the blogosphere, beyond these portal sites. In an attempt to construct an exhaustive database of travel blogs, Nanba et al. [25] identified travel blog entries written in Japanese in a blog database. 2 Blog entries that contain cue phrases, such as "travel", "sightseeing", or "tour", have a high degree of probability of being travel blogs. However, not every travel blog contains such cue phrases. For example, if a blogger describes his/her journey to Norway in multiple blog entries, the blog might state "We traveled to Norway" in the first entry, while only writing "We ate wild sheep!" in the second entry. In this case, because the second entry does not contain any expressions related to travel, it is difficult to identify it as a travel blog entry. Therefore, Nanba et al. focused not only on each blog entry but also on the surrounding entries for the identification of travel blog entries. They formulated the identification of travel blog entries as a sequence-labeling problem, and solved it using machine learning. For the machine learning method, they examined the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) method [20]; its empirical success has been reported recently in the field of natural language processing. The CRF-based method identifies the tag 3 of each entry. Features and tags are given in the CRF method as follows: (1) k tags occur before a target entry; (2) k features occur before a target entry; and (3) k features follow a target entry (see Figure 1). They used the value of k = 4, which was determined in a pilot study. Here, they used the following features for machine learning: whether an entry contains any of 416 cue phrases, such as "ÅL (travel)", "Ä¢ü (tour)", and "úz (departure)", and the number of location names in each entry.

(p2.5) Using the above method, Nanba et al. identified 17,268 travel blog entries from 1,100,000 blog entries, and constructed a system that plotted travel blog entries on a Google map (see Figure 2). 4 In this figure, travel blog entries are shown as icons. If the user clicks an icon, the corresponding blog entry is shown in a pop-up window.
## (s3) Automatic extraction of travel information from texts
(p3.0) Nakatoh et al. [24] proposed a method for extracting names of local culinary dishes from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified when the blog entry included both the name of a sightseeing destination and the word "tourism". They extracted local dishes by gathering nouns that are dependent on the verb "'ßy‹" (eat). Tsai and Chou [32] also proposed a method for extracting dish names from restaurant review blogs written in Chinese using a machine learning (CRF) technique.  In the following, we explain the detail of the bootstrapping-based and machine learning-based information extraction approaches based on Nanba's work [25]. Nanba et al. extracted pairs comprising a location name and a local product from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified using the method described in Section 2.1. For the efficient extraction of travel information, they employed a bootstrapping method.

(p3.1) First, they prepared 482 pairs as seeds for the bootstrapping. These pairs were obtained automatically from a "Web Japanese N-gram" database provided by Google, Inc. The database comprises N-grams (N = 1-7) extracted from 20 billion Japanese sentences on the Web. They applied the pattern "[0 ] i [ i] " ([slot of "location name"] local product [slot of "local product"] ) to the database, and extracted location names and local products from each corresponding slot, thereby obtaining the 482 pairs. Second, they applied a machine learning-based information extraction technique to the travel blogs identified in the previous step, and obtained new pairs. In this step, they prepared training data for the machine learning in the following three steps.

(p3.2) 1. Select 200 sentences that contain both a location name and a local product from the 482 pairs. Then automatically create 200 tagged sentences, to which both "location" and "product" tags are assigned. 5 2. Prepare another 200 sentences that contain only a location name. Then create 200 tagged sentences, to which the "location" tag is assigned.
## (s4) Automatic compilation of travel links
(p4.0) Collections of Web links are usefel information sources. However, maintaining these collections manually is costly. Therefore, an automatic method for compiling collections of Web links is required. In this section, we introduce a method that compiles travel links automatically.

(p4.1) From travel blog entries, which were automatically identified using the method mentioned in Section 2.1, Ishino et al. [15] extracted the hyperlinks to useful Web sites for a tourist spot included by bloggers, and thereby constructed collections of hyperlinks for tourist spots. The procedure for classifying links in travel blog entries is as follows.
## (s8) Travelers' behavior analysis
(p8.0) The analysis of people's transportation information is considered an important issue in various fields, such as city planning, architectural planning, car navigation, sightseeing administration, crime prevention, and tracing the spread of infection of epidemics. In this section, we focus on the analysis of travelers' behavior.

(p8.1) Ishino et al. [15] proposed a method to extract people's transportation information from automatically identified travel blogs written in Japanese [25]. They used machine learning to extract information, such as "departure place", "destination", or "transportation device", from travel blog entries. First, the tags used in their examination are defined.
## (s20) Recommending photos
(p20.0) Bressan et al. [2] proposed a travel blog assistant system that facilitated the travel blog writing by selecting for each blog paragraph the most relevant images from an image set. The procedure is as follows.

(p20.1) 1. The system adds metadata to the traveler's photos based on a generic visual categorizer, which provides annotations (short textual keywords) related to some generic visual aspects of and objects in the image. 14 2. Textual information (tags) was obtained using a cross-content information retrieval system using a repository of multimedia objects.
## (s22) Providing travel information along streetcar lines
(p22.0) Ishino et al. [13] proposed a method for collecting blog entries about the Hiroshima Electric Railway (Hiroden) from a blog database. 15 Hiroden blog entries were defined as travel journals that provide regional information for streetcar stations in Hiroshima. The task of collecting Hiroden blog entries was divided into two steps: (1) collection of blog entries; and (2) identification of Hiroden blog entries. Figure 7 shows a route map used by the system for providing travel information along the Hiroden streetcar lines. The route map shows Hiroden streetcar stations and major tourist spots. The steps in the search procedure are as follows.

(p22.1) • (Step 1) Click the Hiroden streetcar station, such as "Ÿ Éü àM" (Atomic Bomb Dome), in Figure 7 to generate a list of links to Hiroden blog entries ( Figure 8).
## (s23) Natural language interface for accessing databases
(p23.0) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 

(p23.1) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 
## (s38) Automatic identification of travel blog entries
(p38.0) Travel blogs 1 are defined as travel journals written by bloggers in diary form. Travel blogs are considered useful for obtaining travel information, because many bloggers' travel experiences are written in this form.

(p38.1) There are various portal sites for travel blogs, which we will describe in Section 6. At these sites, travel blogs are manually registered by bloggers themselves, and the blogs are classified according to travel destination. However, there are many more travel blogs in the blogosphere, beyond these portal sites. In an attempt to construct an exhaustive database of travel blogs, Nanba et al. [25] identified travel blog entries written in Japanese in a blog database. 2 Blog entries that contain cue phrases, such as "travel", "sightseeing", or "tour", have a high degree of probability of being travel blogs. However, not every travel blog contains such cue phrases. For example, if a blogger describes his/her journey to Norway in multiple blog entries, the blog might state "We traveled to Norway" in the first entry, while only writing "We ate wild sheep!" in the second entry. In this case, because the second entry does not contain any expressions related to travel, it is difficult to identify it as a travel blog entry. Therefore, Nanba et al. focused not only on each blog entry but also on the surrounding entries for the identification of travel blog entries. They formulated the identification of travel blog entries as a sequence-labeling problem, and solved it using machine learning. For the machine learning method, they examined the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) method [20]; its empirical success has been reported recently in the field of natural language processing. The CRF-based method identifies the tag 3 of each entry. Features and tags are given in the CRF method as follows: (1) k tags occur before a target entry; (2) k features occur before a target entry; and (3) k features follow a target entry (see Figure 1). They used the value of k = 4, which was determined in a pilot study. Here, they used the following features for machine learning: whether an entry contains any of 416 cue phrases, such as "ÅL (travel)", "Ä¢ü (tour)", and "úz (departure)", and the number of location names in each entry.

(p38.2) Using the above method, Nanba et al. identified 17,268 travel blog entries from 1,100,000 blog entries, and constructed a system that plotted travel blog entries on a Google map (see Figure 2). 4 In this figure, travel blog entries are shown as icons. If the user clicks an icon, the corresponding blog entry is shown in a pop-up window.

(p38.3) Travel blogs 1 are defined as travel journals written by bloggers in diary form. Travel blogs are considered useful for obtaining travel information, because many bloggers' travel experiences are written in this form.

(p38.4) There are various portal sites for travel blogs, which we will describe in Section 6. At these sites, travel blogs are manually registered by bloggers themselves, and the blogs are classified according to travel destination. However, there are many more travel blogs in the blogosphere, beyond these portal sites. In an attempt to construct an exhaustive database of travel blogs, Nanba et al. [25] identified travel blog entries written in Japanese in a blog database. 2 Blog entries that contain cue phrases, such as "travel", "sightseeing", or "tour", have a high degree of probability of being travel blogs. However, not every travel blog contains such cue phrases. For example, if a blogger describes his/her journey to Norway in multiple blog entries, the blog might state "We traveled to Norway" in the first entry, while only writing "We ate wild sheep!" in the second entry. In this case, because the second entry does not contain any expressions related to travel, it is difficult to identify it as a travel blog entry. Therefore, Nanba et al. focused not only on each blog entry but also on the surrounding entries for the identification of travel blog entries. They formulated the identification of travel blog entries as a sequence-labeling problem, and solved it using machine learning. For the machine learning method, they examined the Conditional Random Fields (CRF) method [20]; its empirical success has been reported recently in the field of natural language processing. The CRF-based method identifies the tag 3 of each entry. Features and tags are given in the CRF method as follows: (1) k tags occur before a target entry; (2) k features occur before a target entry; and (3) k features follow a target entry (see Figure 1). They used the value of k = 4, which was determined in a pilot study. Here, they used the following features for machine learning: whether an entry contains any of 416 cue phrases, such as "ÅL (travel)", "Ä¢ü (tour)", and "úz (departure)", and the number of location names in each entry.

(p38.5) Using the above method, Nanba et al. identified 17,268 travel blog entries from 1,100,000 blog entries, and constructed a system that plotted travel blog entries on a Google map (see Figure 2). 4 In this figure, travel blog entries are shown as icons. If the user clicks an icon, the corresponding blog entry is shown in a pop-up window.
## (s39) Automatic extraction of travel information from texts
(p39.0) Nakatoh et al. [24] proposed a method for extracting names of local culinary dishes from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified when the blog entry included both the name of a sightseeing destination and the word "tourism". They extracted local dishes by gathering nouns that are dependent on the verb "'ßy‹" (eat). Tsai and Chou [32] also proposed a method for extracting dish names from restaurant review blogs written in Chinese using a machine learning (CRF) technique.  In the following, we explain the detail of the bootstrapping-based and machine learning-based information extraction approaches based on Nanba's work [25]. Nanba et al. extracted pairs comprising a location name and a local product from travel blogs written in Japanese, which were identified using the method described in Section 2.1. For the efficient extraction of travel information, they employed a bootstrapping method.

(p39.1) First, they prepared 482 pairs as seeds for the bootstrapping. These pairs were obtained automatically from a "Web Japanese N-gram" database provided by Google, Inc. The database comprises N-grams (N = 1-7) extracted from 20 billion Japanese sentences on the Web. They applied the pattern "[0 ] i [ i] " ([slot of "location name"] local product [slot of "local product"] ) to the database, and extracted location names and local products from each corresponding slot, thereby obtaining the 482 pairs. Second, they applied a machine learning-based information extraction technique to the travel blogs identified in the previous step, and obtained new pairs. In this step, they prepared training data for the machine learning in the following three steps.

(p39.2) 1. Select 200 sentences that contain both a location name and a local product from the 482 pairs. Then automatically create 200 tagged sentences, to which both "location" and "product" tags are assigned. 5 2. Prepare another 200 sentences that contain only a location name. Then create 200 tagged sentences, to which the "location" tag is assigned.
## (s40) Automatic compilation of travel links
(p40.0) Collections of Web links are usefel information sources. However, maintaining these collections manually is costly. Therefore, an automatic method for compiling collections of Web links is required. In this section, we introduce a method that compiles travel links automatically.

(p40.1) From travel blog entries, which were automatically identified using the method mentioned in Section 2.1, Ishino et al. [15] extracted the hyperlinks to useful Web sites for a tourist spot included by bloggers, and thereby constructed collections of hyperlinks for tourist spots. The procedure for classifying links in travel blog entries is as follows.
## (s44) Travelers' behavior analysis
(p44.0) The analysis of people's transportation information is considered an important issue in various fields, such as city planning, architectural planning, car navigation, sightseeing administration, crime prevention, and tracing the spread of infection of epidemics. In this section, we focus on the analysis of travelers' behavior.

(p44.1) Ishino et al. [15] proposed a method to extract people's transportation information from automatically identified travel blogs written in Japanese [25]. They used machine learning to extract information, such as "departure place", "destination", or "transportation device", from travel blog entries. First, the tags used in their examination are defined.
## (s56) Recommending photos
(p56.0) Bressan et al. [2] proposed a travel blog assistant system that facilitated the travel blog writing by selecting for each blog paragraph the most relevant images from an image set. The procedure is as follows.

(p56.1) 1. The system adds metadata to the traveler's photos based on a generic visual categorizer, which provides annotations (short textual keywords) related to some generic visual aspects of and objects in the image. 14 2. Textual information (tags) was obtained using a cross-content information retrieval system using a repository of multimedia objects.
## (s58) Providing travel information along streetcar lines
(p58.0) Ishino et al. [13] proposed a method for collecting blog entries about the Hiroshima Electric Railway (Hiroden) from a blog database. 15 Hiroden blog entries were defined as travel journals that provide regional information for streetcar stations in Hiroshima. The task of collecting Hiroden blog entries was divided into two steps: (1) collection of blog entries; and (2) identification of Hiroden blog entries. Figure 7 shows a route map used by the system for providing travel information along the Hiroden streetcar lines. The route map shows Hiroden streetcar stations and major tourist spots. The steps in the search procedure are as follows.

(p58.1) • (Step 1) Click the Hiroden streetcar station, such as "Ÿ Éü àM" (Atomic Bomb Dome), in Figure 7 to generate a list of links to Hiroden blog entries ( Figure 8).
## (s59) Natural language interface for accessing databases
(p59.0) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 

(p59.1) Several ontologies for e-tourism have been developed (see Section 6). Unfortunately, the gap between human users who want to retrieve information and the Semantic Web is yet to be cloased. Ruiz-Martínez et al. [30] proposed a method for querying ontological knowledge bases using natural language sentences. For example, when the user inputted the query "I want to visit the most important tourist attractions in Paris", the system conducted part-of-speech tagging, lemmatizing, and modification of query terms by synonyms, and finally searched the ontology. 14 Bressan et al. used images that were categorized into 44 classes as training data for visual categorization. Each class was given a short text name, such as "clouds and sky" or "beach". When an image was categorized as belonging to classes A and B using the visual categorizer, the short texts given to each class were assigned as keywords of the image. 15 
