# A Review on Phytochemical Studies and Biological Potential of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. (Cucurbitaceae)

CorpusID: 59334909 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/beef39fbc04338a0e2d22500b9dba709fea0faf4](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/beef39fbc04338a0e2d22500b9dba709fea0faf4)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Phytochemical Studies
(p1.0) A few bioactive compounds of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. fruit have been elucidated in the studies so far. They are included as carbohydrates, alkaloids, fatty acids, glycosides, flavonoids and essential oils. The cucurbitacins are prevalently found in the Cucurbitaceae family. As per chemical structures, cucurbitacins can be divided into 12 categories, yet all are not found in Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. Because of the cytotoxic conduct, cucurbitacins seem to assume an important part in medicate disclosure, especially in anticancer medication advancement. Among different cucurbitacins, cucurbitacin E (compound a) was discovered richly in Citrulluscolocynthis (L.) Schrad. fruit pulp. Colocynthoside A (compound b) and colocynthoside B (compound c), were isolated from the methanolic concentrate of the fruits. Different cucurbitacins secluded from the butanol part were, cucurbitacin L 2-O-β-D-glucopyranoside (compound d), hexanocucurbitacin I 2-O-β-D glucopyranoside (compound e), cucurbitacin K 2-O-β-D glucopyranoside (compound f) and khekadaengoside E (compound g), cucurbitacin J 2-O-β-D glucopyranoside (compound h), cucurbitacin I 2-O-β-D glucopyranoside (compound i). Some flavonoid glycosides e.g., isoorientin 30-O-methyl ether (compound j), isovitexin (compound k) &isosaponarin (compound l)and two cucurbitacin glycosides e.g. 2-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl cucurbitacin L & 2-O-β-D-glucopyranosyl cucurbitacin I were also identified in butanol fraction of the methanolic extract of Citrullus colocynthis (L.)Schrad. fruits. The major fatty acids found in Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. seed oil includes palmitic (8.1-17.3%) and stearic acids (6.1-10.5%) that form principal saturated fatty acids of this oil Linoleic and oleic acids are the primary monounsaturated fats, and this high content of linoleic acid (50.6-60.1%) in seed oil, which is an essential unsaturated fat, makes this oil restoratively profitable. The unsaturated fat profile of the seed oil uncovers that it falls in the class of linoleic-oleic acid oils and closely resembles a few other vegetable oils. In this way, the Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. oil, similar to some other cucurbit seed oils, is probably going to have potential uses as a cooking oil. Previous studies reported that the seed oil composition of this plant was like that of safflower oil, with an aggregate of 80-85% unsaturated fats. An investigation detailing the physical-compound portrayal and the fatty acid composition of the fixed oil of the seeds revealed that it is a decent wellspring of characteristic cancer prevention agents like uncovered that it is a decent wellspring of characteristic cancer prevention agents like natural antioxidants e.g., α-tocopherol, γ-tocopherol and β-carotene with respective composition of 45.1, 435 and 0.18 mg/kg. Many examinations revealed the presence of alkaloids in the Citrullus coloccynthis fruits however just a couple of reports are accessible on the isolation and identification of individual alkaloids. A study was done in 1973 in which choline and two unidentified alkaloids from fruit pulp of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad was isolated. Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. is a superb wellspring of various amino acids as methionine, arginine, and tryptophan. The biological files its protein quality has been depicted as: "lower than soybean however similar to or higher than generally oilseeds." Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. fruits and seeds possess many vitamins and minerals that play an important role in the diet. The potential of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. seed as a source of calcium and niacin is encouraging to the low milk-consuming zones of the world. Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. seeds contain ash-2.00g/100g, protein-13.19g/100 g, moisture-4.91 g/100 g, fat-18.59 g/100 g and mineral such as Calcium-569 mg/100g, Potassium-465 mg/100g, Magnesium-210 mg/100g, Phosphorous 30.0 mg/100g, Sodium-11.9 mg/100g, Iron-11.6 mg/100,
## (s3) Antioxidant Activity
(p3.0) In experimental studies on fruits of Citrullus colocynthis the total phenolic content, was found to be 0.74% of gallic acid equivalents of phenolic compounds and the total flavonoid content was 0.13% of catechin equivalent of fresh mass of C. colocynthis fruit extract. The free radical scavenging effect of fruit extract of this plant on the 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical was found to be 88.0±2.7% (p < 0.005), at concentration of 2500 mgmL -1 while scavenging effects of ascorbic acid, BHA and α-tocopherol were found to be 50 mgmL -1 of 89.5±1.1, 83.2±1.1 and 67.5±0.8% (p < 0.05) respectively [18].
## (s5) Antifertility Effects
(p5.0) In this study, 50% ethanol extract of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) Schrad. administered orally to male albino rats for evaluation of antifertility effects. Prominently reduced cauda epididymis sperm density and motility, a number of pups, fertility, and circulatory levels of testosterone were seen in all treatment groups. The weights of testes, epididymis, seminal vesicle and prostate were significantly reduced in groups receiving 100 mg/kg/day C. colocynthis extract for periods of 20, 40, and 60 days, respectively. The concentration of testicular cholesterol significantly increased, and sialic acid, protein, and alkaline phosphatase concentrations diminished. The histological analysis of the testis showed degenerative modifications in the seminiferous cells, cytolysis, and the lumen filled with eosinophilic substance. Hence 50% ethanol extract of C. colocynthis fruit actuated reversible antifertility activity in male rats because of antiandrogenic nature [20].
## (s6) Antiulcer Activity
(p6.0) Anti-ulcer activity of Citrullus colocynthis fruits showed positive results against pylorus ligation induced ulcers in male Wistar rats. Aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Citrullus colocynthis fruits administered at doses of 200 mg/kg and 400 mg/kg evaluated parameter like-pH, gastric volume, free acidity, total acidity, the percentage inhibition of ulceration and ulcer index. Ethanolic and aqueous extracts at 400 mg/kg indicated anoteworthy (p<0.001) decline in the total acidity, free acidity, and gastric volume. It showed also significant (P<0.001) decrease in ulcer score index and a number of ulcers in pylorus ligation ulceration model [21].
## (s12) Antibacterial and Anticandidal Activity
(p12.0) In vitro antibacterial and anticandidal activity of aqueous and diluted acetone extracts of Citrullus colocynthis Schrad. MIC and MBC/MFC were assessed in plant roots, stems, leaves and three maturation stages of its fruit and seeds against gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria like Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus faecalis and Candida spp. like candida glabrata, candida albicans, Candida parapsilosis and candida kreusei. The most elevated minimum inhibitory concentration (MICs) and minimum bactericidal concentration (MBCs) were obtained from the fruit aqueous extracts (MIC 0.20 mg/ml against Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 0.10 mg/ml against Candida albicans and Candida glabrata) and obtained lowest activity from the plant root extracts [26].
## (s14) Antihyperglycaemic Effect
(p14.0) Antihyperglycaemic effects of the alkaloidal, glycosidic, saponin and aqueous extracts of the rind of Citrullus colocynthis on the plasma glucose levels were studied in normal rabbits and the action of saponin extract on the fasting blood sugar levels were studied in alloxan-induced diabetic rabbits. Oral dosage of aqueous extract of Citrullus colocynthis (300 mg/kg) in normal rabbits produced noteworthy decrease in plasma glucose after 1 h and was exceptionally huge after 2, 3 and 6 h. The action was more articulated with saponin extract which decreased the glucose levels (fasting) after 1 and 2 h and significantly (p<0.001) after 3 and 6 h [28].
## (s15) Antidiabetic Activity
(p15.0) Antidiabetic action of petroleum ether fruits extract of Citrullus colocynthis against Streptozotocin initiated hyperglycemic rats was assessed after oral administration of two distinct doses (300 and 500 mg/ kg) of Citrullus colocynthis. Phytochemical investigations revealed following chemical constituents like alkaloids, terpenes, saponins and glycosides. Administration of petroleum ether extract of Citrullus colocynthis fundamentally enhanced body weight of diabetic rats in a dose and time-dependent manner. Citrullus colocynthis showed antidiabetic action through stimulation of β-cells of islets of Langerhans by releasing more insulin and this effect were brought about by constituents like glycosides, saponins, flavonoids [29].
