# Occupational Exposures and Neurodegenerative Diseases-A Systematic Literature Review and Meta-Analyses

CorpusID: 59342107 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b4d3dbb4cf9ea89a513e113c16cc57121229fd53)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s2) Statistical Methods
(p2.0) Risk estimates from the selected studies are reported as relative risks (RRs), as the outcome is rare. For the purposes of this research, we considered odds ratio (OR) and hazard ratio (HR) equivalent to RR. Where a study reported unadjusted as well as multivariable-adjusted risk estimates, we only considered the adjusted estimates. Studies that reported stratified estimates for sex were treated as separate studies and the estimates of each were included. Where exposure was categorized into different levels the risk rate for the highest level was used. Some studies reported estimates for more than one neurodegenerative disorder and all are included in the summary.

(p2.1) We examined the fixed effects model as well as the random effects model by considering statistical heterogeneity. To this end, we used the I 2 statistic and applied the recommended cut-offs of 25%, 50% and 75% degrees of heterogeneity. We stratified the data by study characteristics (gender, source of funding, exposure characteristics, previous vs. recent studies, low statistical precision studies vs. high precision studies), selected a priori, and used meta-regression to evaluate the significance of the stratification variable. Based on the I 2 criterion and the meta-regression, a random effects model was found to be the most appropriate choice in all of our analyses; hence, the results are reported only with random effects estimates. The weights used for pooling the risk estimates were equal to the inverse-variance weighting. Pooled risk estimates are presented with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).

(p2.2) Publication bias was analysed by inspection of the funnel plot, in which the estimates of RR should be distributed symmetrically around the weighted RR unless the publication was affected by bias. The rank correlation test proposed by Begg and Mazumdar [26] was used to supplement the interpretation of the funnel plot. We investigated whether publication bias could be related to (i) publication year, where early studies of a more exploratory character were more likely to be published if they showed increased RRs, or (ii) the statistical precision of the estimated RR, where studies with less precise CIs for RR were more likely to be published if they indicated an increased RR. To accomplish the stratification of year of publication we used stratification with cut-off points around 2005 and 2006. For statistical precision, we used the standard error of e log(RR), the essential factor that affects the width of the 95% CI for RR. The practical application was to use a value of 0.26 for this standard error, which rendered the two strata (low vs. high precision) to be approximately equal in numbers of estimated RRs for several of the comparisons. The width of the CI is dependent both on the total number of subjects in the study and on the number of cases with the specified diagnosis. We therefore use the phrases "estimate with high precision" and "estimate with low precision" rather than "study with high precision" and "study with low precision". It is possible that the same study with more than one diagnosis analysed may have contributed to one estimate with high and another estimate with low precision.
## (s5) Exposure to Pesticides
(p5.0) Thirty-one studies fulfilling good scientific standards (Armon class II-III) contributed data to meta-analyses of risk rates for pesticide exposure: five studies on ALS [33,[44][45][46][47], four on Alzheimer's disease [33,[48][49][50] and 24 on Parkinson's disease [23,33,. Figure 5 shows an increased overall risk of 50% for contracting these neurodegenerative diseases following exposure to pesticides.  Figure 4. Cumulative meta-analyses for studies ordered by precision of the confidence interval for RR, from low precision with wide confidence intervals for RR to studies with high precision and narrow confidence intervals. The association between ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) and Alzheimer's disease together and occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs) is described. The pooled estimate (Cum RR) is updated for every new study. Column P gives a measure of the precision for the confidence interval for RR, where large P stands for a wide confidence interval and small P stands for a narrow and more precise confidence interval. RR is the Relative Risk for the study included in the Cum RR.
## (s6) Exposure to Pesticides
(p6.0) Thirty-one studies fulfilling good scientific standards (Armon class II-III) contributed data to meta-analyses of risk rates for pesticide exposure: five studies on ALS [33,[44][45][46][47], four on Alzheimer's disease [33,[48][49][50] and 24 on Parkinson's disease [23,33,. Figure 5 shows an increased overall risk of 50% for contracting these neurodegenerative diseases following exposure to pesticides.

(p6.1) The weighted RR for ALS, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease was 1.35 (95% CI 1.02-1.79), 1.50 (95% CI 0.98-2.29) and 1.66 (95% CI 1.42-1.94), respectively. The weighted funnel plot (see Figure 6) showed an evident publication bias also indicated by Begg's test (p = 0.060).  Results for men only are indicated by M, for women by W; otherwise the results concern both sexes. Random effect models were used, with stratification by diagnosis. Heterogeneity was tested by the I 2 statistic (I-squared), with p < 0.05 indicating rejection of homogeneity. CI = confidence interval; RR = relative risk.

(p6.2) The weighted RR for ALS, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease was 1.35 (95% CI 1.02-1.79), 1.50 (95% CI 0.98-2.29) and 1.66 (95% CI 1.42-1.94), respectively. The weighted funnel plot (see Figure 6) showed an evident publication bias also indicated by Begg's test (p = 0.060).
## (s14) Exposure to Metals
(p14.0) In the studied populations, exposure to lead came out to be the significant exposure involving a weighed RR 1.57 for ALS and Parkinson's disease and this risk estimate was not hampered by publication bias. Regarding Alzheimer's disease we have no epidemiological data on lead exposure and can thus not evaluate if lead also involves a risk for this disease. One study present an increased risk after exposure to aluminum [77]. Exposure to a mixture of metals (including welding) did not seem to involve risk in any of these degenerative diseases.

(p14.1) One systematic review and meta-analysis has been published regarding ALS and occupational exposure to metals [11]. It identified only two studies [45,75] and were of high scientific standard. Another systematic review and meta-analysis has been published regarding ALS and occupational exposure to lead [15]. Based on nine studies it estimated the weighted RR at 1.81 (95% CI 1.39-2.36) but only two of the studies [45,74] were of good scientific standard, according to Armon [25]. One systematic review and meta-analysis has been published regarding Parkinson's disease and occupational exposure to welding [14]. Based on nine studies, five of which had a high scientific standard, the weighted RR was 0.86 (95% CI 0.80-0.92).

(p14.2) The results from the abovementioned meta-analyses and our own analysis all confirm that there seems to be about 50% increased risk for ALS and Parkinson's disease after occupational exposure to lead. Exposure to a mixture of metals or welding does not seem to involve an increase in risk.
## (s15) Strengths and Limitations
(p15.0) All previously published meta-analyses on the neurodegenerative diseases ALS, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are based on all publications on the topic that were identified, irrespective of the scientific quality of the study design. One strength of our study is that our meta-analyses were based on a systematic literature review that included only studies of a high scientific standard. Based on the detailed checklist proposed by Armon [25] we used an elaborate protocol for scrutinizing publications [20]. Another strength of our meta-analyses is that we focused heavily on finding all possible sources of bias, using stratification of data with regard to possible confounders. For evaluation of possible publication bias, we used several methods including funnel plots, specific tests and stratification by publication year as well as precision of risk estimates.

(p15.1) General limitations of meta-analyses are that the calculations can only be based on published data and will reflect any inherent weaknesses of design in the studies included. Another limitation is that published epidemiologic studies only present aggregated data on exposure based on questionnaires, interviews, a validated Job Exposure Matrix (associated with job titles) or a work place cohort with specified exposures. Furthermore, the dosage of exposure is not treated uniformly. In some studies exposure is graded Yes or No, in others the dosage is graded into 3-4 levels (but not uniformly between studies). Based on this and other heterogeneities in exposure we selected risk estimates covering medium or high levels and also gave priority to many years of exposure instead of peak exposures. The risk estimates given should thus be interpreted as averages for recurrent occupational exposures. However, according to the decision protocol (see Appendix) we meticulously have scrutinized the quality of exposure data in every included publication.
