# "The SoLoMo customer journey: a review and research agenda" NUMBER OF FIGURES 0 NUMBER OF TABLES 0 The SoLoMo customer journey: a review and research agenda

CorpusID: 59038007 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a294c26db7efa8975283081ff4642c243a9da4f3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a294c26db7efa8975283081ff4642c243a9da4f3)

Fields: Business, Computer Science

## (s1) The SoLoMo consumer behavior
(p1.0) Though a review on relevant literature, this paper aims to better understand the SoLoMo consumers. Particular focus should be given to the new generation of online users who are having a natural inclination towards technology. This generation of students and professionals is defined as digital natives who "spent their entire lives surrounded by and using computers, video games, digital music players, video cams, cell phones, and all the other toys and tools of the digital age" (Prensky, 2001, p. 1).

(p1.1) Digital natives are both pioneers and early adopters of technological concepts (Papakonstantinidis, 2014). Digital natives will try first the new smartphones, and they will set the trends in technology and marketing. Digital natives were those who started downloading MP3-formatted songs from the web and then quickly moved to streaming applications of social entertainment such as Spotify for music and YouTube for videos. Also, digital natives have a natural inclination towards online games where they see it as a chance to increase their reputation among other online gamers. Finally, digital natives prefer meeting online with their friends and followers as they seem to be more open and expressive when using social media than in their face-to-face interactions (Papakonstantinidis, 2014). For this new breed of consumers and online users, SoLoMo is not a marketing strategy. It is a way of living. What makes the SoLoMo consumer different?
## (s2) The digital customer journey
(p2.0) Advertising blooms from the early existence of humanity. People need to influence other people, using any means they have. Until recently brands relied heavily on traditional marketing tools such as television ads, print ads, brochures, posters, and radio ads to communicate with their target markets (Chan & Yazdanifard, 2014). Now, with the rapid development of the internet, brands communicate directly with their consumers seeking immediate and accurate feedback.
## (s3) New technologies
(p3.0) This section highlights essential technologies that have the potentiality to shape the future of marketing. The first technology that future research needs to explore is the NFC (Near Field Communication) Technology. The NFC technology offers vast possibilities for brands to communicate with their consumers. Through wireless technology, NFC enables two devices that are close to each other to exchange bits of information (Dutot, 2015). NFC technology can assist consumers to connect to their bank account and communicate this information to the retailer to make a payment (Pham & Ho, 2015). The NFC technology can allow marketers identify users' personal preferences and shopping habits to develop faster and easier purchase experience during the customer journey.

(p3.1) Consumers want to be able to communicate with the firms in the most natural possible way. They usually forget their passwords of their different accounts, and sometimes they do not even remember that they have an account in a specific firm (Dutot, 2015). How many times have we tried to register on a specific website and get back a message saying "This email is already being used; If you forgot your password, please click here." Firms need to realize that consumers are in need of secure but straightforward ways of access when they are buying products online. They are in need of instant, intuitive connectivity, zero configuration, and quick essential access, and NFC technology could offer that.

(p3.2) Retailers could make use of NFC technology mainly through four categories of NFC applications (Dutot, 2015). The first one is the "Touch & Go". For the consumers to make use of this application, they need to put the device reader close to the access code. Another category of NFC application is the "Touch & Confirm". This category includes any mobile payment that the consumer needs to confirm just by simply entering a password to accept the transaction. The third category is called "Touch & Connect" that allows data transfer to occur between two mobile devices (Levesque et al., 2015).

(p3.3) Consumers exchange music, images, and other bits of information. The fourth category is the "Touch & Explore", and consumers explore different services that are being offered by the same retailer without even typing the URL in their browser. In other words, the retailers could directly inform the local marketing oriented consumers by sending them special offers, discounts, and other types of information through their digital touchpoints (i.e., smart posters, smart billboards, and augmented reality layers).

(p3.4) The second technology that requires further exploration is the internet of things (IoT). Wearable technologies are offering to the retailers a fantastic opportunity to understand their SoLoMo consumers. Sensors and display technologies are being embedded into clothing, and they could identify in real time the emotional state of the consumer. These sensors could illustrate the different types of mood and levels of stress by displaying light or a different color to inform both the wearer and those that are connected with him or her. The new technology incorporated with the wearable items could help retailers to capture things like a heart rate and then try to interpret that in their benefit. For example, if consumers are excited about a brand then their heart rate will increase. If retailers now the exact moment that this will take place they could reinforce that feeling with an extra offer for example, or they could suggest some cross-sales through the app.

(p3.5) Firms need to make consumers feel comfortable to give their data on the spot (i.e., detect emotions). The amount of data that is being gathered from the wearable items could open an entirely new field for the consumer behavior analysis (Park & Skoric, 2015). Further research can explore the brands' intention to use the personal data generated from wearable items such as people's health condition such as someone's heart rate or levels of blood pressure. The fact that firms have an enormous amount of data it does not mean that they can make full use of it. Modern marketing experts need to perform significant data analysis and work with algorithms (Kinnunen et al., 2016). With this new technology, the amount of data is going to be enormous, and firms need to be able to interpret it. The natural extension of these devices is to become from wearable to implantable. In the next years, we will move from glasses to lenses and from clothes that show our mood to e-ink tattoos that light up and express our feelings in the current situation.
