# Evidence Based Library and Information Practice Embedded Academic Librarianship: A Review of the Literature

CorpusID: 60624579 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3c260d2e6ef703b5cf743a33e211a23e0e7daa](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5b3c260d2e6ef703b5cf743a33e211a23e0e7daa)

Fields: Education, Medicine

## (s4) History and Definitions
(p4.0) Historically, embedded librarianship can be traced back to departmental libraries, where librarians provided services and collections within the confines of the department itself. Some of these libraries still exist today, but many have been assimilated into main campus libraries. This has primarily been due to the expansion of digital content, competition for space for non-library uses, and economic factors associated with the costs of maintaining collections (Drewes & Hoffman, 2010). However, these same factors have served to isolate the librarian from his customer, causing librarians to explore ways to interact and integrate with those they serve. More recently, the expression "embedded librarian" takes root in the phrase embedded journalist, a concept connected to wartime media coverage in the last several years. In this situation, journalists become a part of their military unit, providing a perspective, "a slice of the war" ("Pros and Cons of Embedded Journalism," 2003) from their vantage point. Drewes and Hoffman (2010) provide a good discussion of the branch library concept and its connection to modern day embedded librarianship. Brower (2011) also provides a concise recent history of the concept that offers an overview and characteristics of such programs.
## (s11) Permanent office with customers
(p11.0) Bartnik (2007) Brown and Leith (2007) Clyde and Lee (2011) Covone and Lamm (2010) Freiburger and Kramer (2009) Martin (2010) Matava et al. (2010) Matos et al. (2010) Searing and Greenlee (2011) Embedded via social media Filgo (2011) Freiburger and Kramer (2009) discuss several librarians at the Arizona Health Sciences Library who spend at least half their time within their liaison colleges and whose activities span more traditional liaison work to newer roles such as providing literature searches to support grant applications and serving as co-principal investigators on grant applications. Martin (2010) adds spending 80% of her time in the pharmacy school at the same institution. They refer to their model as "liaison librarian in context" (p. 140). Librarians at Arizona Health Sciences Library have the flexibility to customize embedded services based on customer needs. Fitzgerald et al. (2010) describe an innovative embedded librarian program where librarians provide onsite market intelligence service to the non-profit MaRS Discovery District, which assists entrepreneurs in Canada. These librarians are partially funded by the MaRS group and spend the majority of their time with the group, but retain all their University of Toronto connections, privileges, and responsibilities. The types of services provided range from the licensing of appropriate resources to in depth market analysis. This program is worth closer inspection for other reasons aside from the embedded aspect, including how they value their worth and how university librarians can work within a growing trend of universities partnering with non-profits to commercialize research. Brown and Leith (2007) describe a somewhat similar situation where they are embedded in an Australian newsroom environment and support editorial functions of the media groups. Both of these embedded librarian programs demonstrate the use of information expertise in partnership with customer expertise to market a product. In many ways, these programs illustrate non-traditional librarian roles while still maintaining the identity and duties of a traditional librarian.

(p11.1) Similarly, Berdish and Seeman (2010) describe an embedded librarian program focused on providing in depth research assistance to students in graduate business programs at the University of Michigan. Specifically, they provide assistance in an action based learning environment dubbed MAP: multidisciplinary action program. MBA students in this program are doing extensive research on a real project for a real company. Librarians in this program provide research help by being assigned to specific small groups and providing overviews and recommendations about which resources to use. Each team arms itself with targeted information that can be used as they travel to work on their projects.

(p11.2) Librarians' willingness to investigate their customers' needs and tailor services is common among these cases. They are not passive bystanders, but rather, proactive partners filling information gaps. Though service oriented, the librarians are gaining professional reputations for excellent work and are highly valued partners.
## (s12) Research Studies
(p12.0) Very few quality research studies using the conceptual phrase "embedded librarian" exist. The Shumaker and Talley study is an exception to this; however, it does not report outcomes from individual embedded librarian interventions. Comprehensive retrieval of research studies on the topic is more difficult due to the broad definition of embedded librarianship that pervades the current literature. Some case reports and studies reference studies that allude to embedded librarians within the full text of the article but not within the title, the index terms or the abstract, such as the study by Figa, Bone, and MacPherson (2009). Additionally, many studies evaluating the effects of embedding information literacy instruction of any kind within a face-toface or online course could be considered relevant, since these activities are common to embedded librarian initiatives. For the purposes of this review, only studies that overtly considered the effects of embedded librarian initiatives were included (Table 2). Using these criteria, only seven quantitative studies were identified. This review also includes three qualitative studies reporting useful information, including one case study reporting methods of calculating value for services. Of the first seven studies, significant heterogeneity was found.

(p12.1) One study was a pretest/posttest study, one was a citation analysis, one was a comparison of scores on writing assignments, two were analyses of reference questions, one was a postimplementation survey by an embedded program, and one was the descriptive Shumaker and Talley (2009) study.
## (s16) Analysis of Reference Transactions
(p16.0) Two studies evaluated reference transaction data related to embedded librarian interventions. Bennett and Simning (2010) conducted correlation and linear regression calculations to show a positive relationship between the number of librarian interactions in an online course (discussion board comments) and the number of reference transactions in an online-only university setting. Sullo et al. (2012) evaluated 82 reference questions encountered from 16 nursing and health sciences online courses with an embedded librarian component gathered in an approximate 16 month period. More than a third of questions were general research guidance questions, while another 22% were related to citation management, followed by 20% related to identifying, locating or using a library resource. As a result of these findings, librarians planned to embed resources within the course management system so students did not have to find them on the library's web page.
## (s18) Post-Implementation Survey
(p18.0) Following the closing of the Library and Information Science Library at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, several service changes were made, including placing an embedded librarian within the Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) building several hours per week (Searing & Greenlee, 2011). One year after the change, faculty and staff at the library and the GSLIS were surveyed, and 105 responded. With regards to the embedded librarian, respondents indicated appreciation for their presence within the building but noted not using their services often. Based on this and other responses, the embedded librarian made changes to the program.
## (s19) Qualitative Studies
(p19.0) Hoffman (2011) used a mixed methods approach, conducting a survey first to build interview questions and then phone interviewing embedded librarians from five institutions about their experiences in online courses. The interviews presented contrasting experiences related to workload. Three librarians reported not being overly busy while two reported being quite busy. One librarian embedded in up to 35 sections of courses reported that this number of courses did not take a lot time. This may suggest limited engagement on either the part of the librarian or the students in the class, though Hoffman did not speculate about this. Both librarians who reported significant workload increases also graded assignments. This study also found that students had a positive response to online embedded librarians. Hoffman noted the phrase embedded librarian is being used to describe both embedding in an online course and physical embedding in colleges or departments.

(p19.1) Kealey (2011) examined student learning in an online graduate epidemiology and evidence based practice course by using an embedded quiz in the course management system over three years. The quiz evolved somewhat over the three years; however, students consistently scored well. Despite excellent quiz scores, closer inspection of quizzes revealed student difficulties with Clinical Queries and MeSH in PubMed. Based on yearly reflections, Kealey revised her online video lecture and saw learning improvements.

(p19.2) In an effort to measure value to their organization, Fitzgerald et al. (2010) developed a "valuation formula." The formula was value equals time spent (at CAN$200 per hour) divided by cost of the resources delivered. The cost per hour was selected because it fell between typical fee-based library services and consulting MBAs charges. Based on this formula, these librarians calculated that they had provided CAN$4.5 million of resources and CAN$480,000 of service in 2008. This represented ten times the investment in databases licensed for the MaRS group.    Overall, there is a lack of formal, systematic processes to quantify outcomes demonstrating embedded librarian impact. Only two studies analyzed artifacts of learning and another two studies attempted to directly measure practical skills through free responses or quizzes. No study evaluated an embedded librarian who was physically and culturally integrated into an academic or business unit. Despite this, results suggest that librarians embedded in online and face-to-face course settings have positive effects on student learning.
