# The collection and analysis of job advertisements: a review of research methodology

CorpusID: 61001952 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36ecd2c742ea99ad85ff1044512555a053c4ee55](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/36ecd2c742ea99ad85ff1044512555a053c4ee55)

Fields: Business, Sociology, Computer Science

## (s8) Sample size
(p8.0) A key element of a robust research method is the definition and selection of an appropriate sample. The definition of a sample naturally arises from the overall population. In studies of this type, the population is very large, chiefly because it consists of a high number of job adverts within a specific occupational area.

(p8.1) A study by Slaughter and Ang (1996) states that its population consisted of 20,000 job adverts, whilst a study by Koong et al. (2002) argues that the population of a study of job adverts can be theoretically infinite. A theoretically infinite population means that a sizeable sample will be collected.
## (s12) Currency of data
(p12.0) The sampling time period is significant when considering a key distinction in existing studies. In existing research, there are arguably two types of job advertisement collection and analysis. This distinction is important when evaluating the existing research methods.

(p12.1) The first is the collection of job adverts which are actually being used at the time of collection. This approach means that the data are collected at the time when a job advert is active in the public domain. 29 studies (41%) collected job adverts which were current.

(p12.2) Studies using current job adverts require prompt data collection. In a study of health information professionals, Davies (2008) notes that the average advertising time for a job was 17 to 23 days, demonstrating that there is a limited time window when data can be collected. This suggests the need for establishing regular census points to collect data.  The second type is the collection of job adverts which are historical, and are not being used to advertise current positions. This approach means that data are collected from historical sources. 26 studies (37%) collected job adverts which were historical.

(p12.3) The sampling time period is significant when considering a key distinction in existing studies. In existing research, there are arguably two types of job advertisement collection and analysis. This distinction is important when evaluating the existing research methods.

(p12.4) The first is the collection of job adverts which are actually being used at the time of collection. This approach means that the data are collected at the time when a job advert is active in the public domain. 29 studies (41%) collected job adverts which were current.

(p12.5) Studies using current job adverts require prompt data collection. In a study of health information professionals, Davies (2008) notes that the average advertising time for a job was 17 to 23 days, demonstrating that there is a limited time window when data can be collected. This suggests the need for establishing regular census points to collect data.  The second type is the collection of job adverts which are historical, and are not being used to advertise current positions. This approach means that data are collected from historical sources. 26 studies (37%) collected job adverts which were historical.
## (s24) Complementary methods
(p24.0) Most studies of job adverts did not use complementary methods. Such methods of data collection and analysis should be used, because the analysis of job adverts can be a flawed method (see section 2.2). There is a risk that the application of content analysis may discard the data's contextual meaning. Job adverts do not intrinsically explain the numerous variables which influence their content.

(p24.1) This strengthens the case for a more rounded understanding of the life-cycle of job adverts in terms of their production, exchange and consumption. Hodder's (2000) perspective on 'material culture' views documents as cultural artefacts, which are created in a specific historical context. It may be beneficial to examine the original production of job adverts, how these documents are perceived by job seekers, and how job adverts are used after fulfilling the purpose of attracting applications.
## (s46) Sample size
(p46.0) A key element of a robust research method is the definition and selection of an appropriate sample. The definition of a sample naturally arises from the overall population. In studies of this type, the population is very large, chiefly because it consists of a high number of job adverts within a specific occupational area.

(p46.1) A study by Slaughter and Ang (1996) states that its population consisted of 20,000 job adverts, whilst a study by Koong et al. (2002) argues that the population of a study of job adverts can be theoretically infinite. A theoretically infinite population means that a sizeable sample will be collected.
## (s50) Currency of data
(p50.0) The sampling time period is significant when considering a key distinction in existing studies. In existing research, there are arguably two types of job advertisement collection and analysis. This distinction is important when evaluating the existing research methods.

(p50.1) The first is the collection of job adverts which are actually being used at the time of collection. This approach means that the data are collected at the time when a job advert is active in the public domain. 29 studies (41%) collected job adverts which were current.

(p50.2) Studies using current job adverts require prompt data collection. In a study of health information professionals, Davies (2008) notes that the average advertising time for a job was 17 to 23 days, demonstrating that there is a limited time window when data can be collected. This suggests the need for establishing regular census points to collect data.  The second type is the collection of job adverts which are historical, and are not being used to advertise current positions. This approach means that data are collected from historical sources. 26 studies (37%) collected job adverts which were historical.

(p50.3) The sampling time period is significant when considering a key distinction in existing studies. In existing research, there are arguably two types of job advertisement collection and analysis. This distinction is important when evaluating the existing research methods.

(p50.4) The first is the collection of job adverts which are actually being used at the time of collection. This approach means that the data are collected at the time when a job advert is active in the public domain. 29 studies (41%) collected job adverts which were current.

(p50.5) Studies using current job adverts require prompt data collection. In a study of health information professionals, Davies (2008) notes that the average advertising time for a job was 17 to 23 days, demonstrating that there is a limited time window when data can be collected. This suggests the need for establishing regular census points to collect data.  The second type is the collection of job adverts which are historical, and are not being used to advertise current positions. This approach means that data are collected from historical sources. 26 studies (37%) collected job adverts which were historical.
## (s62) Complementary methods
(p62.0) Most studies of job adverts did not use complementary methods. Such methods of data collection and analysis should be used, because the analysis of job adverts can be a flawed method (see section 2.2). There is a risk that the application of content analysis may discard the data's contextual meaning. Job adverts do not intrinsically explain the numerous variables which influence their content.

(p62.1) This strengthens the case for a more rounded understanding of the life-cycle of job adverts in terms of their production, exchange and consumption. Hodder's (2000) perspective on 'material culture' views documents as cultural artefacts, which are created in a specific historical context. It may be beneficial to examine the original production of job adverts, how these documents are perceived by job seekers, and how job adverts are used after fulfilling the purpose of attracting applications.
