# Attacks on Biometric Systems: An Overview

CorpusID: 62901523 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc91bd3e5780ceb475f82c33af0b83592eb3c468](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc91bd3e5780ceb475f82c33af0b83592eb3c468)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s0) I. INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Biometric is a science through which system can uniquely identify an individual on the basis of his physiological (face, iris, fingerprint, hand geometry, retina etc.) and behavioral (gait, voice, signature, keystroke etc.) traits [1]. The use of biometric traits as an authentication technology has become widespread from door access to e-commerce due to the need of better security in many fields. Biometric systems are more convenient to use as compared with traditional authentication systems such as token based (e.g., ID cards) or knowledge based (e.g., passwords) because it alleviates the need to remember long passwords and to carry tokens with itself. It also guards the user against repudiation. Biometric-based personal authentications system may operate in two different modes: identification and verification modes [1].  In identification mode (shown in fig.1), system carries out a one-to-many comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user's input is compared with all the templates stored in system database. The purpose of identification is to answer the question: "Who am I?". Identification systems are costly to deploy and needs processing time to find a match within database.  fig.2), system carries out a one-to-one comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user claims an identity and the system verifies whether the claim is genuine or not on the basis of validating a sample collected against a previously collected biometric sample for the individual. The purpose of verification is to answer the question "Am I who I say I am"?

(p0.1) Fig. 2: Verification Process Each biometric system has four basic modules whether it is identification system or verification system. In the following section 2 biometrics system along with its four basic modules (sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module) is explained.

(p0.2) Biometric is a science through which system can uniquely identify an individual on the basis of his physiological (face, iris, fingerprint, hand geometry, retina etc.) and behavioral (gait, voice, signature, keystroke etc.) traits [1]. The use of biometric traits as an authentication technology has become widespread from door access to e-commerce due to the need of better security in many fields. Biometric systems are more convenient to use as compared with traditional authentication systems such as token based (e.g., ID cards) or knowledge based (e.g., passwords) because it alleviates the need to remember long passwords and to carry tokens with itself. It also guards the user against repudiation. Biometric-based personal authentications system may operate in two different modes: identification and verification modes [1].  In identification mode (shown in fig.1), system carries out a one-to-many comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user's input is compared with all the templates stored in system database. The purpose of identification is to answer the question: "Who am I?". Identification systems are costly to deploy and needs processing time to find a match within database.  fig.2), system carries out a one-to-one comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user claims an identity and the system verifies whether the claim is genuine or not on the basis of validating a sample collected against a previously collected biometric sample for the individual. The purpose of verification is to answer the question "Am I who I say I am"?

(p0.3) Fig. 2: Verification Process Each biometric system has four basic modules whether it is identification system or verification system. In the following section 2 biometrics system along with its four basic modules (sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module) is explained.
## (s1) II. BIOMETRIC SYSTEM
(p1.0) All the biometric systems have four basic modules which are sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module [2]. These four modules are necessary in any biometric system to acquire and process raw biometric data and convert it into some useful information The block diagram of biometric system is shown in fig. 3.

(p1.1) All the biometric systems have four basic modules which are sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module [2]. These four modules are necessary in any biometric system to acquire and process raw biometric data and convert it into some useful information The block diagram of biometric system is shown in fig. 3.
## (s7) III. ATTACKS ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEM
(p7.0) Biometric based authentication systems that uses physiological (face, iris etc.) and behavioral traits (voice, signature etc.) are becoming increasingly popular and utilized in many applications to increase the security of the system. Traditional systems are unable to distinguish between an authorized person and intruder who can fraudulently access the system. Biometric systems are more convenient to use because there is no need to remember any password and with a single biometric trait different account can be secured without the burden of remembering passwords. Biometric systems offer great advantages over traditional systems but they are vulnerable to attacks [3]. There are eight attack points in biometric system which can be attacked as shown in fig.4. These attack points are divided into two categories: Direct attacks and indirect attacks.

(p7.1) Biometric based authentication systems that uses physiological (face, iris etc.) and behavioral traits (voice, signature etc.) are becoming increasingly popular and utilized in many applications to increase the security of the system. Traditional systems are unable to distinguish between an authorized person and intruder who can fraudulently access the system. Biometric systems are more convenient to use because there is no need to remember any password and with a single biometric trait different account can be secured without the burden of remembering passwords. Biometric systems offer great advantages over traditional systems but they are vulnerable to attacks [3]. There are eight attack points in biometric system which can be attacked as shown in fig.4. These attack points are divided into two categories: Direct attacks and indirect attacks.
## (s9) 1) Type 1 Attack:
(p9.0) The sensor module is vulnerable to type 1 attack which is known as "Attack at the sensor". In this attack, a fake biometric trait such as an artificial finger or facial image is presented to the sensor by an imposter to bypass recognition systems [4]. An imposter can also physically damage the recognition system and flood the system with bogus access requests. It is very easy to attack at the sensor because no specific knowledge about the system operation is needed and there is no digital protection mechanisms such as watermarking, cryptography are used at the sensor level. Sensors are unable to distinguish between fake and real characteristics of an individual and can be fooled easily by using synthetic fingerprints and facial image of a person.

(p9.1) The sensor module is vulnerable to type 1 attack which is known as "Attack at the sensor". In this attack, a fake biometric trait such as an artificial finger or facial image is presented to the sensor by an imposter to bypass recognition systems [4]. An imposter can also physically damage the recognition system and flood the system with bogus access requests. It is very easy to attack at the sensor because no specific knowledge about the system operation is needed and there is no digital protection mechanisms such as watermarking, cryptography are used at the sensor level. Sensors are unable to distinguish between fake and real characteristics of an individual and can be fooled easily by using synthetic fingerprints and facial image of a person.
## (s11) 1) Type 2 Attack:
(p11.0) When the sensor acquires a raw biometric data, it sends the raw data to feature extractor module for pre-processing through a communication channel. This channel is in between sensor and the feature extractor module. It is intercepted to steal the biometric trait and stored somewhere. The previously stored biometric trait is replayed to the feature extractor to bypass the sensor. This is known as "replay attack" [4].

(p11.1) When the sensor acquires a raw biometric data, it sends the raw data to feature extractor module for pre-processing through a communication channel. This channel is in between sensor and the feature extractor module. It is intercepted to steal the biometric trait and stored somewhere. The previously stored biometric trait is replayed to the feature extractor to bypass the sensor. This is known as "replay attack" [4].
## (s13) 3) Type 4 Attack:
(p13.0) This attack is similar to attack of type 2 but difference is in that, an imposter intercepts the communication channel between the feature extractor and matcher modules and steal the feature values of genuine user [4]. These values can be replayed to the matcher later on. It is known as "Attack on the channel between the feature extractor and matcher".

(p13.1) This attack is similar to attack of type 2 but difference is in that, an imposter intercepts the communication channel between the feature extractor and matcher modules and steal the feature values of genuine user [4]. These values can be replayed to the matcher later on. It is known as "Attack on the channel between the feature extractor and matcher".
## (s28) A. Liveness Detection:
(p28.0) Liveness detection is a mechanism that is used to detect that input sample feature is provided by live human being or not. It is used to prevent from attacks at sensor. It is an ability to distinguish between real input sample feature provided by living human being and a fake input feature provided by an artifact [8]. Liveness detection can be applied using software or hardware means.

(p28.1) Use of extra hardware to implement liveness detection means to measure various life signs like pulse detection, blood pressure, temperature for fingerprints and movements of face, eyes for face recognition. The limitation of using extra hardware makes the system too much expensive.

(p28.2) Using software means to use the information already captured to detect life signs. The only used method is to use information about sweat pores. For this a scanner that can acquire a high-resolution image is required. It is practically impossible to reproduce the exact size and position of the pores on an artificial mold.

(p28.3) Liveness detection is a mechanism that is used to detect that input sample feature is provided by live human being or not. It is used to prevent from attacks at sensor. It is an ability to distinguish between real input sample feature provided by living human being and a fake input feature provided by an artifact [8]. Liveness detection can be applied using software or hardware means.

(p28.4) Use of extra hardware to implement liveness detection means to measure various life signs like pulse detection, blood pressure, temperature for fingerprints and movements of face, eyes for face recognition. The limitation of using extra hardware makes the system too much expensive.

(p28.5) Using software means to use the information already captured to detect life signs. The only used method is to use information about sweat pores. For this a scanner that can acquire a high-resolution image is required. It is practically impossible to reproduce the exact size and position of the pores on an artificial mold.
## (s29) B. Biometric Cryptosystems
(p29.0) Biometric cryptosystems combines biometrics and cryptography to take advantages from the strengths of both the fields [9]. Cryptography provides higher degree of security and biometrics eliminates the need to remember any passwords or to carry any tokens. In traditional Cryptographic systems, one or more keys are used to convert a plain text into cipher text and key is known as encrypting key(s). Cipher text can be mapped back to plain text only with the help of decrypting key. If imposter obtains the cipher text he/she cannot extract useful information from it without the help of decrypting key. We use cryptographic systems to avoid dictionary attacks that can easily breaks the security of simple password based authentication systems. Biometric cryptosystems are subdivided into key generation and key binding.

(p29.1) Biometric cryptosystems combines biometrics and cryptography to take advantages from the strengths of both the fields [9]. Cryptography provides higher degree of security and biometrics eliminates the need to remember any passwords or to carry any tokens. In traditional Cryptographic systems, one or more keys are used to convert a plain text into cipher text and key is known as encrypting key(s). Cipher text can be mapped back to plain text only with the help of decrypting key. If imposter obtains the cipher text he/she cannot extract useful information from it without the help of decrypting key. We use cryptographic systems to avoid dictionary attacks that can easily breaks the security of simple password based authentication systems. Biometric cryptosystems are subdivided into key generation and key binding.
## (s33) D. Cancellable Biometrics:
(p33.0) Cancellable biometrics is a technique that involves intentional and systematic distortion of biometric template based on a selected non-invertible transform [11]. If transformed template is misplaced then it can be cancelled and re-issued by changing parameters of template. Cancellable biometrics is used to prevent form attacks at the attack point 6 (attack on system database). It also addresses the issue of non-replaceability.

(p33.1) Cancellable biometrics is a technique that involves intentional and systematic distortion of biometric template based on a selected non-invertible transform [11]. If transformed template is misplaced then it can be cancelled and re-issued by changing parameters of template. Cancellable biometrics is used to prevent form attacks at the attack point 6 (attack on system database). It also addresses the issue of non-replaceability.
## (s36) I. INTRODUCTION
(p36.0) Biometric is a science through which system can uniquely identify an individual on the basis of his physiological (face, iris, fingerprint, hand geometry, retina etc.) and behavioral (gait, voice, signature, keystroke etc.) traits [1]. The use of biometric traits as an authentication technology has become widespread from door access to e-commerce due to the need of better security in many fields. Biometric systems are more convenient to use as compared with traditional authentication systems such as token based (e.g., ID cards) or knowledge based (e.g., passwords) because it alleviates the need to remember long passwords and to carry tokens with itself. It also guards the user against repudiation. Biometric-based personal authentications system may operate in two different modes: identification and verification modes [1].  In identification mode (shown in fig.1), system carries out a one-to-many comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user's input is compared with all the templates stored in system database. The purpose of identification is to answer the question: "Who am I?". Identification systems are costly to deploy and needs processing time to find a match within database.  fig.2), system carries out a one-to-one comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user claims an identity and the system verifies whether the claim is genuine or not on the basis of validating a sample collected against a previously collected biometric sample for the individual. The purpose of verification is to answer the question "Am I who I say I am"?

(p36.1) Fig. 2: Verification Process Each biometric system has four basic modules whether it is identification system or verification system. In the following section 2 biometrics system along with its four basic modules (sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module) is explained.

(p36.2) Biometric is a science through which system can uniquely identify an individual on the basis of his physiological (face, iris, fingerprint, hand geometry, retina etc.) and behavioral (gait, voice, signature, keystroke etc.) traits [1]. The use of biometric traits as an authentication technology has become widespread from door access to e-commerce due to the need of better security in many fields. Biometric systems are more convenient to use as compared with traditional authentication systems such as token based (e.g., ID cards) or knowledge based (e.g., passwords) because it alleviates the need to remember long passwords and to carry tokens with itself. It also guards the user against repudiation. Biometric-based personal authentications system may operate in two different modes: identification and verification modes [1].  In identification mode (shown in fig.1), system carries out a one-to-many comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user's input is compared with all the templates stored in system database. The purpose of identification is to answer the question: "Who am I?". Identification systems are costly to deploy and needs processing time to find a match within database.  fig.2), system carries out a one-to-one comparison to set up an individual's identity. In other words, the user claims an identity and the system verifies whether the claim is genuine or not on the basis of validating a sample collected against a previously collected biometric sample for the individual. The purpose of verification is to answer the question "Am I who I say I am"?

(p36.3) Fig. 2: Verification Process Each biometric system has four basic modules whether it is identification system or verification system. In the following section 2 biometrics system along with its four basic modules (sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module) is explained.
## (s37) II. BIOMETRIC SYSTEM
(p37.0) All the biometric systems have four basic modules which are sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module [2]. These four modules are necessary in any biometric system to acquire and process raw biometric data and convert it into some useful information The block diagram of biometric system is shown in fig. 3.

(p37.1) All the biometric systems have four basic modules which are sensor module, feature extractor module, matcher module and decision module [2]. These four modules are necessary in any biometric system to acquire and process raw biometric data and convert it into some useful information The block diagram of biometric system is shown in fig. 3.
## (s43) III. ATTACKS ON BIOMETRIC SYSTEM
(p43.0) Biometric based authentication systems that uses physiological (face, iris etc.) and behavioral traits (voice, signature etc.) are becoming increasingly popular and utilized in many applications to increase the security of the system. Traditional systems are unable to distinguish between an authorized person and intruder who can fraudulently access the system. Biometric systems are more convenient to use because there is no need to remember any password and with a single biometric trait different account can be secured without the burden of remembering passwords. Biometric systems offer great advantages over traditional systems but they are vulnerable to attacks [3]. There are eight attack points in biometric system which can be attacked as shown in fig.4. These attack points are divided into two categories: Direct attacks and indirect attacks.

(p43.1) Biometric based authentication systems that uses physiological (face, iris etc.) and behavioral traits (voice, signature etc.) are becoming increasingly popular and utilized in many applications to increase the security of the system. Traditional systems are unable to distinguish between an authorized person and intruder who can fraudulently access the system. Biometric systems are more convenient to use because there is no need to remember any password and with a single biometric trait different account can be secured without the burden of remembering passwords. Biometric systems offer great advantages over traditional systems but they are vulnerable to attacks [3]. There are eight attack points in biometric system which can be attacked as shown in fig.4. These attack points are divided into two categories: Direct attacks and indirect attacks.
## (s45) 1) Type 1 Attack:
(p45.0) The sensor module is vulnerable to type 1 attack which is known as "Attack at the sensor". In this attack, a fake biometric trait such as an artificial finger or facial image is presented to the sensor by an imposter to bypass recognition systems [4]. An imposter can also physically damage the recognition system and flood the system with bogus access requests. It is very easy to attack at the sensor because no specific knowledge about the system operation is needed and there is no digital protection mechanisms such as watermarking, cryptography are used at the sensor level. Sensors are unable to distinguish between fake and real characteristics of an individual and can be fooled easily by using synthetic fingerprints and facial image of a person.

(p45.1) The sensor module is vulnerable to type 1 attack which is known as "Attack at the sensor". In this attack, a fake biometric trait such as an artificial finger or facial image is presented to the sensor by an imposter to bypass recognition systems [4]. An imposter can also physically damage the recognition system and flood the system with bogus access requests. It is very easy to attack at the sensor because no specific knowledge about the system operation is needed and there is no digital protection mechanisms such as watermarking, cryptography are used at the sensor level. Sensors are unable to distinguish between fake and real characteristics of an individual and can be fooled easily by using synthetic fingerprints and facial image of a person.
## (s47) 1) Type 2 Attack:
(p47.0) When the sensor acquires a raw biometric data, it sends the raw data to feature extractor module for pre-processing through a communication channel. This channel is in between sensor and the feature extractor module. It is intercepted to steal the biometric trait and stored somewhere. The previously stored biometric trait is replayed to the feature extractor to bypass the sensor. This is known as "replay attack" [4].

(p47.1) When the sensor acquires a raw biometric data, it sends the raw data to feature extractor module for pre-processing through a communication channel. This channel is in between sensor and the feature extractor module. It is intercepted to steal the biometric trait and stored somewhere. The previously stored biometric trait is replayed to the feature extractor to bypass the sensor. This is known as "replay attack" [4].
## (s49) 3) Type 4 Attack:
(p49.0) This attack is similar to attack of type 2 but difference is in that, an imposter intercepts the communication channel between the feature extractor and matcher modules and steal the feature values of genuine user [4]. These values can be replayed to the matcher later on. It is known as "Attack on the channel between the feature extractor and matcher".

(p49.1) This attack is similar to attack of type 2 but difference is in that, an imposter intercepts the communication channel between the feature extractor and matcher modules and steal the feature values of genuine user [4]. These values can be replayed to the matcher later on. It is known as "Attack on the channel between the feature extractor and matcher".
## (s64) A. Liveness Detection:
(p64.0) Liveness detection is a mechanism that is used to detect that input sample feature is provided by live human being or not. It is used to prevent from attacks at sensor. It is an ability to distinguish between real input sample feature provided by living human being and a fake input feature provided by an artifact [8]. Liveness detection can be applied using software or hardware means.

(p64.1) Use of extra hardware to implement liveness detection means to measure various life signs like pulse detection, blood pressure, temperature for fingerprints and movements of face, eyes for face recognition. The limitation of using extra hardware makes the system too much expensive.

(p64.2) Using software means to use the information already captured to detect life signs. The only used method is to use information about sweat pores. For this a scanner that can acquire a high-resolution image is required. It is practically impossible to reproduce the exact size and position of the pores on an artificial mold.

(p64.3) Liveness detection is a mechanism that is used to detect that input sample feature is provided by live human being or not. It is used to prevent from attacks at sensor. It is an ability to distinguish between real input sample feature provided by living human being and a fake input feature provided by an artifact [8]. Liveness detection can be applied using software or hardware means.

(p64.4) Use of extra hardware to implement liveness detection means to measure various life signs like pulse detection, blood pressure, temperature for fingerprints and movements of face, eyes for face recognition. The limitation of using extra hardware makes the system too much expensive.

(p64.5) Using software means to use the information already captured to detect life signs. The only used method is to use information about sweat pores. For this a scanner that can acquire a high-resolution image is required. It is practically impossible to reproduce the exact size and position of the pores on an artificial mold.
## (s65) B. Biometric Cryptosystems
(p65.0) Biometric cryptosystems combines biometrics and cryptography to take advantages from the strengths of both the fields [9]. Cryptography provides higher degree of security and biometrics eliminates the need to remember any passwords or to carry any tokens. In traditional Cryptographic systems, one or more keys are used to convert a plain text into cipher text and key is known as encrypting key(s). Cipher text can be mapped back to plain text only with the help of decrypting key. If imposter obtains the cipher text he/she cannot extract useful information from it without the help of decrypting key. We use cryptographic systems to avoid dictionary attacks that can easily breaks the security of simple password based authentication systems. Biometric cryptosystems are subdivided into key generation and key binding.

(p65.1) Biometric cryptosystems combines biometrics and cryptography to take advantages from the strengths of both the fields [9]. Cryptography provides higher degree of security and biometrics eliminates the need to remember any passwords or to carry any tokens. In traditional Cryptographic systems, one or more keys are used to convert a plain text into cipher text and key is known as encrypting key(s). Cipher text can be mapped back to plain text only with the help of decrypting key. If imposter obtains the cipher text he/she cannot extract useful information from it without the help of decrypting key. We use cryptographic systems to avoid dictionary attacks that can easily breaks the security of simple password based authentication systems. Biometric cryptosystems are subdivided into key generation and key binding.
## (s69) D. Cancellable Biometrics:
(p69.0) Cancellable biometrics is a technique that involves intentional and systematic distortion of biometric template based on a selected non-invertible transform [11]. If transformed template is misplaced then it can be cancelled and re-issued by changing parameters of template. Cancellable biometrics is used to prevent form attacks at the attack point 6 (attack on system database). It also addresses the issue of non-replaceability.

(p69.1) Cancellable biometrics is a technique that involves intentional and systematic distortion of biometric template based on a selected non-invertible transform [11]. If transformed template is misplaced then it can be cancelled and re-issued by changing parameters of template. Cancellable biometrics is used to prevent form attacks at the attack point 6 (attack on system database). It also addresses the issue of non-replaceability.
