# Convergence Analysis of ISO/IEC 12207 and CMMI-DEV: Complementary Result from Systematic Literature Review

CorpusID: 65579391 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f150196aaea705009a9632048d0a3daebb812d10](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f150196aaea705009a9632048d0a3daebb812d10)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s1) Background and Related Work
(p1.0) During the previous review, we found some studies about methods or techniques useful for the task of analyzing the coverage of different process models among which may include the following:  In [11], it is determined that the mapping and comparison techniques are widely used in the harmonization of models and standards such as CMMI, ISO 9001, ISO/IEC 15504 and ISO/IEC 12207.
## (s11) RQ-1. Are there any research studies related to the comparison between ISO/IEC 12207 and CMMI-DEV?
(p11.0) According to the results, studies related with comparison between ISO/IEC 12207 and CMMI in its different versions were founded. The following studies make a comparison between the two models as the main objective of their research:  In [21], a comparison between CMM (SW-CMM) v.1.1 and IEEE/EIA 12207 is performed in order to serve as a guide to meet the requirements for implementing IEEE/EIA 12207 using CMM.
## (s17) PI-5. What has been the degree of coverage obtained from the comparison of ISO/IEC 12207 and CMMI DEV?
(p17.0)  In [21] it is determined that at high-level, the standard ISO/IEC 12207 covers 15 of 18 key process areas from CMM. It also determines that the processes of Supply, Operation and Maintenance have no relationship to any key process area of CMM. But it provides a detailed list of the requirements of IEEE/EIA 12207 which are not covered by CMM. At low level, only shows a list with requirements of IEE/EIA 12207 that are not covered by the elements of CMM.
