# A review on recent innovation in osmotically controlled drug delivery system

CorpusID: 6526196 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18fd54301f316f38d7348d6780c4130574d17dec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/18fd54301f316f38d7348d6780c4130574d17dec)

Fields: Medicine, Materials Science

## (s7) Ideal properties of semi permeable membrane [21]
(p7.0) The semi permeable membrane must meet some performance criteria, a. The material must possess sufficient wet strength (10-5 psi) and wet modules so (10-5 psi) as to retain its dimensional integrity during the operational lifetime of device. b. The membrane must exhibit sufficient water permeability so as to attain water flux rates (dv/dt) in the desired range. The water vapour transmission rate can be used to estimate water flux rate. c. The reflection co-efficient (ɵ) or "leakiness" of the osmotic agent should approach the limiting value of unity. But polymer membrane must be more permeable to water. Hai Bang Lee et al (2000) studied the sandwiched osmotic tablet system (SOTS). A sandwiched osmotic tablet core surrounded by a cellulose acetate membrane with two orifices on the surfaces of both sides was successfully prepared for the purpose of delivering nifedipine. The appropriate orifice size was observed in the range of 0.50 -1.41 mm. It was also found that the drug release rate of SOTS could be increased by incorporating hydrophilic plasticizer in the membrane, whereas it could be decreased by incorporating a hydrophobic plasticizer [22]. Herbig S. M. et al (1995) found a new type of asymmetric membrane tablet coatings offering significant advantages over conventional osmotic tablets. These asymmetric-membrane coatings can be used to make osmotic drug-delivery formulations with several unique characteristics. The use of asymmetric-membrane coatings on pharmaceutical tablets is described in this study; the coatings have also been applied to capsules and multi-particulate formulations [23].
## (s13) (3) Use of leachable substances in the semipermeable coating
(p13.0) Incorporation of water-soluble additives in the membrane wall is the most widely reported method for the formation of pores in CPOP take place. These water-soluble additives dissolve on coming in contact with water, leaving behind pores in the membrane through which drug release takes place [55] (4) Systems with passageway formed in situ:
## (s19) Osmotic delivery systems for liquids
(p19.0) Active ingredients in liquid form are difficult to deliver from controlled release platforms because they tend to leak in their native form. Therefore, liquid active agents typically are enclosed in a soft gelatin capsule, which is surrounded by an osmotic layer that, in turn, is coated with a semipermeable membrane. When the system takes up water from its surroundings, the osmotic layer squeezes the innermost drug reservoir. The increasing internal pressure displaces the liquid from the system via a rupturing soft gelatin capsule [58].
## (s21) Elementary osmotic pump (EOP)
(p21.0) The was introduced in 1970s to deliver drug at zero order rates for prolonged periods, and is minimally affected by environmental factors such as pH or motility. The tablet consists of an osmotic core containing the drug surrounded by a semipermeable membrane laser drilled with delivery orifice. Following ingestion, water in absorbed into system dissolving the drug, and the resulting drug solution is delivered at the same rate as the water entering the tablet. The disadvantages of the elementary pump are that it is only suitable for the delivery of water soluble drugs [59,60].
## (s23) Push-Pull Osmotic Pump (PPOP)
(p23.0) The two-layer push-pull osmotic tablet system appeared in 1980s. Push pull osmotic pump is a modified elementary osmotic pump through, which it is possible to deliver both poorly water-soluble and highly water soluble drugs at a constant rate. The push-pull osmotic tablet consists of two layers, one containing the drug and the other an osmotic agent and expandable agent. A semipermeable membrane that regulates water influx into both layers surrounds the system. While the push-pull osmotic tablet operates successfully in delivering water-insoluble drugs, it has a disadvantage that the complicated laser drilling technology should be employed to drill the orifice next to the drug compartment [61].
## (s26) Controlled Porosity Osmotic Pump
(p26.0) A controlled porosity osmotic pump-based drug delivery system Unlike the elementary osmotic pump (EOP) which consists of an osmotic core with the drug surrounded by a semipermeable membrane drilled with a delivery orifice, controlled porosity of the membrane is accomplished by the use of different channeling agents in the coating [62]. The CPOP contains water soluble additives in coating membrane, which after coming in contact with water; dissolve resulting in an in-situ formation of microporous membrane. Then the resulting membrane is substantially permeable to both water and dissolved solutes and the mechanism of drug release from these system was found to be primarily osmotic, with simple diffusion playing a minor role [63,64]. Drug delivery from asymmetric membrane capsule is principally controlled by the osmotic pressure of the core formation. In-situ formed delivery orifice in the asymmetric membrane in mainly responsible for the solubilization in the core for a drug with poor water solubility [65].
