# Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma: a report of six cases and a review of the Chinese literature

CorpusID: 6619917 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/372a003e8173e2275c98af36d61d1b704f0d9000](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/372a003e8173e2275c98af36d61d1b704f0d9000)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Classified as accessory cells of the immune system, the follicular dendritic cells (FDC), also known as dendritic reticulum cells, are essential for the function of antigen presentation and germinal center reaction regulation. Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma (FDCS) is an uncommon tumor that usually arises in lymph nodes, especially in the cervical, mediastinal, and axillary areas, but also in extranodal sites. The existence of a primary neoplasm of the follicular dendritic cell was first recognized in 1986 by Monda et al [1]; since then, scattered cases have been reported in literatures. Approximately 150 cases have been reported in English literature so far. The scarcity may be partially due to under-recognition of this entity. In recent years there has been an increasing interest in this specific type of neoplasm due to the emerging availability of specific antibodies that can confirm the FDC lineage.

(p0.1) To add to the existing literature on FDCS to deepen the understanding of the disease, we analyzed the clinical characteristics, pathologic features, immunophenotypic profile, treatments and outcome of 50 cases including our 6 cases and 44 cases from reviewing the Chinese literatures on the FDCS.
## (s4) pathologic features Morphological findings
(p4.0) The gross measurements of this tumor varied from case to case, ranging from 0.6 to 21 cm. Macroscopically, the tumor was characteristically well circumscribed or even had a capsule. It was soft to slightly firm and might contain areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of oval to spindle cells, regardless of the sites of involvement, arranging in storiform, whorled, and fasciclar patterns ( Figure 1). Individual cells possessed characteristic features, including slightly eosinophilic, fibrillary cytoplasm, a delicate nuclear membrane, vesicular nuclei, small but distinct nucleoli and indistinct cell borders with occasionally multinucleated forms ( Figure 2). A common and highly characteristic feature was the sprinkling across the entire tumor of small lymphocytes, occasionally leading to a misdiagnosis of lymphoma. The lymphocytes sometimes also showed cuffing around the blood vessels. The giant cells and mitotic figures were identified occasionally ( Figure 3). Irregular hemorrhage and coagulative necrosis were observed in some cases.

(p4.1) Three out of nine cases that involves the liver and spleen were distinct in that they often had histological features resembling inflammatory pseudotumor [2][3][4]. In these cases, the spindle cells were dispersed in  distribution, scattered by a prominent lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate( Figure 4).
