# Fit for the future? The place of global health in the UK's postgraduate medical training: a review

CorpusID: 6664849 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83c324de5356a0bb955e19c6aaf73e290ad72ce5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/83c324de5356a0bb955e19c6aaf73e290ad72ce5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Strengths and weaknesses
(p4.0) There are a number of strengths and limitations to our study. First, all those reviewing the curricula have an interest in global health. This facilitated a shared understanding of what was meant by a global health competency and arguably helped with consistency across curriculum reviews.   However, reviewers without a global health interest may have reached different conclusions. Secondly, the process of assignation of a competency to a category, though guided by the agreed definitions, is ultimately a subjective decision. While in some cases several people reviewed curricula, and in the FPH curriculum review good inter-rater reliability was achieved, 22 this was not possible for all curricula. To reduce inconsistency all assignations to the global health category were reviewed by JH and discussed with reviewers. As demonstrated in Table 3, the global health competencies identified were very similar across the curricula indicating that this process was fairly successful. Finally, there were some discrepancies between the curricula in terms of exactly what 'a competency' was. Pragmatic decisions were taken where necessary and for this reason there are a number of caveats to the total number of competencies presented for each curriculum. These decisions were taken to increase the comparability of results between the curricula.
## (s5) Meaning of the study: possible mechanisms and implications for clinicians or policy-makers
(p5.0) There is a strong case and increasing consensus on the need for a common minimum requirement of global health awareness that trainees of all specialties must attain. This can be achieved through a small number of common core competencies in global health, easily realizable without overseas experience, which are consistent across core curricula. These could cover issues such as the global burden of disease, global determinants of health, the role of international organizations in health, sustainable development and the potential structures of health-care systems. These competencies do not need to be developed from scratch; those already introduced by Colleges and described in Table 3 can be used as a starting point. Such competencies can be framed to naturally follow on from those being introduced into undergraduate medical training. 7 With common core competencies in place, Colleges can develop additional competencies relevant to their specialty at their own discretion. Levels of knowledge and understanding of global health issues will fit with standard levels of competence in curricula, though ensuring that they are covered by appropriate assessments will require a specific mandate from Colleges.

(p5.1) To seize this opportunity a forum for Colleges to collaborate will be required. This could either be through current structures, such as the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, or could be a separate venture organized by, for example, the General Medical Council or an enthusiastic College. With competencies in place their utility in facilitating better care within the NHS can be robustly assessed.

(p5.2) For trainees who want to take their enthusiasm for global health further there should be easily accessible further training in global health that complements ongoing specialty training. A tiered structure to this effect has previously been proposed. 23 
