# Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment Dovepress Video abstract Current approaches to treatments for schizophrenia spectrum disorders, part i: an overview and medical treatments

CorpusID: 6752803 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1dccc0d497f137610ca4a67f3165b453529a995](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f1dccc0d497f137610ca4a67f3165b453529a995)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s25) Pharmacological treatment used in different developmental stages of life
(p25.0) During the last decade, there have been an increasing number of randomized controlled trials of the efficacy and safety of the FGAs and secondary-generation antipsychotics in children and adolescents with schizophrenia, involving double-blind, placebo-controlled, or open-labeled design and short-to medium-term follow-up (ie, 4-8 weeks). 97-103 Those aged 12-17 years were usually included in the controlled trials, and a wide variety of second-generation antipsychotics such as quetapine, 97 risperidone, 98 paliperidone, 99 and olanzapine 100 were tested. A few main patient outcomes were commonly used, including global functioning, symptom severity, and quality-of-life assessment; however, few of the studies involved any long-term follow-up (ie, .8 weeks). [97][98][99][100][101][102][103] In addition, a few types of treatment-emergent adverse events specifically for the second-generation antipsychotic used were observed (eg, metabolic and endocrine abnormalities for olanzapine and somnolence, agitation and electrocardiogram (ECG) and ophthalmic abnormalities for quetiapine). Similar to other age groups, most of the antipsychotics have had positive benefits for adolescents on reducing psychotic symptoms and global functioning, and the treatment was well-tolerated with acceptable levels of adverse events in low and medium dosages. None of the FGAs or second-generation antipsychotics has shown its superiority over the others, and the benefits of polypharmacy to any psychotic symptoms and comorbidities such as mood disorders for adolescents are also inconclusive. 102,103 Nonetheless, it is suggested that antipsychotics are generally better tolerated and more effective in early psychosis.

(p25.1) Interestingly, a case study on a 17-year-old patient with intractable catatonic schizophrenia showed moderate effects in the resumption of spontaneous movement as a result of ECT as an adjunct to clozapine treatment. 104 The researchers suggested that appropriate combinations of antipsychotic medication and other treatment modalities could also be considered in young patients, although it would be unusual.

(p25.2) It is estimated globally that about 23% of hospitalized patients with schizophrenia are older than 40 years and that more than 0.1% of elderly people have a diagnosis of lateonset schizophrenia. 105 Very few studies have been done on those aged more than 65 years, and thus there are inadequate data and evidence to support any guidelines for treatment of late-onset schizophrenia or to serve these older patients' quality of life, functioning, and service use. 105,106 ECT and other treatments ECT, in which clonic seizure is electrically induced in anesthetized patients for therapeutic effects such as improved mood and volition, was commonly used in the 1930s-1970s. One of the major patient groups for this treatment comprised those with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder. Although recent research findings are limited, ECT is considered an alternative treatment for those with unfavorable responses to antipsychotics alone after receiving different courses of medical or psychological treatment, and/or those with very strong suicidality and catatonic features. 107,108 It is an effective adjunct to clozapine in treating refractory schizophrenia. 104 There is certainly no strong or conclusive evidence to suggest that ECT alone or as an adjunct to antipsychotics is superior to antipsychotics alone or to any combination of different treatment modalities for schizophrenia. In addition, ECT may cause short-term, or occasionally long-term, memory impairment and leaves many unanswered questions about its role and mechanisms in the treatment of schizophrenia. 108 Similarly, transcranial magnetic stimulation (a procedure that uses magnetic fields to stimulate the depolarization or hyperpolarization of the neuron cells in the cortical regions of the brain) has shown preliminary positive evidence in treating refractory negative symptoms and auditory hallucinations. 109,110 Neuropsychiatric Disease and Treatment 2013:9 submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s28) 1325
(p28.0) Current treatments for schizophrenia spectrum disorders It is also believed that Chinese herbal medicine produces progressive positive changes in physiological and mental state and fewer adverse effects when compared with Western medicine. The adverse effects of antipsychoticsinduced psycho-and physiopathological changes (eg, dysfunctions of the body organs and sleep-wake cycle) in the body can be treated with such herbal medicine, which is considered to promote the Yin-Yang balance and maintain a homeostatic environment of the internal bodily condition. 111 Electroacupuncture for schizophrenia sufferers with auditory hallucination who were partially or fully nonresponsive to risperidone monotherapy was studied with a small-sized sample. The results showed that there was no significance difference between the two treatment modalities in terms of adverse effects, whereas electroacupuncture could induce a satisfactory improvement in auditory hallucination and a few other positive symptoms. 112 Nevertheless, no conclusions were drawn on the potential efficacy of traditional Chinese medicine in treating schizophrenia, because of the very limited empirical evidence on this topic.
