# Platelet-rich plasma for androgenetic alopecia: A review of the literature and proposed treatment protocol ☆,☆☆

CorpusID: 67861972 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40065f41ce45fe09938d82db1c6f01515f2dbbee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/40065f41ce45fe09938d82db1c6f01515f2dbbee)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Androgenetic alopecia (AGA), also known as female pattern hair loss, is the most common cause of hair loss, affects up to 50% of women over the course of their lifetime, and is known to advance with age and menopause (Rogers and Avram, 2008). AGA is a nonscarring diffuse alopecia due to hormonal and genetic influences and is characterized by the progressive miniaturization of hair follicles, with the transformation of terminal hair into vellus hair (Dinh and Sinclair, 2007). AGA is believed to be attributed to genetic and environmental factors and is known to cause upregulated perifollicular 5-alpha reductase (Rogers and Avram, 2008). The 5alpha reductase converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone, which binds to androgen receptors and leads to the activation of genes that transform healthy terminal follicles into vellus-like hairs in androgen-dependent areas of the scalp. These areas are the central, frontal, and parietal regions.

(p0.1) Hair loss can cause considerable psychological and emotional distress and decreased quality of life. Therefore, developing a safe and effective treatment modality can greatly benefit patients in a dermatology practice setting. Current treatment options include minoxidil, finasteride, spironolactone, nutritional supplementation, low-level light therapy, and hair transplantation surgery. Although topical minoxidil and oral finasteride are approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, they have drawbacks including limited degree of clinical improvement in some patients. The efficacy of new hair growth with current U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approved therapies can be unsatisfactory and significant improvement is not always observed.

(p0.2) Platelet-rich plasma (PRP) is a treatment modality that has gained popularity for AGA due to its autologous nature, minimal invasiveness, absence of major side effects, and more affordable cost compared with hair restoration surgery. PRP is an autologous preparation of platelets in concentrated plasma (usually N 1,000,000 platelets/μL or 2-7 times the native concentration of whole blood) (Marx, 2001). Due to its autologous origin and minimally invasive collection technique, the risk of infection and immune rejection is minimized.

(p0.3) Platelet-rich plasma mechanism of action Activated platelets are understood to release numerous growth factors and cytokines from their alpha granules as part of the wound healing process. Platelets in PRP become activated when injected into the scalp and release multiple growth factors, which promote hair growth. These growth factors play a role in fibroblast activation, collagen synthesis, stimulation of the extracellular matrix, and overexpression of endogenous growth factors.

(p0.4) Growth factors including platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), epidermal growth factor (EGF), and insulinlike growth factor-1 (IGF-1) are released by activated platelets in PRP (Alves and Grimalt, 2016) and believed to promote cell proliferation, differentiation, angiogenesis, and chemotaxis that is necessary for new hair regrowth (Kim et al., 2011;Uebel et al., 2006). IGF-1 has been shown to induce and prolong the anagen phase of the hair growth cycle. Platelets also contain dense granules that contain bioactive factors to increase membrane permeability and modulate inflammation (Leo et al., 2015). Dense granules contain serotonin, histamine, dopamine, calcium, and adenosine that increase membrane permeability and modulate inflammation (Asadi et al., 2014;Leo et al., 2015).
## (s1) Platelet-rich plasma classification systems
(p1.0) Multiple authors have suggested classification systems to promote the standardization of PRP to facilitate interpretation and comparison of different studies and its efficacy. Currently, PRP is an umbrella term that does not distinguish between the various characteristics of what is being used, including platelet concentration, presence or absence of granulocytes, and other factors that can affect hair growth. Mishra's PRP classification system was based on the presence or absence of white blood cells, activation status, and platelet concentration coefficient compared with whole-blood baseline (Mishra et al., 2012). This classification system was based on available PRP systems in 2006, which included buffy coat and singlespin suspension. Since its publication, technology and knowledge of important PRP attributes have evolved. The double-spin method was developed and produces a higher platelet concentration (N5 times whole-blood platelet concentration) with little to no red blood cells and neutrophils (Mautner et al., 2015).

(p1.1) In 2009, Dohan Ehrenfest et al. published a PRP classification based on the presence of individual components (platelet and leukocyte concentrations) and the presence or absence of fibrin (Dohan Ehrenfest et al., 2009). Commercially available systems were placed into four main families: pure PRP (P-PRP), leukocyte and PRP (L-PRP), P-PRF (pure platelet-rich fibrin), and L-PRF (leukocyte and platelet-rich fibrin). Pure P-PRP or leukocyte-poor PRP includes preparations without leukocytes and with a low-density fibrin network after activation; L-PRP includes preparations with leukocytes and with a low-density fibrin network after activation; P-PRF or leukocyte-poor platelet-rich fibrin encompasses preparations without leukocytes and with a high-density fibrin network; L-PRF products are preparations with leukocytes and with a high-density fibrin network.

(p1.2) The previous PRP classifications did not address red blood cell content, volume of PRP preparation, or dose of injected platelets in the final volume. In 2016, Magalon et al. proposed a standardized dose/efficiency/purity/activation classification of PRP called DEPA, which is based on four components: dose of injected platelets, efficiency of the production, purity of PRP obtained, and activation process (Magalon et al., 2016). The dose of injected platelets is calculated by multiplying the platelet concentration in PRP by the obtained volume of PRP. The injected dose of platelets should be measured in billions or millions of platelets. The efficiency of the production corresponds to the percentage of platelets recovered in the PRP from blood samples. The purity of the PRP refers to the relative composition of platelets, leukocytes, and red blood cells. The activation process of the classification applies if exogenous platelet activators such as thrombin, calcium gluconate, or calcium chloride were added (Magalon et al., 2016).
## (s2) Preparation of platelet-rich plasma
(p2.0) There is still no standardized method of preparation and application of PRP. PRP is produced through cell separation by centrifugation and then injected into androgen-dependent areas of the scalp. Multiple methods of preparation of PRP have been reported in the literature including commercial kits and manual methods using a laboratory centrifuge. Some devices include an accessory to reduce leukocyte count and increase platelet purity. Most preparations use either closed or semi-closed systems, which differ in their ability to concentrate platelets (Dhurat and Sukesh, 2014). This results in suspensions that contain different concentrations of platelets and leukocytes.

(p2.1) All PRP preparation protocols follow a generic method. Blood is collected with an anticoagulant such as citrate (a calcium chelator) to prevent spontaneous blood clotting and consequent platelet activation. Subsequently, whole blood is centrifuged to separate red blood cells, followed by centrifugation to concentrate platelets (Dhurat and Sukesh, 2014). Many protocols include the addition of exogenous platelet activators such as thrombin or calcium chloride prior to administration, which results in an immediate dose-dependent release of growth factors. However, there is no consensus about whether this improves efficacy (Dhurat and Sukesh, 2014). Nonactivated or resting PRP may be injected and spontaneous platelet activation occurs due to exposure to dermal collagen and thrombin (Cavallo et al., 2016). Active growth factor secretion begins within 10 minutes of activation, and a release of N95% of growth factors occurs within 1 hour ( (Marx, 2001). Platelet growth factor synthesis continues for 7 days (Senzel et al., 2009).

(p2.2) PRP is injected sub-or intradermally into the affected scalp regions. The optimal number of treatments and time spaced between them has not been established. The wide variation in reported protocols to obtain PRP may lead to samples with different compositions of platelets, leukocytes, erythrocytes, and growth factor concentrations that may induce different biological responses (Dohan Ehrenfest et al., 2009;Mazzocca et al., 2012). Establishing the significance of these elements is crucial to identify the most effective preparation for AGA.

(p2.3) Platelet concentration factor is the most frequently described parameter and thought to primarily influence PRP efficacy (Magalon et al., 2016). Several studies have discussed the importance of the platelet concentration factor in the promotion of tissue regeneration, which indicates that a concentration two to six times higher than basal platelet count is required for optimal outcomes (Weibrich et al., 2004). A study by Giusti et al. (2009) showed that the optimal platelet concentration for the induction of angiogenesis in human endothelial cells was 1.5 million platelets per microliter. In contrast, higher concentrations of platelets were suggested to decrease the angiogenic potential (Giusti et al., 2009).
