# Positive suggestion techniques in somatic medicine: A review of the empirical studies

CorpusID: 7065999 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f7543eef3bfbc65b05789475b781f4e51eec822](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f7543eef3bfbc65b05789475b781f4e51eec822)

Fields: Psychology, Medicine

## (s6) Suggestion techniques in surgery
(p6.0) One of the most extensively studied areas of suggestive techniques is their application in relieving surgical pain. A good example is the research of McLintock et al. [20] in which they worked with 63 patients enlisted for elective hysterectomy. Patients were allocated into two groups. Participants in the intervention group listened to a tape under general anesthesia containing positive suggestions prepared specifi cally for this procedure. The script of the intervention contained for example the following suggestions: "Everything is going very well, we're very pleased with your progress"; "You feel warm and comfortable, calm, and relaxed"; "Any pain that you feel after the operation will not concern you." For the members of the control group a blank tape was played. The researchers report that women who heard the suggestions needed less morphine from the fi rst hour after the operation compared to those who listened to the blank tape, and this diff erence only got larger in the fi rst 24 hours after the procedure. 14.6 mg (22.4%) less morphine was used in the intervention group compared to the control.

(p6.1) Nilsson et al. [21] also report positive results using a similar study protocol. The group getting positive suggestions combined with music under general anesthesia needed in average 26.6 mg less ketobemidone after the operation. (The mean of pain medication used in the control group was 35.3 mg.)
## (s8) Suggestion techniques in treating specifi c illnesses
(p8.0) Chronic pain Edelson and Fitzpatrick [44] studied 27 patients suff ering from various chronic pain disorders. They evaluated the eff ectiveness of a type of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) for pain control. This method contained several positive suggestion elements, like it encouraged patients to avoid using the word "pain" during the expressing of their experiences, and to use imagery techniques to reinterpret these feelings as "numbness". They were also taught to identify and positively reframe negative inner speech.

(p8.1) Signifi cant increase in activity level (measured through 3 days after the last session) and decrease in pain intensity (measured at the end of the last session) was found in the CBT group. In this study hypnosis was also applied in one of the intervention groups. Although treatment with hypnosis also yielded improved pain ratings after the 4 th session, interestingly it did not increase the activity level of patients like CBT alone. One of the reasons for this could be that patients might have attributed their improvements to hypnosis induction itself which is not that easily transferred to their daily routines as techniques learned during the cognitive therapy.
## (s10) Somatization
(p10.0) Somatization disorders are common in the offi ce of the general practitioner. These patients have symptoms that elicit signifi cant suff ering but physicians cannot fi nd any physiological or organic cause for the symptoms. Thomas [47] conducted a study involving 200 patients with symptoms but no abnormal physical signs and for whom no defi nite diagnosis could be made. The participants were randomly selected to attend one of four standardized consultations. They either received positive or negative consultation with or without treatment. The results showed that of patients who got positive consultation (in these groups the patient was given a fi rm diagnosis and told confi dently that he would be better in a few days, pp. 1200), 64% felt better in two weeks, conversely only 39% of those getting negative consultation (in which no fi rm assurance was given) reported getting better.
## (s11) Warts
(p11.0) Based on their results Spanos et al. [48] concluded that positive suggestions facilitate the treatment of warts as well. Members of the intervention group received positive suggestions at two occasions, while the control group got no treatment. During the suggestion sessions patients were asked to focus their attention inward and they were told that the skin around the wart starts to tingle and to get warmer. The dermatologist applying the intervention also informed the patients that their wart will get smaller and smaller and it will fall off . He asked the subjects to imagine vividly that their wart starts to shrink and disappears. Hypnosis induction preceded the suggestions in the fi rst intervention group, relaxation in the second and in the third there were no adjunct methods, only the above-mentioned suggestions. The intervention was most effi cient in the latter (suggestions only) group. After the 6-week follow-up period one-third of the participants from this group lost at least one wart from their hand, while there was no spontaneous healing in the control group.
