# IJBCP International Journal of Basic & Clinical Pharmacology Advances in human papilloma virus vaccines: a review

CorpusID: 72468269 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4775486ddf4f901753082c0b4bfae818e7bf1f42](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/4775486ddf4f901753082c0b4bfae818e7bf1f42)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Virus-Like Particles (VLPs)
(p2.0) A major breakthrough in HPV vaccine research came with the discovery that the capsid proteins L1 and L2 (or L1 alone) self-assemble into virus-like particles (VLPs) when expressed in cells. VLPs closely resemble native HPV particles and include the conformational epitopes that induce virus-neutralizing antibodies. Therefore, the immune system perceives VLPs as infectious viruses and responds accordingly. 24,30 Because VLPs are empty and do not include viral DNA, they are not infectious. VLPs have been produced for at least ten HPV types so far (6, 11,16,18,31,33,35,39,45, and 58), proving the applicability of this approach for a multivalent vaccine. 31 Two prophylactic HPV-VLP vaccines are available globally and in India. A bivalent HPV16/18 L1 VLP vaccine (Cervarix; Glaxo Smith Kline Biologicals, Rixensart, Belgium), [32][33][34] and a quadrivalent HPV6/11/16/18 L1 VLP vaccine (GARDASIL; Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). [35][36][37][38][39] The vaccines are administered by intramuscular injection (0.5ml) either in deltoid muscle or in the anterolateral thigh at a dose of 20-40 micrograms of each VLP at three time points over a 6-month period (0, 1 or 2, and 6 months). 40 For storage and administration of vaccine manufacturer's instructions should be followed.
## (s6) Edible vaccines
(p6.0) Creating edible vaccines involves introduction of selected desired genes into plants and then inducing these altered plants to manufacture the encoded proteins. This process is known as transformation and the altered plants are called 'transgenic plants.' Like conventional subunit vaccines, edible vaccines are composed of antigenic proteins and are devoid of pathogenic genes. Thus they are safe especially in immunocompromised patients. These vaccines are inexpensive, heat stable, noninjectable, need not required purification and refrigeration and produce good mucosal response. These vaccines activate both mucosal and systemic immunity, as they come in contact with the digestive tract lining. 54 edible prophylactic vaccines are under investigation.
## (s7) CONCLUSION
(p7.0) In developing countries, cervical cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in women, and 91% of global estimated HPV-related cancer deaths are due to cervical cancer. HPV vaccines are very effective at preventing infection and disease related to the vaccine-specific genotypes in women with no evidence of past or current HPV infection. Protection lasts for at least 5 years.

(p7.1) HPV vaccines will reduce but not eliminate the risk of cervical cancer, and screening programmes will be important interventions for cervical cancer even after HPV vaccines are introduced, although the procedures used for screening may need to be adapted. 55 The primary target age group for HPV vaccines is likely to be pre-adolescent girls, but the cost-effectiveness of vaccinating other groups needs to be evaluated. With some HPV vaccine candidates about to enter Phase III clinical trials, a viable prophylactic vaccine against one or two types of HPV could be available in as little as five years. Most of the therapeutic vaccines under investigation are designed to complement conventional therapy for advanced disease, and it is not yet clear how much benefit they will offer and at what cost for these women. Therapeutic vaccines designed to clear HPV infections in their earliest stages are less well developed, but they hold greater promise for reducing the suffering and treatment costs associated with cervical disease. It is important to continue developing appropriate screening and treatment programs for precancerous lesions at the same time as vaccine development efforts move forward.
