# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Two faces of p53: aging and tumor suppression

CorpusID: 7278576 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c9a7f6734891d45a88b86d9c6988bc01eb4a642d)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Longevity assurance and tumor suppression
(p1.0) Cancer is a potentially lethal disease that poses a major challenge to longevity in organisms with renewable tissues. Cancers, or malignant tumors, contain cells that have acquired several aberrant properties, often by somatic mutation or epigenetic changes in gene expression. These properties include uncontrolled proliferation, resistance to cell death signals, inappropriate migratory and invasive capability, and the capacity to alter the tissue microenvironment to promote angiogenesis and evasion of immune surveillance (1). A number of mammalian genes function to prevent the development of cancer, some of which are directly implicated in longevity assurance. One such longevity assurance gene is TP53, which encodes the tumor suppressor protein p53. p53 promotes longevity by reducing somatic mutations and/or the survival or proliferation of mutant cells, thereby reducing the occurrence of cancer (2,3). Interestingly, however, recent findings suggest that too much of a good thing, even increased tumor suppression by p53, can have deleterious effects and promote selected aspects of the aging process (4)(5)(6). These findings suggest there is a tight balance between tumor suppression and long-term cell proliferative potential, which is essential for the longevity of organisms, such as mammals, with renewable tissues.
## (s4) P53 AND AGING IN MOUSE MODELS
(p4.0) Recent studies indicate that proteins involved in DNA damage repair play an essential role in life span determination (61)(62)(63)(64). Several of these studies implicate a role of p53 in establishing senescence and implicate it as a potential regulator of organismal aging (4,6). Although a physiological role for p53 in aging is controversial, studies with different mouse models indicate a delicate balance between the tumor suppressive and agepromoting functions of p53. Here, we discuss several of these mouse models (summarized in Table 1). Note that when referring to altered aging phenotypes in mouse models, in general, premature aging refers to phenotypes that occur very early (weeks) after birth, whereas accelarated aging refers to phenotypes that take longer to develop (months/years), but that would normally take much longer to develop in control animals.   
## (s5) Mouse models affected by p53
(p5.0) Ku80 null mice. Ku80 is a DNA repair protein that associates with Ku70 to comprise the DNA-binding component of DNA-PK (65). Ku80 null mice exhibit accelerated aging phenotypes, including skin atrophy, osteopenia, hepatocellular degeneration and shortened life span (61). The authors speculated that a lack of NHEJ and therefore increased DNA damage load could account for the accelerated aging phenotype. In support of this hypothesis, mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from Ku80 À/À mice clearly underwent p53-dependent premature replicative senescence. A requirement for p53 was illustrated by the limited proliferative capacity of Ku80 À/À cells compared to Ku80 À/À p53 +/À fibroblasts (66). Thus, p53 deficiency rescues the premature replicative senescence of Ku80 À/À MEFs. If, as suggested, increased DNA damage and increased p53 activity is responsible for the accelerated aging phenotype of Ku80 À/À mice, crossing these animals with p53-deficient mice might rescue the accelerated aging. Interestingly, mice deficient in both Ku80 and p53 were much more cancer-prone than mice that were deficient only in p53 (66). The increase in cancer incidence was large enough to obscure any beneficial effect that loss of p53 might have conferred on the accelerated aging observed in Ku80deficient mice. Clearly, loss of p53 cannot rescue accelerated aging phenotypes if cancer incidence is dramatically increased.

(p5.1) Telomerase-deficient mice. Telomerase is a key enzyme that maintains telomere length in stem cells and other proliferating cells. Defects in telomerase enzyme components lead to telomere dysfunction, resulting in premature aging phenotypes in mice and dyskeratosis congenita, which has aspects of premature aging, in humans (67). Dysfunctional telomeres are recognized by the DNA repair machinery as DNA-DSBs and thus activate the DDR and p53 (68)(69)(70). Mice deficient in the telomerase catalytic subunit (Terc) (mTR À/À mice) are prone to telomere erosion in all tissues, and late generation animals have a decreased life span and show decreased body weight, increased skin lesions and delayed wound healing (71,72). Because mice have long telomeres, early generation mTR À/À mice are phenotypically normal and have a normal life span. Importantly, some of the premature aging phenotypes observed in later generation mTR À/À mice could be rescued by p53 deficiency. This result indicates that, at least in a telomerase-deficient background, short telomeres activate p53, which contributes to premature aging (73).

(p5.2) Zmpste24 protease null mice. Zmpste24 is a metalloproteinase that participates in the maturation of lamin A. Lamin A is an essential component of the nuclear envelope, defects in which can cause premature aging phenotypes in humans and mice (74)(75)(76). Some humans with progeroid syndromes have been shown to carry mutations in the genes encoding Lamin A as well as ZMPSTE24 (77,78). Not surprisingly, mice deficient in Zmpste24 and lamin A exhibited many features of premature aging (74)(75)(76). Microarray analysis of transcriptional alterations in tissues from Zmpste24 À/À mice showed an upregulation of several p53 target genes (79). Although the levels of p53 itself were unchanged, it was proposed that a stress response triggered by nuclear envelope abnormalities in Zmpste24 À/À mice activated p53. When compared to wildtype cells, fibroblasts from Zmpste24 À/À mice showed a p53-dependent decrease in proliferative capacity and premature cellular senescence. Crossing Zmpste24 À/À mice to p53 À/À mice further tested the possibility that the progeroid symptoms observed in Zmpste24 À/À mice were due to hyperactive p53. Indeed, loss of p53 in the Zmpste24 À/À background partially rescued the aging phenotype characteristic of Zmpste24 deficiency, markedly increasing body weight and life span. Thus the premature aging syndrome caused by alterations in nuclear lamina structure triggers activation of p53, possibly through increased DNA damage and DDR signaling (80,81), which contributes to the premature aging of Zmpste24 À/À mice.

(p5.3) BRCA1 hypomorphic mutant mice. BRCA1 is a tumorsuppressor protein that acts both as a checkpoint protein and DNA damage repair protein (82). About 98% of embryos carrying a hypomorphic mutation in Brca1 (BRCA1 Á11/Á11 ) die between days 12 and 18 of gestation. Importantly, haploid loss of p53 completely suppressed this embryonic lethality, allowing Brca1 Á11/Á11 mice to survive to adulthood (83). In those adult animals, Brca1 Á11/Á11 p53 +/À females developed tumors whereas males exhibited accelerated aging phenotypes. These findings suggest that genomic instability and DNA damage due to BRCA1 deficiency lead to a rapid cancer phenotype in females. They also reveal a scenario in which increased DNA damage in cancer spared males may result in a remaining hyperactive p53 allele, which could promote accelerated aging (84). Recent findings show that indeed, the ATM-Chk2-p53 DDR pathway is activated upon BRCA1 deficiency in mice (85). Consistent with an important role for p53 in the DDR, complete or haploid loss of ATM or Chk2 rescued the Brca1 deficiency-associated embryonic lethality and accelerated aging in adult mutant mice. These findings are consistent with a model in which BRCA1 deficiency impairs proper DNA damage repair, which in turn promote p53 hyperactivity through the DDR components ATM and Chk2 (see Figure 1). In cancer spared animals, absence of ATM or Chk2 prevents the hyperactivity of p53 caused by BRCA1 deficiency, hence these mice are rescued from accelerated aging.
## (s6) Mouse models that affect p53 directly
(p6.0) Short isoforms of p53 in mice: the p53 +/m mice. The first evidence for a direct role for p53 in promoting aging phenotypes came from Tyner et al., who generated mice in which a spontaneous recombination event deleted a stretch of DNA upstream of the mouse p53 gene that included exons 1-6 of the p53 coding sequence (4).

(p6.1) The mutant p53 allele (m allele) contained exons 7-11 and was presumed to be under the transcriptional control of a promoter from an upstream gene. Experiments with MEFS isolated from p53 +/m mice indicated that the m allele product could enhance the stability and the transacivation activity of p53. Consistent with an increase in p53 activity, p53 +/m mice were strikingly cancer resistant at 18 months of age compared to similarly aged p53 +/+ mice. Surprisingly, however, the cancer resistant p53 +/m mice had a 20-30% shorter life span. Moreover, the mutant mice exhibited several signs of accelerated aging including tissue atrophy (in the skin, skeletal muscle, liver and lymphoid organs). Thus, enhanced p53 activity could drive aging phenotypes at the cost of tumor suppression, at least in these mutant mice. The authors suggested that the accelerated aging was caused by an impaired ability of stem cells to produce adequate numbers of progenitor and mature differentiated cells. A recent analysis of hematopoietic stem cell dynamics in p53 +/m mice confirmed that, compared to wild-type mice, these mice exhibit a reduced number of proliferating hematopoietic stem cells with age (5). Haploid insufficiency for p53 (p53 +/À ) partially rescued the reduced hematopoietic stem cell proliferative potential, presumably due to diminished p53 activity.

(p6.2) While the phenotypes of p53 +/m mice suggest that increased p53 activity promotes tumor suppression at the cost of aging, there are two major caveats to consider. First, due to the low expression level of the m allele in p53 +/m tissues, no m-derived protein could be detected. Second, and more important, the unknown stretch of DNA upstream of the p53 gene that was deleted in the m allele has recently been characterized and shown to include 24 upstream genes in addition to the p53 truncation (86). Absence of one or more of these 24 genes can in principle, give rise to the accelerated aging and cancer resistance of the p53 +/m mice.

(p6.3) Short isoforms of p53 in mice: the P+/+ mice. Subsequent studies not only confirmed the idea that p53 status can modulate organismal aging but removed some of the ambiguities present in the above studies (6). Maier et al. created transgenic mice that overexpressed p44 (a short naturally occurring p53 isoform that lacks the main transactivation domain) (P+/+ mice). By 4 months of age, P+/+ mice showed selected signs of premature aging. By 1 year of age, most of the P+/+ mice had died, whereas the non-transgenic mice were still alive and healthy. P+/+ mice had a very low incidence of cancer, suggesting that p44 overexpression increased wild-type p53 activity. Indeed, the overexpressed p44 short isoform modulated p53 functions, resulting in enhanced expression or repression of certain p53 target genes. Moreover, the authors attributed the early premature aging phenotypes of p44-tg mice to p53 hyperactivity, which upregulated the activity of the IGFsignaling pathway. This pathway has been shown to drive aging in species as diverse as nematodes, fruit flies and mice (87,88).

(p6.4) The super-p53 mice. In line with phenotypes of p53 +/m and P+/+ mice, Garcia-Cao et al. showed that transgenic mice carrying one or two extra copies of wild-type p53 genes (super-p53 or p53 tg mice) were remarkably cancer resistant. However, and in contrast to p53 +/m and P+/+ mice, super-p53 mice showed no symptoms of premature or accelerated aging (89). Notably, cells from super-p53 mice expressed normal basal levels of p53, and displayed normal levels of p53 activity, in the absence of stress. In response to DNA damage, however, cells from super-53 mice displayed enhanced p53 activity. Upon whole body irradiation, super-53 mice showed elevated levels of p21 mRNA in all tissues and increased apoptosis in the thymus, compared to irradiated control mice. Super-p53 mice were also resistant to carcinogen-induced tumors. Despite enhanced p53-dependent apoptosis, super-p53 mice had a normal life span and showed no signs of premature or accelerated aging, as determined by normal hair growth and skin thickness and an absence of lordokyphosis and osteoporosis.

(p6.5) Why do these mice with increased p53 activity not show signs of premature/accelerated aging? The authors speculate that the constitutively high level of p53 activity in p53 +/m or P+/+ mice, or a chronic stress signal is required to chronically activate p53 and induce premature/accelerated aging. This hypothesis raises the possibility that enhanced p53-dependent tumor suppression is possible without accelerating aging or increasing noncancer mortality. Conversely, these results also suggest that super-p53 mice might age prematurely if chronically stressed. However, the accelerated aging shown by telomerase-null mice was not further accelerated when these mice were crossed with super-53 mice (90). The authors observed that cells harboring DNA damage due to defective telomeres were more efficiently eliminated in super-p53 mice as compared to wild-type mice, although p53 did not have any effect on telomere-driven aging. The authors suggested that the decrease in damaged cells was not of a sufficient magnitude to delay the pathologies associated with aging in mice. More recently, it was shown that the double super-p53/p19ARF mice can effectively eliminate cells harboring age-associated persistent DNA damage markers in the absence of any premature or accelerated aging phenotypes. In fact, the super-p53/p19ARF animals were cancer-free, showed increased resistance to oxidative stress and displayed general signs of delayed aging (91). The authors suggested that increased, but properly regulated p53 activity, provide both stress resistance and tumor suppression activity. It remains to be seen if super-p53 or super-p53/p19ARF mice display accelerated aging phenotypes when under other types of chronic stress.

(p6.6) The hypomorphic Mdm2 mice. H/Mdm2 is a powerful inhibitor of p53. Mdm2 binds the transcriptional activation domain of p53 and prevents its interaction with the transcriptional machinery. Mdm2 also facilitates the nuclear export of p53, and ubiquitinates p53 and promotes its degradation by the proteasome (36). Mdm2-deficient mice are embryonic lethal; deletion of p53 rescues this lethality, indicating that very high levels of p53 are incompatible with embryonic development (92,93). Similarly, acute activation of p53 in adult mice lacking Mdm2 but carrying an inducible p53 protein was incompatible with survival (94). Mendrysa et al. generated mice that express low levels of Mdm2 (mdm2 puro/Á7À12 mice) owing to the presence of one hypomorphic (puro) and one null allele (Á7-12). These mice expressed 30% of the normal level of Mdm2 (95,96). As expected, these mice also showed increased basal levels of p53 and, upon activation, increased expression of p53 target genes as well as increased apoptosis in the small intestine. mdm2 puro/Á7-12 mice were also highly resistant to cancer, presumably as a consequence of increased p53 activity. Despite having increased p53 activity, these mice had a normal life span, and showed no signs of accelerated aging.
