# membranes Pd-Based Membranes: Overview and Perspectives

CorpusID: 73447516 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3a157258112d63b66a1de8fe7e3899a850bbcea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f3a157258112d63b66a1de8fe7e3899a850bbcea)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Engineering, Environmental Science, Materials Science

## (s3) Material Investigations
(p3.0) For metal membranes to be massively integrated into industrial processes to separate hydrogen from gas mixture, it is crucial to assess their performance and stability under actual operating conditions. In particular, as these types of membranes are thought to operate at relatively high temperatures (300-600 • C) and high pressure (2-50 bar and even more), while also in transient conditions in which they can be subjected to rapid changes, it is essential to understand the behavior of the materials they are made of under such conditions.

(p3.1) In this Special Issue, three papers regarding novel and non-conventional studies of materials are offered. In particular, Vicinanza et al. [7] studied the heat treatment of Pd-based membranes, separating the single contributions of both membrane surfaces (i.e., on the feed and permeate side). In their work, they consider three different membrane thicknesses, from whose analysis the effects of adsorption and desorption are disentangled, quantifying the surface phenomena influence, and also in terms of the apparent Arrhenius parameters for permeation before and after the heat treatment [7].

(p3.2) Complementary to the work of Vicinanza et al. [7], Løvvik et al. [8] carried out an interesting and specific work on the influence of grain boundary segregation of bulk in Pd-Ag-Cu membranes, an area to which the literature has generally paid relatively poor attention. Specifically, this study is based on first-principles electronic structure calculations performed on realistic atomic-scale models of binary Pd-Cu and ternary Pd-Cu-Ag alloys. In this way, a systematic approach to designing metal alloys is introduced, which opens up the possibility of more precisely predicting the behaviour of metal lattices a priori, thus reducing the number of experimental tests required and the costs related to the development of new membrane alloy materials.

(p3.3) In the third paper in this section, Bellini et al. [9] provide an original review on thermodynamic aspects related to hydrogen-metal systems in non-ideal conditions (i.e., pressure-dependent diffusivity and solubility [10][11][12][13]). Analysing information drawn from several studies in the open literature they show a systematic thermodynamic approach based on the chemical potential of the Pd-H system to deal with modeling of hydrogen solubility in the lattice. In particular, an explicit expression for the activity of H atoms in the lattice is obtained, allowing membrane behavior to be modeled under conditions of interest for real industrial applications.
## (s4) Module and Reactor Design
(p4.0) This Special Issue of Membranes would not be complete if it did not provide an insight into novel module and reactor design. Here, micro-membrane reactors that enhance heat management, reduce gas phase diffusion limitations, and increase the membrane area to reactor volume ratio compared to traditional tubular reactors are introduced [14,15]. The papers dealing with this topic are those of Wunsch et al., which report a number of aspects related to micro-membrane reactors, ranging from reactor configuration development, feasible and low-cost fabrication techniques of micro-membranes, and optimal coupling and integration of reactive and separating processes in single compact modules [6,16]. Specifically, Dittmeyer and colleagues at the Institute for Micro Process Engineering at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT) have developed micro-membrane reactors composed of stacks of sub-modules including multiple reactive and permeative stages. Even though the idea of using staged membrane reactors is not new [17], the technological approach at KIT is to develop compact systems so as to minimize the drawbacks of larger-scale devices, such as heat removal, concentration polarization and a relatively low membrane surface area per catalyst volume (ca. 10 3 -10 6 m −1 ). The main applications of these micro devices, for now, are reforming of methane and dehydrogenation of liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs) [6,16], which we also refer to in Section 2.4.
