# Application of Sensory Descriptive Analysis and Consumer Studies to Investigate Traditional and Authentic Foods: A Review

CorpusID: 73415577 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5777416e3ab3ce6a0f0f1fd740182e764964e266](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5777416e3ab3ce6a0f0f1fd740182e764964e266)

Fields: Business, Medicine, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s1) Literature Review
(p1.0) Articles were searched from the web-library of Pusan National University (https://lib.pusan.ac.kr) using keywords. In the case of sensory descriptive analysis, "descriptive sensory lexicon", "descriptive sensory terminology", and "descriptive sensory characteristics" were searched from 2000 to 15 August 2018. Consumer studies were searched using "consumer liking" for the same time period. Hundreds of papers were searched because of the wide range of keywords, although only a limited number of these evaluated traditional or ethnic foods as samples. All selected studies comprised research papers written in English and did not include any textbooks or papers written in different languages.
## (s3) Beverages
(p3.0) In the beverage category, descriptive analyses of rooibos and green tea were included. Although the tea market is growing, we considered that rooibos and green tea are still classified as ethnic foods compared to black tea. A sensory wheel for rooibos was developed by Koch et al. [19]. Those authors used a total of 69 samples evaluated by nine panelists with extensive experience on descriptive analysis. They first developed 121 descriptors during the training sessions and then 27 terms were selected for inclusion in the sensory wheel based on their relevance. After testing, 17 attributes were eventually selected for efficient sensory profiling by grouping and eliminating descriptors. The suggested application of the sensory wheel was for use for the quality control of rooibos tea. For full profiling of rooibos tea, more descriptors might be needed [18]. Jolley et al. [56] also evaluated rooibos tea; samples were compared to determine differences based on production area and harvest year. Approximately nine to 10 trained female panelists, most of whom had previous experience on rooibos evaluation, participated and a total of 208 tea samples were assessed using the 17 characteristics developed by Koch et al. [19]. Understanding the results of the study was suggested as helping to understand product segments, opening up the opportunity for marketing niche products especially at the global level.

(p3.1) In the case of green tea, a greater number of studies have been conducted, likely reflecting increased awareness and consumption by global consumers worldwide. Lee and Chambers [17] examined differences among green teas from different countries and the correlation with consumer data using six panelists performing a sensory descriptive analysis on six samples using 18 attributes. These findings have the potential to explain the differences among samples from different production areas, processing methods, or with different flavor characteristics. Lee and Chambers [18] developed the lexicon of green tea from nine countries (China, India, Japan, Kenya, Korea, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tanzania, and Vietnam) and established definitions and references. They used a total of 138 green tea samples to generate descriptors that could distinguish all kinds of green tea samples. Specifically, 31 attributes were generated by six highly trained panelists who had more than 120 h of general descriptive training and averaged more than 1200 h of sensory descriptive testing. They used the flavor profile method, which usually involves a smaller number of panelists compared to other sensory descriptive methods. The consensus procedure was used however the original flavor profile method was modified by using a 0-15 scale. Subsequently, those authors further analyzed the data to cluster green teas based on their flavor profiles and found that the origin influenced flavors through a combination of varietal differences, growing conditions, and processing variations [57]. They noted that their study could be used as a marketing tool for consumer segments for green tea so that consumers would be able to select teas that met their specific sensory preferences. Those authors also identified flavor change during storage using two green tea samples with five different storage durations [58], suggesting that the tea retailer must consider the type of packaging of green tea in order to maintain its quality during the distribution period. In addition, other research groups also worked on green tea. Lee et al. [59] developed a method to establish sample preparation and presentation procedures using six green tea samples (three green teas × two grades) and evaluating 16 characteristics. They were attempting to create a method that would minimize possible bias caused by the changes in brewing temperature that could result in differences in volatile compounds of the tea. Those authors then analyzed differences in sensory attributes such as "turbidity" or "bitter taste" between green teas that were processed under different methods and the correlation of those sensory attributes with consumer acceptability [60]. They further evaluated decaffeinated green teas as samples to ascertain the product market of decaffeinated beverages potential [61].
## (s4) Sauce, Paste and Dressing
(p4.0) In this category, soy sauce, Eshabwe (Ghee sauce), Gochujang (Korean chili paste), soybean paste, and Danish honey were included for review. In the case of sauce or paste, different characteristics were evaluated in different countries depending on the characteristics of the product. It is likely that the foods within this category may reflect specific food cultures of each country.

(p4.1) Soy sauce has become a widely used sauce originating from Asian countries. Jeong et al. [62] developed a lexicon with 22 attributes for understanding and establishing a standardized descriptive analysis procedure and descriptors for fermented soy sauce in various conditions. However, that study had limited samples. Thus, the developed lexicon only had eight descriptors that were similar to those found in a later study by Cherdchu et al. [63], which was based on a larger number of samples. Those attributes were alcohol, caramel, chemical, fermented, metallic, pungent, salty, and sour. Cultural differences, sample composition, or a difference in the range of samples chosen may be the reason for the difference in the lexicon. The article by Cherdchu et al. [63] developed 58 attributes using a wide range of 20 kinds of soy sauce (selected after screening an initial set of over 120 samples). The study included the participation of panelists from Thailand and the U.S. in this cross-cultural research project. In particular, they mentioned that language and culture constituted factors that limited the ability to describe certain characteristics, although they found ways to adapt to language issues by emphasizing the importance of using standard references to conduct well-communicated evaluations in cross-cultural studies. Imamura [64] later conducted a study of 149 mostly Japanese soy sauce samples that established 88 sensory descriptors, of which many were the same descriptors as those provided by Cherdchu et al. [63]. Imamura's descriptors were divided into nine subgroups and were evaluated by 13-17 female descriptive panelists in each subgroup. A flavor wheel of soy sauce was developed to facilitate sensory evaluation and communication regarding sample qualities. In a follow-up study by Pujchakarn et al. [65], 9 female panelists, aged 38 to 56 years, developed 34 descriptors for seasoning soy sauce, a specific category of soy sauce, with the intent to provide new terms/references to add to prior soy sauce research. Soy sauce also was used as a sample for the investigation of the effects of different types of carriers [66]. That study showed changes in the flavor of soy sauce when used with differences in carriers such as rice, soup broth, and meat.

(p4.2) Eshabwe (Ghee sauce) comprises a traditional salty pudding-like condiment prepared from ghee or butter in western Uganda, eastern Congo, Rwanda, and Burundi [67]. Mukisa and Kiwanuka [67] established 15 characteristics with 10 panelists and evaluated the quality of samples. The developed descriptors consisted of not only flavor however also quality attributes such as soggy, musty, and stale. They considered that standardization of the food made following traditional processes crucial. Their results may be helpful for manufacturers to standardize Eshabwe processing methods to ensure product consistency.

(p4.3) Gochujang (Korean chili paste) was evaluated by Kim et al. [68], who reported the development of 34 attributes by 10 panelists for 31 different samples. Their aim was to investigate the characteristics of different Gochujang made by various producers and to determine any correlation with consumer age segments differing. Gochujang dressing, a similar product, was studied by Hong et al. [69], where eight panelists developed 10 sensory terms; in addition, cross-cultural consumer tests also were conducted in Korea, China, and the U.S. The terminology of their study was used to find drivers of consumer preference and it was mentioned that an understanding of the flavors of traditional foods was important for this purpose.

(p4.4) Soybean paste is a well-known food in Eastern Asia. Jung et al. [20] described 18 characteristics of 14 samples for comparing data from a panel performing a sensory descriptive analysis and electronic devices such as e-nose and e-tongue. From their findings, they emphasized the importance of sensory testing for describing a complex food matrix. Kim et al. [70] examined 30 sensory attributes of various soybean paste products available in Korean markets made with different manufacturing processes and then compared these with consumer acceptability data. They indicated that consumer acceptability was significantly influenced by sweet and monosodium glutamate (MSG) flavor characteristics of products. Chung and Chung [21] previously performed cross-cultural descriptive studies from which they developed 48 terms. Notably, they mentioned that the usage pattern of the same attribute differed cross-culturally; thus, further research was suggested to overcome the linguistic differences.

(p4.5) In total, 27 sensory descriptors of 21 Danish honeys were created using sensory descriptive analysis [71] with the aim to describe and differentiate the uniqueness of locally produced honeys in Denmark. Ten sensory panelists, six women and four men aged 20 to 62 participated in the evaluation. Their results might be used to help communicate the specific sensory quality of honeys; however, it would be difficult to promote local uniqueness, as they did not compare the Danish honey with honeys from other countries.
## (s9) Miscellaneous Products
(p9.0) The category of other foods included some cheese products, tofu, meat products, and additional foods as shown in Table 2. Although cheese comprises a well-known food product worldwide, some traditional types, which are authentic to specific regions, still constitute special and unfamiliar foods to many consumers. Ojeda et al. [42] used Idiazabal cheese with three different quality levels to compare the liking of local consumers in Spain with the sensory quality as assessed by trained panelists. In that study, the preferences of a large group of consumers was mainly driven by certain characteristics such as "sweet" and "toasty" attributes described by the trained panel. Scamorza cheese with different milk and starter type was studied by Braghieri et al. [43] in Italy who identified the driver of liking in terms of specific sensory input. They mentioned that the liking of specific sensory attributes such as appearance, taste/flavor, and texture were highly related to overall liking. They concluded that further studies were needed to promote product differentiation and to meet the sensory requirements of particular consumer segments. Swiss cheeses including different kinds of retail products were evaluated in the U.S. by Liggett et al. [45], who investigated the relationship between consumer liking and the specific flavor characteristics. For establishing the characteristics of unique food products and understanding consumer acceptance, descriptive analysis may be combined with consumer testing to better understand specific foods.
## (s10) Discussion
(p10.0) Numerous kinds of unique and special food products exist, however only a small number of those have been studied using good sensory methods. We summarized the sensory studies of traditional and authentic food products. There were research projects conducted for both sensory descriptive analysis and consumer study to develop attributes, analyze consumer preference/perception, and identify the factors affecting consumer acceptance. Both methods were important to understand food products and their consumer perception. Where only sensory descriptive analysis was conducted, researchers could understand the attributes and intensities of the sample and potentially differentiate among samples with different ingredients, processing, storage conditions, etc. However, researchers could not determine which attributes would be related to consumer acceptance. Similarly, studies that used only consumers could understand consumer preference, however they could not prove which attributes affected consumer acceptance and perception. For the deepest understanding of consumer products, both methods should be used.

(p10.1) Some limitations were observed in the studies. For descriptive analysis in this review, there were large variations in the numbers of panelists that were used. The minimum panelist number was 5 [22] and the maximum number of panelists was 18-19 [24,81]. It is not certain whether the difference in the number of panelists affects the reliability of the sensory results, however it is clear that there are differences between methods for each descriptive study. Actually, the recommended ideal number of judges was not clear. Although the number of panelists varies by method, researchers should provide a clear basis if their participant number was sufficient. Chambers et al. [97] pointed out that the number of panelists necessary for descriptive panels was dependent on the training of the assessors and the types of attributes that were evaluated, with fewer being needed when the training/experience level was higher or when the attributes were more easily evaluated.

(p10.2) There was also variation among the number of participants in consumer tests. Consumers who participated in consumer tests should be representative of potential consumers of the product [97]. Thus, generally 100 or more consumers need to be recruited per segment for quantitative consumer tests to be reliable. Because some of the consumer tests in this review were conducted with small numbers of consumers, it is important to understand that the reliability of those studies may be less than others. For example, Hong et al. [69] conducted a cross-cultural study of Gochujang dressing with Korean (n = 50), Chinese (n = 34), and U.S. (n = 26) citizens. Although the total number of consumers was more than 100, participants from each country were not enough to be representative of populations in each country. Other research [49,96] also had small numbers of consumers. Consumer tests should be conducted with sufficient numbers of consumers because otherwise they may present unreliable results that are not representative of the population. If conducting consumer studies with a smaller number of participants, researchers must justify their reasoning for deviating from recommendations.
