# Epsilon wave: A review of historical aspects-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)

CorpusID: 73475704 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a67e855f9d7c364ba5a9ba529a3793831052a677](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a67e855f9d7c364ba5a9ba529a3793831052a677)

Fields: Medicine

## (s1) Epsilon wave definition
(p1.0) The epsilon (ε) wave can be defined as an electric signal of depolarization observed between the end of the QRS complex and the beginning of the T wave. The ε wave is found in the right precordial leads, where the QRS complex is broader than the in the left precordial leads (difference !25 ms) in arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC). In patients with AC, who have left ventricular (LV) involvement, the ε wave can be registered in the left and/or inferior leads. The ε wave represents delayed potentials resulting from slow intraventricular conduction due to islands of surviving myocardium interspersed with fatty and fibrous tissue.

(p1.1) This ventricular post-excitation wave consists of a slurring at the end of the QRS complex or an independent potential/s after the return to the isoelectric line. The depolarization abnormality is hardly detectable by the standard 12-lead ECG (S-12-ECG) [1].

(p1.2) Because the ε wave is of low amplitude, it may be affected by ECG filter settings. At the recommended 150-Hz cutoff frequency the ε wave is best detected in the right precordial leads. Currently ECG guidelines recommend a cutoff of 150 Hz for adolescents and adults and 250 Hz for children [2]. The ECG acquisition is often accompanied by high-frequency electromyographic noise. The noise is difficult to filter due to considerable overlapping of its frequency spectrum with the frequency spectrum of the ECG. In clinical practice a 40-Hz cutoff frequency may be used to reduce muscle noise and improve the appearance of the tracing. This approach results in the loss of important information, which was demonstrated in a case report, where ε waves were masked by excessive low-pass filtering in a patient with AC [3] (Fig. 1). Therefore, it is possible that the prevalence of the ε wave in AC patients may be underestimated.

(p1.3) AC can no longer be regarded as an isolated disease of the right ventricle (RV). T-wave inversion in the lateral leads and premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) of LV origin help to identify LV involvement. Timing of the ε wave corresponded to activation of the sub-tricuspid region in patients, who underwent endocardial and epicardial electro-anatomical activation mapping in sinus rhythm [4]. It can also be an aid to the diagnosis of patients with AC, who have other signs or symptoms suggesting the disease, including episodes of myocarditis.
## (s4) Ventricular arrhythmias
(p4.0) Three-dimensional electroanatomical endocardial and epicardial mapping studies for ablation of ventricular tachycardia (VT) in AC showed that the ε wave indicates a delayed depolarization of myocardial tissue, which in AC corresponds to the substrate of fibro-fatty infiltration within the RV. The ε wave is a marker of poor prognosis in AC [23]. VT or ventricular fibrillation (VF) may be easily triggered with electrophysiologic testing. Marstrand et al. studied 42 patients admitted with VT or VF, who had undergone both SAECG recording and cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI). Clinical data and CMRI findings were compared in patients with and without LPs. The majority, 26 (62%) patients, were survivors of sudden cardiac death and the remaining 16 (38%) were admitted with VT. After complete diagnostic evaluation, the most common diagnoses in the cohort were idiopathic VT/VF (60%) or cardiomyopathies (26%). There were no significant differences in RV size relative to body surface area (102 ml/m 2 vs 92 ml/m 2 ), RV ejection fraction (55% vs 58%), or positive late gadolinium enhancement (29% vs 24%). LPs were present in 69% when using the revised TFC criteria.

(p4.1) The ε wave is a major diagnostic criterion for AC, but remains non-quantifiable, and therefore may leave room for substantial subjective interpretation [11,24]. The presence of ε waves on the S-12-ECG reflects significant RV outflow tract involvement, which is associated with episodes of sustained VT but not with sudden cardiac death. It is possible that lead location of the ε wave may have prognostic significance. Lead aVR ε wave may be a marker of poor prognosis [23,25]. It should be pointed out that the ε wave is only one ECG manifestation of AC [26].
## (s6) Possible physiological ε waves
(p6.0) In a study with elite endurance athletes (190 senior and 157 junior athletes), an ε wave was found in 3/190 senior athletes (1.57%) and in 1/189 individuals from a sedentary control group 31e40 years of age [27]. CMRI showed AC findings in one of the senior athletes.
## (s7) Pathological ε waves in patients other than in AC
(p7.0) a. Coronary artery disease: the ε wave has been observed in one case of acute inferior myocardial infarction (MI) associated with RV myocardial infarction [28]. b. Uhl's anomaly or "parchment heart": is an unusual myocardial abnormality first described by Henry Uhl in 1952 [29]. It is characterized by partial or complete absence of the RV myocardium, with severe RV systolic and diastolic impairment. Patients with Uhl's anomaly, who survive to adulthood, may develop right-sided heart failure or arrhythmias [30]. The ECG shows tall and wide P waves, right axis deviation, frequent RBBB, prominent ε waves in all QRS complexes, and signs of severe dilatation of the RV and right atrium. c. After repair of Fallot's tetralogy [31]: a case report described a patient with tetralogy of Fallot, who showed all features of the familial form of RV, including an ε wave. The patient had heart transplantation because of numerous episodes of ventricular tachycardia, and chronic heart failure, and he had a right ventricular outflow patch aneurysm. d. Infiltrative diseases: cardiac sarcoidosis may cause the pathological substrate required for production of ε waves [32]. Therefore, differentiating AC from cardiac sarcoidosis is of clinical importance [33]. Fig. 2 shows a single-lead ε wave in a patient with cardiac sarcoidosis. e. Sickle cell anemia [8]: JW Hurst briefly mentions a probably unpublished observation of epsilon waves in a patient with sickle cell disease with RV hypertrophy due to pulmonary arterial hypertension. f. Brugada syndrome (BrS): it is believed that BrS and AC are different clinical entities with respect to the clinical presentation and the genetic predisposition. The coexistence of these two relatively rare clinical entities has been reported [34]. There may be cases where the differential diagnosis is not clear [35]. ε waves appear to be rare in BrS, and were found in 2 of 47 patients by Letsas et al. [36], and in 1 of a total of 12 unrelated index BrS cases included in the study by Yu et al. [37].
## (s8) New names for the identification of depolarization abnormalities?
(p8.0) Initially, depolarization abnormalities occurring at the beginning, inside or at the end of the QRS complex were classified as ε waves [26]. These changes could also be defined as QRS fragmentation. Later on, it was considered preferable to use the term ε wave only for LPs occurring after the QRS for clinical use. Li et al. proposed to use the terms Presilon, Topsilon and Postsilon for depolarization abnormalities occurring at the beginning, in the top of and at the end of the QRS complex, respectively [26] (Fig. 3).
