# Transition from intravenous epoprostenol to oral or subcutaneous therapy in pulmonary arterial hypertension: A retrospective case series and systematic literature review

CorpusID: 74774644 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2424044746823e610773a6dc1a449c0b6494e370](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2424044746823e610773a6dc1a449c0b6494e370)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) SySTeMATiC LiTeRATuRe RevieW
(p8.0) Our initial database search yielded 420 citations. A review of titles and abstracts excluded 405 citations that did not fulfill the inclusion criteria. Fifteen publications were extracted for full review. Nine articles contained relevant information and were included in the final evaluation. Eight studies described transition from parenteral to oral therapies (14)(15)(16)(17)(18)(19)23), and two described transition to subcutaneous therapies (25,26) (Table 3). A 10th study (24) revisited outcomes from a subset of patients in one of the original studies (18) but was not included in the analysis (Table 3 legend).

(p8.1) Reasons for transition to oral agents included sepsis, line infections (14,15,26), side effects of epoprostenol (14,17), difficult venous access (15) and patient preference (14,16,18). For transition from subcutaneous treprostinil, injection site pain was also cited (14,23). Time for transition from parenteral to oral agents ranged from four weeks (23) to one year (16).
## (s9) DiSCuSSiOn
(p9.0) We described six patients with PAH who successfully transitioned off of IV epoprostenol. Reasons for transition included recurrent line infections, medication side effects, compromised central access and patient preference in the context of clinical stability ( Table 2). These were similar to the reasons that were cited in the literature.

(p9.1) Four of our patients have transitioned to oral agents, and have survived epoprostenol free for between four months and 13 years. This is longer than the mean follow-up period reported in the literature, which varied between eight weeks (25) and 70 months (15).

(p9.2) Although each case was unique, our patients had oral agents initiated for a period of at least one month before a reduction in parenteral prostanoid dosing, which was then performed gradually over a period of up to six months, noting that the timeframe for dose reduction for the patient described in Case 6 was not available.

(p9.3) Where specified in the literature, oral agents were similarly initiated for at least four weeks before reduction in epoprostenol dose (16,18). In studies that specified rates, epoprostenol was downtitrated from between 1 ng/kg/week and 2 ng/kg/week (14,15,17), to between 1 ng/kg/min and 2 ng/kg/min every day or alternate day (16,18). In the two studies involving transition from treprostinil to oral agents (14,23), patients were either on oral agents for at least two months before treprostinil dose reduction (14) or started on sildenafil after treprostinil had been weaned to one-half dose (23).

(p9.4) Two previous studies reported transition from IV to subcutaneous prostanoids. Vachiery et al (26) described eight patients who were successful, with a follow-up period of between four and 11 months. Rubenfire et al (25) performed a randomized placebo-controlled trial in which patients on IV epoprostenol were transitioned to subcutaneous treprostinil or placebo. Thirteen of 14 patients who were withdrawn from treprostinil did so without clinical deterioration when followed for eight weeks.

(p9.5) Two of our patients switched from IV to subcutaneous agents, with initiation performed in hospital for both over periods of days. This was similar to the series by Vachiery et al (26) in which patients were transitioned in hospital over 21 h to 96 h, and Rubenfire et al (25) who reported a mean transition period of seven days.
