# Security, Privacy and Trust for Smart Mobile-Internet of Things (M-IoT): A Survey

CorpusID: 76667957 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99290ce0e864b4e5d4f40711b677ad87bf50d625](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/99290ce0e864b4e5d4f40711b677ad87bf50d625)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s1) A. Advantages and Applications of Smart M-IoT
(p1.0) Smart M-IoT focuses the applications which help in regulating the daily works of their users. Smart M-IoT provides a different set of applications in largely diversified areas such as a smart factory, smart city, smart home, smart grid [19]- [22], healthcare, personal care, emergencies [23], as shown in Fig. 1. With smart M-IoT, it becomes easier for both users as well as business organization to accommodate and host services through intelligent architecture with effective security. In terms of market trends, business houses are looking at a huge monetary advantage from smart M-IoT networks and applications. Including these, other advantages and applications of smart M-IoT are as follows:

(p1.1) • Formation of the contextual network through intelligent and rapid data acquisition and processing. • Self-configuring capacity and support for a large set of devices through a common interface. • Support for human to device and device to device communication with lower overheads and low-complexity. • Information management, processing, and validation and data flow management across a wide range of the network.

(p1.2) • Support for real-world applications such as driverless cars, urban-surveillance, smart retailing, industrial Internet, and even provisioning of application base for Augmented Reality (AR)/Virtual Reality(VR) services. • Low-cost deployment and development of personal applications as well as private networks and clouds. • Requires low-frequent maintenance and can be operated through distant mode. On-site evaluations may be subject to special requirements and upgrades. • Supports crowdsourcing as well as edge-computing models by forming an on-demand network in case of public safety communications. • Industrial automation and personalized control formations through light-weight and low-complex Integrated Development Environments (IDEs). Further, M-IoT also helps in tracking the traffic-flows by incorporating transmissions over dynamic nodes, such as drones, smart cars, autonomous bicycles and rail networks.
## (s4) II. ROADMAP AND COMPARISON WITH RELATED SURVEY ARTICLES
(p4.0) Fig. 2 helps to follow the roadmap of different surveys presented over the period of time that can be used for selecting an appropriate approach for justifying the requirements of M-IoT networks in terms of security, privacy, and trust. In addition to this, Appendix. Table III provides comparative evaluations and reachability of existing studies which are closely related to the survey presented in this article. There are limited works that focus on the details of M-IoT. Only a few of them have written in parts about such requirements and technologies for supporting communications in smart M-IoT. Despite the limited literature in this direction, some of the key and broad surveys have been selected which provides sufficient material to be followed for covering the aspects related to security, privacy, and trust. From the comparisons, it is evident that the closely related survey is the one provided by Feng et al. [24], but it covers major portions related to Mobile Crowdsourcing (MC), which is not so tightly related to the requirements of smart M-IoT. The other studies in [25]- [37] do not focus on major considerations which are mandatory to form a highly secure, private and trustworthy M-IoT networks. Sicari et al. [38], Arias et al. [39] and Yang et al. [40] have discussed the concepts related to M-IoT, but do not cover enough details on the security, privacy and trust management in smart M-IoT. In addition to these, there are no comparative strategies provided for discussing the protocol and framework security in any of these surveys, which is a major limitation. Further, handoffs are the major part of mobile-oriented networks, which are not evaluated in the existing studies. Thus, the necessity of such a study, in-depth evaluations and conceptual-reachability of the proposed survey will help researchers to gain insight into the requirements of secure communications in smart and connected M-IoT. In addition, Appendix.  
## (s5) A. Characteristics of Smart Mobile IoT Networks
(p5.0) Smart M-IoT focuses on reliable and sustainable connectivity between the devices on the move, as shown in Fig. 3. Smart M-IoT focuses on the establishment of a trust relationship between the devices through an enhanced reputation-cycling. Dependence on Machine to Machine (M2M) communication [41], Device to Device (D2D) marking, in-built-service sharing, and energy conservation are the key characteristics of M-IoT. With the devices operating in a battery constrained environment, M-IoT characterizes on the utilization of technologies that offer a wide range but at low battery consumption. The characteristics of smart M-IoT can be summarized as follows:

(p5.1) • M-IoT includes devices with low power, but operable up to a wide range with lower complexity and lesser resource consumptions. • Supports ultra-dense communication with a unique feature of reliability despite such a huge number of devices operating simultaneously. • M-IoT may be subjected to frequent handovers and may be involved in inter-or intra-handovers depending on their network design and deployment. • Licensed and shared spectrum usability with a primary focus on services similar to short messages. Most of the applications do not require any retraining, and configurations are automatically loaded as a part of application program. • Smart M-IoT applications and services are vendor specific.

(p5.2) However, the licensing of narrow bands can be governed by small-scale network organizations with core setups at the big business houses. • M-IoT operations are dependent on the synergy among the mobile operators and rely heavily on the trust-relationship for their security and distributions. • One-tap facilities for all the services, where a user just has to install and load a required feature for experiencing the applications that focus on consumer-electronics, healthcare of smart home automation. • M-IoT needs media independent support for most of the applications as some of the entities may be operating on 3G, while other may have 4G/LTE or even the upcoming 5G accessibility through mmWave functionalities. • Virtualization and privatization of services are the other main characteristics of M-IoT. Virtualization has further been leveraged through the properties of network slicing, which is one of the solutions for distributed security. • Support for immediate acquisition, decision and action are the major features of smart M-IoT. Management of information and building contextual relationships are the other unique characteristics of smart M-IoT.
## (s9) E. Security, Privacy, and Trust for smart M-IoT
(p9.0) Because of a difference in mode of deployment and applicability, security, privacy, and trust of M-IoT devices are of utmost importance. These differences in the characteristics of involved devices raise an alarming factor for securing and isolating each user's operations as the variation in behavior and operations of each device may lead to different kind of threats based on their specifications [76]. Thus, it is important to study all the aspects related to the security, privacy, and trust of smart M-IoT networks. Majority of the threats occur due to inadequate configurations of security properties and some of them are the vulnerabilities that remain undetected over a course of time due to the negligence of their developers [77] [78]. Minimizing data acquisition, supporting M2M routing, resolving hidden terminals and encryption can help to secure and privatize each user's data and information.

(p9.1) F. Methodologies for Analyses of Security, Privacy, and Trust in Smart M-IoT An approach is secure for the time being it is not broken, which means security is difficult to analyze as there are no direct simulators and emulators to be used for evaluation of a system for these requirements. Visualization is another big issue for such requirements. Visualization of trust can be obtained as it is comparatively easier to define trust as a metric between the communicating entities; whereas security and privacy are governed by rules and policies which can only be evaluated in an attacker environment. Creation and demonstration of such an environment are difficult as it requires a lot of automation, which is not applicable to most of the available tools. Majority of the solutions are formally analyzed using BurrowsAbadiNeedham (BAN) logic, which is operated on belief theory [102] [103]. Some approaches follow reduction techniques, while others simply rely on evaluating the computational cost of operations. Apart from these, some other methods include formal semantic evaluations, equational theory, etc [104]. Cryptographic solutions can be evaluated using random oracle model, inductive methods, provable security, etc [105]- [107]. Model checking and theory of proving are used by some approaches for evaluating the flow of their solution. There are certain tools available which can be used for these evaluations like, Automated Validation of Internet Security Protocols and Applications (AVISPA), A Computational Logic for Applicative Common Lisp (ACL2), ProVerif, Scyther, etc [108]- [111]. Irrespective of these evaluations, it is recommended that solutions should conduct certain case studies while presenting outputs of their proposed schemes and should demonstrate the effects on the performance of the system and the network.
## (s10) IV. SECURE FRAMEWORKS FOR SMART M-IOT
(p10.0) M-IoT networks are vulnerable to a different set of attacks which can be launched due to improper configurations and deployment strategies. It is required that these networks are deployed with ultra-reliable formations, which help to hinder launching of any unknown as well as known attacks. Further, security implications, assessment, and threat modeling can help to identify any such possibilities at a prior, which may support prevention against intruders during the operations of IoT devices [112] [113] [114]. Siboni et al. [115] highlighted the importance of a framework for securing the content in wearable IoT devices, which are considered as an important part of M-IoT systems. The authors developed an innovative testbed setup for evaluating the security policies of dynamic IoT devices. The need of the hour is to provide such a framework that can be used for supporting the security requirements of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) that heavily rely on M-IoT devices for their regular operations [116]. Authorization, privacy as well as physical security and anonymity should be the core aspect of frameworks, which primarily focus on the security of smart M-IoT networks [117] [118]. Although the existing frameworks provide a base for network formations, these have to be operated with a different set of schemes, protocols, as well as policy-mechanisms for a fully-reliable and secure network establishment.
## (s12) B. Risk-Assessment-based Framework
(p12.0) Identification of potential conflicting components and users through detection modeling is mainly studied under riskassessment-based frameworks for security in smart M-IoT. Such kind of frameworks helps to pre-identify any potential risks involved in leveraging services through a particular aspect of the network. These aspects may include situational awareness of every involved entity of the network. Based on the mode of identification, risk-assessment-based frameworks can be further classified into three main types as shown below:

(p12.1) • Prediction-based: The Framework which identifies and manages risk through predictive or estimated evaluations of the network components are termed as prediction-based risk assessment frameworks [89]. Such type of frameworks considers prior and current states to identify the mode of operations and uses decision modeling to arrive at a decision of potential risks in the network. • Probability-based: In probabilistic-based, the network is evaluated for different kind of operations which are executed over a period of time. Then, each process is operated with a probabilistic model which then helps to finalize the probabilistic cost of the networks, while providing knowledge about the factors which dominates the most and can affect the performance as well as security policies. The most common aspect of such frameworks is to identify attack success possibilities in a network while using parameters like false positives, false negatives, accuracy, recall, and precision as considered in [90], [91]. • Standard-based: Most of the organizations have a predefined set of conditions which are to be fulfilled by every framework which aims to provide a special kind of services to its users. Majority of these conditions are the benchmark and supported by standards organizations such as International Organization for Standardization (ISO), Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), International Telecommunications Union (ITU). These organizations provide guidelines for every framework to justify its security considerations for the defined services.
## (s13) C. Authentication-based Framework
(p13.0) Authentication of the users and devices in smart M-IoT is of utmost importance and highly crucial. It is required that all the services are provided only to the users which authenticates themselves with the security servers usually Authentication, Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) in any network. These security servers ensure the safety of other legitimate and authenticated users by providing a secure mode of communications. One of the crucial aspects of authentication is the positioning of authentication-server along with the number of passes required to reach it. The mode of authentication is quite vast, but for smart M-IoT, it can be classified into primary mode of authentication, the secondary mode of authentication and group-authentication. The choice among each of them depends on the types of device, network architecture and types of services to be supported by the involved entities. The details on each of them are provided below:

(p13.1) • Primary: The authentication which is performed with the core of any network while using the secure channels between the entity and the authentication server is known as primary mode [93], [94]. Such kind of authentication is much secure but often suffers from the consequences of long paths and requirements of route optimizations.
## (s14) D. Secure Services-based Framework
(p14.0) Type of services affects the security of a network. Some services may require light-frameworks which are easy on resources while others may require fast processing frameworks which operate with lesser delays and fewer overheads. Such type of frameworks is usually related to the authentication facilities supported for managing the security of the network as the authentication phase is itself responsible for resource consumption and delays. Based on the requirements of services, these frameworks can be classified into time-bound, resourcebound, and hybrid frameworks as explained below:

(p14.1) • Time-bound: The frameworks which operate with time as a crucial entity in securing the services and the users of a network are studied as a time-bound services-based framework. As studied in [86], [96], such frameworks are lightweight and highly fast in processing and evaluation of security policies. Usually, such frameworks perform periodic evaluations on the time consumed in authenticating users and allocating communication uplink for data transmissions. Evaluation time, discovery time, and authentication time are the crucial parameters in timebound security frameworks. • Resource-bound: Most of the devices in smart M-IoT are low on resources and suffer from the threat of average lifetime. Usually, their lifetime is driven by the energy and memory consumed by the services operational on each device and often the mandatory services consume the majority of their services [80], [83], [97]. Thus, it becomes important to develop frameworks which focus on the security while keeping a control on the utilization of M-IoT resources with a limited burden on the operational control and activity of the device. Such type of frameworks uses checkpoint mechanism to manage the resource consumption for the security of M-IoT applications. • Hybrid: Nowadays, the smart applications tend to be time-bound as well as resource-bound. Thus, there is a requirement of frameworks which can apply both these features while forming a hybrid services-based framework that can use both the resource-checkpoints as well as periodic evaluation of security policies for securing activities in smart M-IoT. Accessibility and response time can be considered as mutual parameters for accessing the performance of such frameworks [85].
## (s15) E. Anomaly Detection-based Framework
(p15.0) Identification of false users, false services and false entities in a network is studied under this category. It is a responsibility of security framework to identify communities and users which pose potential risks to legitimate users of the network. Further, such a classification helps to manage the flow of information as well as limit the accessibility of users with harmful properties and high risks to network services. Anomaly detections are performed by checking the correctness of a device or user against the predefined policies of accurate operations. On a broader side, such frameworks can be classified into on-site and off-site evaluators with the description as given below:

(p15.1) • On-site: The real-time evaluation of the users for legitimate and accurate operations is classified as on-site or real-time anomaly detection. Such type of detections is performed by deploying real-time Intrusion Detection System (IDS) which dedicated sniffs the traffic without breaking its flow and without any excessive overheads [98]- [100]. Majority of evaluations are conducted through sandboxes which do not reveal their identity to the users and prohibits anomaly users from accessing the services across the network. • Off-site: In some cases, real-time evaluations may pose an excessive burden on the network and it is difficult to analyze the high flow of data. Such networks are evaluated off-site at their respective data centers which check for the presence of any abnormal activity for each of its users. Usually, such type is suitable for scenarios which allow delayed transactions without affecting the services such as payment gateways or smart-phone updates [46], [99], [101]. In addition to above, anomaly detections can be classified as periodic or continuous depending on the time and procedure of detection.
## (s18) B. Authentication mode-based
(p18.0) Similar to authentication-based frameworks, authentication protocols allow identification of legitimate users which can interact with each other for acquiring particular services over the network. Authentication protocols help to validate the users for transmissions in M-IoT. The vulnerability and importance of M-IoT demand the employment of exceedingly reliable methods in the design of secure systems. Authentication protocols are one of the most important design parameters. These protocols help to achieve a reliable trust and security for exchange information. On the basis of mode of operations, the authentication protocols can be classified into following two types:

(p18.1) • Proactive: Authentication protocols which focus on preverification of the users before beginning the transmissions are termed as proactive authentication [140], [141], [143]. Such schemes are highly reliable but sometimes slower in operations. Thus, these are often the primary preference of setups that focus on the services over smart M-IoT. • Reactive: Authentication protocols which focus on the on-demand verification of the users and support a direct linking between the network users are termed as reactive authentication [144]. Reactive authentication is fast in operations, but is usually, vulnerable to a lot of network attacks which raises a question about their secure usability for smart M-IoT. However, with modern solutions like crowdsourcing and blockchains, reactive protocols can easily be extended and secure for their usability in smart M-IoT setups.
## (s20) D. Property-based
(p20.0) Security protocols can also be classified on the basis of properties which are used for securing the transmissions between the nodes. Based on some key requirements, the security protocols can be categorized on the basis of following properties:

(p20.1) • Freshness-based: Freshness means that messages exchanged in a session are generated specifically for a particular session. The attacker cannot use the previous session for messages. Freshness based protocols are used for communication between the two parties by establishing a secure channel on the basis of the freshness of sessions. The receiver believes that the obtained information is fresh and authenticated. Freshness is achieved by updating keys and sessions through consistent changes in parameters like seeds, nonce and sequence numbers of involved entities in smart M-IoT. Approaches based on freshness of keys and sessions are discussed in [129], [139], [147]- [153]. • Encryption-based: Encryption is an interesting piece of technology that works by scrambling data or information so it is unreadable by attackers. Encryption is a keybased approach to combine confidentiality and integrity, and provides a secure mechanism against external threats such as chosen plaintext and chosen ciphertext attacks. Encryption based protocol ensure the confidentiality of sharing information between the users in smart M-IoT [129], [137], [139], [146], [147], [149]- [157]. • Access-based: Limiting the users from accessing a particular service is one of the key requirements of smart M-IoT applications. Protocols which can help to define role to every user and control their activity are classified into access-based security protocols. There are a lot of existing solutions, which aim at enhancing the security of the mobile network by limiting the user operations while using the policies for information flow, management, and control [129], [146], [147], [149]- [157]. A highly stabilized access control protocol can prevent misleading or eavesdropper from gaining access to crucial information in smart M-IoT. • System Integrity-based: System integrity protection is a necessary step to ensure a high level of security. As discussed in [115], [139], [146], [147], [149], [152], [156], [157], development of system integrity protection protocols can help to manage information disturbances and prevent attacks. The involved parties in smart M-IoT setups want to assure that all the remote data they receive is from systems that satisfy the users' integrity requirements. Therefore, it is important that system integrity based protocols can protect the information results from being polluted by attackers.
## (s21) E. Summary and Insights
(p21.0) In this section, we presented a detailed study on securityaware protocols for smart M-IoT. Following the abovediscussed classification, some major contributions to security protocols which are applicable to M-IoT are highlighted in Appendix. Table VII. The existing protocols are evaluated on the basis of system integrity, freshness, confidentiality, mutual authentication, access control, overheads, encryption, and non-repudiation. Apart from these, several schemes can be followed from SPORE [183], which is a repository of security protocols.. Over the last decade, protocols have been improvised by utilizing security as a crucial metric to decide a
## (s22) Classification of privacy-preservation approaches in smart M-IoT
(p22.0) Encryption-based Architecture-based Protocol-based [154], [166] Tool-based [130], [167], [168] Symmetric-key [169] Asymmetric-key [170]- [177] Homomorphic [178]- [180] Centralized [181] Distributed [166] [182] Research can be extended towards the designing of a secure protocol stack, which can include channel as well as message protection without compromising the QoS to its users. Network patrolling, perimeter evaluation, and deployment of intrusion detection protocols can help to further secure the operations of smart M-IoT.
## (s23) VI. PRIVACY PRESERVATION APPROACHES FOR SMART M-IOT
(p23.0) Data in M-IoT is highly crucial as well as sensitive and any eavesdropping may result in leakage of users' personal information [184] [185]. With data processing reaching a fine granularity level, it becomes tedious to privatize the content as new issues arise because of many dependencies on the platform used for transmissions. The collection and control of data are two of the main reasons that increase threat-level for data privacy in M-IoT [186] [187] [188]. With the difference in architectural deployment, smart M-IoT possesses large-scale implications for removing issues which may leak the entire information of the networks. Most of the approaches fail to support access control and authorization while deploying applications for smart M-IoT networks. Reducing the reachability of every user and keeping a watch on the amount and level of contents accessed by an individual can help in privacypreservation [189] [25] [190].

(p23.1) Encryption of data for every link can further help this cause, however, with the networks attaining a high-speed property, it becomes necessary to support both encryption and decryption at a rapid pace [191]. Majority of the intermediate procedures should be done on the cipher itself, as this will help to prevent any unauthorized decryption of the text being shared between M-IoT devices. Further, approaches can use customized identifiers for creating policies for maintaining the anonymity of access between its users. Along with these, prevention of hidden terminals is another major requirement for privacy-preservation [192]- [195].

(p23.2) Practical problems like network partitioning and isolations increase the risks of leakage of data and it is necessary to formulate approaches that can help to identify such issues before-hand and with low-complexity [196]- [200]. Data privacy can be guaranteed by using solutions, which prevent sniffing and do not yield any information even if discovered by intermediates [201] [202] [203]. This can be further enhanced by using non-store approach, which refers to the immediate forwarding of the data without consuming the excessive time stamp as well as keeping the freshness of the keys. Privacy can further be assured by preventing third party-based evaluations as these may disclose the encryption mechanisms of the entire route as well as of the traffic [204].

(p23.3) Distribution of incoming traffic not only prevents DoS or DDoS but also helps to make sure about the identification of any eavesdropper that may be listening to the incoming or outgoing traffic [205] [206]. Updating security policies, maintenance of logs and refining network architecture at regular intervals for the detected traffic and anomalies can further help in privacypreservation of M-IoT networks [207]. Some of the major contributions on data privacy in IoT, which are applicable to M-IoT architecture, are discussed in Appendix. Table VIII. These schemes can be further classified into four major types, encryption-based, architecture-based, protocol-based and toolbased privacy preservation, as shown in Fig. 10. The details of each of these are provided below:
## (s24) A. Encryption-based
(p24.0) Privacy is mainly the protection of personal information of users and devices in smart M-IoT. Disclosure of information can be protected through encryption of data which prohibits any eavesdropper from obtaining any knowledge even if he or she is able to capture the majority of its parts. Encryption-based schemes are not different from usual encryption algorithms. Thus, the existing solutions can be classified into traditional encryption schemes on the basis of algorithm or mechanism used by them for protecting the data. These types are as follows:

(p24.1) • Symmetric encryption: The symmetric key encryption relies on the same key for encryption and decryption i.e. the key used for the encryption and the decryption should be same at both the parties. Symmetric-key encryption is essentially the same as a secret code that each of the two entities must know in order to encrypt and decrypt information. The symmetric key encryption has the major problem of exchange overheads of keys between the two parties, especially with maintaining trust when encryption is used for authentication and integrity checking [169]. • Asymmetric encryption: Asymmetrical encryption is also known as public key cryptography, uses two keys to encrypt or decrypt of a plain text. The secret keys are exchanged over the Internet or a large network. The message encrypted by a public key can only be decrypted using a private key and similarly, data encrypted using a private key can only be decrypted using a public key [170]- [177]. Asymmetric encryption is far better in ensuring the security of information transmitted during communication. • Homomorphic encryptions: Homomorphic encryptions allow complex mathematical operations to be performed on encrypted data without compromising the encryption. The encrypted data set is transformed into another data set by preserving relationships between elements in both sets. Studies conducted on the topic of Homomorphic encryption in [178]- [180] highlight their applicability over the smart M-IoT.
## (s25) B. Architecture-based
(p25.0) Privacy preservation schemes can also be marked on the basis of architecture used for deployment and operations. Generally, the existing solutions depend on a centralized mechanism, but with solutions like blockchain which primarily uses public key operations, the architectural deployments become distributed.

(p25.1) • Centralized: Approaches which use a controller or centralized entity as a key enabler for privacy-preservation are studied in this type. Centralized solutions are effective from the monitoring perspective, but these pose a threat to a single point of failure which is difficult to sustain for any network [181]. Especially, in smart M-IoT, if all the traffic is regulated by the centralized authority, it becomes necessary to develop schemes which will define the policies of load management as well as prevent excessive utilization of resources for the traffic coming from a single source. • Distributed: Such schemes depend on the distributed and flat nature of architectures and prevent a common point of failure as privacy preservation is initiated by the user or a node which are abstracted from other components of the network. In some scenarios, multiple nodes are used for defining policies for privacy preservation. However, the success of such approaches depends on their compliance degree and synergy in supporting common algorithms for a large set of nodes [166] [182].
## (s26) C. Protocol-based
(p26.0) As discussed in the protocol section, privacy can be supported by defining rules which are operated as a part of conditions and help to decide on the sharing of information between the users. Protocol-based privacy is easier to achieve and an efficient way for networks that operate in close proximity to each other [154], [166]. Such schemes are extremely useful for networks using crowdsourcing and can be used as broadcast mechanisms for blockchain-based distributed solutions for privacy preservations.
## (s27) D. Tool-based
(p27.0) Such an approach is easier to manage as it only involves process like masking, tagging or user-controlled policies [130], [167], [168]. Tool-based privacy is governed by the properties and services offered by the application platforms running for smart M-IoT. However, the correctness of such solutions is dependent on the legitimacy of the service providers and their honesty which cannot be measured through any tool and depends on the level of commitment to their users.
## (s29) VII. TRUST MANAGEMENT APPROACHES FOR SMART M-IOT
(p29.0) M-IoT aims at maintaining a secure relationship between the entities involved in service provisioning as well as data dissemination [229] [230]. Most of the trust-enabled networks establish a reputation system based on a centralized entity that can help to check whether a particular node in the network can be relied upon or not. Such evaluations of reliability are an integral part of trust management systems [231]. With a billion of devices, the complexity of maintaining trust increases and it becomes relatively difficult to handle such an enormous number of devices, which leads the network into attacks by false reputation enhancement of an intruder [232].

(p29.1) Most of the trust management systems are governed by policies which are decided on the basis of the configurations of the network as well as the types of services supported by the M-IoT devices [233]. Trust management depends heavily on
## (s36) E. Summary and Insights
(p36.0) In this section, we provided a detailed classification of trust management approaches for smart M-IoT. Trust relationships not only secure the M-IoT but also help in building reliable CPS. Evaluation of trust by using a limited set of metrics is a challenge for M-IoT, however, such a system offers huge scalability and can be operated with less management and better control [28]. Incorporation of software security, privacy control, and security constraints further strengthen the trust modeling in M-IoT. Along with these, trust-based solutions can be modeled into secure communication systems through security protocols, which use encryption policies for defining new security schemes by using a similar model of trust-relaying systems [238] [31] [239].

(p36.1) To summarize, a detailed state-of-the-art comparative study on various trust management schemes is presented in Appendix. Table IX, which can be extended for their use in the smart M-IoT environment. The table helps to understand the key features and parameters focused by most of the existing solutions along with their core ideology for maintaining trust between the IoT entities.
## (s37) VIII. PHYSICAL LAYER SECURITY FOR SMART M-IOT
(p37.0) Unlike traditional security solutions, which focus on the logical aspects of the networks, physical security is hardest and difficult to follow because of a difference in the type and make of an M-IoT device. With each device following a different set of parameters and configurations, it becomes difficult to provide a common solution which can withstand the Channel State Information (CSI) requirements of the entire network while securing the physical transmission of the network [254] [255] [256]. Network coding and multiplexing approaches usually rely on cryptographic solutions only to reduce the complexity of physical layer; however, this makes the system vulnerable to different types of attacks that can be launched over the used mechanisms. With devices being operated on battery, physical layer security becomes far more challenging and should be attained with lesser overheads as well as a lesser number of computations. A highly burdened operation may deplete the energy resources and an operational M-IoT network becomes of no use. The types of technology, 3G, 4G/LTE or upcoming 5G, play a crucial role in selecting an approach that can fit into the physical configurations as well as can support the load at a dedicated frame size [255] [257] [258].

(p37.1) Designing of security schemes on the physical layer may seem to be difficult, but it provides all set of new opportunities for improving the QoS as well as QoE for the end-users. The strength of the physical layer security depends on the adversary model which is used for evaluating the developed solution [254] [259]. Such solutions are usually driven by the assumptions of the CSI as well as device type and may or may not stand once new vulnerabilities are discovered over a course of time [260] [261] [262]. The existing solutions can be broadly classified into two main types, service-based physical layer security, and channel-based physical layer security, as shown in Fig. 12. The details on both of these are presented below:
## (s39) B. Channel-based
(p39.0) Physical layer solutions which emphasize the security of channel used for communications are dependent on the signal alterations and induction of bit codes into the transmission medium. Such solutions should operate with a low-complexity and their operations must be completed in few nanoseconds. The success of these solutions depends on the type of communication setup used for transmissions and the approaches used for securing the bits. Based on the mode of operations, these can be classified into modulation-based and encodingbased solutions:

(p39.1) • Modulation-based: Such schemes changes the signal properties (Amplitude, Phase, or Frequency) for preventing any eavesdropping on the transmitted data. In general, secure-spectrums can help to attain modulation-based channel security in smart M-IoT. These solutions are performed by using carrier waves [250] [251]. • Encoding-based: Using different codes for the security algorithms at the physical layer helps to secure the traffic and such an approach is classified into encoding based solution. These are performed through binary codes [252] [253].
## (s40) C. Summary and Insights
(p40.0) In this section, we summarized the existing studies into two main categories of physical-layer approaches namely, servicebased and channel-based solutions. These solutions were further studies by classifying them on the basis of cryptographic mechanism, access control and transmission policies, jamming facilities, modulation, and encoding. From the study, it is evident that channel estimation, M2M modeling, fading losses, noisy models, energy-constraints are some of the crucial aspects to be taken care of while deploying security solutions for physical layer in M-IoT [275]- [278].

(p40.1) Physical security of the M-IoT network is also impacted by the burden of devices and interference-management, which are driven by the density of the network. Most of the physical layer security solutions are driven by Signal-to-Interference Ratio (SIR), Signal-to-Interference-plus-Noise Ratio (SINR), secrecy, outage policies, and transmit energies. Despite a plethora of approaches for IoT's physical layer security, there are only a few solutions which can withstand the requirements of M-IoT; thus, a comparison study is presented in Appendix. Table X, which helps to understand the reach and level of security provided by the existing solutions.
## (s41) IX. HANDOVER SECURITY FOR SMART M-IOT
(p41.0) Handovers can be hard, soft, horizontal, vertical, terminal and network controlled, and terminal and network initiated. The handovers allow the shifting of radios between the same or different media in a network. M-IoT devices undergo handoffs once they leave their service-space and enter an area governed by a different entity. Most of the handovers in M-IoT are vertical that require efficient security measures for the protection of links during their switching [279] [141] [280]. There is a huge requirement of trust as well as seamless shifting of services across the terminals while performing handoffs and mobility management in the network [281] [282]. Usually, the M-IoT networks focus on using an Access Point (AP), M-IoT device, AS, and core terminals for shifting services across the network [140]. Most of the networks require seamless services and faster authentication which can be obtained through proactive mechanisms [283]. These proactive approaches define pre-determined system model over which the authentication is performed and verified against the attacker models. Most of the approaches are selected on the basis of handoff latency, and time consumed in laying off their services onto the next terminals along with their cost of operations [284].
## (s44) A. Initiation-based
(p44.0) Handovers are operated through a governing entity which initiates the procedures of attachment and detachment of a node in the network. Based on the initiation, the handovers authentication procedures can be divided into following two types:

(p44.1) • Host-initiated: When the service consuming entity starts the procedures of handovers, the type of handovers is marked as host-initiated. Host-initiated handovers consume much signaling and might have a weak security because of a failure in the identification of requests which may come from an anomaly node [263]. • Network-initiated: When the service providing entity starts the procedures of handovers, the type of handovers is marked as network-initiated. This type of handover is low complex and more secure in because of control by a centralized authority [264]. However, security layouts and architectural complexity can affect the performance of such handovers.
## (s47) X. RESEARCH CHALLENGES, OPEN ISSUES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
(p47.0) Security, privacy, and trust are supported through specific requirements of a system, which are the open challenges to be resolved in M-IoT. Most of the challenges and issues can be acquired from the studies presented in [24]- [40], [301]- [306]. From these studies, it is noticeable that the major open issues to be resolved for M-IoT are:
## (s49) D. Necessity of Amalgamation
(p49.0) Security, privacy, and trust in M-IoT go hand in hand. A breach of policies of one may lead to attack through other. Security policies must be strong enough to prevent any unauthorized access to the personal information of an individual in M-IoT and privacy policies must ensure that the data is always shared with the trusted party. Such an activity is also operational in reverse and holds true for any sort of network formations in smart M-IoT. The necessities for amalgamating these solutions can be accounted for following points:

(p49.1) • Prevention against Cyber Spies: Combining all the aspects of security, privacy and trust for smart M-IoT ensure protection against cyber bullies, spies, and service breachers [73], [320], [321]. These three requirements ensure that the network is operating in closed perimeter even its operations are distributed across the huge cyber network.

(p49.2) Here, close perimeter refers to the path lengths and routes which can be tracked down easily and conterminously without many overheads.  [326] with lower dependencies and controlled cohesion and coupling amongst their software solutions. Thus, it becomes inevitably important to develop solutions, which hold true justifications for security, privacy, and trust at the same instance and at the same level.
