# molecules Assessment of Enzyme Inhibition: A Review with Examples from the Development of Monoamine Oxidase and Cholinesterase Inhibitory Drugs

CorpusID: 7896027 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9c2f7fe59cd159c9c3d7edbfd0c06b5c868a9cfe)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine

## (s2) Propargylamines
(p2.0) The first drug used in the propargyl class was the non-specific pargyline (Figure 1a). Subsequent development led to selective inactivators, clorgyline for MAO A and l-deprenyl and rasagiline for MAO B. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline are used for adjunct therapy of Parkinson's disease. Both ldeprenyl and rasagiline inactivate MAO B at nanomolar concentrations, but can also inactivate MAO A at higher concentrations [30]. A polar anionic mechanism has been proposed from quantumchemical calculations, where the flavin moiety acts as an electrophile and the bond is formed after deprotonation at the terminal carbon [62]. The acetylenic moiety of the propargyl group is particularly useful for incorporation into multi-target compounds because specificity is defined by the requirement for the catalytic activity of the MAO. Its further adaptation into multi-target compounds for neurodegenerative diseases has been reviewed [63].
## (s4) Propargylamines
(p4.0) The first drug used in the propargyl class was the non-specific pargyline (Figure 1a). Subsequent development led to selective inactivators, clorgyline for MAO A and l-deprenyl and rasagiline for MAO B. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline are used for adjunct therapy of Parkinson's disease. Both l-deprenyl and rasagiline inactivate MAO B at nanomolar concentrations, but can also inactivate MAO A at higher concentrations [30]. A polar anionic mechanism has been proposed from quantum-chemical calculations, where the flavin moiety acts as an electrophile and the bond is formed after deprotonation at the terminal carbon [62]. The acetylenic moiety of the propargyl group is particularly useful for incorporation into multi-target compounds because specificity is defined by the requirement for the catalytic activity of the MAO. Its further adaptation into multi-target compounds for neurodegenerative diseases has been reviewed [63].
## (s6) Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) as Drug Targets
(p6.0) Human tissues contain two enzymes that catalyse the hydrolysis of acetylcholine, acetylcholinesterase (AChE; EC 3.1.1.7) and butyrylcholinesterase (BChE; EC 3.1.1.8). The situation has been confused by the many other names that have been used for these enzymes. AChE is also known as true cholinesterase; choline esterase I; cholinesterase; acetylthiocholinesterase; acetylcholine hydrolase; acetyl-β-methylcholinesterase; AcCholE; whereas butyrylcholinesterase has also been called pseudocholinesterase; butyrylcholine esterase; non-specific cholinesterase; choline esterase II (unspecific); benzoylcholinesterase; choline esterase; butyrylcholinesterase; propionyl-cholinesterase; BtChEase. This can make it difficult to interpret some of the earlier literature on these activities. As the name cholinesterase has been used for both, it should be avoided except when used to cover both enzymes. Both enzymes are glycoproteins that can exist as membrane-bound or soluble forms.

(p6.1) AChE is a key enzyme in both central and peripheral cholinergic neurotransmission [73]. It is predominately membrane-bound and is found mainly at neuronal synapses in the central nervous system and at neuromuscular junctions, where it terminates the action of acetylcholine (Ach) that has been released, by nerve stimulation. The enzyme is also found associated with the erythrocyte membrane and in soluble forms. There is a single AChE gene in the human, but different mRNA splicing results in sequence variations at the C-terminal end of the enzyme that determine its membrane attachment. The commonest form expressed in mammalian systems is the 'tailed' variant in which there is a 40 residue C-terminal 'T peptide' that can associate with membranes either through the collagen type anchoring protein, collagen Q (ColQ), or through the transmembrane protein, PRiMA (proline-rich membrane anchor) [74]. The PRiMA-associated form is the major AChE present in brain [75], whereas ColQ attachment is found at neuromuscular junctions. In contrast, the attachment to the erythrocyte membrane is through a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor [76]. Other variants, without the T-peptide result in soluble forms of the enzyme, which like the membrane-bound forms may be monomeric dimeric, or tetrameric. All these forms appear to possess the same catalytic domain.

(p6.2) AChE catalyses the hydrolysis of Ach with high efficiency, but the location of its catalytic site in a deep cavity, or gorge ( Figure 2), results in a lesser ability to cleave esters with bulkier acyl groups [77]. In contrast to AChE, butyrylcholinesterase, which has a wider gorge, is a less specific esterase which can cleave various esters with bulkier acyl groups [78,79]. Table 2 summarizes some of the known specificity differences between these two enzymes. BChE also has aryl acylamidase activity that catalyses the hydrolysis of acyl amides of aromatic amines. The synthetic compound σ-nitroacetanilide is often used to determine this activity [80], which seems to involve the same catalytic site as that involved in choline ester hydrolysis. A physiological substrate for this activity has not yet been identified.
## (s8) Inhibitors of Acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE)
(p8.0) The observations that presynaptic ACh levels and the activity of its synthetic enzyme, choline acetyltransferase are decreased in AD resulted in the use of AChE inhibitors to treat the cognitive dysfunction. AChE inhibitors have also been used in the treatment of myasthenia gravis and as a CNS stimulant (analeptic) following the early observation that tacrine (1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-9-acridinamine) caused rapid arousal in experimental animals after morphine administration [100]. Tacrine was subsequently shown to be a reversible inhibitor of both AChE and BChe (see [101,102]). This was the first drug approved in the USA for therapy in Alzheimer's disease. Despite moderate success, its use was subsequently discontinued because of adverse effects. Along with several other cholinesterase inhibitors, it has also been marketed as a cognitive enhancing (nootropic) agent.
## (s9) Design of Compounds that Inhibit Both MAO and ChE
(p9.0) The starting point for rational design of dual inhibitors of MAO and ChE has been existing drugs and known pharmacophores. Figure 4 shows the strategy followed in some recent publications to combine anti AD drugs donepezil or tacrine that inhibit ChEs with coumarin structures that inhibit MAO. The combination of donepezil and coumarin shown in Figure 5 met with some success with the best compound showing micromolar AChE and BChE inhibition (IC 50 = 9.10 µM and 5.90 µM, respectively), and selective hMAO-B inhibition (IC 50 = 0.30 µM), but the potency on the four enzymes varied widely across the series [14]. Using tacrine as in the example in Figure 4b was less successful because the large size decreased the inhibition of MAO (IC 50 = 10-100 µM), although the inhibtion of ChEs remained in the sub-micromolar range [129]. Huperzine A ( Figure 3) is an alkaloid that was first isolated from the club moss Huperzia serrata, which has been a traditional 'folk-medicine' remedy in in China. It binds to the PAS, but may also penetrate the active site gorge [124]. It is much less potent as an inhibitor of BChE. It appears to have several additional targets, in protecting mitochondrial function, reducing the tissue labile iron pool and behaving as an antioxidant. [125]. Although Huperzine A is licenced for use as a drug for AD and vascular dementia in China, it is only available as a nutraceutical in many other countries. This may have hampered detailed international clinical trials and account for the conflicting evidence that is presently available on its effectiveness [126,127].

(p9.1) There have been many, sometimes conflicting reports on the comparative efficacy of donepezil, galantamine, and rivastigmine. A Cochrane Systematic Review concluded that there was little to choose between them in terms of their value in the therapy of mild-to-moderate AD and that the choice might be dictated by the side-effects experienced by an individual [128].
## (s10) Design of Compounds that Inhibit Both MAO and ChE
(p10.0) The starting point for rational design of dual inhibitors of MAO and ChE has been existing drugs and known pharmacophores. Figure 4 shows the strategy followed in some recent publications to combine anti AD drugs donepezil or tacrine that inhibit ChEs with coumarin structures that inhibit MAO. The combination of donepezil and coumarin shown in Figure 5 met with some success with the best compound showing micromolar AChE and BChE inhibition (IC50 = 9.10 μM and 5.90 μM, respectively), and selective hMAO-B inhibition (IC50 = 0.30 μM), but the potency on the four enzymes varied widely across the series [14]. Using tacrine as in the example in Figure 4b was less successful because the large size decreased the inhibition of MAO (IC50 = 10-100 μM), although the inhibtion of ChEs remained in the sub-micromolar range [129]. Combining existing drugs to produce multi-target compounds. (a) The core structure of donepezil, an anticholinesterase drug used for AD cognitive effects, is combined with coumarins that inhibit MAO [14]; (b) the discontinued AD drug, tacrine, combined with coumarin [129]; (c) combining the propargyl MAOI rasagiline with the carbamate moeity of the AD drug rivastigmine [130]. Combining existing drugs to produce multi-target compounds. (a) The core structure of donepezil, an anticholinesterase drug used for AD cognitive effects, is combined with coumarins that inhibit MAO [14]; (b) the discontinued AD drug, tacrine, combined with coumarin [129]; (c) combining the propargyl MAOI rasagiline with the carbamate moeity of the AD drug rivastigmine [130]. 7. Change in assay conditions: If the assay conditions are not constant the rate of product formation might be expected to change. If, for example, the reaction involves the formation or consumption of hydrogen ions, the pH of the reaction mixture may change during the reaction, unless it is adequately buffered. If this resulted in a change of pH away from the optimum pH of the reaction this could lead to a decrease in the rate of the reaction. Coupled assays, which continuously remove one of the products, should prevent any decline from cause 2 and, possibly, 3 from occurring.

(p10.1) At very short assay times none of these effects should be significant. Thus, if the initial, linear, rate of the reaction is determined (see Figure 5), these possible complexities can be avoided. The linear portion of an assay is often long enough to allow the initial rate (or the initial velocity; v) to be estimated by drawing a tangent to (or taking the first derivative of) the early part of the progress curve. It has sometimes been assumed that restricting measurements of reaction rates to a period in which less than 10-20% of the total substrate consumption has occurred will give an accurate measure of the initial rate. However, the variety of possible causes for non-linearity indicates that such an assumption may not be valid.

(p10.2) In cases where curvature makes it difficult to estimate the initial rate accurately, it may be possible to do so by fitting the observed time-dependence of product formation to a polynomial equation and deriving the initial slope at t = 0. Graphs of product concentration/time against either time or product concentration will intersect the vertical axis at a point corresponding to the initial rate (see [134]).

(p10.3) The problems associated with failure to measure initial rates can be illustrated by the example shown in Figure 6. This exemplifies the fact that detailed controls are always necessary with discontinuous or batch assays, which involve determining the extent of the reaction after a fixed time, are to be used. It is essential to ensure that the time chosen gives a true measure of the initial rate under all conditions that are to be used. 
## (s23) Inhibition
(p23.0) Enzyme inhibitors may act by combining with the enzyme either reversibly or irreversibly. as summarized in Table 3. It is important to distinguish between these types for any interpretation of their behavior, either in vivo or in vitro. This can most simply be done by determining whether dilution, gel-filtration or dialysis results in reversal of the inhibition. For reversible inhibition, the full inhibition is usually obtained extremely rapidly since there is no chemical reaction involved; simply a noncovalent interaction, where the dissociation constant for the reaction (k −1 /k +1 ), is defined as the inhibitor constant, K i . Inhibition is reversed by dialysis or gel-filtration of the enzyme-inhibitor mixture or, simply by dilution to lower the concentration of the inhibitor. In vivo, the rate of recovery from the effects of a reversible inhibitor will be governed by the rate that it is removed from the tissues by metabolism and elimination.

(p23.1) There are several basic types of reversible inhibitor. For a simple single-substrate reaction the possible modes of inhibitor binding are shown in Scheme 1. They are normally distinguished by their effects on the Michaelis-Menten relationship:

(p23.2) where V max = k cat [E] and is the maximum, or limiting, velocity at the enzyme concentration [E] used, [S] is the substrate concentration, and K m is the Michaelis constant, which corresponds to the substrate concentration that gives half maximum velocity. The kinetic equations describing the different types of reversible inhibition are treated in most biochemistry textbooks and their behavior is summarized in Table 4. The reciprocal rearrangement of the Michaelis-Menten equation, to give a linear dependence of 1/v upon 1/[S], often known as the Lineweaver-Burk or double-reciprocal plot, has commonly been used. It is useful for displaying the differences between the kinetic behavior of the different inhibitor types, but it is an extremely inaccurate way of determining kinetic parameters (see [140]) for which a direct, nonlinear regression fit to the Michaelis-Menten equation is to be preferred to any of the linear rearrangements. The behavior in terms of the double-reciprocal plot is shown in Table 4, since that representation has been used in many publications.
## (s24) Competitive Inhibitors
(p24.0) Competitive inhibitors, whose binding is indicated by the inhibitor constant K i in Scheme 2, bind to the same site on the enzyme as the substrate; substrate analogues and products are often competitive inhibitors. The enzyme can either bind substrate or inhibitor but not both at once. At very high substrate concentrations the inhibitor will be displaced from the enzyme; therefore, V max is unchanged, but in the presence of inhibitors more substrate will be needed to get to V max . Thus, more substrate is also needed to reach V max /2. So, for competitive inhibitors, V max is unchanged but K m is increased as shown in Table 4. Thus, at any fixed inhibitor concentration, the degree of inhibition will decrease as the substrate concentration is increased, tending to zero as [S] becomes very large, as illustrated in Figure 8. The reciprocal rearrangement of the Michaelis-Menten equation, to give a linear dependence of 1/v upon 1/[S], often known as the Lineweaver-Burk or double-reciprocal plot, has commonly been used. It is useful for displaying the differences between the kinetic behavior of the different inhibitor types, but it is an extremely inaccurate way of determining kinetic parameters (see [140]) for which a direct, nonlinear regression fit to the Michaelis-Menten equation is to be preferred to any of the linear rearrangements. The behavior in terms of the double-reciprocal plot is shown in Table 4, since that representation has been used in many publications.
## (s27) Mixed and noncompetitive inhibition
(p27.0) This represents the case where the inhibitor can bind both to the free enzyme (competitive) and to the enzyme-substrate complex (uncompetitive). Such a compound would behave as a mixture of a competitive and an uncompetitive inhibitor; hence the term mixed inhibition. The competitive effect (governed by Ki in Scheme 2) will increase the Km, whereas the uncompetitive effect (governed by K'i The simple treatment of competitive inhibition implies the inhibitor binding to the same site as the substrate. However, it is possible to envisage cases where the inhibitor binds to an adjacent site that prevents substrate binding whilst substrate also prevents inhibitor binding. Such a situation appears to occur with edrophonium (N-ethyl-3-hydroxy-N,N-dimethylanilinium), which competitively inhibits AChE by binding to the PAS [141]. An allosteric effect, whereby inhibitor binding results in a conformational change which prevents substrate binding, whereas substrate binding causes a conformational change that prevents inhibitor binding, is also possible, as appears to be case for several AChE inhibitors [142].
## (s33) Tight-binding inhibitors
(p33.0) Some inhibitors bind so tightly to an enzyme that inhibition occurs with inhibitor concentrations that are comparable to those of the enzyme. In such cases, the rate of onset of inhibition, which will be governed by the second-order rate constant for combination between E and I, can be relatively slow. Conversely the rate of dissociation after dilution of the enzyme-inhibitor complex would also be expected to be slow. The kinetic equations governing such inhibition have been presented [144] and graphical [145] and computational [146,147] methods have been reported for determining the type of inhibition and Ki values. Inhibitors of MAO that have been shown to behave in this way include cimoxatone [148], harmaline (see [149]) and methylene blue [150]. As discussed above, AChE is inhibited by high concentrations of substrate, which has been attributed to substrate binding to the PAS as well as to the active site. Such high substrate inhibition may be most simply represented by the model shown in Scheme 4, where a second molecule of substrate binds to the ES complex. This gives a relationship of the form:
## (s35) Tight-Binding Inhibitors
(p35.0) Some inhibitors bind so tightly to an enzyme that inhibition occurs with inhibitor concentrations that are comparable to those of the enzyme. In such cases, the rate of onset of inhibition, which will be governed by the second-order rate constant for combination between E and I, can be relatively slow. Conversely the rate of dissociation after dilution of the enzyme-inhibitor complex would also be expected to be slow. The kinetic equations governing such inhibition have been presented [144] and graphical [145] and computational [146,147] methods have been reported for determining the type of inhibition and K i values. Inhibitors of MAO that have been shown to behave in this way include cimoxatone [148], harmaline (see [149]) and methylene blue [150].
## (s39) High-substrate inhibition
(p39.0) appropriate controls to ensure that it is a property of the enzyme and its substrate rather than an artefact arising from failure to control the pH, ionic strength or dielectric of the assay medium correctly. It is also necessary to show that the inhibition is due to the substrate itself rather than to an inhibitory contaminant. Such contamination has been found to affect assays when the free-base form of benzylamine, obtained from some sources was used for MAO assays rather than benzylamine hydrochloride [135]. High-substrate inhibition, which is time-dependent, has also been reported for MAO-B from rat liver with 2-phenylethylamine as substrate [151]. 
## (s40) Reactions involving more than one substrate
(p40.0) Most enzyme catalyzed reactions involve reactions between two or more compounds. In the case of the ChEs, there are two substrates, the ester and water. However, since water is present at very high concentrations (about 55.5 M in pure water) and it is rather difficult to vary its concentration, it is generally assumed that it can be ignored. The MAO-catalysed reaction also involves oxygen. The type of inhibition given towards the amine substrate will not be the same with respect to oxygen. The kinetic behavior observed in such cases can be used to show how the reaction proceeds. This has been the subject of several detailed studies involving MAO (see [144]).
## (s42) Reactions Involving More than One Substrate
(p42.0) Most enzyme catalyzed reactions involve reactions between two or more compounds. In the case of the ChEs, there are two substrates, the ester and water. However, since water is present at very high concentrations (about 55.5 M in pure water) and it is rather difficult to vary its concentration, it is generally assumed that it can be ignored. The MAO-catalysed reaction also involves oxygen. The type of inhibition given towards the amine substrate will not be the same with respect to oxygen. The kinetic behavior observed in such cases can be used to show how the reaction proceeds. This has been the subject of several detailed studies involving MAO (see [144]).
## (s45) Irreversible Inhibitors as Substrates
(p45.0) Since such inhibitors mimic the behavior of substrates, it is not surprising that some compounds in this class are in fact very poor substrates and the activity slowly recovers as the reaction proceeds (Scheme 7). Scheme 6. Irreversible active site directed inhibition.

(p45.1) In the second type, the inhibitor is not intrinsically reactive. It first forms a noncovalent complex with the active site of the enzyme, and subsequent reaction within that complex leads to the generation of a reactive species that reacts with the enzyme to form the irreversibly inhibited species. Inhibitors of this type are known as mechanism-based, kcat or suicide inhibitors. They can show a higher specificity towards a target enzyme because the generation of the effective inhibitory species from an essentially unreactive compound involves part of the catalytic function of the enzyme itself. Furthermore, the lack of intrinsic reactivity minimizes the possibility of unwanted reactions with other tissue components.

(p45.2) It is possible to characterize this system in terms of two parameters, K'i (sometimes designated KI), which is the inhibitor concentration that gives half maximal rate of inhibition and k+2 (or kinact) from analysis of rates at which activity is lost at different inhibitor concentrations [153]. This procedure has been used to characterize the inhibition of MAO by the acetylenic inhibitors clorgyline, l-deprenyl and pargyline [154] and the inhibition of AChE by some organophosphates and carbamates [155].
## (s47) Scheme 7. Reaction of inhibitors that act as poor substrates
(p47.0) If k+2 is sufficiently slow inhibition will be time-dependent, but it will be slowly reversed by dialysis. The inhibition of AChE by rivastigmine (see above) has been accounted for by this model, in which the hydrolytic step is extremely slow [156].

(p47.1) In other cases the enzyme-catalysed formation of product and the irreversible inhibition can be competing processes in which the enzyme inhibitor complex (E.I) is converted to an activated intermediate (EI *) which can either react to form product(s) or to form an irreversibly inhibited species (E-I) as shown in Scheme 8. Such inhibitors are often termed suicide substrates.
## (s48) Scheme 7. Reaction of inhibitors that act as poor substrates
(p48.0) If k +2 is sufficiently slow inhibition will be time-dependent, but it will be slowly reversed by dialysis. The inhibition of AChE by rivastigmine (see above) has been accounted for by this model, in which the hydrolytic step is extremely slow [156].

(p48.1) In other cases the enzyme-catalysed formation of product and the irreversible inhibition can be competing processes in which the enzyme inhibitor complex (E.I) is converted to an activated intermediate (EI *) which can either react to form product(s) or to form an irreversibly inhibited species (E-I) as shown in Scheme 8. Such inhibitors are often termed suicide substrates. The hydrolysis and 'ageing' process that can occur in the interactions of AChE with organophosphates, discussed above, and the interaction of MAO with a number of inhibitory substrates, including the pro-neurotoxin MPTP (1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine) [157], the anticonvulsant milacemide [158] and the never marketed MAO-B inhibitor MD 780236 [159] are examples of this behavior. This process can be characterized by two parameters, K'i (the inhibitor concentration giving half maximal rate of product formation or inhibition) and an overall rate constant rate constant kinact, where:
## (s52) Direct Assays for MAO Activity
(p52.0) A convenient spectrophotometric method for both MAO A and B measures the absorbance change from the oxidation of kynuramine to 4-hydroxyquinoline at 314 nm (extinction coefficient = 12,100 M −1 cm −1 ) [135,164]. Kynuramine is a substrate for both MAO A and MAO B, although kinetic studies on MAO B have usually used benzylamine as the substrate, measuring the change in absorbance at 250 nm (extinction coefficient = 12,800 M −1 cm −1 ) [135]. Inhibitors that absorb in the UV can be problematic in this procedure, due to high absorbance.
## (s53) Coupled Assays for MAO Activity
(p53.0) A recently reported chemically coupled assay that takes advantage of the of the acid-induced conversion of the aldehyde product to a form that induces the aggregation of silole to a fluorescent product has been reported [172]. More convenient are the various enzyme-coupled assays developed for high throughput work, using peroxidase to couple the H 2 O 2 formed by MAO activity to the oxidation of a dye. Several dyes have been employed for this purpose, but, not surprisingly, those that are available commercially in assay kits, have become the most widely used. The use of 10-acetyl-3,7-dihydroxyphenoxazine (Amplex Red™) that oxidizes to the fluorescent compound, resorufin, with fluorescence detection is sensitive and convenient, but careful controls for interference in the detection components by the compounds to be studied as inhibitors of MAO are essential. For example, a series of disubstituted indolyl thioureas, particularly those with phenolic groups, being assessed as inhibitors of MAO were found to be potent inhibitors of horseradish peroxidase preventing the use of this coupled assay [176]. Furthermore, it is necessary that the substrate used is not oxidized by the H 2 O 2 -peroxidase system or the detection dye. The luminescence assay (MAO-Glo™ [170] minimizes the problem of inhibition of the coupling system by using a luciferin derivative as the substrate incubated with MAO alone, then stopping the reaction by adding excess coupling system. This makes the MAO-Glo method a stopped (single time point) assay so linearity with time must be verified. As with all coupled assays, careful controls are required and it is advisable to validate hits with direct or different assays.

(p53.1) The horseradish peroxidase coupled assay kits, fulfill the requirements for sensitive, continuous, high-throughput assays but must be adapted for medicinal chemistry use in inhibitor assessment. The manufacturer's protocols and the kits are designed to measure any MAO activity present in a sample, using a fixed substrate concentration above K m . This is not ideal for comparing reversible inhibition of two enzymes with different K m values. To determine the IC 50 of a compound expected to give reversible inhibition, the substrate concentration should be sub-saturating so that in the steady state there is free enzyme available for binding either inhibitor or substrate. For medicinal chemists investigating the selectivity of their compounds for MAO A or MAO B, the proportion of free enzyme should be the same for both enzymes. In practice this means using the substrate at around 2 × K m , remembering that the two enzymes have difference substrate specificities (Table 1).
## (s58) Optimized Conditions for MAO Inhibition Screening Using the Amplex Red Coupled Assay
(p58.0) Providing all the control checks are done, the Amplex Red assay is convenient for highthroughput screening of novel compounds in medicinal chemistry. However, the conditions that must be used are different from the standard kit protocol. The kit assay is designed to detect the total activity of MAO present, so it uses a high substrate concentration (1 mM tyramine). For reversible inhibitor assessment (most compounds in recent articles are reversible inhibitors), the substrate concentration must be sub-saturating. Using commercial membrane-bound human MAO, the Km values for tyramine are different for MAO A (0.4 mM) and MAO B (0.2 mM) (see Table 1). At 1 mM tyramine, about 70% of MAO A active sites will be occupied by substrate, in contrast to 83% for MAO B. Using 2 × Km as the substrate concentration in routine screening assays for reversible inhibitors gives satisfactory rates of reaction with a defined saturation of the active sites (67%).

(p58.1) A further complication is that Amplex Red inhibits MAO A ( Figure 13) so the concentration should be 50 μM in the well. Alternatively, to set a best common condition for both MAO A and B, 100 μM could be used. Amplex Red and resorufin have a tricyclic structure, like that of Methylene Blue (Figure 1) that binds tightly to MAO A (Ki = 27 nM) but poorly to MAO B (Ki = 5 μM) [150]. With the assay conditions verified, new compounds can be screened with confidence.
## (s59) Optimized Conditions for MAO Inhibition Screening Using the Amplex Red Coupled Assay
(p59.0) Providing all the control checks are done, the Amplex Red assay is convenient for high-throughput screening of novel compounds in medicinal chemistry. However, the conditions that must be used are different from the standard kit protocol. The kit assay is designed to detect the total activity of MAO present, so it uses a high substrate concentration (1 mM tyramine). For reversible inhibitor assessment (most compounds in recent articles are reversible inhibitors), the substrate concentration must be sub-saturating. Using commercial membrane-bound human MAO, the K m values for tyramine are different for MAO A (0.4 mM) and MAO B (0.2 mM) (see Table 1). At 1 mM tyramine, about 70% of MAO A active sites will be occupied by substrate, in contrast to 83% for MAO B. Using 2 × K m as the substrate concentration in routine screening assays for reversible inhibitors gives satisfactory rates of reaction with a defined saturation of the active sites (67%).

(p59.1) A further complication is that Amplex Red inhibits MAO A (Figure 13) so the concentration should be 50 µM in the well. Alternatively, to set a best common condition for both MAO A and B, 100 µM could be used. Amplex Red and resorufin have a tricyclic structure, like that of Methylene Blue (Figure 1) that binds tightly to MAO A (K i = 27 nM) but poorly to MAO B (K i = 5 µM) [150]. activity of MAO present, so it uses a high substrate concentration (1 mM tyramine). For reversible inhibitor assessment (most compounds in recent articles are reversible inhibitors), the substrate concentration must be sub-saturating. Using commercial membrane-bound human MAO, the Km values for tyramine are different for MAO A (0.4 mM) and MAO B (0.2 mM) (see Table 1). At 1 mM tyramine, about 70% of MAO A active sites will be occupied by substrate, in contrast to 83% for MAO B. Using 2 × Km as the substrate concentration in routine screening assays for reversible inhibitors gives satisfactory rates of reaction with a defined saturation of the active sites (67%).

(p59.2) A further complication is that Amplex Red inhibits MAO A ( Figure 13) so the concentration should be 50 μM in the well. Alternatively, to set a best common condition for both MAO A and B, 100 μM could be used. Amplex Red and resorufin have a tricyclic structure, like that of Methylene Blue (Figure 1) that binds tightly to MAO A (Ki = 27 nM) but poorly to MAO B (Ki = 5 μM) [150].  
## (s61) Species Differences in Inhibition of MAO
(p61.0) The differences in MAO A and B sequence [178] and overall structure [18] are small, but the minor differences in the active site mean that MAO A and MAO B have different catalytic efficiencies [19]. Not surprisingly, MAO enzymes from different species have different ligand affinities [162,179,180]. Other examples include the 10,000-fold difference between the K i values for oxazolidinone inhibition of MAO B from human versus bovine liver [181] and smaller differences between rat and human MAO IC 50 values that have been reported for various inhibitors [179,181,182]. A comparison of the IC 50 values obtained for the four enzymes inhibited by ASS234, a multi-target compound designed for Alzheimer's disease, in commercial human enzymes versus the more economical alternative sources is shown in Table 7. 
## (s62) Determination of Acetylcholinesterase Activity
(p62.0) Numerous assay procedures have been reported for the cholinesterases, although many of these are modifications of earlier methods to make them more appropriate for specific applications, such as large-scale screening for inhibitors. Before considering the procedures that that may be used, it is necessary to consider the applications for which assays are desired. At the basic level, they might be used to answer the simple questions of whether an individual has been exposed to a toxic AChE inhibitor or whether an area is contaminated with such compounds that may have been used as pesticides or herbicides. Such assays are sometimes carried out in the field where elaborate laboratory equipment is not available and a high degree of accuracy is not required. The details of such methods have been covered in excellent reviews [136,185,186]. More sophisticated procedures are necessary for studies on the mechanisms of inhibition and the kinetic constants involved. This account will concentrate on assays (such as shown in Figure 14) used for accurate kinetic purposes and refer only briefly to the others. necessary to consider the applications for which assays are desired. At the basic level, they might be used to answer the simple questions of whether an individual has been exposed to a toxic AChE inhibitor or whether an area is contaminated with such compounds that may have been used as pesticides or herbicides. Such assays are sometimes carried out in the field where elaborate laboratory equipment is not available and a high degree of accuracy is not required. The details of such methods have been covered in excellent reviews [136,185,186]. More sophisticated procedures are necessary for studies on the mechanisms of inhibition and the kinetic constants involved. This account will concentrate on assays (such as shown in Figure 14) used for accurate kinetic purposes and refer only briefly to the others. Figure 14. Hydrolysis of acetylcholine. The products used as the basis of assay methods are indicated.
## (s63) Radiochemical Assays
(p63.0) Radiochemical assays used in the past were based on the release of acetate from on acetylcholine labelled in the acetyl moiety with 14 C or 3 H. The reaction could be stopped, e.g., by acidification, and the labelled acetate extracted into an organic solvent-based scintillant for counting. Alternatively, the excess acetylcholine may be removed by precipitation with reineckate before counting (see [187]). Separation by ion-exchange chromatography or HPLC has also been used. The radiochemical method Figure 14. Hydrolysis of acetylcholine. The products used as the basis of assay methods are indicated.
## (s64) Radiochemical Assays
(p64.0) Radiochemical assays used in the past were based on the release of acetate from on acetylcholine labelled in the acetyl moiety with 14 C or 3 H. The reaction could be stopped, e.g., by acidification, and the labelled acetate extracted into an organic solvent-based scintillant for counting. Alternatively, the excess acetylcholine may be removed by precipitation with reineckate before counting (see [187]). Separation by ion-exchange chromatography or HPLC has also been used. The radiochemical method had the advantage of using the natural AChE substrate rather than a synthetic analogue. Although simple and highly sensitive, its use has become restricted on health and safety grounds.
## (s65) Hydrogen Ion Liberation
(p65.0) As illustrated in Figure 14, the hydrolysis of acetylcholine liberates a hydrogen ion. Thus, the reaction can simply be followed by determining the pH change. Originally, the method involved just two measurements at different times, with the activity being then expressed as ∆pH/hour [188]. A variation involved measuring the time taken for the pH to fall by a set amount. A more elaborate development of this approach for screening acetylcholinesterase inhibitors has been to immobilize the enzyme on to the surface of the pH electrode [189]. However, generally one would wish the pH to remain constant during the reaction, and furthermore, the pH scale is logarithmic rather than linear. This has been overcome titrating with an alkaline solution to keep the pH constant and measuring the amount added with time. Originally this was done manually but this has been superseded but the pH-stat (see [190]), which automatically adds dilute alkali (NaOH or KOH) to the assay mixture to keep the pH constant whilst recording the rate of addition to give a direct measure of the reaction rate. An alternative procedure involves the use of a pH indicator to provide a colorimetric determination of the pH change (see [191]). A variety of indicators, such as phenol red, have been used.

(p65.1) A difficulty with all such methods is that the assay mixture must be unbuffered, or only weakly buffered. For example, the protein in serum or blood samples can militate against any pH changes. Furthermore, it may affect the choice of substrate and any other reaction component under test. For example, acetylthiocholine, which is a commonly-used artificial substrate for AChE, is hydrolysed to the weak acid thiocholine that consumes some of the H + released [190]. Although pH methods have been largely replaced by other approaches for the accurate determination of AChE activity, rapid assessments of inhibition can be made by using test-strips comprising entrapped AChE and a suitable indicator (see [192]).
## (s67) Enzyme Coupled Assays
(p67.0) An assay commonly in use involves the use of two coupling enzymes, choline oxidase to convert choline to betaine +H 2 O 2 ( Figure 14) and peroxidase to couple the H 2 O 2 to the oxidation of a leuko-dye, as discussed in connection with the assay of MAO. Several different oxidizable dyes have been used in the peroxidase reaction including 4-aminoantipyrine, for spectrophotometric assay [207], luminol, for luminescence assays [208], and N-acetyl-3,7-dihydroxyphenoxazine (Amplex Red TM ) for fluorescence assays [209]. Amplex Red has proven to be the most widely used of these, because assay kits based on this method are available from a number of suppliers. The controls and precautions necessary are similar to those discussed in connection of MAO assays with this compound, with the additional complication that there are two coupling enzymes, neither of which should be rate-limiting or be affected by any inhibitor, or other reaction component, under test.
## (s68) Virtual Screening
(p68.0) Rational design of ligands has been greatly facilitated by the availability of crystal structures of target enzymes. Docking programmes allow basic visualization of ligands in the active site and prediction of suitable modifications to small molecules to improve affinity and selectivity. Virtual screening using scoring functions to estimate binding energies for each compound can be used to seek new ligands from large chemical libraries. Probabilistic models, based on the compound structure, have also been used to predict both the primary pharmaceutical target and any off-target interactions [4,6]. Although virtual screening has proved successful in identifying new leads, the accuracy of predicted binding energies is doubtful [210]. Docking methods have become major tools in rational drug design, particularly for multi-target compounds, to probe the effects of alterations in ligand structure on the affinity of the compound for the target enzyme(s). However, predictions of the functional effect of ligand binding on the catalysis by the target(s) still requires verification by assays. Docking cannot predict the efficiency of the mechanism-based inhibitor-only its initial reversible binding. Combining information from theoretical and laboratory assays facilitates the design of analogs from a lead compound, as exemplified by multi-potent ASS234 analogs [183]. In another example, experimental values closely paralleled the predicted values in a test set of carbamate compounds when 3D-Quantitative-Structure-Activity Relationship (3D-QSAR) was used to define 3D-pharmacophores for inhibition of MAO A and B, and of the ChEs [211].

(p68.1) The application of computational approaches to MTDL design has been reviewed recently [4]. The monoaminergic neurotransmitters interact with multiple binding proteins, such as MAO, COMT and the families of specific receptors and transporters. The breakdown enzymes such as MAO can be designated as promiscuous targets binding many compounds while compounds that bind to both MAO and to receptors are promiscuous ligands. When multiple moieties for binding to different targets are incorporated into MTDL, investigation for off-target activity is essential, particularly for the monoamine system where each receptor can have a different effect.
## (s69) Inhibition for Effective Drugs
(p69.0) Some of the nerve gases, suicide inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase, discussed in Section 2.4, cholinesterases have been used therapeutically but they are also toxins. Their off-target interactions with the neurotoxin-target esterase can cause further deleterious effects. Since carbamates do not affect NTE, they have proven to be safer alternatives. Many of these are behave as poor substrates for AChE, in which the rate of hydrolysis of the carbamyl-serine intermediate is relatively slow. Their effective half-lives in vivo will depend on the rate of this hydrolytic step. In contrast, the rate of recovery from the effects of reversible inhibitors will be determined by their rates of clearance by metabolism and excretion. The toxicity of irreversible AChE inhibitors, led to the application of reversible and competitive inhibitors for use in AD. The main ones, now in general use, donepezil, galantamine and rivastigmine, are different in structure and also in their target binding sites. Their reported effectiveness in mild-to-moderate AD, leaves open the question of whether, or not, binding to the PAS, rather than, or as well as, to the active site, confers any particular benefit. Despite this uncertainty, one strategy in designing AChE inhibitors for use in against Alzheimer's disease, has been to incorporate binding both at the catalytic site (to spare acetylcholine) and at the peripheral site (to prevent facilitation of Aβ aggregation). Binding of an inhibitor to two sites on the target can also result in a considerable enhancement of affinity as a result of the chelate effect [212]. Examples of multiple points of binding resulting in increased affinity can be seen, for example, in [213][214][215][216]. Since galantamine and rivastigmine also inhibit BChE, whereas donepezil does not, further evidence would be necessary, before it would be possible to evaluate the possible benefits of inhibiting that enzyme. Each inhibitor has a relatively short duration of action and rivastigmine has been reported to give about 30% occupancy [217].

(p69.1) Many different MAO inhibitors have been used therapeutically and this has resulted in an accumulated understanding of their interactions and metabolism. The enzyme has an important role in the metabolism of ingested and xenobiotic amines in addition to neurotransmitter metabolism. The antidepressant moclobemide, a reversible competitive inhibitor that is selective for MAO A, does not completely prevent the intestinal enzyme from catalysing the oxidation of tyramine. In contrast, irreversible inhibitors that are selective for MAO A, such as clorgyline and those that are non-selective, such as, pargyline, allow tyramine to pass unchanged through the intestinal wall and into the serum, with a consequent vascular crisis [53]. In the brain, moclobemide, provides anti-depressant effects at 74% occupancy of MAO A [218]. The proportion of enzyme molecules occupied by such a reversible inhibitor will vary depending on the local concentration of other ligands, such as the substrates, competing for the active site. With competitive inhibitors, the inhibitor can be displaced from the active site by higher substrate concentrations, as discussed above for intestinal MAO, where the inhibitor may be displaced by dietary tyramine allowing some metabolism to occur [219]. For enzymes such as AChE catalyzing essential processes, using a competitive inhibitor ensures that the metabolism can take place when the substrate spikes in concentration. It should be noted that the amelioration of inhibitory effects by rising substrate concentrations requires a competitive inhibitor, since the effects of a true noncompetitive inhibitor would be unaffected whereas those of an uncompetitive inhibitor would be strengthened.

(p69.2) The early MAO inhibitors used as antidepressants were hydrazine derivatives. However, most of these were withdrawn because, in addition to the cheese reaction, there were serious hepatotoxicity problems. The hepatotoxicity appears to have resulted from the N-hydroxylation of the hydrazine group to form a toxic metabolite by microsomal hydroxylases [220]. The one hydrazine, phenelzine (Nardil), that remains in use has few hepatotoxic problems. It appears that the earlier problems may have been compounded by the co-administration of barbiturates to counter sleep disturbances [221]. Such compounds are powerful inducers of the microsomal system and would thus potentiate the toxification of the hydrazine derivatives. The discontinuation of use of barbiturates has now reduced this problem.

(p69.3) Metabolic complications also occur with some other MAO inhibitors. For example, l-deprenyl can be metabolized to l-amphetamine and it has been speculated that this may contribute to its effects [222]. The formation of the more active enantiomer, d-amphetamine from d-deprenyl caused undeniable side-effects that led to led to the discontinuation of that racaemic deprenyl. There is conflicting evidence that the antidepressant tranylcypromine may also be metabolized to amphetamine [223].

(p69.4) In contrast, the antiparkinsonian drugs, l-deprenyl and rasagiline are mechanism-based MAO inhibitors with high selectivity for MAO B (>10,000). Effective inhibition of MAO B in the brain by l-deprenyl was determined using PET scans as about 60% [37]. l-Deprenyl and rasagiline contain a propargyl group that after oxidation reacts with the flavin prosthetic group forming a covalent adduct at the N5 of the FAD in the active site [18]. In the case of the propargylamine derivatives, their off-target neuroprotective effects, which are independent of MAO inhibition [see 24], enhance their therapeutic value.
## (s70) Inhibiting Multiple Enzyme Targets
(p70.0) The above description defines an effective approach for therapeutic inhibition of MAO B as irreversible inhibition by a propargylamine derivative to take advantage of the neuroprotective action. In the case of AChE, those known to be effective are reversible, or pseudo-reversible, inhibitors. The use of a single compound to inhibit both MAO B and AChE raises questions about the suitable dosage regime to achieve the correct concentration at the target active sites. In theory, for chronic administration, the reversible inhibition of AChE and BChE can be titrated to the required dose, while MAO inactivation will progress with time. Provided that the selectivity for MAO B is high, then constant low doses of the MAO inactivator should avoid side effects, as has been established in the therapeutic uses of l-deprenyl and rasagiline.

(p70.1) Combining two established inhibitors, with known absorption, elimination and distribution kinetics, into a single MTDL can simplify investigations into their behavior in vivo, although it is important to ensure that the MTDL does behave in the same way as its components. This should also take into account that one of the targets, AChE is an extracellular enzyme, whereas MAO is intracellular.

(p70.2) A recent example MTDL is ladostigil, a MAO B-selective propargylamine inhibitor and reversible cholinesterase inhibitor spanning the active and peripheral sites of AChE and BChE, with additional neuroprotective properties [8,224,225]. Although promising in animal studies, the Phase 2 clinical trial did not show significant slowing of the progression of AD. Although ladostigil can give about 80% inhibition of AChE, the major metabolite, R-MCPAI, is a pseudo-reversible inhibitor of AChE due to fast hydrolysis of the adduct, so that inhibition in vivo does not exceed 55% [226]. From the considerations discussed above, this might make it a safer drug candidate.

(p70.3) While exploring simple components for construction of MTDL, one group found that the small propargylamine, N-(furan-2-ylmethyl)-N-methylprop-2-yn-1-amine (F2MPA), gave enhanced synaptic transmission in the hippocampus of rats. Although it is a very weak competitive inhibitor of human MAO A (IC 50 = 214 µM) and human MAO B ((IC 50 = 111 µM), F2MPA increased 5-HT and noradrenaline levels in rat cortex, but with a pattern distinct from those with clorgyline (MAO A) and l-deprenyl (MAO B) [227]. Irreversible inactivation of rat MAO B did occur, with a K I value of 65 µM and k inact of 0.53 min −1 . Although binding is much weaker than for l-deprenyl, F2MPA is similarly rapid in forming the covalent adduct with FAD. However, metabolism by hydroxylation was fast in the rat, so it seems likely that the increase in rat brain amines was not due to MAO B inhibition. This weak inhibitor of MAO B would be discarded in an in vitro screen, yet the off-target activity of it, or of its metabolites, gave interesting in vivo effects.

(p70.4) Similarly, inhibitors of MAO may also have effects on other monoamine binding proteins, such as the dopamine receptors. The study of promiscuous ligands for the monoaminergic system using off-target predictions for multi-target bioactivities to assess potential MTDL compounds for the treatment of neurological diseases has been reviewed recently [4].
## (s72) Conclusions
(p72.0) Designing multiple activities into one molecule is a challenge but it may simplify pharmacokinetic evaluation as well as patient drug regimes. However, as the size and complexity of the molecule increases, it gets harder to maintain efficacy at each target. Maintaining specific and potent inhibition of the enzyme and receptor targets is a priority. The physical effects (such as iron chelation of antioxidant properties) will often require higher concentrations in the cell than those required for a selective ligand directed towards to a protein target. This raises the question of combining target actions in the right proportion and the most effective MTDL treatment schedules. For example, the neuroprotective effects of l-deprenyl are seen at significantly lower doses lower than those required to inhibit MAO B.

(p72.1) In this context, it should be noted that low doses of l-deprenyl protect cells from radiation damage, by a process that involves elevation of Bcl-2 levels, but this action is lost at higher doses [236]. Thus, the construction of MTDLs that will prove effective at a single dosage regime may require careful adjustment of the activities of some individual moieties if they are to be a viable alternative to the use of combinations of single drugs. The ability to manipulate specifically the integrated network of signalling pathways that control cell survival is at present not possible, but as targets linked to individual diseases (such as PINK/Parkin to Parkinson's disease become better understood, the next generation of new target-directed MTDL may be developed.
