# Volume 4 • Issue 3 • 1000152 P ha rmaceut ic a l R eg ulat ory Af fa ir s : O pe n Acce ss On Statistical Principles for Clinical Trials in Pharmaceutical Development -A Review of China FDA Draft Guidance

CorpusID: 79441822 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66caaf446d61927fc774e5b7c5a88ed0e9e378c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/66caaf446d61927fc774e5b7c5a88ed0e9e378c1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) Multicenter studies
(p4.0) The draft guidance emphasizes the importance of center difference and treatment-by-center interaction which may have an impact on the evaluation of the test treatment under investigation. Thus, it is suggested that statistical test for treatment-by-center interaction be performed before the data from individual centers are combined for a combined analysis. In practice, however, a false positive effect of treatment-by-center interaction is most likely observed if there are too many heterogeneous small centers. In this case, the method of center grouping (either based on geographical location or random grouping) is usually recommended to form some bigger dummy centers and the treatment-by-center interaction is then tested based on these dummy centers for evaluation of the true treatment-by-center interaction.

(p4.1) As too many small centers could cause the issue of observing false treatment-by-center interaction, this raises the interesting question that how many centers should be considered in clinical trials. In practice, as rule of thumb for selection of the number of centers in a given clinical trial, it is suggested that the number of centers should not be greater than the number of subjects in each center for achieving the optimal statistical properties of the data collected from each center [2].
## (s5) Types of comparative trials
(p5.0) For comparative trials, the draft guidance discusses superiority trial and non-inferiority and equivalence trials. As indicated by the draft guidance, one of the key issues in non-inferiority/equivalence trials is the selection of non-inferiority margin (or equivalence limit). Similar to FDA (2010a) [3], the draft guidance provides general principles for selection of non-inferiority margin and suggests considering either M 1 or M 2 approach. M 1 may be selected by considering the lower confidence limit of the effect of the active control agent, while M 2 may be selected depending upon the retention ratio (f) between the effect of test treatment and the effect of the active control agent. It is suggested that f should be selected based on clinical judgment.
## (s9) Protocol amendment
(p9.0) The draft guidance allows the issuance of protocol amendment by relaxing or modifying the inclusion/exclusion criteria if a notable portion of subjects fail to meet the eligible criteria or there is slow enrollment. It, however, should be noted that the original target patient population under study could have become a similar but different patient population if significant changes or modifications are made. This raises the concern regarding the validity of the statistical inference drawn based on data collected before and after protocol amendment [5].

(p9.1) In practice, there is a risk that major (or significant) modifications made to the trial procedures and/or statistical procedures could lead to a totally different trial, which cannot address the scientific/medical questions that the clinical trial is intended to answer. In clinical trials, most investigators consider protocol amendment is a God-sent gift which allows the flexibility to make any changes/modifications to the on-going clinical trials. It, however, should be recognized that protocol amendments have potential risks for introducing additional bias/ variation to the on-going clinical trial. Thus, it is important to identify, control, and hopefully eliminate/minimize the sources of bias/variation. Thus, it is of interest to measure the impact of changes or modifications that made to the trial procedures and/or statistical methods after the protocol amendment. This has raised another concern regarding (i) the impact of changes made and (ii) the degree of changes that are allowed in a protocol amendment.

(p9.2) In current practice, standard statistical methods are applied to the data collected from the actual patient population regardless the frequency of changes (protocol amendments) that have been made during the conduct of the trial provided that the overall type I error is controlled at the pre-specified level of significance. This, however, has raised a serious regulatory/statistical concern that whether the resultant statistical inference (e.g., independent estimates, confidence intervals, and p-values) drawn on the originally planned target patient Pharmaceut Reg Affairs, an open access journal ISSN: 2167-7689 population based on the clinical data from the actual patient population (as the result of the modifications made via protocol amendments) are accurate and reliable? After some modifications are made to the trial procedures and/or statistical methods, not only the target patient population may have become a similar but different patient population, but also the sample size may not achieve the desired power for detection of a clinically important effect size of the test treatment at the end of the study. In practice, we expect to lose power when the modifications have led to a shift in mean response and/or inflation of variability of the response of the primary study endpoint. As a result, the originally planned sample size may have to be adjusted. Thus, it is suggested that the relative efficiency at each protocol amendment be taken into consideration for derivation of an adjusted factor for sample size in order to achieve the desired power.

(p9.3) In addition, it is suggested that the impact of major changes (as described in protocol amendment) on statistical inference should be carefully assessed through clinical trial simulation with relevant sensitivity analysis. Also, it is suggested that the number of protocol amendments that are allowed for a given size of clinical trial should be specified to prevent the potential abuse of changing study protocol through the issuance of protocol amendments as frequent changes could lead to a similar but different study protocol which may not be able to address the scientific or medical questions the original protocol intended to answer.
## (s17) Data transformation
(p17.0) The draft guidance suggests that data transformation such as logtransformation or square root transformation should be pre-specified based on prior knowledge of the data collected from similar studies. It, however, should be noted that data transformation for a valid analysis depends upon the sampling distribution of the observed data. Thus, it is suggested that the draft guidance be modified by considering the commonly used method of Box-Cox transformation (which includes log-transformation and square root transformation) for an accurate and reliable assessment of the test treatment under investigation [15].
