# A review of culturally tailored interventions to reduce cardiovascular disease in South Asians

CorpusID: 81716334 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3cf2fc563b09f9533bfce090c10d2f6d0d057d04)

Fields: Sociology, Medicine

## (s1) Methods
(p1.0) The scoping review was performed by searching the PUBMED, CINAHL, and Web of Science databases to identify publications of ethnically specific CVD prevention interventions on SA adults, which were written in English from January 1995 through January 2017. A combination of the following keywords was used: South Asian, cardiovascular disease risk factors, self-management, health behavior changes and lifestyle intervention. Only articles that met this inclusion criteria that focused on interventional studies in the South Asians were included. A total of 132 articles were found in the search, 25 duplicate articles were removed and 94 were excluded. A total of 14 articles were used for this review. Two authors independently assessed the quality of each article using the Effective Public Health Practice Project Quality Assessment Tool for Quantitative Studies [12]. According to the tool, eight studies were classified as strong, four as moderate, and two as weak. Disagreements between reviewers were resolved through discussion (Table 1) 
## (s3) Single intervention: Diet
(p3.0) For SAs, a culturally tailored diet provides a link back to the culture and traditions of their native countries. Dietary interventions are often difficult to sustain but provide an opportunistic modifiable variable. Studies focusing on culturally tailored dietary interventions alone showed significant reductions of CVD risk factors in SAs [13,14]. Specifically, dietary interventions found focused on education programs that featured methods to modify culturally traditional ingredients with low fat, low cholesterol-based foods. Backes et al. [13] assessed the efficacy of a 3-month dietary modification program (calorie and carbohydrate-restricted diet) in twenty-three women with ages ranging from 30-65 years, BMI ≥ 23 kg/m 2 with no reported history of diabetes or other chronic diseases. In the 3 months following their caloric restriction diet (use olive oil vs. ghee, brown rice vs. white rice, etc.) from a dietician (weekly visit), the cohort showed statistically significant reductions in weight, BMI, fasting blood glucose (FBG), steady state plasma glucose (SSPG), and triglyceride (TG).

(p3.1) While the short-term changes reported by authors are favorable, sustained changes in diet are often difficult to maintain [13]. To investigate this, a 2-year follow-up study by Singh et al. [14] evaluated the effects of Indo-Mediterranean diet vs. the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) diet in SAs with pre-existing coronary artery disease. One thousand SAs were included in this study to measure the impact of diet on disease progression and complications. Although the authors did not specify what specific changes were made to the basic Indo-Mediterranean diet, this diet traditionally comprises increased fruit, nut, vegetables, legumes and whole grains [15]. The NCEP diet recommends consuming lower amounts of saturated fat and cholesterol while increasing soluble fiber intake [16]. Participants in the intervention group were asked to follow the Indi-Mediterranean diet, asked to complete for 1 week a record of food intake and physical activity, and followed-up at the regular intervals. Those that consumed the modified Indo-Mediterranean diet presented with significantly lower CVD events over the length of the study compared with the NCEP diet group. Both Backes et al. [13] and Singh et al. [14] supported the overall effect of instituting dietary modifications to reduce CVD risk factors in this population.
## (s4) Single intervention: Physical activity
(p4.0) To measure the impact of physical activity, a pilot study was conducted by Gany et al. [17] of otherwise sedentary SA taxi drivers over a 12-week span. Seventy-four participants with elevated CVD risk factors were issued pedometers to increase their daily step counts and to measure the potential impact of intervention on this high-risk population. Comprehensive intake and exit health questionnaires and health screenings (BP, BMI, cholesterol, glucose) were administered. Baseline daily step counts were recorded starting four days after the initial screening. At the 4, 8, and 12-week points, step counts were recorded. Overall, the step count intervention resulted in a small (nonsignificant) increase in daily step count of among the 29 participants that completed the program. However, when data was stratified for mediating variables, Gany et al. [17] found significant increases in physical activity in men who were married, suggesting that partner support may be relevant mediator for increased physical activity in this cohort.

(p4.1) In accordance, a longitudinal randomized control trial study on sedentary participants accomplished by Andersen et al. [18] reported significant improvements in physical activity over six months using a community-based intervention. The intervention group received structured group exercise 60-minutes, twice a week, two group lectures, once individual counseling, written material, and a followup phone call 6 month after the study. The control group was offered organized exercise once a week for four months, one group lecture, and written material. Both study groups received accelerometers to track daily activity. Participants were followed-up at six months after the completion of interventions to measure the long-term effects of physical activity. Significant changes in physical activity were found between both arms, with the intervention arm raising the level, as well as the intensity of their physical activity.

(p4.2) Work by both Andersen et al. [18] and Gany et al. [17] showed promising trends in reducing CVD risk factors in SAs through exercise alone. Andersen et al. [18] reported significant decreases in total time spent sedentary with a higher participants retention rate. However, the association between activity levels and anthropometric or serum values were not discussed. Gany et al. [17] had less success in motivating participants to decrease their sedentary time while working with varied work schedules. One reported limitation of the study was that contacting the participants was difficult, as their work, environment, and schedule did not make telephone contact consistent.
## (s5) Mixed interventions using community health workers
(p5.0) Ten studies used patient education and motivation with either trained community health workers (CHW) or dieticians in a community and/or faith-based settings. Willis et al. [19] studied the use of CHW to deliver educational interventions at the faith-based center to participants at high risk for type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). After the initial screening, the authors invited 32 participants at high risk for T2DM to attend weekly group educational sessions for up to 4 weeks; however, only 18 (56.3%) participants completed the sessions. The authors reported that using CHW was both feasible and effective in facilitating high numbers of screening, teaching, and the setting supported to be advantageous regarding participant attendance. Some of the limitations of this study are a small number of participants completed the study and authors did not report changes in CVD risk factors.

(p5.1) To further understand the cultural differences between SA groups and the efficacy of CHW interventions, Islam and colleagues published that were conducted on two different SA groups with T2DM [20,21]. The first study [20] investigated the use of CHW on CVD risk factors in Bangladeshi-Americans with T2DM. Six monthly CHW facilitated sessions were performed on the topic of diabetes management. Surveys were conducted at baseline, 3, 6, 9, and 12-months. Improvements were seen in diabetes knowledge, self-efficacy of exercise, diet, medication compliance, a decrease in AIC, and BMI. Another study by Islam et al. [21] on a Sikh Indian community the authors implemented the existing U.S. Diabetes Prevention Program [22]. Of 126 enrolled participants, 108 completing the study surveys at baseline and at 6-months [21]. The authors reported significant improvements in the clinical variables (weight, BMI, WC, BP, FBG, and cholesterol) and health behaviors (physical activity, dietary choices, and diabetes knowledge) were significant.

(p5.2) Guess et al. [23] examined the effect of intensive dietary modifications over a period of 5 years in SAs from Sri-Lanka with two or more well-defined CVD risk factors. Participants in the treatment group received three monthly telephone and/or face-to-face contacts (4 per year) to assess their progress and to reiterate goals. Participants in the control group received the same advice, but only one face-toface contact per year. Lifestyle advice was based on the Indian Diabetes Prevention Program, [24] which include balancing food intake (i.e., replacing sugar/refined carbohydrates with fiber-rich food and reducing total fat intake) and increased physical activity. The authors reported that the participants who followed the dietary regimen reduced their BMI, WC, and FBG [23].

(p5.3) The above four studies showed the feasibility and acceptance of CHW led education in different SA groups. All four studies strongly supported the feasibility and effectiveness of using CHW to deliver CVD risk factor reduction interventions for different SA groups. The reported retention rate was also 50% and higher for the above studies.

(p5.4) Admiraal et al. [25] focused on a single subset of the SA population (Hindustani Surinamese) where culturally proficient dietitians provided dietary counseling. Unfortunately, no statically significant changes in the participants' anthropometric or serum profile were reported with a high dropout rate. Bhopal et al. [26] study had the distinction of intervention being delivered at home by a dietitian over a 3-year period. The authors recruited 171 SA participants, aged ≥ 35 years, with WC ≥ 90 cm for male and ≥ 80 cm for female, and with impaired glucose tolerance. The study allowed for up to 15 home visits over a three-year period. The participants were asked to complete a 3-day food diary and measure their physical activity with a provided pedometer. The authors concluded that the participants in the intervention group exhibited significantly reduced weight, BMI, waist and hip circumference (primary outcome of the study). Physical activity was increased over baseline for both groups, but the difference was not statistically significant. The secondary outcome, 'progression to T2DM' was observed less frequently in the intervention group.

(p5.5) A longitudinal study conducted by Mathews et al. [27] in several SA community settings where participants attended initial health screening, including blood tests. Participants had a follow-up visit to discuss their blood tests and to set goals related to healthy diet, physical exercise, stress management, and others. At a 6-month follow, authors measured the change in behaviors and motivation to achieve the set goals using the Transtheoretical model of change. Authors reported a significant reduction in participants' weight, BP, TC, and several positive self-reported behaviors changes such as increasing physical activity and using healthier cooking methods. Similarly, Kandula et al. [28] focused on reducing CVD risk factors by increasing physical activity and instituting a healthy diet with the goal of reducing weight and stress. The authors reported that the intervention group achieved a significant decrease in weight and HbA1c compared to the control group at 6-months. The authors reported no significant difference between both arms regarding BP, dietary modification, TC, FBG, or psychosocial outcomes. With this pilot study (n=63) the researchers could involve the medically underserved community and evaluate the significant impact of intensive hands-on educational instructions and exercise classes on the study participants.
## (s6) Interventions using Technology
(p6.0) Two studies reported the use of novel approaches using technology-based approaches to reducing CVD risk factors in SAs. Shah et al. [29] reported the effectiveness of using multimedia health education on participants' knowledge on 112 SAs across different language, education, and acculturation levels. The authors measured participants' CVD risk factors knowledge using pre, post questionnaire and concluded that post-test score of study participants significantly improved, including those with limited English proficiency. To integrate digital health interventions into the lives of SAs, Anand et al. [30] aimed to educate the target SA population, free of CVD, in regard to their personal genetic risk of developing CVD, as well as attempting to encourage the individual to modify physical activity and dietary intake. This was accomplished by sending bi-weekly emails or weekly text messages based on the participants preferred a mode of communication. Researchers focused on BP, waist to hip ratio, HbA1c, and apolipoprotein A/B ratios. The researcher reported that neither the digital interventions nor the knowledge of the participant's MI risk factor showed significant positive change to prevent CVD. Some of the reasons for non-significant findings could be that the authors have recruited participants who were free of CVD, reported already physically active and were involved in dietary modification. It might be helpful to follow these participants longer than 1 year to measure the impact of digital health interventions in this ethnic group.
