# MEDITERRANEAN JOURNAL OF RHEUMATOLOGY Association of Monoclonal Gammopathy of Undetermined Significance with Behcet's Disease: A Review of Shared Common Disease Pathogenetic Mechanisms

CorpusID: 81523315 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8aa515d98f30f760d59fe0c721a7c58505539f5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e8aa515d98f30f760d59fe0c721a7c58505539f5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Inflammatory rheumatic diseases (RD) and neoplastic disorders can be associated in a number of ways. However, although the association of RD with a pre-malignant state such as monoclonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS) has been recognised in a number of chronic inflammatory autoimmune conditions, no such link has been described in patients with Behcet's disease.

(p0.1) MGUS is a CD19-, CD45-and CD56+ plasma cell disorder associated with an asymptomatic monoclonal paraproteinaemia and has a 1% average annual progression rate to multiple myeloma (MM). 1-3 MGUS, like smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM) and MM, is a neoplastic disease that retains many of the phenotypic properties of healthy CD138+, CD19+, CD45+, CD56-plasma cells. However, MGUS plasma cells are immunophenotypically indistinguishable from those in SSM and MM, maintain low proliferation rates and can evolve into MM or Waldenström's macroglobulinemia or AL amyloidosis or a lymphoma. There is a genomic instability associated with IgH translocations or hyper-diploidy and chromosome 13 deletion in MGUS. Its cause is unknown. MGUS has been associated with a number of RDs: Sjogren's syndrome (SS), Systemic Lupus Erythematous (SLE), Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and spondyloarthropathies. 2,3 It has been suggested that this association is
## (s1) ASSOCIATION OF MONOCLONAL GAMMOPATHY OF UNDETERMINED SIGNIFICANCE WITH BEHCET'S DISEASE: A REVIEW OF SHARED COMMON DISEASE PATHOGENETIC MECHANISMS
(p1.0) not coincidental and could arise from persistent antigenic stimulation and cytogenetic abnormalities due to chronic, persistent pro-inflammatory microenvironment milieu-induced deleterious epigenetic modifications. 4 There are no reports in the literature of an association between MGUS and BD. Given the relatively high prevalence of MGUS in the general population, the reported associations may be coincidental. 5 However, a population-based study reported that inflammatory conditions and autoimmune diseases including rheumatic diseases, but not Behcet's disease (BD), are significantly associated with an increased risk of developing MGUS. 6 Behcet's disease (BD) is a multi-systemic chronic auto-inflammatory disorder exhibiting varied clinical characteristics which include the classic triad of recurrent orogenital aphthosis, uveitis, and cutaneous lesions.

(p1.1) Nervous system, visual loss, gastrointestinal, vascular and musculoskeletal involvement may occur. 7 From a pathophysiologic perspective, it sits at the interphase between chronic auto-inflammatory and chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease, but the exact pathophysiologic mechanisms have not been fully elucidated. In BD, a pro-inflammatory state is maintained by the adaptive immune system in response to environmental and auto-antigenic factors which trigger an overexpression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and vasculitis. BD lacks the classical chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease features, such as autoantibody production, but interestingly, immunosuppressants have proven effective treatments of the condition. A unifying hypothesis has been proposed suggesting that innate and adaptive immune pathways are aberrantly integrated in BD through mechanisms such as neutrophil activation, T-cell derived chemokines and HLA-B51-associated immune reactions. Although an infectious agent probably triggers the innate-derived inflammation, bacterial persistence or autoantigen-activated antigen-presenting cells may sustain the adaptive responses. 8 The aim of this review is to examine the association of MGUS with BD, in light of the rare case of a patient with BD who developed MGUS reported here, and to discuss the potential pathogenic mechanisms. This BD-MGUS association can provide a basis for molecular exploration of the aetiopathogenetic mechanisms of these two ill understood conditions and may offer some insights into the development of targeted therapies.
## (s3) DISCUSSION
(p3.0) We review and report here for the first time the association of BD with MGUS development. There has been a report of a patient receiving hydroxyurea who developed chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) and three other CML cases who also developed BD whilst on IFN-α therapy. 9 The link between RDs and MGUS has been investigated with population-based studies reporting a significant association. 5,6 No associations of MGUS and BD have been reported in the medical literature. BD and MGUS are both complex diseases with poorly understood pathogenetic and pathophysiological mechanisms. The mechanisms involved in both conditions probably arise from shared immunological aberrations and overlap in pathogenetic pathways. One hypothesis is the shared role of chronic antigen stimulation in the aetiopathogenesis of both diseases. Autoinflammatory perturbations in BD could act as a trigger for MGUS development via epigenetic modifications in part. A multi-step view of autoimmune disease pathogenesis indicates that tolerance checkpoints exist and that the genes and molecular pathways that underpin these mechanisms overlap with those involved in tumour suppression. 10 Elimination or disruption of these pathways can therefore potentially result in the development of both diseases in tandem or sequentially.
## (s6) Epigenetics
(p6.0) The role of epigenetics in the pathogenesis of BD and its association with MGUS could explain in part the contribution of the environment to the pathogenetic mechanisms. MicroRNAs which are short noncoding RNAs that negatively regulate gene expression by acting post-transcriptionally, have been implicated in BD. 38 They are crucial in modulating cellular processes such as proliferation and apoptosis. MicroRNA-155 is significantly decreased in dendritic cells from BD patients whilst IL-6 and IL-17 production are increased. 39 DNA methylation -an epigenetic mechanism through which methyl groups are added to DNA molecule causing genes to switch off or on -were identified by a recent genome-wide study as playing a role in the epigenetic remodelling of cytoskeleton-related genes involved in the pathogenesis of BD. 40 Dysregulation of these genes could underpin increased leukocyte migration observed in BD. In comparison to health controls, 283 and 125 differentially methylated sites were identified in monocytes and CD4+ T-cells from BD patients. Interestingly, treatment reversed these methylation differences with complete restoration of a normal profile in many cases. 40 GWAS has shown changes in DNA methylation in MGUS also, with aberrant demethylation occurring in Cytosine-phosphodiester-Guanine (CpG) islands and differential methylation occurring in genes involved in cell proliferation and cell cycle. 41  functions, such as miR-21 in MGUS, which could promote plasma cell transformation by blocking apoptosis. Upregulation of miR-17 downregulates a gene (SOCS-1) which play a critical role in inhibiting IL-6 growth signalling. 42 Epigenetic therapy targeting the distinctive signatures in MGUS, myeloma and BD inflammatory cells could therefore have therapeutic potential.

(p6.1) Therapeutic Implications BD and MGUS have shared and specific pathogenetic mechanisms which are important targets for current and emerging therapies. Potential therapeutic targets such as biologics are avenues for further exploration and for development of personalised therapy. Cytokine profiling (e.g. elevated levels of 1L-1β, 1L-12, 1L-17) can aid in the identification of which biologicals are potential treatments based on the cytokine profile of a disease. Microarray gene profiling will enable assessment of gene expression patterns that may help identify which patients can respond to certain targeted therapy such as epigenetic therapy. There is also a role in monitoring to detect changes in cytokine or epigenetic profiles as a measure of disease remission or as a signal to change to a better suited therapy.
