# Principles and guidelines for managing tooth wear: a review

CorpusID: 81753721 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd9375af4dde0e3da36f79a773a81767af167fd9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cd9375af4dde0e3da36f79a773a81767af167fd9)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Non-Carious Tooth Surface Loss (NCTSL) also termed Tooth Wear (TW) is a current issue of concern to dental practitioners regarding the diagnosis, identification of the etiological factors, prevention, and execution of an adequate treatment [1,2].
## (s10) Fluoride addition
(p10.0) It has been proved to reduce the damage of acid drinks to teeth. Whereas it's application, via mouth rinses gels is recommended to fight acid damage, requiring thus, the use of 0.7% fluoride solution followed by home application of 0.4% fluoride [36]. Other authors report that tooth pastes containing potassium are also considered to be appropriate for the management of sensitive dentine [30].

(p10.1) When it comes to parafunctional activity, patients with GERD are advised to wear a protective occlusal splint. However, specific attention and rigorous hygiene instructions are recommended as acidic substances may accumulate within the splints which may further exacerbate the rate of TW. [30] Reference to other medical specialities is recommended in case of voluntary vomiting and suspected gastro-esophageal reflux [30].
## (s13) Clinical examination
(p13.0) An extraoral examination is necessary. [30] It involves palpation and auscultation of temporo mandibular joints (TMJ). The presence of muscle tenderness as well as clicking or crepitations in TMJ must be checked. The opening trajectory is examined and any deviation on opening or closure must be noted. Another important feature to be marked is the enlargement of the parotide gland which is a typical characteristic of bulimic patients [39].
## (s14) Occlusal Vertical Dimension (OVD) evaluation
(p14.0) It is critical to assess the loss of the OVD before any restoration. The different techniques used are: assessment of phonetic (sibilant sounds), the use of interocclusal distance, and the evaluation of soft tissue contours. The most commonly described method includes the foreway space evaluation, patients resting vertical dimension (RVD) and the use of calipers or Willis gauge [37,30].
## (s15) Pretreatment phase
(p15.0) Impressions must be performed then, and two complete sets of diagnostic casts be poured with die stone. A complete jaw relationship records must be made. Casts are mounted on the semi adjustable articulator. One set is maintained as an unaltered pretreatment record, while the other is modified by reconstructive wax up during diagnostic treatment planning. This blueprint is a pattern integrating a treatment plan that is properly sequenced and used for provisional restorations constructed to a new planned functional occlusion [30,38].
## (s18) Direct composite resin
(p18.0) The use of composite resin to treat cases of tooth wear was first described by Bevenius et al. [47] According to Briggs et al. [48] a rim of enamel, known as the 'gingival ring', is usually present at the gingival margins of severely eroded teeth. It enhances the predictability of bonding hard tissue to resin composites.
## (s27) Category 1: Excessive tooth wear, together with a loss in the OVD
(p27.0) They are the most straightforwardly managed. The required space for restorative material is already cleared through the tooth wear process. Thus, the increase in OVD is expected without any occlusal reduction. This can be applied using an acrylic stabilization splint enabling to evaluate the patient's ability to accept changes according to planned occlusal schemes. The splint will ovoid not only an increase in the OVD but also offers a mutually protective occlusal scheme.

(p27.1) However, for some authors, the use of this appliance for these patients is not essential. [58] The increased ODV is equally divided between maxillary and mandibular arches and this to guarantee a successful adaptation and the reduction of the OVD increasing abruptness.

(p27.2) Obviously, there are two approaches to adopt: the adhesive additive and the conventional restorative approach. During the former, all the involved teeth can be prepared in one visit: this preparation consists of finishing lines accommodation placement of adhesive restoration providing, thus, adequate resistance. The latter requires teeth preparations during a single visit.

(p27.3) Preparation of maxillary or mandibular teeth is performed according to the importance of tooth wear. In fact, arch where tooth wear pattern is more compromising the occlusal plane, is prepared first. Interim restorations will be performed to correct the occlusal plane discrepancies according to the planned OVD on the waxed casts used to perform silicone guides.
