# A Review on organogel for skin aging

CorpusID: 81535286 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b78b045015e4cc972b61d8e9b97cfa247c1540ec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b78b045015e4cc972b61d8e9b97cfa247c1540ec)

Fields: Chemistry, Medicine, Materials Science

## (s2) Review Article 30 Xerogel
(p2.0) Xerogel are the solid gels with low solvent concentration. These are produced by evaporation of solvent or freeze drying, leaving the gel framework behind on contact with fresh fluid, they swells and can be reconstituted. E.g. Tragacanth ribbons, acacia tear β-cyclodextrin, dry cellulose and polystyrene. [20] Organogel Organogels are thermodynamically stable, visco-elastic biphasic systems comprising of a gelator [any substance capable of forming gel] and a nonpolar phase, with or without the presence of water molecules within the network formed by the gelator system. When compared with hydrogel they have a lower degree of hydration. Because of their non-irritating property and biocompatibility they gained importance in the delivery of drugs over the past few years. Although organogel comprised of large amount of liquid systems but it exhibit morphological and rheological properties similar to solids. The thermodynamic and kinetic stability of these systems can be attributed to the opposing forces which are operating and are associated with the organogelator's partial solubility in the continuous phase. The Gelling matrix governs by the resulting interaction and physicochemical properties of gel components. Gels can be classified on the basis of the properties of gelators, solvents and the intermolecular interactions which converted into gels. Organogelators are mostly small molecules, while gelators in a hydrogel are polymeric in nature [ Fig.1 
## (s3) Molecular Model of Organogels
(p3.0) Initially lecithin forms the spherical reverse micelles which are in a nonpolar organic solution, converted into cylindrical from once the water has been added. In 1990 Luisi and Schurtenberger established this with the help of light scattering and small angle neutron scattering techniques. This one-dimensional growth of micelles is caused by the formation of hydrogen bonds between water molecules and phosphate groups of lecithin molecules so that two adjusting lecithin molecules are bridged together by one water molecule. IR and NMR spectroscopies showed that water molecules could interact simultaneously with phosphate groups of neighbouring lipid molecules via hydrogen bonding, acting as a bridge between them. The hydrogen bond arrange in such a way that it formed a network between solvent molecules and lecithin phosphate groups. [27] Long tubular and flexible micelles formed with increase of water amount. These socalled polymer-like, wormlike or spaghetti-like micelles can be entangled and therefore build up a transient threedimensional network that is responsible for the viscoelastic properties of the lecithin organogels. [24] The network shrinks and the phase separation occurs, at the critical concentration of water. At still higher concentrations of water, a transformation to a solid, non-transparent precipitate can be observed. This diluted solution is composed of rod-like micelles which their length is not enough to overlap and form a three-dimensional network. It was shown by IR spectroscopic studies that following addition of water to the lecithin solution about three first water molecules are attached to a phosphate group through hydrogen bonds. [25] At this molar ratio, water molecules begin coming to the carbonyl groups. They interact with each other, also forming hydrogen bonds. With increasing further the solvent amount, water molecules are found adjacent to a choline group. At this point the solvent molecules do not interact strongly with lecithin ester groups. A series of polar solvents have been studied to determine how their nature influences the formation of jelly-like hydrogen binding network in lecithin solutions. It has been established [27] that glycerol, formamide and ethylene glycol, in addition to water, have the ability to induce organogel formation in the following order: glycerol> water> formamide> ethylene glycol. These polar solvents tend to be located in the most polar moiety of lecithin near the phosphate group. It has been inferred from the results that the organogel formation is sensitive to the structure of polar solvents, and in turn it should be sensitive to their physicochemical properties. [27] Drug Release from Organogel The exact mechanism of drug release varies with the organogel system used. However, in case of a majority of organogel system, drug relese occurs by simple diffusion. This diffusion is controlled by the presence of three-dimension network of gelator molecules. The extent of cross-linking determines the rate of drug release. More the crosslinking[higher concentration of gelator], slower is the rate of drug release. However, in case of Eudragit-L based organogel [surface erosion] and in case of Eudragit-S based organogel [diffusion process]. In the case of transdermal and ophthalmic delivery of drug through organogels, attempts have been made to enhance the permeation of drug rather than controlling the release of drug which occurs by diffusion. when organogel are used as carrier for delivery of vaccines the percolation of interstitial fluid into three-dimensional
