# The Clinical Implications of Poly Implant Prothèse Breast Implants: An Overview

CorpusID: 8210821 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/322e6249c3d1cbc1602386b4b0aa13653c7a7206](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/322e6249c3d1cbc1602386b4b0aa13653c7a7206)

Fields: Medicine

## (s4) LIFE SPAN AND RE-AUGMENTATION
(p4.0) As is the case with all other breast implants, PIP device would require removal or replacement towards the end of their life span. Therefore, we believe it is worth briefly discussing the relevant clinical considerations regarding re-augmentation and removal.

(p4.1) It is usual to explain to patients that the average lifespan of current breast implants is 10-15 years. Excluding any medical complications, such as infection and haematoma formation, the reasons for re-operations in women who have primary breast augmentation include capsule formation around the implant leading to hardening and change in the shape of the breast, implant rupture and aesthetic revision. The latter category relates to issues such as asymmetry, mal-positioning, rippling, palpability of implant, the patient's preference to change the size of the implant and the development of ptosis with aging. The development of capsule formation is the commonest cause for re-operation and this tends to occur after an average period of 10 years following the primary breast augmentation. It is worth noting that there is currently no evidence to suggest that PIP implants are more or less prone to capsule formation compared to other devices. Overall, approximately 30% of women undergoing primary augmentation require one additional surgical procedure within the first six years and those who have surgical revision are more likely to require further surgical revision in the future for both medical and aesthetic reasons [40]. A very small percentage of women request removal of the implants due to the development of other health issues, such as autoimmune disorders and they assume that the implants are the cause, despite the fact that there is no evidence from large epidemiological studies. Breast implants are not lifetime devices and women should expect at least one procedure to replace or remove them during their lifetime. The number of procedures required in the future largely depends upon the age of the patient at the time of initial augmentation.
