# Overview of the BioCreative III Workshop

CorpusID: 8589534 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c52960ada9057506b20fc8784326fe5a685eb65](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/0c52960ada9057506b20fc8784326fe5a685eb65)

Fields: Computer Science, Medicine, Biology

## (s3) BioCreative III gene normalization task
(p3.0) The gene normalization (GN) task in BioCreative III was organized by Zhiyong Lu and John Wilbur from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). A total of 13 teams participated in the task and submitted 36 official runs. The task required systems to automatically identify genes or gene products mentioned in the literature and link them to EntrezGene database identifiers. This year's task was a continuation of past GN tasks in BioCreative I and II but with some new features. In terms of the task itself, there were two differences compared to past GN tasks: 1) full text articles Table 1 Tasks performed by participants in the four BioCreative Workshops held to date. Abbreviations are defined as follows, interacting protein normalization task (INT), interaction article subtask (IAS) or article classification task (ACT), interaction methods subtask (IMS) or task (IMT), interaction pairs subtask (IPS) or task (IPT), interaction sentence subtask (ISS) were used instead of abstracts; and 2) instead of focusing on specific species (e.g. human in BioCreative II), all species were included in the analysis and no species information was provided. Both changes were implemented to make the GN task closer to a real literature curation task. Indeed, six teams used their GN systems as support for their participation in the realistic curation tasks of the IAT challenge. Methods used by participants in the current GN task, relied heavily on gene mention finding algorithms developed for past competitions and most of this year's effort was spent on researching ways to reliably determine the species corresponding to a gene mention. While a number of methods were tried, top performance went to a team that used an information retrieval approach to rank the candidate ids (species). See the GN Overview paper [15] for further discussion on methods.

(p3.1) In addition to the more realistic task, there were two innovative changes to the task evaluation. First, the organizers implemented a novel EM (expectation maximization) algorithm for inferring ground truth based on team submissions and showed its ability to detect differences in team performance. For a discussion of this approach see the GN Overview article [15]. Second, to better measure the quality of rankings in submitted results, a new metric called Threshold Average Precision (TAP-k) [19] replaced the traditional measures (precision, recall, and F-measure) in this year's task. The TAP-k is a truncated form of mean average precision that truncates the calculation of average precision essentially after seeing k irrelevant retrievals. Thus the TAP-k is always lower than the mean average precision and the TAP-k is progressively lower as k gets smaller.

(p3.2) In order for teams to optimize their GN systems, the organizers provided two sets of training data consisting of 32 fully annotated full text articles and 500 full text articles annotated only for the genes judged most important for the article, respectively. The test data consisted of 507 full text articles where 50 articles were fully annotated by human curators. The annotations of the remaining 457 articles were inferred by the EM algorithm based on submitted team results. The highest TAP scores (k=5) were 0.3297 and 0.4873 on human-curated and algorithm-inferred annotations, respectively. Compared with results from past GN tasks, the team performance in this year's challenge is overall lower (see GN Overview paper [15] for discussion of this issue), which can be attributed to the added complexity of full text and the necessity of species identification. By combining team results in an ensemble system, an increased performance of 0.3614 (TAP-5) on the human-curated data was obtained.
## (s6) Limitations of current methods
(p6.0) The most important and fundamental goal of the Bio-Creative Workshops is to provide practical aid to the investigator or curator in dealing with the literature. The first question that seems relevant to this goal is: how accurate are the computer methods currently in use when applied to the BioCreative shared tasks? The article classification (ACT) task for PPI appeared in Bio-Creative II, II.5, and III. In BioCreative II the task was to select the curatable articles for protein-protein interactions based on the content of the corresponding PubMed abstracts, with testing on a balanced set of equal numbers of positive and negative articles. The highest F score achieved was 0.78 [20]. In BioCreative II.5 the task required the treatment of full text articles and testing involved 595 FEBS Letters articles with 63 positives; the highest F score achieved was 0.85. In Bio-Creative III testing was on 6000 abstracts from a variety of journals with 15% positives and the best F score was 0.61. The use of abstracts only, unbalanced data, and a wide mixture of journals makes this latter test the most difficult and perhaps the most realistic and highlights the difficulty of a realistic task.

(p6.1) The GN task appeared in BioCreative I, II, and III, with a similar task for protein normalization in BioCreative II.5. In BioCreative I and II it was limited to particular organisms and the best F scores were on fly (0.82), mouse (0.79), and yeast (0.92) in I, and on human (0.81) in II. These results were all obtained on PubMed abstracts. In BioCreative II.5 a similar task (INT) focused on protein normalization with no restriction on organisms; this task required the annotation of full text articles with UniProt IDs for proteins that had experimental PPI evidence in the article. The best raw F score was 0.28 when macro-averaged over all articles [21]. It is important to note that the main difference from the GN tasks was an exhaustive annotation of all genes in the GN tasks and the limitation to proteins with experimental evidence of interaction in the interacting protein normalization task, making the latter significantly more difficult. In BioCreative III the gene normalization task was broadened to involve all organisms and used full text, with the best (break even) F score of 0.50. As a final example, the PPI Interacting Pair Task (IPT) in BioCreative II and II.5 required annotation of an interaction relation between pairs of interacting proteins from the full text. In BioCreative II the highest macroaveraged F score was 0.29, while in BioCreative II.5 the highest macro-averaged F score was 0.22. These results show that the shared tasks are very challenging. We believe progress has been made on all these tasks, but it is difficult to quantify the progress because as the tasks have been repeated, they have also become more realistic and hence more difficult.
## (s8) A possible use scenario
(p8.0) We turn now to the second question: can we use the methods of entity and relational recognition and normalization, as studied in the BioCreative tasks, to enhance the user's experience? Will these methods aid in focusing attention, disambiguating expressions, and supplying external information so that the user is benefited in time and effort saved? While we cannot give a definitive answer to this question, we believe the evidence favours a positive answer. First, let us consider the article classification task (ACT). We know that the ACT for PPI is not sufficiently accurate to provide definitive answers on its own. On the other hand, if PPI abstracts were selected manually from a ranked list of automatically generated results, the best system reports half of all relevant abstracts (295) in the top 7% of its result list (421/6000), which translates to a false positive rate of three in ten articles (calculated from the interpolated Precision/Recall curve evaluation for ACT). Given the top ranked 7% of abstracts returned by the system, the user then must decide which are valuable for PPI extraction. Either the user can read the abstracts or alternatively the system could supply an analysis on which its recommendation was based as evidence to the user. The most useful evidence in this regard would be evidence that can be easily and quickly examined by a human to check its validity. To fully implement such an approach will require a refinement of the ACT with a focus on designing systems that can produce such evidence. The goal would be a system that generally supplies easily usable evidence, but which may fail some percentage of the time, with the result that the human has to make a more detailed examination of the document in question. If we are dealing with the use case projected here where only 30% of the abstracts are irrelevant to PPI, then one might argue that supplying such evidence is less important, but we believe such evidence could potentially save the user significant reading time. On the other hand there are situations where a more exhaustive search is in order and it would be essential to examine many more documents with a much higher false positive rate. For example an exhaustive effort could be required to protect a large investment in drug development. It is in such situations that we believe a system that could present easily useable evidence could be most valuable, as an alternative to the user reading the whole abstract. A goal of future BioCreatives will be to perform experiments to measure time saved through the use of automated document ranking enhanced by evidence summaries. Now suppose one has arrived at a document that gives promise of having curatable PPIs. Let us consider first the GN task for this document. Current GN systems could propose a ranked list of gene identifiers for the article and show the relationship of each identifier to a proposed named entity occurrence in the article. However, we know that the results would not be very accurate. We believe a more useful approach would make the evidence available to the user for each ranked item. A gene/protein ID would be accompanied by the gene mention, the species name, and clickable links into the text where these entities may be found and examined along with their relationship in the text. One may also provide other links to outside information, when available, where the gene name and species name are further described. If one requires high recall, the approach just outlined may not prove to be efficient. As an alternative one can imagine a process which moves linearly through the article highlighting genes/proteins, displaying their database IDs, and allowing the user to either confirm a given entity designation or click on it to obtain further information, potentially leading to a correction of the system output. Such further information could take many forms, from highlighting the near occurrences in the text of species or gene/protein names relevant to the entity in question, to displaying some schematic of the reasoning used by the system to make its initial designation, to providing access to database entries relevant in determining the entity type. Clearly the suggested approaches are only a small part of what is possible.

(p8.1) In any approach the user will be involved in providing corrections to the system and there is also the potential to learn from this feedback in an online fashion to improve subsequent suggestions by the system for a given article and across articles. This feature would allow BioCreative tasks to be designed to be general and species-independent, to support the needs across the larger curation community and address important shared problems, such as gene normalization. For example, even though the Model Organism Database (MOD) curation tasks have many similarities, they still differ in many details, mainly due to the nature of the different organisms under study. The 13 UAG members, who included representatives from different MODs, had lengthy discussions on what makes a gene primary/ curatable in the literature. Although a final consensus was reached for the IAT task, different views expressed during the formulation of this definition made it clear that each curation group has their own standards and needs for GN. In other words, the definition of "important" genes for the IAT task is likely not to be the same as what a specific MOD decides in practice. Therefore, a useful feature of the GN systems would be to automatically learn the new set of criteria and subsequently rerank its gene results through interaction with MOD curators.

(p8.2) Finally, suppose the annotation of PPI pairs is the designated task for an article. Then what we have said regarding the GN task is relevant, but just for those gene/protein pairs involved in a PPI. One can still imagine moving linearly through the article examining highlighted gene/protein names, but now ignoring those not involved in a PPI. In addition to highlighting potential gene/protein names, the system can also highlight clues to the existence of a PPI. Again such clues can be clickable to access information about their origin and validity. Though the PPI task has an added level of complexity over the GN task, the same principle applies. In an error prone process the system needs to provide the evidence for its suggestions where possible and in a form as easy to comprehend as possible. In the foregoing discussion we have envisioned a scenario where we believe computational algorithms can provide the most practical impact in assisting a human investigator to interact with the literature in a curation task. The automatic processing of text does not lose any of its importance and we should continue seeking ways to improve algorithms. However, there is recognition that our automatic methods fall short and that from a practical point of view they must provide the evidence for their suggestions and that this evidence must be understandable by a human. Here it must be admitted that current machine learning technology is largely based on weighting many features (often thousands to millions) and it is frequently a challenge to know why a particular recommendation is made. However progress has been made in explaining such opaque models as neural networks and support vector machines [24,25] and this challenge must be dealt with successfully. To the extent that this is successful we believe the algorithms can have a positive impact on the process.

(p8.3) An important lesson learned from the IAT task was that providing specifications of a desired system is not enough; developers and users should team up early on and work together throughout the process of system development. In addition, the user adoption of automated tools into their curation process will depend heavily on performance: systems with many highly ranked incorrect suggestions are not acceptable. Adoption also will depend on the overall convenience of a tool. For example, tools which make use of the synergy of finding the link between a gene mention, its species and its database identifier simultaneously are preferable to tools dealing with species mentions, gene mentions, and subsequently gene ids in separate stages. These observations will guide the development of future Bio-Creative interactive challenges.
