# Fats and oils: The health concerns and issues-A review

CorpusID: 86814731 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1052c748821cbab1457e6430052422d768cbabca](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1052c748821cbab1457e6430052422d768cbabca)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s0) CLASSIFICATION OF FATTY ACIDS
(p0.0) Fats are broadly classified as Saturated fats and Unsaturated fats. Saturated fats are the ones which have all single bonds and are found in animal based products; butter, cheese, beef fat, coconut oil, palm oil, palm kernel oil. Unsaturated fats are further classified as MUFA (Monounsaturated Fatty Acids) and PUFA (Poly Unsaturated Fatty Acids). MUFA contain one double bond and PUFA contain more than one double bond. Olive oil, avocados and seeds are sources of MUFA. PUFA are considered essential fatty acids as human beings cannot synthesize them. Omega-3 and Omega-6 are important essential fatty acids. Fish, soyabeen, cotton seed oils are some important sources of PUFA. Trans fat is generated by hydrogenation of oil and improves shelf life of fat. Trans fatty Acids (TFA) are considered risk factors for Coronary Heart Disease (CHD) (Mozaffarian et al., 2006). Saturated fats and trans fats are also called bad fats owing to health risk factors. TFAs have higher melting points, hence are solids. MUFA and PUFA have low melting points and are liquids. Saturated fatty acids: Some of the common examples of natural SFAs are Butyric acid found in butter, Myristic acid found in cows milk and dairy products, Lauric acid found in human breast milk, cows milk and goats milk, Palmitic acid found in palm oil. Tallow, lard, red meat are rich nonvegetarian sources of saturated fats. Unsaturated fatty acids: Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA): Oleic acid found in almonds (It is Omega-9 Fatty Acid).

(p0.1) Poly Unsaturated Fatty acids(PUFA): (i) Omega-3 fatty acids: Alpha linoleic acid (ALA) is an omega-3 fatty acid found in walnuts and Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) found in fish, eggs are examples of omega-3 fatty acids. Flax seeds are rich source of alpha linoleic acid. (ii) Omega-6 fatty acids: Linoleic acid (LA) is found in eggs, popcorns, vegetable oils. Gamma Linolenic acid (GLA) is found in plant based oils.

(p0.2) Trans fats: Elaidic Acid is trans isomer of Oleic Acid found in bovine milk (0.1%) or partially hydrogenated oils. The dairy products contain trans fats in 2-5% range. Trans fats (Hydrogenated ones) are used in cookies, pizza, biscuits, pastries etc.
## (s2) ISSUES AND CONCERNS
(p2.0) Trans Fats: Conjugated Linoleic acid (CLA), a natural trans fatty acid, is found in dairy products and a report even suggests reduced risk of heart disease with diet consisting of CLA (Bonthuis et al.,2010). Intake of dairy products was not associated with mortality of increased heart risk. The study was conducted over a period of sixteen years. Natural sources of fatty acids contain small amounts of Trans fats. However studies on artificial Trans fats have confirmed their bad effects. Replacement of Saturated fatty acids with hydrogenated fats (trans fats) resulted in decreased HDL in blood and ability of arteries to dilate was also impaired (de Roos et al., 2001). Trans fats are bad in a way that they reduce HDL and increase LDL in blood increasing the risk of cardiovascular disease greatly. Food and Drug Agency of USA (FDA) has directed edible oil manufactures to completely phase out Trans fats by 2018. Trans fatty acid contents in erythrocytes have been found to be associated with an elevated risk of Cardiovascular Heart Disease (CHD) in a nested case-control study among US women (Sun et al., 2007). Another study carried out on Finish men over a period of 6 years observed a significant positive association between the intake of trans-fatty acids and the risk of coronary death (Pietinen et al., 1997). Younger women were found to be at higher risk of CHD owing to high trans fat intake (Oh et al., 2005) Omega 3 vs. Omega 6 fatty acids: Omega-3 and omega-6 refers to the position of double bond from methyl end of the fatty acid. Studies show a link between diet containing omega-3 fatty acids and reduction in life threatening diseases such as heart diseases, arthritis and cancer (The nutrition source). Apart from these benefits omega-3 has been found to have anti-inflammatory properties and prevents diabetes. Omega-3, EPA (Eicosapentaenoic acid), DHA (Docosahexaenoic acid) and ALA (alpha-linolenic acid) are three important omega-3 acids. DHA is good for nervous system, good sleep and improved mood. EPA and DHA are considered good for pregnant women while humans being cannot directly use ALA but are able to convert ALA to DHA (DHA.EPA Omega-3 Institute). Human body is capable of producing all fatty acid except LA (Omega-6) and ALA (Omega-3). Hence LA and ALA are essential fatty acids i.e. they must be a part of the diet. Excessive intake of omega-6 fatty acids is reported to interfere with health benefits of omega-3 fatty acids as both types compete for same enzymes (Simopoulos, 2002). Typically an omega 6 to omega 3 ratio in diet should be 1:1 based on evolutionary trends (Simopoulos, 2006). Modern diet ratio for the same is 16:1 which indicates lower omega-3 intake. A study in India has also documented low omega-3 intake across large segments of the population (Ghafoorunissa, 1998). Some studies have linked this diet to breast cancer in post menopausal women and prostate cancer. Many other studies suggest an ideal ratio of 4:1 is good for health. One thing is for sure we are taking much higher amounts of omega 6 fatty acids than are actually needed. We need to either considerably reduce refined oils (that are rich in omega-6) or increase consumption of omega-3 fatty acids to maintain healthy ratio.
## (s3) WHY WE NEED FATS IN DIET
(p3.0) Fats are storehouse of energy. 1 gram of fat provides 9 calories irrespective of its type. Essentials fats are important components of our brain and play important role in nerve function and transport of fat soluble vitamins; A, D, E and K. These vitamins play an important role in biological functions. A fat deficient diet may lead to deficiency of these vitamins. Fats are precursors for steroid hormones and regulate transport across cell membranes. The body stores fat around vital organs to protect them from shock. Fat layer under our skin protects as an insulating sheet and saves us from sudden temperature changes. When temperature drops very low, body metabolizes fat molecules to unlock energy and keep us warm. Dietary Fats are important precursors of Prostaglandins (Hassam et al. 1979) which regulate a number of biological functions.
## (s7) CONCLUSION
(p7.0) Diet high in refined oils reduces cholesterol levels. Diet high in omega-6 may lower HDL (Good Cholesterol) as well as LDL (Bad Cholesterol). However a higher omega-3 diet maintains HDL levels and lowers LDL. Modern diet is low in omega-3 fatty acids, fish may be taken as a source of omega-3 as recommended by AHA. Inflammatory diseases and hypertension incidents are on the rise due to low omega-3 and high omega-6 in the American diet (Simopoulos 2002). Moreover there is no conclusive evidence that saturated fatty acids (Desi Ghee and other natural SFAs) are bad for health (Cholesterol Levels). Natural SFAs have been reported to raise HDL levels in blood. There is conclusive evidence that trans fatty acids are bad. Some reports even distinguish between natural and processed trans fatty acids. Processed fatty acids/hydrogenated oils are used in all packaged food available in the market. There is a downward trend world over in consumption of trans fatty acids. Among the refined oils Rice Bran oil seems to be the best bet whereas Mustard oil and Desi ghee have desirable omega-3 levels(CSE report). ICMR recommends blending of mustard oil with other oils to control erucic acid level and appropriate omeg6/3 ratio. Vitamin C should be made part of the daily diet and natural/homemade food should be encouraged.
