# Biomarkers of Pineal Region Tumors: A Review

CorpusID: 88027554 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76a543a7964c3a97e0b95211c83912a99d2738c1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/76a543a7964c3a97e0b95211c83912a99d2738c1)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Germ Cell Tumors
(p2.0) Among germ cell tumors, dermoid tumors, epidermoid tumors, and teratomas are considered benign; choriocarcinomas, endodermal sinus tumors, and embryonal carcinomas are considered malignant; and germinomas and immature teratomas fall in between. Germ cell tumors can occur in the brain within the pineal region and in the suprasellar region in the midline, corresponding to the route of primordial germ cell migration. Thirteen percent of germ cell tumors arise in the pineal or suprasellar region. 8,9 Precocious puberty can occur in boys with intracerebral germ cell tumors because of luteinizing hormone-like effects of beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) in the central nervous system. Drop metastases can cause radiculopathy and/or myelopathy. 7,10-13
## (s8) Workup Including Biomarkers
(p8.0) Workup of a pineal mass presently entails imaging followed by serum and CSF laboratory workup for germ cell tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein, β-hCG, and placental alkaline phosphatase. As described above, these markers can Ochsner Journal Carr, C be somewhat helpful for diagnosis, but they are more useful for monitoring response to treatment. 55 A pineal mass that is negative for all 3 markers may be a germ cell tumor that is negative for markers or a pineal parenchymal cell tumor. Imaging and laboratory workup are followed by biopsy. Stereotactic biopsy has a low rate of complications (1.3% mortality, 7% morbidity) and a high diagnostic yield (94%), but stereotactic biopsy may underdetect histologically heterogeneous tumors. 15 If histologically heterogeneous tumors are suspected, biomarkers may inform diagnosis. For instance, a stereotactic biopsy notable for a germ cell tumor that is not a germinoma and elevated serum β-hCG could indicate a histologically heterogeneous tumor with some undetected germinoma component. This distinction could be important because germinomas, the most common pineal neoplasm, generally respond well to radiation and chemotherapy. The standard treatment for pineal parenchymal tumors is radiation. Surgery is an option, particularly for children who often have adverse consequences from chemotherapy or radiation. However, surgery has a mortality rate of 5%-10%. 7,15 CONCLUSION Serum and CSF biomarker assays play an important role in the diagnostic workup of cases of suspected pineal germ cell or parenchymal neoplasms and can inform both treatment planning and follow-up. Biomarkers-including alphafetoprotein, β-hCG, and placental alkaline phosphataseinform diagnosis and treatment and are important for monitoring response to treatment in germ cell tumors. Serum and CSF biomarkers in conjunction with clinical and radiographic evidence of a pineal region mass can inform the decision to undertake stereotactic biopsy or surgical excision or whether to proceed straight to medical treatment.
