# Food Reviews International Post-harvest technologies applied to edible flowers: A review

CorpusID: 90752406 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1146997f620b596e15b85b6d9a4dfe2778ba14b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/b1146997f620b596e15b85b6d9a4dfe2778ba14b)

Fields: Business, Agricultural And Food Sciences

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Flowers have held an eminent place in art, religion, health, and culinary since ancient times. Particularly, the popularity of edible flowers has increased since the late 1980s. The market of edible flowers is becoming more important due to the increased number of recipe books, magazine articles, and websites on the theme, as well as to the growth of research on their nutritional and bioactive potential. [1,2] However, the market for edible flowers still receives less attention than that of other products, such as vegetables and fruits, because the production of edible flowers is still low and it is still a niche market.
## (s2) Low temperature storage
(p2.0) Temperature is one of the most important environmental factors limiting the shelf life of fruits, vegetables, and herbs. [10] Until this moment, the main technologies used by the industry of edible flowers are cold storage (refrigeration and freezing) and hot-air drying, as will be detailed below.

(p2.1) Cold storage delays flower senescence and quality deterioration during storage. Storage at low temperatures is associated with an increase of flowers' shelf life, because there is a reduction of respiration and internal breakdown of tissues by enzymes, reduction of water loss and wilting, slower growth of microorganisms, and reduction of ethylene production. [11] Several studies dealing with freezing and refrigerated storage have been conducted, with their most important details and conclusions assembled in Tables 1 and 2. Regarding  Table 1, relative to edible flowers not including artichoke and Brassica species, good results have been obtained with temperatures at −2.5°C (ex. borage), 2.5°C (heartsease, nasturtium, pansies, and pumpkin) and 5°C (pumpkin) for up to two weeks. It must be Polyethylene bags, −2.5 to 20°C [5] Heartsease (Viola tricolor) Polyethylene bags, at −2.5, 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 20°C [5] Nasturtium (Tropaeolum majus) Pansies (Viola×wittrockiana) Pumpkin (Curcubita pepo)
## (s3) Broccoli (Brassica oleracea var. italica)
(p3.0) Hot-air (37, 42, 45, 48, 50°C for 1 or 3 h) Storage conditions: At 20°C for 4 days [25] Osmotic dehydration: 40% (w/w) syrups of trehalose, 35°C, 2 h Ultrasound assistant osmotic dehydration for 10, 20, 30, and 40 min [27] Cauliflower (Brassica oleracea var. botrytis)

(p3.1) Osmotic dehydration: salt and sucrose (cane sugar), alone and in combination (optimum condition: 3% salt and 6% sucrose for 12-16 h at 4°C) [28] Osmotic dehydration: salt concentration (5-25%), temperature (40-90°C), ratio of brine to material (2-4, w/ w) and time (5-180 min) (optimum condition: 12% (w/w) brine, 80°C, 5 min in 2 times) [29] Edible coating Artichoke (Cynara scolymus)

(p3.2) Dipping: citric acid and calcium chloride solution Coating: Sodium alginate with citric acid After, packaging in: multilayer-film (All-PE) biodegradable monolayer film (NVT2) oriented polypropylene film (OPP) Storage conditions: 4°C for 6 days [32] Broccoli (Brassica oleracea var. italica)
## (s5) Edible films and coatings
(p5.0) Edible films and coatings are distinct methods used by the food industry. A film can be defined as a thin skin formed and then applied to the product (e.g., through casing with a biopolymer solution prepared separately from the food that is later applied to), while coating is a suspension or an emulsion applied directly on the surface of the food, leading to the subsequent formation of a coating. [30] However, both are generally based on biological materials, such as proteins, lipids, and polysaccharides. Presently, both methods are already used in fruits and vegetables, acting mainly as a barrier against gas transport and microorganism growth. [31] Regarding edible coatings, no studies have been done on edible flowers and a few works have been published on artichoke and brassicas ( Table 2). Some polysaccharides have been included in edible coating formulations like alginate [32] , chitosan, [33,34] and carboxymethyl-cellulose. [31] Concerning alginate coating, its application on artichoke showed the best results in terms of shelf life (increased microbial stability) in comparison with dipping in citric acid/calcium chloride solution. [32] Furthermore, these authors also stated the importance of choosing a correct packaging material, with better results (higher microbial stability and increased shelf life) obtained with the biodegradable monolayer film (NVT2) than multilayer-film (All-PE) and oriented polypropylene film (OPP). The effectiveness of chitosan to improve the microbiological and sensory quality of fresh cut broccoli was evaluated by Moreira et al. [33] , regarded as a viable alternative to control the microbiota present in minimally processed broccoli because the growth of total coliforms, psychrotrophic, and mesophilic aerobes was substantially inhibited during the whole storage period tested. Furthermore, coated broccoli samples had acceptable scores in all sensory parameters examined until the end of storage, without appearance of undesirable odors and with higher quality levels than control samples. A similar study [34] also showed that chitosan coating enriched with essential oils (tea tree, rosemary, clove, lemon, oreganum, calendula, and aloe vera) and bioactive compounds (bee pollen, ethanolic extract of propolis, pomegranate dried extract, and resveratrol) had significant antibacterial properties. Again, the application of chitosan coatings alone or enriched did not introduce negative effects on the sensory attributes of minimally processed broccoli. [34] Ansorena et al. [31] also studied the effect of chitosan and carboxymethyl-cellulose coatings on several quality parameters (weight loss, texture, color, microbial load, ascorbic acid, total chlorophyll, browning potential, and sensory quality) of fresh-cut broccoli during refrigerated storage, and explored if there was any additional benefit in a combined treatment of mild heat shock followed by edible coating. They concluded that chitosan coating effectively maintained quality attributes and extended shelf life of minimally processed broccoli, but chitosan coating after a mild heat shock showed the best performance for long-term refrigerated storage of minimally processed broccoli. Thus, chitosan and alginate coatings, alone or enriched with biopreservatives or combined with other technologies can be a good post-harvest technology to increase the shelf life and improve the quality of edible flowers. However, in the future more studies must be done on edible coatings to better understand the effect of other materials and to evaluate their role on other edible flowers species.

(p5.1) Concerning edible films, only a study in cauliflower has been published, with the aim to evaluate the effects of methyl cellulose-based edible films with variable amounts of stearic, ascorbic, and citric acids, on oxygen (O 2 ) permeability. [35] The authors observed that films containing ascorbic acid or citric acid applied to cauliflower slowed down browning reactions, as well as the polyphenoloxidase activity and vitamin C losses when compared to uncoated ones and with films without antioxidants. [35] Also here, studies involving other types of edible flowers are required.
## (s6) High hydrostatic pressure
(p6.0) High hydrostatic pressure is an emerging nonthermal food processing method that subjects liquid or solid foods, with or without packaging, to pressures between 50 and 1000 MPa. [36] HHP has shown considerable potential as an alternative technology to heat treatments, in terms of assuring safety and quality attributes in minimally processed food products. Some studies of HHP treatments in edible flowers have been done, evaluating the effect on physical (e.g., color and texture) and nutritional characteristics, as well as on microbial and enzymatic inactivation. Among edible flowers, only two studies have been done (Table 1). On the other hand, much more work on the HHP application to broccoli and cauliflower have been performed (Table 2).

(p6.1) Regarding edible flowers (Table 1), these have different cellular structures, which cause a different behavior when submitted to HHP. For example, borage and camellia showed an unacceptable appearance (loss of structure and firmness) after HHP application, while centaurea presented good appearance at 100/5 MPa/min; however, the shelf life did not increase. [37] On contrary, pansies submitted at 75/5 or 75/10 MPa/min maintained good appearance over 20 days of storage at 4°C, as well as HHP induced the production of bioactive compounds. This phenomenon might be associated with structural alteration of the cells provoked by the HHPs, yielding a higher amount of extracted metabolites or a physiological response of the flower to stress conditions at higher pressurization levels. [37] The effect of HHP on the retention and bioactivity of natural phytochemicals present in Echinacea purpurea, as well as the microbial load, were studied by Chen et al. [38] They reported that HHP significantly reduced the microbial contamination in flowers without affecting the retention of phytochemical, such as chicoric, caftaric and chlorogenic acids, and total alkamides.

(p6.2) On broccoli (Table 2), the effect of HHP in enzymatic inactivation has been studied by some authors. [39][40][41][42] A pressure of 210 MPa at −20°C was insufficient to inactivate peroxidase and polyphenoloxidase [39] , whereas pectinmethylesterase, β-galactosidase and α-rabinofuranosidase were inactivated by HHP. [42] Furthermore, the application of HHP may induce cell permeabilization, favoring glucosinolate conversion and hydrolysis of health promoting products. [40] Concerning the effect of HHP treatment on physical attributes, Fernández et al. [43] concluded that blanched and high-pressure treated broccoli followed by freezing presented better texture than conventional frozen ones, without great changes in color and flavor. Furthermore, Butz et al. [44] reported that no detectable effects on green color (chlorophyll a and b) were observed after long treatments at 600 MPa and 75°C. Regarding the effect of HHP on antioxidant activity, pressures at 400 and 600 MPa did not affect the antioxidant properties of broccoli when compared to raw. [45] On cauliflower, the effect of HHP on folate bioavailability (monoglutamate form) was examined by Melse-Boonstra et al. [46] They detected a 2-3 fold increase of monoglutamate folate form in cauliflower, but also a substantial loss of total folates. In addition, blanching before or after HHP led to great losses on monoglutamate folate content, perhaps due to direct solubilization in the water. Préstamo and Arroyo [47] reported lower structural changes in cauliflower treated at 400 MPa for 30 min at 5°C than in spinach, since in the latter, more cell membrane damage occurred, with greater loss of nutrients. The resistance of microorganisms subjected to HHP was studied in cauliflower by Arroyo et al. [48] A pressure of 300 MPa, 5°C for 30 min was sufficient to decrease the viable aerobic mesophiles below the detection limit.

(p6.3) In summary, HHP can be a promising technology on edible flowers and inflorescences, to maintain their quality for long periods of time. However, each flower shows a different behavior to pressure, making it necessary to perform further studies in order to better understand the effects of HHP on each type of flower.
