# Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.net An Overview about the Biology of Skeletal Muscle Satellite Cells

CorpusID: 91977177 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53df7c8209e318ba3e04dce53027f3409b2b31f1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/53df7c8209e318ba3e04dce53027f3409b2b31f1)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Muscle development is a well-coordinated process in which the segmental derivatives of the paraxial mesoderm, namely the somites, give rise to the dermomyotome from which progenitor cells undergo differentiation to form multinucleated myofibers [1][2][3].

(p0.1) The existence of multipotent cells was thought to be restricted to tissue development; however, a suite of somatic stem cells has been recognized in early post-natal and mature skeletal muscle, significantly contributing to muscle growth, homeostatic maintenance, and regeneration [4].

(p0.2) Indeed, although myofibers are terminally differentiated, adult muscles retain the capability to increase in size upon hypertrophic stimuli and to efficiently regenerate after injury. This exceptional plasticity has been generally associated with the presence of adult stem cells, namely Satellite Cells (SCs), within mature cell populations. Satellite cells, surrounding myofibers, are considered the primary stem cells in adult skeletal muscle playing a central role in tissue growth and regeneration [5][6][7]. These undifferentiated cells are maintained under quiescent conditions in healthy muscles, being able to repristinate their proliferative activity upon proper stimulation. Satellite cells that are induced to leave the quiescence re-enter the cell cycle, undergoing multiple divisions. Retaining stem cell properties, these cells can engage both symmetric and asymmetric divisions, guaranteeing the maintenance of the stem cell pool and the production of committed cells, which contribute to muscle plasticity [5,7]. Starting from their identification, satellite cell functions have been extensively studied; however, the contribution of these muscle stem cells to muscle growth and the exact mechanism regulating their behavior during regeneration still lacks a comprehensive picture.

(p0.3) Here, we reported an integrated overview of genetic and epigenetic mechanisms underlining satellite cell biology, reporting current advances in understanding regulatory networks characterizing every single stage of SCs activity during muscle regeneration. Furthermore, we described the interplay between myogenic and non-myogenic cells in regenerating muscle environment, providing evidences about the impact of the different cell components on the efficacy of tissue healing. In particular, we discuss the impact of both intrinsic and non-cell autonomous mechanisms regulating muscle regeneration with a focus on the alteration of this homeostatic mechanism in aging and disease.
## (s1) SATELLITE CELLS IN MUSCLE PLASTICITY: FROM GROWTH TO REGENERATION
(p1.0) Skeletal muscle stem cell population was firstly identified by Mauro A. [8] and Katz B. [9] in 1961 by electron microscopy approach on frog and rat muscle samples, respectively. The denomination of Satellite Cells derived from the peculiar position within muscle tissue, in close association with single myofibers. As emerged from the first observation by Mauro and confirmed over time by more detailed studies, SCs occupied a protected location between the basal lamina and the sarcolemma, an exclusive niche preserving and regulating stem cell survival and behavior.
## (s4) Myogenic Differentiation of Activated Satellite Cells
(p4.0) The transition from satellite cells proliferation to differentiation involves the down-regulation of proliferativeassociated genes and the activation of specific differentiating markers, such as myogenin, neonatal isoform of myosin heavy chain (MHC), slow-twitch skeletal muscle troponin T (Tnnt1), cardiac and slow-twitch skeletal muscle Ca 2+ -ATPase (Atp2a2), Insulin-like growth factor-2 (Igf-2), fibroblast growth factor receptor 4 (Fgfr4), nicotinic cholinergic receptor alpha polypeptide 1 (Chrna1), and cardiac/slowtwitch skeletal muscle troponin C (Tncc) [63,64]. The permanent exit from the cell cycle is then ratified by the expression of p21 protein [65]. The expression of MyoD is not restricted to activated/proliferating SCs since it has been recognized as a master regulator of the myogenic program, modulating a suite of genetic and epigenetic mediators involved in myoblast differentiation ( Fig. 2B-C). For instance, it has been described that MyoD induced the expression of miRNAs promoting myoblast differentiation, as miR 206 and miR486 (Fig. 2C). When proliferating myoblasts engage the differentiative program, miR 206/486 are involved in the downmodulation of Pax7 by directly targeting the 3' untranslated region (UTR) of its gene sequence [66]. Although MyoD exerts the genetic control of myogenic factors, even its function is tightly regulated. The transcriptional activity of MyoD is known to be dependent on the association with chromatin modifiers as Baf60c, connoting the epigenetic control of its function. In this context the importance of the muscle-specific long non-coding RNA Linc-RAM it has been recently highlighted. Yu and colleagues reported that Linc-RAM can function as a transcriptional enhancer of MyoD, by promoting the formation of the MyoD-Baf60c-Brg1 complex, responsible for the expression of genes strictly required for myogenic differentiation [33]. Supporting this mechanistic model, Linc-RAM knock-out mice showed important defects in muscle regeneration due to an impaired muscle differentiation. Moreover, ChIP analysis in C2C12 myogenic cell line revealed that MyoD was significantly enriched in the promoter region of myogenin gene when Linc-RAM was over-expressed, indicating that this lncRNA can promote muscle differentiation [67]. In fact, the terminal differentiation of committed myoblasts requires the expression of both MyoD and myogenin, acting in a tightly regulated mechanism determining the expression of the myogenic regulatory factor 4 (Mrf 4), along with other markers of the terminally differentiated state [68].

(p4.1) Terminally differentiated myoblasts can fuse each other or to damaged myofibers to became part of a multinucleated muscle fiber. The differentiation program is then completed by the expression of protein associated with the mature muscle phenotype such as myosin heavy chain (MHC), enolase 3 (ENO3) and the muscle creatine kinase (MCK) (Fig. 2C). 
## (s5) CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR INTERACTORS IN MUSCLE STEM CELL NICHE
(p5.0) Although satellite cells represent the main actors in muscle plasticity, the complex mechanism of muscle regeneration cannot be considered a "one cell show". Efficient healing of skeletal muscle occurs in five interrelated phases: i) muscle degeneration; ii) activation of the inflammatory response; iii) regeneration; iv) tissue remodeling and angiogenesis; v) muscle maturation and recovery of function. Each stage involves the active participation of different cell populations that play a critical role in regulating and supporting SCs activity, contributing to the establishment of a qualitative environment permissive for proper regeneration. Among cellular interactors in muscle regeneration immune cells, myogenic and non-myogenic progenitors, endothelial cells and fibroblasts create an intricated and tightly regulated network of mechanical and molecular signals within the stem cell niche. The concept of stem cell niche has been extended over time, by the definition of the anatomical compartment to the cohesive influence of a wealth of stimuli deriving from the environment surrounding SCs. Indeed, although residing in a privileged location, satellite cells convey the influence of other cell types within the muscle tissue which are responsible for the production of physical and molecular signals regulating their behavior. Supporting the concept of muscle regeneration as an intricate network of cellular and molecular mediators, a series of studies reported that the depletion of specific cell populations in skeletal muscle environment can profoundly affect the ability of SCs to repair damaged tissue. In fact, during muscle regeneration, the activation and differentiation of SCs are strictly accompanied by related homeostatic responses favoring and supporting the myogenic program.

(p5.1) The activation of an acute inflammation represents the first physiologic response to tissue damage, which is the trigger stimulus for muscle regeneration. Resident immune cells, as mast cells and neutrophils, can function as sentries at the site of the lesion being rapidly activated by necrotic cell-derived molecules. This first response is then reinforced by a subsequent wave of pro-inflammatory mediators released by activated neutrophils and degranulating mast cells. Among secreted factors, histamine is responsible for the enhanced vascular permeability facilitating immune cell infiltration, whereas Tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα), Interferon γ (IFNγ) and Interleukin-1β (IL-1β) contribute to the recruitment of peripheral myeloid cells. This pro-inflammatory milieu will summon a great number of neutrophils early after damage (2-24h), which are, in turn, responsible for the first phase of cell debris removal. The early action of neutrophils in triggering inflammation is required for proper muscle regeneration since neutropenia, experimentally induced in mice, impaired tissue regeneration after injury [69].

(p5.2) In addition, neutrophil-derived mediators as the soluble receptor of Interleukin-6 (sIL6R), are involved in the modu-lation of inflammation. Indeed, a different subtype of macrophages can exert various functions during tissue healing. M1 polarized cells present phagocytic activity and produce several Matrix Metalloproteinases (MMPs), contributing to the clearance of the necrotic area, thus promoting the establishment of a pro-regenerative environment [70]. Macrophages contribute to muscle regeneration also through the secretion of soluble mediators as TNFα and IL-6, which are necessary to promote myoblast proliferation and differentiation [71][72][73]. Besides the classical M1 activation, recruited monocytes can be alternatively activated acquiring the M2 antiinflammatory phenotype. M2 cells can be divided into different subtypes which are induced by varied stimuli and exert immunomodulatory effects. M2a and M2b phenotype are known to be induced by IL-4/-13 and IL-1R agonists respectively, whereas M2c cells are induced by IL-10, a critical anti-inflammatory cytokine promoting the transition from classically to alternatively activated macrophages [74]. M2 macrophages, lacking the phagocytic activity, are involved in the resolution of the inflammatory response, the promotion of myoblast proliferation and in the differentiation of myotubes, contributing to the progression of the myogenic program in regenerating muscles [75,76]. To support the pivotal role of macrophages in muscle regeneration, Liu and colleagues studied the impact of macrophagic depletion in a contusion model of muscle injury [77]. Mice treated with clodronate-containing liposomes, inducing apoptosis specifically in macrophages, showed a marked impairment in muscle regeneration with an accumulation of necrotic fibers and inflammatory cells at the site of the lesion 7 days after injury, when muscles from control animals mostly presented centronucleated fibers [77]. In addition, the damaged muscles depleted of macrophages presented a reduced expression of factors positively regulating tissue regeneration as a hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1). Satellite cells are responsive to IGF-1, a trophic factor implicated in many anabolic pathways in skeletal muscle [35]. IGF-1 is able to stimulate satellite cell proliferation by promoting the activation of the Akt/FoxO1 pathway, whilst in post-mitotic myoblasts can induce myogenic differentiation by modulating regulatory networks [78,79]. Furthermore, IGF-1 has been reported as a modulator of the inflammatory response in injured muscles, playing a central role during regeneration [80]. Interfering with the macrophagic production of IGF-1, Tonkin and colleagues reported an imbalance between M1 and M2 populations in regenerating muscles, leading to the impaired tissue repair. Another soluble mediator released by activated macrophages and influencing satellite cell behavior is IL-6 [81,82]. Transiently increased levels of IL-6 are physiologically required to induce satellite cell proliferation under regenerative conditions, and this homeostatic mechanism was found deregulated in transgenic mice lacking the expression of this specific myokine [83].

(p5.3) Both IGF-1 and IL-6, along with Follistatin and Wnt factors, are also produced and released by another peculiar cell population in skeletal muscle environment, namely fibroadipogenic progenitors (FAPs) [84,85], which are lineage neg. /Sca1 pos. /CD34 pos. /α7integrin neg. cells. Satellite cells and Fibro-adipogenic Progenitors (FAPs) present a reciprocal regulation in muscle tissue, and their interactions are critical for an efficient regenerative process. Indeed, FAPs represent a multipotent cell population of non-myogenic progenitors with a pivotal role in supporting myogenic cells during muscle regeneration. In particular, FAPs are involved in the paracrine regulation of the initial stages of muscle healing through the secretion of trophic and pro-myogenic mediators, being rapidly mobilized when muscle damage occurs. In vitro studies reported that FAPs not only promoted SCs proliferation but also influenced the commitment of myoblasts to terminal differentiation [84,86]. Culturing myogenic progenitors in the presence of FAPs resulted in the downmodulation of early markers of quiescent and activated SCs and in the enhanced expression of myogenic markers as MyoD and myogenin [84]. The influence of FAPs in modulating muscle environment and promoting reparative myogenesis is known to be transient and finely regulated. In fact, the excess of FAPs resulted from a physiologic regeneration is subject to clearance mechanisms mainly mediated by apoptotic stimuli derived from immune cells and satellite cells, whereas proliferating progenitors repristinated the quiescent state [86,87]. Furthermore, FAPs can differentiate in myofibroblasts which are designated to the production of extracellular matrix components, constituting a proper scaffold for newly generated myofibers further allowing their alignment.

(p5.4) The production and remodeling of Extracellular Matrix (ECM) represent another critical step in muscle regeneration since the ECM components not only serve as physical support for regenerating fibers but also provide mechanical and biochemical signals for SCs, by influencing the retention and activity of secreted mediators in muscle milieu [88][89][90]. In this context the temporary action of FAPs in inducing regenerative fibrogenesis has been reported to be necessary for muscle regeneration [39,91]. Accordingly, a negative impact of the genetic or pharmacologic ablation of FAPs on regenerative myogenesis has been described. Nilotinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been used as a pharmacologic approach to inhibit FAPs proliferation during muscle regeneration. This treatment induced a significant reduction of the transient ECM deposition after acute damage and marked impairment of SCs proliferation, thus leading to a defective regeneration [91].

(p5.5) A large amount of ECM components, including collagen VI, derived from muscle connective tissue (MCT) fibroblasts which can be recognized by the expression of Tcf4. In particular, collagen VI has been involved in the prevention of myogenic commitment and in the promotion of self-renewal in activated satellite cells [92]. MCT fibroblasts have been detected in close association with satellite cells in vivo and are thought to influence their activity. In fact, SCs in murine muscles depleted of Tcf4 pos. fibroblasts showed an impaired ability to proliferate upon traumatic stimuli, undergoing a premature differentiation [39].

(p5.6) Other important players in muscle regeneration are endothelial cells (ECs) of blood vessels since angiogenesis contributes to muscle plasticity and changes in vascular system are observed during regenerative processes [93,94]. In vivo and in vitro studies revealed that ECs exert a pro-myogenic activity on muscle progenitor cells (MPCs) by stimulating their migration, proliferation and terminal differentiation [94]. The reciprocal stimulation between ECs and MPCs has been associated to the secretion of molecular mediators as Apelin (APLN) that promotes myogenesis/angiogenesis, Oncostatin M (OSM) which exerts both stimulatory and inhibitory actions on angiogenesis and myogenesis, and Periostin (POSTN) stimulating angiogenesis and later stages of myogenic differentiation. Indeed, inhibitors of APLN, OSM and POSTN impaired both angiogenesis and myogenesis in vitro and muscle regeneration in vivo [94]. The effective restoration of functional muscle tissue after the injury occurs when regenerated myofibers are terminally differentiated and when the vascular bed and functional connections with nerves have been restored. The restoration of neuro-muscular junctions occurs within few weeks after injury and represents the final stage of muscle regeneration/maturation. This process must be also finely regulated and occurs only when the regenerating myofibers completed the differentiative program. Satellite cells also play a critical role in this process since they have been identified as a source of semaphorin 3A (Sema3A). This neural chemorepellent factor avoids a premature motor neuron reattachment inhibiting the establishment of a synaptic contact on damaged or not completely mature myofibers [95]. On the other hand, Sema3A promotes the myogenic differentiation of satellite cells [95][96][97], suggesting an SC-mediated control of tissue repair exerted by preventing an improper innervation and thus regulating the spatiotemporal progression of muscle regeneration.
## (s6) Other Myogenic Populations Contributing to Muscle Regeneration
(p6.0) Satellite cells are considered the primary players of regenerative myogenesis. However, it has been proposed that other non-muscle stem cells and progenitors, including endothelial-associated cells [98], interstitial cells [99][100][101], vessel-associated stem cells [102,103], and bone marrowderived stem cells [104,105] can contribute to muscle regeneration, supporting the activity of satellite cells.

(p6.1) In particular, a specific subpopulation of circulating hematopoietic/endothelial progenitors has been identified in human blood. These stem cells, expressing AC133 antigen, have been shown the capability to differentiate into myoblasts in vitro and to occupy the satellite cell niche in vivo [106]. In another work, a skeletal muscle side population (SP), has been recognized in muscle tissue and identified as CD45 neg. /c-Kit neg. /Sca-1 pos. /Abcg2 pos. cells [104,[107][108][109][110]. Skeletal muscle SP cells, exerting myogenic functions in muscle tissue, mostly originate from somites and can be divided into interstitial SP cells and satellite-SP cells, according to their specific anatomic location [110]. It has been observed that SP cells residing in muscular interstitium can contribute to muscle repair after injury, although they lack spontaneous myogenic activity in vitro [107]. In contrast, satellite-SP cells have been indicated as possible progenitors of satellite cells residing in close association with mature myofibers and maintaining their location even after single fiber isolation [110]. Other multipotent progenitors involved in adult myogenesis are vessel-associated stem cells with the mesodermal origin and elevated myogenic activity. In particular mesoangioblasts (MABs), originally isolated from the embryonic dorsal aorta, have been recognized in postnatal skeletal muscle and heart as multipotent progenitors associ-ated with small vessels [102,103]. These progenitor/stem cells are known to express endothelial-vascular and pericytes markers and have been shown to share a common signature with FAPs [103,111,112]. However, MABs exhibited a clear myogenic activity both in vitro and in vivo, differentiating into skeletal and smooth muscle [102,113,114]. In addition, aorta-derived stem cells have shown to exert a therapeutic potential in preclinical and clinical studies of muscle pathologies [113][114][115]. A class of progenitors correlated with MABs are pericytes, which are thought to derive from prenatal mesoangioblasts. It has been suggested that pericyte cells represent the interstitial progeny of prenatal MABs which can leave their endothelial location during development, acquiring a pericyte-like phenotype [111]. Pericytes exert myogenic activity in vitro [116,117] and are known to contribute to postnatal muscle growth and regenerative myogenesis, being also able to join the satellite cell compartment [116][117][118][119]. However, pericytes might also represent a heterogeneous population. Birbrair and colleagues identified two subtypes of pericytes in the skeletal muscle interstitium: type-1 pericytes, expressing NG2 marker and negative for Nestin; type-2 cells Nestin pos. /NG2 pos. [119]. In particular, while type-1 subtype is involved in fatty tissue accumulation and lacks myogenic activity in vitro and in vivo, type-2 cells have been identified as the myogenic subpopulation of pericytes in skeletal muscle [119].
## (s7) INTRINSIC AND EXTRINSIC ALTERATIONS OF STEM CELL BIOLOGY IN AGING AND DISEASES
(p7.0) Skeletal muscle tissue is known to retain elevated adaptive capabilities, being able to dynamically respond to metabolic changes and physical insults. However, it has been extensively described that the ability of muscle tissue to support homeostatic changes and regenerative processes is impaired during aging and diseases [120,121]. Aged muscles present a decline in the ability to respond to hypertrophic stimuli and to recovery after traumatic events. Since the SCs reservoir is mainly involved in muscle growth and repair, the intrinsic alteration of satellite cells accumulated throughout lifespan has been proposed as a key contributor to muscle weakening during aging. Genome-wide analysis on SCs derived from a range of healthy individuals, from 21 to 78 years of age, revealed that SCs accumulated a number of mutations every year [122]. These mutations occurring during aging seem to affect genes involved in SCs activity. In particular, it has been reported that SCs from human biopsies showed an impaired myogenic differentiation in vitro, which was directly correlated with the average number of carrying mutations, suggesting a novel mechanism contributing to the loss of muscle mass maintenance in elderly [122].

(p7.1) Another proposed factor involved in the intrinsic alteration of SCs behaviour is telomere shortening that occurs at every cell division. Reduced levels in adult cells of telomerase, the enzyme responsible for telomeric DNA adjunction, implicated that subsequent SCs division throughout life could progressively reduce telomeres, until reaching the Hayflik minimum and thus proliferative senescence [123][124][125][126]. In spite of what reported in healthy individuals, a significant reduction of satellite cell telomeres has been described in patients affected by Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) [126,127]. DMD is a genetic disease due to the ab-sence of a functional dystrophin protein and is characterized by extensive muscle degeneration, inflammation and impaired regeneration. The extent of necrosis in dystrophic muscle continuously stimulates regenerative processes which resulted in an inefficient tissue repair and led to the progressive exhaustion of the SCs pool [82,128]. In this context, several studies ascribed, at least to some extent, the impaired regenerative potential of SCs to premature senescence induced by their excessive proliferation. Indeed, SCs deriving from DMD patients showed a marked reduction of telomeres fragment length compared to healthy subjects. In addition, the progressive shortening of telomeres during the disease course was correlated with the delay of regenerative foci in older DMD patients, suggesting that satellite cell senescence could be involved in the abortive regeneration observed in dystrophic muscles at later stages of the pathology [126,127].
