# SURVEY AND SUMMARY Genomics of bacteria and archaea: the emerging dynamic view of the prokaryotic world

CorpusID: 9840217 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/631aed33530c24035a07c43128c70e89410489ed](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/631aed33530c24035a07c43128c70e89410489ed)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Modern genomics of prokaryotes (and, generally, cellular life forms) is a rare scientific field whose birth date can be pinpointed precisely. It is natural to associate the advent of the modern era in genomics with the appearance of the first complete genome, namely, the genome of the pathogenic bacterium Haemophilus influenzae (1).

(p0.1) Very shortly, thereafter, the second bacterial genome, that of Mycoplasma genitalium, was sequenced (2), and modern comparative genomics was born. A considerable amount of sequences from diverse organisms was available prior to these reports, but the first fully sequenced bacterial genome forever changed the state of the art in genome analysis. The availability of complete genomes (i.e. with nearly all the genetic material from the given organism sequenced as opposed to, say, 90%, so that all genes are available for analysis) is crucial to the entire enterprise of comparative genomics for at least two related but distinct, fundamental reasons: (i) some caveats notwithstanding (see below), the availability of complete genome sequences (or, more precisely, full complements of genes) provides for the possibility to identify sets of orthologs, i.e. genes that evolved from the same ancestral gene in the common ancestor of the compared genomes, (ii) comparison of complete genomes (gene sets) is the necessary condition to determine not only which genes are present in any particular genome but also which ones are absent (3,4). The ability to delineate sets of orthologs and to pinpoint missing genes is indispensable for genome-based reconstruction of an organism's metabolism and other functional systems and for reconstructions of genome evolution.
## (s2) THE PROKARYOTIC GENE AND GENOME SPACES
(p2.0) Clusters of orthologs and classification of genes by phyletic patterns: the three classes of prokaryotic genes One of the early and crucial generalizations of comparative genomics of prokaryotes is the readily recognizable evolutionary conservation of protein sequences encoded in the majority of the genes in each sequenced genome (27). More specifically, for a substantial majority of the genes, there are confidently identifiable orthologs in other, relatively distant bacteria and/or archaea. Orthologs are traditionally defined as genes that descend from the same ancestral gene in the common ancestor of the compared species (28). Of course, this crucial concept of evolutionary biology was originally defined in the context of evolutionary analysis of animal or plant species where the notion of the common ancestral species is unambiguous (29,30). This is not the case in bacteria and archaea where horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is pervasive, and as the result, at least, in distant organisms, genes often have different histories (see below). Nevertheless, empirically, using the simple notion of a bidirectional best hit (BBH), it has been shown (shortly after the first complete genome sequences became available) that, for the majority of genes in any sequenced bacterial or archaeal genome, apparent counterparts (defined as orthologs, in a generalization of the original definition) were readily identifiable in other genomes (31,32). These findings stimulated the development of the notion of clusters of orthologous genes (COGs) and methods for their identification (33,34). Identification of COGs is a nontrivial task owing to evolutionary processes that confound orthologous relationships between genes, in particular, lineagespecific expansion of paralogous gene families that is common in archaea and bacteria (35), even if not nearly as prominent as it is in eukaryotes, and leads to coorthologous relationship between multiple paralogous genes in the compared genomes (28). Accordingly, the definition of a BBH needs to be generalized to include many-to-many (and many-to-one) relationships between genes [hence the original, rather awkward explication of COGs as Cluster of Orthologous Groups (33)]. Additional complications in the identification of orthologs stem from changes in domain architectures of proteins and differential loss of paralogous genes. Following the original COG study, a variety of increasingly sophisticated methods for identification of clusters of orthologs have been developed, some turning to explicit, genome-wide phylogenetic analysis (36)(37)(38)(39)(40). The latest and most comprehensive advancement in this direction is the EggNog project that relied on the COG collection as the nucleus of a new database of orthologous gene clusters including 312 bacterial and 26 archaeal genomes (41).

(p2.1) The coverage of selected archaeal and bacterial genomes in the EggNOG database is shown in Figure 5. With the notable exception of some bacteria with the largest genomes, such as Pirellula sp. and some archaea that belong to distinct, apparently, fast-evolving lineages, such as N. equitans, in most of the sequenced genomes, 80% of the genes (or more, in cases when closely related genomes are available) belong to clusters of orthologs. Thus, the great majority of proteins encoded in each sequenced archaeal or bacterial genome show, at least, some degree of evolutionary conservation within the explored portion of the prokaryotic gene space. However, the distribution of the clusters by the number of included organisms immediately reveals the flip side of the coin: the great majority of the clusters include only a few organisms (Figure 6a). A more detailed examination of this distribution reveals distinct structure in the prokaryotic sequence space. The distribution is, essentially, an exponential decay curve, with a rise at the left end that corresponds to the universal or nearly universal clusters. Assuming that the distribution is described by an exponent(s), the best approximation is obtained with a sum of three exponential functions (Figure 6b). The first exponent represents the conserved (universal or nearly universal) gene core (70 clusters), the second exponent describes the 'shell' of moderately common genes (5700 clusters), and the third exponent corresponds to the 'cloud' (24 000 clusters) that consists of genes shared by a small number of organisms. The possibility exists that the size of the cloud is somewhat inflated, i.e. some of the small clusters actually include highly diverged orthologous genes and have to be merged. However, the same overall shape of the distribution has been seen in independent studies, e.g. the recent analysis of archaeal COGs (42), suggesting that it reflects the actual structure of the prokaryotic gene space that consists of:

(p2.2) (i) a miniscule fraction of highly conserved genes, (ii) a much (two orders of magnitude) larger set of moderately conserved genes, (iii) an even greater number of narrowly distributed genes.

(p2.3) This diversity of phyletic (phylogenetic) patterns (a term often used to describe the distribution of genes across organisms) reflects major trends in prokaryotic evolution, namely, extensive horizontal transfer of genes, pervasive gene loss and functional plasticity of many cellular systems (see below).

(p2.4) In the current databases, there is also a large number of archaeal and bacterial genes that encode protein sequences without detectable similarity to any other available protein sequences; accordingly, these genes are often denoted ORFans (43,44). Typically, ORFans comprise 10-15% of the predicted genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes, depending on the availability of closely related genomes ( Figure 7) Figure 5. Coverage of bacterial and archaeal genomes with cluster of orthologous genes. The COGs were from the EggNOG database (41), and the proteins from each genome were assigned to these clusters using a modified COGNITOR method (42). flattering name ELFs, Evil Little Fellows, and it has been argued that many of them are false predictions rather than actual protein-coding genes (45). Furthermore, it has been proposed that the majority of those ORFans that are real genes were derived from bacteriophages and, accordingly, are characterized by high horizontal mobility although, occasionally, they can be recruited for a cellular function and, accordingly, fixed in a bacterial or archaeal lineage (46). Recent estimates from metagenomic surveys of bacteriophages suggest that the diversity of phage sequences is vast and remains, largely, unexplored (47). Therefore, it does seem plausible that a major fraction of bacterial and archaeal ORFans derives from the still poorly explored but, certainly, vast bacteriophage gene pool. Obviously, it is impossible to rule out and, indeed, is most likely that a fraction of the ORFans have orthologs in multiple prokaryotic genomes that avoid detection because of their rapid evolution, a possibility that is not incompatible with the origin of most ORFans in the phage gene pool. When elements of the gene space are represented as clusters of orthologs, it appears that ORFans can be reasonably merged into the 'cloud' of poorly represented, rare genes. This compounded 'cloud' obviously dominates the gene space when each cluster of orthologous genes is taken as a point. This is, however, not the case when individual genomes are considered: in each genome, the majority of the genes belong to the moderately conserved 'shell' (Figure 7). Of course, there is no paradox involved because, although the fraction of 'cloud' genes and ORFans in each genome is relatively small, they are, by definition (nearly) unique and, combined, account for the great majority of points in the gene space.

(p2.5) Detailed extrapolation of the expansion of the gene space with further bacterial and archaeal genome sequencing and a reliable estimate of the actual size of this space are hard to obtain, and such analysis is beyond the scope of the present article. Nevertheless, considering the vast diversity of bacteriophages revealed in metagenomic analyses, it appears most likely that the number of elements of the prokaryotic gene space will increase by orders of magnitude, and almost entirely, through expansion of the 'cloud'.
## (s4) PRINCIPLES OF PROKARYOTIC GENOME ARCHITECTURE AND ITS EVOLUTION
(p4.0) Almost immediately after the release of the first complete genome sequences, it became apparent that the gene order in bacterial and archaeal genomes is relatively poorly conserved (4,67-69), dramatically less so than genes themselves (see above). To analyze conservation of gene orders, one needs to obtain a robust set of orthologous genes between the compared genomes. Once such a set of orthologous genes is defined, it becomes straightforward to assess the gene order conservation by means of a dotplot (one of the earliest representations of nucleotide and protein sequence similarity) where each point corresponds to a pair of orthologs. Examination of these plots reveals rapid divergence of gene order in prokaryotes ( Figure 13) so that, even between closely related organisms, the chromosomal colinearity is broken at several points ( Figure 13a), moderately diverged organisms show only a few extended collinear regions (Figure 13b and c), whereas for any pair of relatively distant organisms, the plot looks like the map of the night sky ( Figure 13d). Disruption of synteny during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes typically shows a clear and striking pattern, with an X-shape seen in the dot-plots (Figure 11b and c). It has been proposed that the X-pattern is generated by symmetric chromosomal inversions around the origin of replication (70). The underlying cause of these inversions could be the high frequency of recombination in replication forks that, in the circular chromosomes of bacteria and archaea, are normally located on both sides of and at the same distance from the origin site (71).

(p4.1) Most prokaryotic genomes contain a single, bidirectional replication origin site, and this origin is a special point in the genome that defines the global genome architecture (72). By definition, a bidirectional origin is the switch point between the leading and lagging strand that in bacteria and archaea are replicated in different modes, continuous and discontinuous, respectively. In most prokaryotes, the leading and lagging strands show substantial asymmetries in nucleotide composition, gene orientation and gene content (73). A diagnostic distinction between the leading and lagging strands is the difference in   GC-and AT-skews, i.e. excess of purines or pyrimidines (violation of Chargaff's second parity rule). The underlying causes of the GC/AT-skews are thought to reflect an interplay of selective and mutational forces, i.e. selection against secondary structure formation in the leading strand and differential increase of different types of mutations in single-stranded DNA (74,75). The GC/AT-skew patterns in the leading and lagging strands of bacterial and archaeal chromosomes are consistent and significant enough to (usually) allow an accurate prediction of the origin position in an uncharacterized prokaryotic genome (76,77). The leading and lagging strands also show asymmetric (to a widely varying degree in different genomes) distributions of genes, with a greater density of genes found on the leading strand. Moreover, a substantial majority of these genes, especially, highly expressed and/or essential ones, e.g. those coding for ribosomal RNAs and proteins, are cooriented with replication (78)(79)(80)(81). Usually, the patterns of gene distribution are explained by different versions of the polymerase collision model that postulates selection for minimizing head-on collision between the replicating DNA polymerase and the transcribing RNA polymerase that are both more likely and more damaging than codirectional collisions (73,78,79). The exact mechanisms that affect the overall layout of bacterial chromosomes require much further analysis and cannot be discussed here in detail but the general conclusion seems clear that the mechanisms and rate of chromosomal replication are important factors that determine the genome architecture.

(p4.2) One of the earliest and central concepts of bacterial genetics is the operon, a group of cotranscribed and coregulated genes (82). Although enormous amount of variation on the simple theme of regulation by the Lac repressor developed by Jacob and Monod (83) has been discovered in the years since, the operon has stood the test of comparative genomics as the principle of organization of bacterial and archaeal genomes (84). Operons, particularly, those that encode physically interacting proteins, are much stronger conserved during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes than large-scale synteny. Comparative analysis of gene order in bacteria and archaea reveals relatively few operons that are shared by a broad range of organisms. As noticed early on, these highly conserved operons typically encode physically interacting proteins (68), a trend that is readily interpretable in terms of selection against the deleterious effects of imbalance between protein complex subunits (85). The most striking illustration of this trend is the ribosomal superoperon that includes over 50 genes of ribosomal proteins that are found in different combinations and arrangements in all sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes (86,87). Analysis of the ribosomal superoperon and other, smaller groups of partially conserved operons led to the notion of an u¨beroperon (88) or a conserved gene neighborhood (89), an array of overlapping, partially conserved genes strings (known or predicted operons). In addition to the ribosomal superoperon, striking examples of conserved neighborhoods are the group of predicted overlapping operons that encode subunits of the archaeal exosomal complex (90) and the Cas genes that comprise an antivirus defense system (see also below) (89,91,92). Analysis of such large, partially conserved neighborhoods has high predictive value and can lead to the identification of novel functional systems, as in the latter two cases. The majority of genes in the u¨beroperons encode proteins involved in the same process and/or complex but highly conserved arrangements including genes with seemingly unrelated functions exist as well, e.g. the common occurrence of the enolase gene in ribosomal neighborhoods or genes for proteasome subunits in the archaeal exosome neighborhood. The presence of these seemingly unrelated genes can be explained either by 'gene sharing', i.e. multiple functionalities of the respective proteins, or by 'genomic hitchhiking', a case when an operon combines genes without specific functional links but with similar requirements for expression (89).

(p4.3) The majority of operons do not belong to complex, interconnected neighborhood but instead are simple strings of two to four genes, with variations in their arrangement (69,86,89,93). Identical or similar, in terms of gene organization, operons are often found in highly diverse organisms and in different functional systems. A case in point is numerous metabolite transport operons that consist of similarly arranged genes encoding the transmebrane permease, ATPase and periplasmic subunits of the so-called ABC transporters (94). The persistence of such common operons in diverse bacteria and archaea has been interpreted within the framework of the selfish operon concept, the notion that operons are maintained not so much because of the functional importance of coregulation of the constituent genes but due to the selfish character of these compact genetic units that are prone to horizontal spread among prokaryotes (95-97) (we will return to this concept in the discussion of horizontal gene transfer subsequently).

(p4.4) A systematic comparison of the arrangements of orthologous genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes revealed a relatively small fraction of conserved (predicted) operons and a much greater abundance of unique directons, i.e. strings of genes transcribed in the same direction and separated by short intergenic sequences (83,86). In benchmark studies, directons have been shown to be surprisingly accurate predictors of operons (98). Thus, the organization of archaeal and bacterial genomes seem to be governed by the operonic principle, with a small number of highly conserved operons and a much larger number of unique or rare ones. In this respect, the pattern of operon conservation is reminiscent of the distribution of clusters of orthologs that includes a small, highly conserved core, a larger, moderately conserved 'shell', and an expansive 'cloud' of (nearly) unique genes ( Figure 6).

(p4.5) The degree of genome 'operonization' widely differs among bacteria and archaea; some genomes, e.g. that of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima, are almost fully covered by (predicted) operons, whereas others, such as those of most Cyanobacteria, seem to contain few operons (86,99). What determines the extent of operonization in an organism remains unclear, although it stands to reason that this degree depends on the balance between intensity of recombination, the horizontal gene flux and selective forces that oppose disruption of operons.

(p4.6) Almost immediately after the release of the first complete genome sequences, it became apparent that the gene order in bacterial and archaeal genomes is relatively poorly conserved (4,67-69), dramatically less so than genes themselves (see above). To analyze conservation of gene orders, one needs to obtain a robust set of orthologous genes between the compared genomes. Once such a set of orthologous genes is defined, it becomes straightforward to assess the gene order conservation by means of a dotplot (one of the earliest representations of nucleotide and protein sequence similarity) where each point corresponds to a pair of orthologs. Examination of these plots reveals rapid divergence of gene order in prokaryotes ( Figure 13) so that, even between closely related organisms, the chromosomal colinearity is broken at several points ( Figure 13a), moderately diverged organisms show only a few extended collinear regions (Figure 13b and c), whereas for any pair of relatively distant organisms, the plot looks like the map of the night sky ( Figure 13d). Disruption of synteny during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes typically shows a clear and striking pattern, with an X-shape seen in the dot-plots (Figure 11b and c). It has been proposed that the X-pattern is generated by symmetric chromosomal inversions around the origin of replication (70). The underlying cause of these inversions could be the high frequency of recombination in replication forks that, in the circular chromosomes of bacteria and archaea, are normally located on both sides of and at the same distance from the origin site (71).

(p4.7) Most prokaryotic genomes contain a single, bidirectional replication origin site, and this origin is a special point in the genome that defines the global genome architecture (72). By definition, a bidirectional origin is the switch point between the leading and lagging strand that in bacteria and archaea are replicated in different modes, continuous and discontinuous, respectively. In most prokaryotes, the leading and lagging strands show substantial asymmetries in nucleotide composition, gene orientation and gene content (73). A diagnostic distinction between the leading and lagging strands is the difference in   GC-and AT-skews, i.e. excess of purines or pyrimidines (violation of Chargaff's second parity rule). The underlying causes of the GC/AT-skews are thought to reflect an interplay of selective and mutational forces, i.e. selection against secondary structure formation in the leading strand and differential increase of different types of mutations in single-stranded DNA (74,75). The GC/AT-skew patterns in the leading and lagging strands of bacterial and archaeal chromosomes are consistent and significant enough to (usually) allow an accurate prediction of the origin position in an uncharacterized prokaryotic genome (76,77). The leading and lagging strands also show asymmetric (to a widely varying degree in different genomes) distributions of genes, with a greater density of genes found on the leading strand. Moreover, a substantial majority of these genes, especially, highly expressed and/or essential ones, e.g. those coding for ribosomal RNAs and proteins, are cooriented with replication (78)(79)(80)(81). Usually, the patterns of gene distribution are explained by different versions of the polymerase collision model that postulates selection for minimizing head-on collision between the replicating DNA polymerase and the transcribing RNA polymerase that are both more likely and more damaging than codirectional collisions (73,78,79). The exact mechanisms that affect the overall layout of bacterial chromosomes require much further analysis and cannot be discussed here in detail but the general conclusion seems clear that the mechanisms and rate of chromosomal replication are important factors that determine the genome architecture.

(p4.8) One of the earliest and central concepts of bacterial genetics is the operon, a group of cotranscribed and coregulated genes (82). Although enormous amount of variation on the simple theme of regulation by the Lac repressor developed by Jacob and Monod (83) has been discovered in the years since, the operon has stood the test of comparative genomics as the principle of organization of bacterial and archaeal genomes (84). Operons, particularly, those that encode physically interacting proteins, are much stronger conserved during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes than large-scale synteny. Comparative analysis of gene order in bacteria and archaea reveals relatively few operons that are shared by a broad range of organisms. As noticed early on, these highly conserved operons typically encode physically interacting proteins (68), a trend that is readily interpretable in terms of selection against the deleterious effects of imbalance between protein complex subunits (85). The most striking illustration of this trend is the ribosomal superoperon that includes over 50 genes of ribosomal proteins that are found in different combinations and arrangements in all sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes (86,87). Analysis of the ribosomal superoperon and other, smaller groups of partially conserved operons led to the notion of an u¨beroperon (88) or a conserved gene neighborhood (89), an array of overlapping, partially conserved genes strings (known or predicted operons). In addition to the ribosomal superoperon, striking examples of conserved neighborhoods are the group of predicted overlapping operons that encode subunits of the archaeal exosomal complex (90) and the Cas genes that comprise an antivirus defense system (see also below) (89,91,92). Analysis of such large, partially conserved neighborhoods has high predictive value and can lead to the identification of novel functional systems, as in the latter two cases. The majority of genes in the u¨beroperons encode proteins involved in the same process and/or complex but highly conserved arrangements including genes with seemingly unrelated functions exist as well, e.g. the common occurrence of the enolase gene in ribosomal neighborhoods or genes for proteasome subunits in the archaeal exosome neighborhood. The presence of these seemingly unrelated genes can be explained either by 'gene sharing', i.e. multiple functionalities of the respective proteins, or by 'genomic hitchhiking', a case when an operon combines genes without specific functional links but with similar requirements for expression (89).

(p4.9) The majority of operons do not belong to complex, interconnected neighborhood but instead are simple strings of two to four genes, with variations in their arrangement (69,86,89,93). Identical or similar, in terms of gene organization, operons are often found in highly diverse organisms and in different functional systems. A case in point is numerous metabolite transport operons that consist of similarly arranged genes encoding the transmebrane permease, ATPase and periplasmic subunits of the so-called ABC transporters (94). The persistence of such common operons in diverse bacteria and archaea has been interpreted within the framework of the selfish operon concept, the notion that operons are maintained not so much because of the functional importance of coregulation of the constituent genes but due to the selfish character of these compact genetic units that are prone to horizontal spread among prokaryotes (95-97) (we will return to this concept in the discussion of horizontal gene transfer subsequently).

(p4.10) A systematic comparison of the arrangements of orthologous genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes revealed a relatively small fraction of conserved (predicted) operons and a much greater abundance of unique directons, i.e. strings of genes transcribed in the same direction and separated by short intergenic sequences (83,86). In benchmark studies, directons have been shown to be surprisingly accurate predictors of operons (98). Thus, the organization of archaeal and bacterial genomes seem to be governed by the operonic principle, with a small number of highly conserved operons and a much larger number of unique or rare ones. In this respect, the pattern of operon conservation is reminiscent of the distribution of clusters of orthologs that includes a small, highly conserved core, a larger, moderately conserved 'shell', and an expansive 'cloud' of (nearly) unique genes ( Figure 6).

(p4.11) The degree of genome 'operonization' widely differs among bacteria and archaea; some genomes, e.g. that of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima, are almost fully covered by (predicted) operons, whereas others, such as those of most Cyanobacteria, seem to contain few operons (86,99). What determines the extent of operonization in an organism remains unclear, although it stands to reason that this degree depends on the balance between intensity of recombination, the horizontal gene flux and selective forces that oppose disruption of operons.
## (s5) PRINCIPLES OF REGULATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION IN BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: AN OVERHAUL IN THE ERA OF COMPARATIVE GENOMICS
(p5.0) Bacteria and archaea possess distinct, elegantly structured systems of gene-expression regulation, and comparative genomics has dramatically changed the existing views of their organizational principles, distribution in nature and evolution. The operon concept of Jacob and Monod (82), which was introduced above as the organizing principle of the local architecture of bacterial and archaeal genome, is also the paradigm of gene expression regulation and signal transduction in these organisms (84). Under the Jacob-Monod model, the regulator (the lac-repressor in their classic study) is a sensor of extracellular or intracellular cues (in this case, the concentration of lactose) that affect the regulator protein conformation and, indirectly, the expression state of the operon (in the case of the lacoperon, the repressor binds lactose, dissociates from the operator and allows transcription). Over the 47 years that elapsed since Jacob-Monod's breakthrough, numerous variations on this subject have been discovered, including regulators that symmetrically affect transcription of adjacent divergent genes, and global regulators that regulate numerous, dispersed genes and operons, as opposed to specific regulation of a single operon under the Jacob-Monod model (100)(101)(102). The most prominent global regulators are the catabolite repressor protein (CRP) (103,104) and the stress response (SOS) regulator LexA (105). Considering the discovery of these and other global regulators, the operon concept was amended with the notion of a regulon, a set of genes that share the same cis regulatory signal (operator) and are regulated by the same regulator protein (106,107). Comparative genomic analysis of regulons has revealed their extreme evolutionary plasticity, with substantial differences found between regulons seen even among closely related organisms (108)(109)(110). A global transcription regulator, such as LexA, can be widespread and highly conserved in diverse bacteria but the gene composition of the LexA regulon is highly variable. The plasticity of regulons parallels the variability of genome architectures (see above) in support of the notion that regulation of gene expression and genome architecture are tightly linked in the evolution of archaea and bacteria.

(p5.1) In a striking contrast to the variability and plasticity of regulons, there is a remarkable unity in the architecture and structure of bacterial and archaeal transcription regulators (111)(112)(113). Typically, these regulators consist of a small molecule-binding sensor domain and a DNA-binding domain. The overwhelming majority of the DNAbinding domains are variations on the same structural theme, helix-turn-helix (113). Less common DNAbinding domains include ribbon-helix-helix and Zn-ribbon (111).
## (s8) THE PROKARYOTIC MOBILOME
(p8.0) As noted in the preceding section, hardly any COG is refractory to HGT in principle but, certainly, some genes are much more equal than others in that respect. A substantial part of the prokaryotic genetic material consists of selfish elements for which horizontal mobility is the dominant mode of dissemination and that have been aptly termed the mobilome (216). A full-fledged discussion of the mobilome requires a separate article(s) but in order to sketch an emerging coherent view of the prokaryotic world, we must briefly summarize here the salient features of this class of genetic elements. The mobilome consists of bacteriophages, plasmids, transposable elements and genes that are often associated with them and regularly become passengers such as restriction-modification (RM) and toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. It seems natural that, inasmuch as viruses and plasmids are mobile by definition, so are the systems of defense. The mobilome is inextricably connected with the 'main' prokaryotic chromosomes. Viruses (bacteriophages) and many plasmids systematically integrate into chromosomes, either reversibly, in which case they often mobilize chromosomal genes or irreversibly whereby a mobile element becomes 'domesticated', giving rise to resident genes, initially, of the ORFan class (216,217). It is well known since the classic experiments of Jacob and Wollman (218) that conjugative plasmids can mediate the transfer of large segments of bacterial chromosomes. The discovery of the GTAs, that seem to be specialized HGT vectors, further emphasizes the existence of regular channels of communication between the mobilome and the chromosomes.

(p8.1) Transfer of antibiotic resistance and secondary metabolic capabilities on plasmids are textbook examples of bacterial mobilome dynamics but the role of plasmids extends far beyond such relatively narrow biological areas (219). Actually, the boundary between chromosomes and plasmids is fuzzy (220)(221)(222). Plasmids are replicons (typically, circular but in some cases, linear) that, similarly to prokaryotic chromosomes, carry an origin site and encode at least some of the proteins involved in the plasmid replication and partitioning (223). The key proteins involved in plasmid and chromosome partitioning, in particular, ATPases of the FtsK-HerA family are homologous throughout the prokaryotic world, a fact that emphasizes common evolutionary origins and strategies of diverse prokaryotic replicons (224).

(p8.2) The 'canonical' genomes of numerous bacteria and archaea include, in addition to the 'main' chromosome(s), one or more relatively stable, essential, large extrachromosomal elements, often described as megaplasmids (221). Megaplasmids can be remarkably persistent during evolution. For instance, it has been shown that the single megaplasmid of Thermus thermophilus is homologous to one of the two megaplasmids of Deinococcus radiodurans and, by implication, derives from the common ancestor of these related but highly diverged bacteria (225). However, over the course of evolution of this ancient bacterial group, the megaplasmids have accumulated (relative to their size) many more differences in their gene repertoires than chromosomes. Moreover, the megaplasmids carry numerous horizontally transferred genes including genes from thermophilic organisms that apparently were acquired by the Thermus lineage and appear to be important for the thermophylic life style (225). Thus, although megaplasmids can persist in prokaryotic lineages over long evolutionary spans, they display greater genomic plasticity than chromosomes, and appear to be act as reservoirs of HGT.

(p8.3) All sequenced prokaryotic genomes contain traces of integration of multiple plasmids and phages (216). It is particularly notable that most of the archaeal genomes possess multiple versions of the HerA-NurA operon that encodes key component of the plasmid partitioning machinery (224). Thus, replicon fusion is likely to be a relatively common event in prokaryotes, and over the course of evolution, such fusion might have been a major factor in shaping the observed architecture of prokaryotic chromosomes.

(p8.4) Defense and stress response systems, in particular, RM and TA systems can be considered special parts of the mobilome. Comparative analysis of these systems shows evidence of rapid evolution and frequent HGT, and they are frequently found in plasmid and bacteriophage genomes (226). Despite their enormous molecular diversity, RM and TA systems function on the same principle: they are comprised of a toxin, a protein that destroys the chromosomal DNA (restriction enzymes), blocks translation (RNA endonuclease toxins) or kills the cell by making holes in the membrane. Cell death is prevented by specific methylation of the DNA, in the case of RM systems or by neutralization of the toxin by the antitoxin in the case of TA systems, either through toxin proteinantitoxin protein interaction or through abrogation of the translation of the toxin mRNA by the antitoxin antisense RNA. These systems possess properties of selfish elements: when the respective genes are lost from a cell, the cell typically dies either because the toxin is more stable than the antitoxin, and its activity is unleashed once the antitoxin degrades but cannot be replenished (227,228) or because of the differential effects of dilution on the restriction and modification enzymes (229). Because of the same property of TA systems, there is strong selection for plasmids carrying TA genes that ensure plasmid 'addiction' by killing cells that have lost the plasmid. The currently known TA systems are likely to comprise the proverbial tips of the iceberg as bacterial and archaeal genomes carry a great variety of operons whose properties mimic those of TA operons (a pair of genes that encode small proteins and occur as a stable combination in diverse genomes and genomic neighborhoods) but that have not been experimentally characterized (K.S. Makarova, Y.I.W. and E.V.K., unpublished data).

(p8.5) Recently, a novel and highly unusual class of defense systems has been shown to exist in approximately half of bacteria and archaea whose genomes have been sequenced (230). This system is centered around arrays of so-called CRISPR repeats (231) and has been accordingly denoted CAS (CRISPR-Associated System) (92). The CAS systems includes 50 distinct gene families (91,92) and comes across as the second largest, after the ribosomal superoperon, array of connected gene neighborhoods in prokaryotic genomes (89,232). The CAS system protects prokaryotic cells against phages and plasmids via a 'Lamarckian mechanism', whereby a fragment of a phage or plasmid gene is integrated into the CRISPR locus on the bacterial chromosome and is subsequently transcribed and utilized, via still poorly characterized mechanisms, to abrogate the selfish agent's replication (233). The CAS system shows extreme plasticity, even among closely related isolates of bacteria and archaea, and strong evidence of extensive HGT (92,230).

(p8.6) The selected examples discussed here point to enormous, still incompletely understood diversity of the prokaryotic mobilomeand the major contribution that the mobilomes makes to the evolution of the prokaryotic genome space.

(p8.7) As noted in the preceding section, hardly any COG is refractory to HGT in principle but, certainly, some genes are much more equal than others in that respect. A substantial part of the prokaryotic genetic material consists of selfish elements for which horizontal mobility is the dominant mode of dissemination and that have been aptly termed the mobilome (216). A full-fledged discussion of the mobilome requires a separate article(s) but in order to sketch an emerging coherent view of the prokaryotic world, we must briefly summarize here the salient features of this class of genetic elements. The mobilome consists of bacteriophages, plasmids, transposable elements and genes that are often associated with them and regularly become passengers such as restriction-modification (RM) and toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. It seems natural that, inasmuch as viruses and plasmids are mobile by definition, so are the systems of defense. The mobilome is inextricably connected with the 'main' prokaryotic chromosomes. Viruses (bacteriophages) and many plasmids systematically integrate into chromosomes, either reversibly, in which case they often mobilize chromosomal genes or irreversibly whereby a mobile element becomes 'domesticated', giving rise to resident genes, initially, of the ORFan class (216,217). It is well known since the classic experiments of Jacob and Wollman (218) that conjugative plasmids can mediate the transfer of large segments of bacterial chromosomes. The discovery of the GTAs, that seem to be specialized HGT vectors, further emphasizes the existence of regular channels of communication between the mobilome and the chromosomes.

(p8.8) Transfer of antibiotic resistance and secondary metabolic capabilities on plasmids are textbook examples of bacterial mobilome dynamics but the role of plasmids extends far beyond such relatively narrow biological areas (219). Actually, the boundary between chromosomes and plasmids is fuzzy (220)(221)(222). Plasmids are replicons (typically, circular but in some cases, linear) that, similarly to prokaryotic chromosomes, carry an origin site and encode at least some of the proteins involved in the plasmid replication and partitioning (223). The key proteins involved in plasmid and chromosome partitioning, in particular, ATPases of the FtsK-HerA family are homologous throughout the prokaryotic world, a fact that emphasizes common evolutionary origins and strategies of diverse prokaryotic replicons (224).

(p8.9) The 'canonical' genomes of numerous bacteria and archaea include, in addition to the 'main' chromosome(s), one or more relatively stable, essential, large extrachromosomal elements, often described as megaplasmids (221). Megaplasmids can be remarkably persistent during evolution. For instance, it has been shown that the single megaplasmid of Thermus thermophilus is homologous to one of the two megaplasmids of Deinococcus radiodurans and, by implication, derives from the common ancestor of these related but highly diverged bacteria (225). However, over the course of evolution of this ancient bacterial group, the megaplasmids have accumulated (relative to their size) many more differences in their gene repertoires than chromosomes. Moreover, the megaplasmids carry numerous horizontally transferred genes including genes from thermophilic organisms that apparently were acquired by the Thermus lineage and appear to be important for the thermophylic life style (225). Thus, although megaplasmids can persist in prokaryotic lineages over long evolutionary spans, they display greater genomic plasticity than chromosomes, and appear to be act as reservoirs of HGT.

(p8.10) All sequenced prokaryotic genomes contain traces of integration of multiple plasmids and phages (216). It is particularly notable that most of the archaeal genomes possess multiple versions of the HerA-NurA operon that encodes key component of the plasmid partitioning machinery (224). Thus, replicon fusion is likely to be a relatively common event in prokaryotes, and over the course of evolution, such fusion might have been a major factor in shaping the observed architecture of prokaryotic chromosomes.

(p8.11) Defense and stress response systems, in particular, RM and TA systems can be considered special parts of the mobilome. Comparative analysis of these systems shows evidence of rapid evolution and frequent HGT, and they are frequently found in plasmid and bacteriophage genomes (226). Despite their enormous molecular diversity, RM and TA systems function on the same principle: they are comprised of a toxin, a protein that destroys the chromosomal DNA (restriction enzymes), blocks translation (RNA endonuclease toxins) or kills the cell by making holes in the membrane. Cell death is prevented by specific methylation of the DNA, in the case of RM systems or by neutralization of the toxin by the antitoxin in the case of TA systems, either through toxin proteinantitoxin protein interaction or through abrogation of the translation of the toxin mRNA by the antitoxin antisense RNA. These systems possess properties of selfish elements: when the respective genes are lost from a cell, the cell typically dies either because the toxin is more stable than the antitoxin, and its activity is unleashed once the antitoxin degrades but cannot be replenished (227,228) or because of the differential effects of dilution on the restriction and modification enzymes (229). Because of the same property of TA systems, there is strong selection for plasmids carrying TA genes that ensure plasmid 'addiction' by killing cells that have lost the plasmid. The currently known TA systems are likely to comprise the proverbial tips of the iceberg as bacterial and archaeal genomes carry a great variety of operons whose properties mimic those of TA operons (a pair of genes that encode small proteins and occur as a stable combination in diverse genomes and genomic neighborhoods) but that have not been experimentally characterized (K.S. Makarova, Y.I.W. and E.V.K., unpublished data).

(p8.12) Recently, a novel and highly unusual class of defense systems has been shown to exist in approximately half of bacteria and archaea whose genomes have been sequenced (230). This system is centered around arrays of so-called CRISPR repeats (231) and has been accordingly denoted CAS (CRISPR-Associated System) (92). The CAS systems includes 50 distinct gene families (91,92) and comes across as the second largest, after the ribosomal superoperon, array of connected gene neighborhoods in prokaryotic genomes (89,232). The CAS system protects prokaryotic cells against phages and plasmids via a 'Lamarckian mechanism', whereby a fragment of a phage or plasmid gene is integrated into the CRISPR locus on the bacterial chromosome and is subsequently transcribed and utilized, via still poorly characterized mechanisms, to abrogate the selfish agent's replication (233). The CAS system shows extreme plasticity, even among closely related isolates of bacteria and archaea, and strong evidence of extensive HGT (92,230).

(p8.13) The selected examples discussed here point to enormous, still incompletely understood diversity of the prokaryotic mobilomeand the major contribution that the mobilomes makes to the evolution of the prokaryotic genome space.
## (s9) THE NEW, DYNAMIC VIEW OF THE PROKARYOTIC WORLD AND THE DEMISE OF THE TREE OF LIFE
(p9.0) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).

(p9.1) Under the network vision of the prokaryotic world, archaeal and bacterial chromosomes are not envisaged as strictly defined genotypes gradually changing in time but rather as islands of temporary, relative dynamic stability that forms tightly connected (vertically and horizontally) areas of the network. The prokaryotic genome space is, obviously, not limited to chromosomes of cellular life forms but consists of a tremendous diversity of replicons including all components of the mobilome. The importance of these agents cannot be overestimated when one takes into account that metagenomic studies show that viruses are the most common entities in the biosphere, with about 10 virus particles per cell found in marine environments (47). Fusion, fission and recombination between replicons comprise the dominant mode of the genetic dynamics in the prokaryotic world. However, the notion of dynamic stability that is manifest in persistence of distinct structure in the prokaryotic world network extends also to the relationship between the genetic complements of prokaryotic cellular life forms and the mobilome. All their enormous mobility notwithstanding, selfish elements posses a core of 'hallmark' genes that only transiently appear in bacterial and archaeal chromosomes (234).

(p9.2) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).

(p9.3) Under the network vision of the prokaryotic world, archaeal and bacterial chromosomes are not envisaged as strictly defined genotypes gradually changing in time but rather as islands of temporary, relative dynamic stability that forms tightly connected (vertically and horizontally) areas of the network. The prokaryotic genome space is, obviously, not limited to chromosomes of cellular life forms but consists of a tremendous diversity of replicons including all components of the mobilome. The importance of these agents cannot be overestimated when one takes into account that metagenomic studies show that viruses are the most common entities in the biosphere, with about 10 virus particles per cell found in marine environments (47). Fusion, fission and recombination between replicons comprise the dominant mode of the genetic dynamics in the prokaryotic world. However, the notion of dynamic stability that is manifest in persistence of distinct structure in the prokaryotic world network extends also to the relationship between the genetic complements of prokaryotic cellular life forms and the mobilome. All their enormous mobility notwithstanding, selfish elements posses a core of 'hallmark' genes that only transiently appear in bacterial and archaeal chromosomes (234).
## (s10) THE PRINCIPAL PROCESSES OF PROKARYOTIC EVOLUTION
(p10.0) Having formulated the notion of the dynamic prokaryotic world, we are now in a position to classify the major processes that affect evolution of prokaryotes. In doing so, one necessarily must take into account the population-genetic theory of evolution of genomic complexity that was recently expounded by Lynch (235,236). The essence of this theory is that genetic changes leading to an increase of complexity such as duplications can be fixed only when purifying selection in a population is relatively weak, i.e. substantial complexification is possible only during population bottlenecks. Under this view, genomic complexity is not adaptive but is brought about by neutral population-genetic processes under conditions when purifying selection is (relatively) ineffective. Thus, complexification starts off as a 'genomic syndrome' although complex features subsequently become subject to adaptive selection. In contrast, in 'highly successful', large populations, purifying selection is intense, and the prevailing mode of evolution is thought to be genome streamlining (237).
## (s11) GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF DISTINCT LIFE STYLES OF BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA
(p11.0) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).

(p11.1) Genomic signatures of more complex phenotypes, such as thermophily or radioresistance, turned out to be much more elusive. The most effort, perhaps, has been dedicated to the quest for signs of thermophilic adaptation. Remarkably, there is a single gene that is found in all sequenced hyperthemrophilic genomes but not in any of the mesophiles, and this gene encodes a protein that is strictly required for DNA replication at extreme high temperatures, reverse gyrase (259). Moreover, the genome of a moderate thermophile T. thermophilus (strainHB27) contains a reverse gyrase pseudogene, whereas the related strain HB8 contains an intact reverse gyrase gene, demonstrating an ongoing process of reverse gyrase elimination after the probable switch from hyperthermophilic to moderate thermophilic life style (225,260). However, search for other thermophile-specific genes yielded limited information, with no genes other than reverse gyrase showing a clean pattern of presence-absence correlated with (hyper)thermophily and only a few showing significant enrichment in thermophilic compared to mesophilic archaea and bacteria (261). Genome-wide searches for thermophilic determinants have been directed also at detecting relevant patterns of differences at the level of nucleotide and protein sequences and structures. Although these studies have revealed several suggestive distinctions of thermophilic proteins, such as higher charge density (262,263) and overrepresentation of disulphide bridges (264), the ultimate significance of each of these features remains uncertain. The overall conclusion from these studies is that so far comparative genomics has failed to reveal 'secrets' of the thermophilic life style (intuitively, one would suspect that there must be major, genome-encoded differences between organisms whose optimal growth temperature exceeds 958C and those that optimally grow at 378C).

(p11.2) The story of the search for genomic correlates of extreme radioresistance and desiccation resistance might be even more illuminating. Some bacteria and archaea, of which the best characterized is the bacterium D. radiodurans, possess extreme radiation resistance that is thought to be a side effect of their adaptive desiccation resistance (265). Extensive genome analysis of D. radiodurans did not immediately reveal any unique features of the genome or of DNA repair systems that could explain the exceptional ability of this organism to survive radiation damage although homologs of plant proteins implicated in desiccation resistance and, at the time, not found in any other bacteria, have been identified (266). Deinococcus radiodurans is a model experimental system, so subsequently, transcriptomic and proteomics studies have been undertaken to characterize the response of this bacterium to high-dose irradiation (267)(268)(269). These studies have generated some excitement because substantial upregulation of several uncharacterized genes whose products were implicated in potentially relevant processes such as double-strand break repair (267). However, knockout of these genes failed to affect radiation resistance, whereas knockouts of a few genes that did not encode any recognizable domains and were not upregulated upon irradiation did render the organism radiationsensitive (270). The recent comparative analysis of two related, radiation-resistant bacteria, D. radiodurans and D. geothermalis, failed to resolve and even further complicated the problem of genomic determinants of radioresistance (270). No genes with clear relevance to radiation resistance were discovered that would be unique to these radioresistant bacteria. Moreover, orthologs of many of the genes that are strongly upregulated in D. radiodurans upon irradiation are missing in D. geothermalis. The careful comparison of operon structure and predicted regulatory sites in the two Deinococcus genomes led to the prediction of a putative radiation-resistance regulon. However, for most of the genes that comprise this putative regulon, the relevance for radiation and desiccation resistance is uncertain. The principal determinants of radioresistance remain elusive, and there is growing evidence that important roles could belong to genes that mediate resistance in unexpected, indirect ways, e.g. through regulation of the intracellular concentrations of divalent cations that affect the level of protein damage resulting from irradiation or desiccation (271,272).

(p11.3) The only possible conclusion on the current state of understanding of the genome-phenotype connections in prokaryotes is that these links are multifaceted, and that distinct sets of genes responsible for complex phenotypes are not readily identifiable despite the existence of clear signatures of certain phenotypes such as reverse gyrase in the case of hyperthermophily. The complexity of this relationship parallels the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene and functional spaces of prokaryotes discussed earlier.

(p11.4) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).

(p11.5) Genomic signatures of more complex phenotypes, such as thermophily or radioresistance, turned out to be much more elusive. The most effort, perhaps, has been dedicated to the quest for signs of thermophilic adaptation. Remarkably, there is a single gene that is found in all sequenced hyperthemrophilic genomes but not in any of the mesophiles, and this gene encodes a protein that is strictly required for DNA replication at extreme high temperatures, reverse gyrase (259). Moreover, the genome of a moderate thermophile T. thermophilus (strainHB27) contains a reverse gyrase pseudogene, whereas the related strain HB8 contains an intact reverse gyrase gene, demonstrating an ongoing process of reverse gyrase elimination after the probable switch from hyperthermophilic to moderate thermophilic life style (225,260). However, search for other thermophile-specific genes yielded limited information, with no genes other than reverse gyrase showing a clean pattern of presence-absence correlated with (hyper)thermophily and only a few showing significant enrichment in thermophilic compared to mesophilic archaea and bacteria (261). Genome-wide searches for thermophilic determinants have been directed also at detecting relevant patterns of differences at the level of nucleotide and protein sequences and structures. Although these studies have revealed several suggestive distinctions of thermophilic proteins, such as higher charge density (262,263) and overrepresentation of disulphide bridges (264), the ultimate significance of each of these features remains uncertain. The overall conclusion from these studies is that so far comparative genomics has failed to reveal 'secrets' of the thermophilic life style (intuitively, one would suspect that there must be major, genome-encoded differences between organisms whose optimal growth temperature exceeds 958C and those that optimally grow at 378C).

(p11.6) The story of the search for genomic correlates of extreme radioresistance and desiccation resistance might be even more illuminating. Some bacteria and archaea, of which the best characterized is the bacterium D. radiodurans, possess extreme radiation resistance that is thought to be a side effect of their adaptive desiccation resistance (265). Extensive genome analysis of D. radiodurans did not immediately reveal any unique features of the genome or of DNA repair systems that could explain the exceptional ability of this organism to survive radiation damage although homologs of plant proteins implicated in desiccation resistance and, at the time, not found in any other bacteria, have been identified (266). Deinococcus radiodurans is a model experimental system, so subsequently, transcriptomic and proteomics studies have been undertaken to characterize the response of this bacterium to high-dose irradiation (267)(268)(269). These studies have generated some excitement because substantial upregulation of several uncharacterized genes whose products were implicated in potentially relevant processes such as double-strand break repair (267). However, knockout of these genes failed to affect radiation resistance, whereas knockouts of a few genes that did not encode any recognizable domains and were not upregulated upon irradiation did render the organism radiationsensitive (270). The recent comparative analysis of two related, radiation-resistant bacteria, D. radiodurans and D. geothermalis, failed to resolve and even further complicated the problem of genomic determinants of radioresistance (270). No genes with clear relevance to radiation resistance were discovered that would be unique to these radioresistant bacteria. Moreover, orthologs of many of the genes that are strongly upregulated in D. radiodurans upon irradiation are missing in D. geothermalis. The careful comparison of operon structure and predicted regulatory sites in the two Deinococcus genomes led to the prediction of a putative radiation-resistance regulon. However, for most of the genes that comprise this putative regulon, the relevance for radiation and desiccation resistance is uncertain. The principal determinants of radioresistance remain elusive, and there is growing evidence that important roles could belong to genes that mediate resistance in unexpected, indirect ways, e.g. through regulation of the intracellular concentrations of divalent cations that affect the level of protein damage resulting from irradiation or desiccation (271,272).

(p11.7) The only possible conclusion on the current state of understanding of the genome-phenotype connections in prokaryotes is that these links are multifaceted, and that distinct sets of genes responsible for complex phenotypes are not readily identifiable despite the existence of clear signatures of certain phenotypes such as reverse gyrase in the case of hyperthermophily. The complexity of this relationship parallels the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene and functional spaces of prokaryotes discussed earlier.
## (s12) ARCHAEA AND BACTERIA IN THE LIGHT OF COMPARATIVE GENOMICS: WHITHER PROKARYOTES?
(p12.0) The very validity of the term and concept of a prokaryote has been challenged as outdated and based on a negative definition, i.e. the absence of a eponymous organelle of the 'higher' organisms (eukaryotes), the nucleus (26,273). Instead of the purportedly inadequate notion of a prokaryote, it has been proposed to classify life forms solely on the basis of phylogenetic divisions that have been derived, primarily, from rRNA trees and supported by trees for a few other (nearly) universal informational genes. The argument on the negative definition of prokaryotes has been countered by defining positive characters such as transcription-translation coupling (274). Regardless of the relative merits of these arguments, comparative genomics throws its own light on the prokaryotic problem. There is little universal conservation in terms of gene composition across archaea and bacteria, and next to none in terms of the organization of specific genes (see above). In trees built on the basis of comparisons of gene composition or conserved pairs of adjacent genes, the split between bacteria and archaea is unequivocal (50). In a stark contrast, the overall genome organization of bacteria and archaea is remarkably uniform. Some exceptions notwithstanding, this general principle of genome organization can be easily captured in a succinct description: bacteria and archaea have compact genomes with short intergenic regions so that many genes form directons that tend to function as operons. The formation of directons many of which become operons can be considered a direct consequence of genome contraction. The persistence of operons is subsequently ensured by a combination of purifying selection and frequent HGT as captured in the selfish operon concept. Thus, the uniform principle of organization of the genomes of bacteria and archaea emerges as a direct consequence of the forces operating in the evolution of these life forms, and these forces themselves are linked to their population structure. Considering this unity, we have to conclude that the concept of prokaryotes as life forms that evolve under a distinct, common mode leading to a common type of genome organization is well justified. Whether or not 'prokaryotes' is a good term to describe this part of the biosphere remains a debatable issue (the problem of the origin of eukaryotes from which this issues hardly can be separated is beyond the scope of this article) but, probably, one of secondary importance.

(p12.1) The very validity of the term and concept of a prokaryote has been challenged as outdated and based on a negative definition, i.e. the absence of a eponymous organelle of the 'higher' organisms (eukaryotes), the nucleus (26,273). Instead of the purportedly inadequate notion of a prokaryote, it has been proposed to classify life forms solely on the basis of phylogenetic divisions that have been derived, primarily, from rRNA trees and supported by trees for a few other (nearly) universal informational genes. The argument on the negative definition of prokaryotes has been countered by defining positive characters such as transcription-translation coupling (274). Regardless of the relative merits of these arguments, comparative genomics throws its own light on the prokaryotic problem. There is little universal conservation in terms of gene composition across archaea and bacteria, and next to none in terms of the organization of specific genes (see above). In trees built on the basis of comparisons of gene composition or conserved pairs of adjacent genes, the split between bacteria and archaea is unequivocal (50). In a stark contrast, the overall genome organization of bacteria and archaea is remarkably uniform. Some exceptions notwithstanding, this general principle of genome organization can be easily captured in a succinct description: bacteria and archaea have compact genomes with short intergenic regions so that many genes form directons that tend to function as operons. The formation of directons many of which become operons can be considered a direct consequence of genome contraction. The persistence of operons is subsequently ensured by a combination of purifying selection and frequent HGT as captured in the selfish operon concept. Thus, the uniform principle of organization of the genomes of bacteria and archaea emerges as a direct consequence of the forces operating in the evolution of these life forms, and these forces themselves are linked to their population structure. Considering this unity, we have to conclude that the concept of prokaryotes as life forms that evolve under a distinct, common mode leading to a common type of genome organization is well justified. Whether or not 'prokaryotes' is a good term to describe this part of the biosphere remains a debatable issue (the problem of the origin of eukaryotes from which this issues hardly can be separated is beyond the scope of this article) but, probably, one of secondary importance.
## (s13) CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE
(p13.0) By any account, the progress of knowledge of the prokaryotic world brought about by comparative genomics has been enormous. Many of the major trends and patterns discussed here, such as the distinction along with the similarities between archaea and bacteria, the operonic organization of bacterial genes, and the existence of HGT, have been noticed in the pregenomic era, but more as anecdotes than as general patterns. Comparative genomics allows one to actually determine how (un)common is a particular pattern, and the confidence of such inference increases with the growth of the genome collection. In the early days of genomics, a hope for a new suite of 'laws of genomics' has been expressed (275). Certain striking, nearly universal quantitative regularities indeed have been revealed by comparison of prokaryotic genomes. The two best candidates for 'laws of genomics' seem to be the scaling of different functional classes of genes with the genome (147) and the universal distribution of the evolutionary rates in orthologous gene sets (239). On the whole, however, 13 years into the comparative genomic enterprise, it seems more appropriate to speak of regularities, constraints, and perhaps, principles. Indeed, in terms of general organization, the great majority of the archaeal and bacterial genomes are notably similar, and are built according to the same, simple 'master plan' with wall-to-wall protein-coding and RNA-coding genes, preferentially organized in directons, typically, with a single origin of replication. Most of the arcaheal and bacterial genes are simple units, with uninterrupted coding sequence and short regulatory regions. There seems to be a nontrivial connection between gene functions and genome complexity: scaling of the number of genes of different functional classes appears to be (nearly) the same across the wide range of the available genomes, with the nearly constant, 'frozen' set of genes involved in translation and a steep increase in the number of regulators and signaling proteins with genome size. This increased 'burden of bureaucracy' is likely to be one of the important factors that set the upper limit for prokaryotic genome size and, accordingly, complexity. These regularities come as close to 'laws of genomics' as one can imagine although, as always in biology, there are multiple exceptions to any rule. More importantly, within these simple constraints, lie the enormous diversity and intricacy of the content and history of prokaryotic genomes.

(p13.1) Cases in point abound. The demonstration that the great majority of genes in each genome are not ORFans but rather have orthologs is, arguably, the very cornerstone of the genomic enterprise, which underlies all functional annotation of the sequenced genomes as well as evolutionary reconstructions. However, the flip side of the coin, namely, the patchy distribution of COGs in the gene space is no less fundamental. This distribution is the product of the major forces that shape prokaryotic evolution, namely, HGT, genes loss that often reflects genome streamlining, and nonorthologous gene displacement, which reflects the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene space and the functional space. The virtually unlimited flexibility of the architecture of prokaryotic genomes owing to extensive rearrangements, which create diverse variations on the themes of conserved operons, and the discovery of previously unsuspected signaling, regulatory and defense systems, only a few of which are briefly discussed in this article, add to the complexity of the prokaryotic genomescape that is revealed by comparative genomics.

(p13.2) Arguably, the most important conceptual novelty brought about by genomics is the demonstration that HGT is ubiquitous in the prokaryotic world, even as the extent of gene movement between distantly related organisms remains an issue of debate. Regardless of the further developments in these debates, the wide spread of HGT and the apparent absence of impenetrable barriers means that the prokaryotic world is a single connected gene pool, although this pool has a complex, compartmentalized structure, with its distinct parts being partially isolated from each other. Horizontal gene transfer affects different classes of genes to different extents, at least, in part, according to the complexity hypothesis, but no gene seems to be completely immune to HGT. The compartmentalization of the gene pool notwithstanding, the results of comparative genomics refute the TOL concept, at least, as applied to the prokaryotic world, as well as the notion of prokaryotic species. At best, the tree representation of genome evolution might be applicable to subsets of conserved genes from relatively close organisms. Delineation of 'higher taxa' of bacteria and archaea might not be a feasible project, given the erosion of the phylogenetic signal, the cumulative effect of HGT over time and the possibility that the early evolution of prokaryotes involved even more extensive HGT and could have been more akin to partially constrained sampling of the gene pool (214). From a complementary, genome-centric perspective, the results of comparative genomics indicate that the genes in any genome are far from having the same history, and it could be hard even to identify a set of genes that have a coherent history over a substantial evolutionary span. To this, it must added the a substantial fraction of most prokaryotic genomes belongs to the mobilome, the vast set of genes that come and go at striking rates and, generally, might not have any adaptive value for the organisms, even if occasionally recruited by some organisms for specific biological functions.

(p13.3) Taken together, these findings amount to a new, dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world that is best represented as a complex network of genetic elements, which exchange genes at widely varying rates. In this network, the distinction between the relatively stable chromosomes and the mobilome is a difference in degree (of mobility) rather than in kind. The remarkably uniform general organization of prokaryotic genomes appears to be determined by the dynamic nature of the prokaryotic genome space along with the intensive purifying selection underpinned by the large effective population size of most prokaryotes that itself is a function of extensive gene exchange.

(p13.4) The paradox of today's state of the art is that, despite the tremendous progress-but also owing to these advances-the emerging complexity of the prokaryotic world is currently beyond our grasp. We have no adequate language, in terms of theory or tools, to describe the workings and histories of the genomic network. Developing such a language is the major challenge for the next stage in the evolution of prokaryotic genomics.

(p13.5) By any account, the progress of knowledge of the prokaryotic world brought about by comparative genomics has been enormous. Many of the major trends and patterns discussed here, such as the distinction along with the similarities between archaea and bacteria, the operonic organization of bacterial genes, and the existence of HGT, have been noticed in the pregenomic era, but more as anecdotes than as general patterns. Comparative genomics allows one to actually determine how (un)common is a particular pattern, and the confidence of such inference increases with the growth of the genome collection. In the early days of genomics, a hope for a new suite of 'laws of genomics' has been expressed (275). Certain striking, nearly universal quantitative regularities indeed have been revealed by comparison of prokaryotic genomes. The two best candidates for 'laws of genomics' seem to be the scaling of different functional classes of genes with the genome (147) and the universal distribution of the evolutionary rates in orthologous gene sets (239). On the whole, however, 13 years into the comparative genomic enterprise, it seems more appropriate to speak of regularities, constraints, and perhaps, principles. Indeed, in terms of general organization, the great majority of the archaeal and bacterial genomes are notably similar, and are built according to the same, simple 'master plan' with wall-to-wall protein-coding and RNA-coding genes, preferentially organized in directons, typically, with a single origin of replication. Most of the arcaheal and bacterial genes are simple units, with uninterrupted coding sequence and short regulatory regions. There seems to be a nontrivial connection between gene functions and genome complexity: scaling of the number of genes of different functional classes appears to be (nearly) the same across the wide range of the available genomes, with the nearly constant, 'frozen' set of genes involved in translation and a steep increase in the number of regulators and signaling proteins with genome size. This increased 'burden of bureaucracy' is likely to be one of the important factors that set the upper limit for prokaryotic genome size and, accordingly, complexity. These regularities come as close to 'laws of genomics' as one can imagine although, as always in biology, there are multiple exceptions to any rule. More importantly, within these simple constraints, lie the enormous diversity and intricacy of the content and history of prokaryotic genomes.

(p13.6) Cases in point abound. The demonstration that the great majority of genes in each genome are not ORFans but rather have orthologs is, arguably, the very cornerstone of the genomic enterprise, which underlies all functional annotation of the sequenced genomes as well as evolutionary reconstructions. However, the flip side of the coin, namely, the patchy distribution of COGs in the gene space is no less fundamental. This distribution is the product of the major forces that shape prokaryotic evolution, namely, HGT, genes loss that often reflects genome streamlining, and nonorthologous gene displacement, which reflects the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene space and the functional space. The virtually unlimited flexibility of the architecture of prokaryotic genomes owing to extensive rearrangements, which create diverse variations on the themes of conserved operons, and the discovery of previously unsuspected signaling, regulatory and defense systems, only a few of which are briefly discussed in this article, add to the complexity of the prokaryotic genomescape that is revealed by comparative genomics.

(p13.7) Arguably, the most important conceptual novelty brought about by genomics is the demonstration that HGT is ubiquitous in the prokaryotic world, even as the extent of gene movement between distantly related organisms remains an issue of debate. Regardless of the further developments in these debates, the wide spread of HGT and the apparent absence of impenetrable barriers means that the prokaryotic world is a single connected gene pool, although this pool has a complex, compartmentalized structure, with its distinct parts being partially isolated from each other. Horizontal gene transfer affects different classes of genes to different extents, at least, in part, according to the complexity hypothesis, but no gene seems to be completely immune to HGT. The compartmentalization of the gene pool notwithstanding, the results of comparative genomics refute the TOL concept, at least, as applied to the prokaryotic world, as well as the notion of prokaryotic species. At best, the tree representation of genome evolution might be applicable to subsets of conserved genes from relatively close organisms. Delineation of 'higher taxa' of bacteria and archaea might not be a feasible project, given the erosion of the phylogenetic signal, the cumulative effect of HGT over time and the possibility that the early evolution of prokaryotes involved even more extensive HGT and could have been more akin to partially constrained sampling of the gene pool (214). From a complementary, genome-centric perspective, the results of comparative genomics indicate that the genes in any genome are far from having the same history, and it could be hard even to identify a set of genes that have a coherent history over a substantial evolutionary span. To this, it must added the a substantial fraction of most prokaryotic genomes belongs to the mobilome, the vast set of genes that come and go at striking rates and, generally, might not have any adaptive value for the organisms, even if occasionally recruited by some organisms for specific biological functions.

(p13.8) Taken together, these findings amount to a new, dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world that is best represented as a complex network of genetic elements, which exchange genes at widely varying rates. In this network, the distinction between the relatively stable chromosomes and the mobilome is a difference in degree (of mobility) rather than in kind. The remarkably uniform general organization of prokaryotic genomes appears to be determined by the dynamic nature of the prokaryotic genome space along with the intensive purifying selection underpinned by the large effective population size of most prokaryotes that itself is a function of extensive gene exchange.

(p13.9) The paradox of today's state of the art is that, despite the tremendous progress-but also owing to these advances-the emerging complexity of the prokaryotic world is currently beyond our grasp. We have no adequate language, in terms of theory or tools, to describe the workings and histories of the genomic network. Developing such a language is the major challenge for the next stage in the evolution of prokaryotic genomics.
## (s33) INTRODUCTION
(p33.0) Modern genomics of prokaryotes (and, generally, cellular life forms) is a rare scientific field whose birth date can be pinpointed precisely. It is natural to associate the advent of the modern era in genomics with the appearance of the first complete genome, namely, the genome of the pathogenic bacterium Haemophilus influenzae (1).

(p33.1) Very shortly, thereafter, the second bacterial genome, that of Mycoplasma genitalium, was sequenced (2), and modern comparative genomics was born. A considerable amount of sequences from diverse organisms was available prior to these reports, but the first fully sequenced bacterial genome forever changed the state of the art in genome analysis. The availability of complete genomes (i.e. with nearly all the genetic material from the given organism sequenced as opposed to, say, 90%, so that all genes are available for analysis) is crucial to the entire enterprise of comparative genomics for at least two related but distinct, fundamental reasons: (i) some caveats notwithstanding (see below), the availability of complete genome sequences (or, more precisely, full complements of genes) provides for the possibility to identify sets of orthologs, i.e. genes that evolved from the same ancestral gene in the common ancestor of the compared genomes, (ii) comparison of complete genomes (gene sets) is the necessary condition to determine not only which genes are present in any particular genome but also which ones are absent (3,4). The ability to delineate sets of orthologs and to pinpoint missing genes is indispensable for genome-based reconstruction of an organism's metabolism and other functional systems and for reconstructions of genome evolution.
## (s35) THE PROKARYOTIC GENE AND GENOME SPACES
(p35.0) Clusters of orthologs and classification of genes by phyletic patterns: the three classes of prokaryotic genes One of the early and crucial generalizations of comparative genomics of prokaryotes is the readily recognizable evolutionary conservation of protein sequences encoded in the majority of the genes in each sequenced genome (27). More specifically, for a substantial majority of the genes, there are confidently identifiable orthologs in other, relatively distant bacteria and/or archaea. Orthologs are traditionally defined as genes that descend from the same ancestral gene in the common ancestor of the compared species (28). Of course, this crucial concept of evolutionary biology was originally defined in the context of evolutionary analysis of animal or plant species where the notion of the common ancestral species is unambiguous (29,30). This is not the case in bacteria and archaea where horizontal gene transfer (HGT) is pervasive, and as the result, at least, in distant organisms, genes often have different histories (see below). Nevertheless, empirically, using the simple notion of a bidirectional best hit (BBH), it has been shown (shortly after the first complete genome sequences became available) that, for the majority of genes in any sequenced bacterial or archaeal genome, apparent counterparts (defined as orthologs, in a generalization of the original definition) were readily identifiable in other genomes (31,32). These findings stimulated the development of the notion of clusters of orthologous genes (COGs) and methods for their identification (33,34). Identification of COGs is a nontrivial task owing to evolutionary processes that confound orthologous relationships between genes, in particular, lineagespecific expansion of paralogous gene families that is common in archaea and bacteria (35), even if not nearly as prominent as it is in eukaryotes, and leads to coorthologous relationship between multiple paralogous genes in the compared genomes (28). Accordingly, the definition of a BBH needs to be generalized to include many-to-many (and many-to-one) relationships between genes [hence the original, rather awkward explication of COGs as Cluster of Orthologous Groups (33)]. Additional complications in the identification of orthologs stem from changes in domain architectures of proteins and differential loss of paralogous genes. Following the original COG study, a variety of increasingly sophisticated methods for identification of clusters of orthologs have been developed, some turning to explicit, genome-wide phylogenetic analysis (36)(37)(38)(39)(40). The latest and most comprehensive advancement in this direction is the EggNog project that relied on the COG collection as the nucleus of a new database of orthologous gene clusters including 312 bacterial and 26 archaeal genomes (41).

(p35.1) The coverage of selected archaeal and bacterial genomes in the EggNOG database is shown in Figure 5. With the notable exception of some bacteria with the largest genomes, such as Pirellula sp. and some archaea that belong to distinct, apparently, fast-evolving lineages, such as N. equitans, in most of the sequenced genomes, 80% of the genes (or more, in cases when closely related genomes are available) belong to clusters of orthologs. Thus, the great majority of proteins encoded in each sequenced archaeal or bacterial genome show, at least, some degree of evolutionary conservation within the explored portion of the prokaryotic gene space. However, the distribution of the clusters by the number of included organisms immediately reveals the flip side of the coin: the great majority of the clusters include only a few organisms (Figure 6a). A more detailed examination of this distribution reveals distinct structure in the prokaryotic sequence space. The distribution is, essentially, an exponential decay curve, with a rise at the left end that corresponds to the universal or nearly universal clusters. Assuming that the distribution is described by an exponent(s), the best approximation is obtained with a sum of three exponential functions (Figure 6b). The first exponent represents the conserved (universal or nearly universal) gene core (70 clusters), the second exponent describes the 'shell' of moderately common genes (5700 clusters), and the third exponent corresponds to the 'cloud' (24 000 clusters) that consists of genes shared by a small number of organisms. The possibility exists that the size of the cloud is somewhat inflated, i.e. some of the small clusters actually include highly diverged orthologous genes and have to be merged. However, the same overall shape of the distribution has been seen in independent studies, e.g. the recent analysis of archaeal COGs (42), suggesting that it reflects the actual structure of the prokaryotic gene space that consists of:

(p35.2) (i) a miniscule fraction of highly conserved genes, (ii) a much (two orders of magnitude) larger set of moderately conserved genes, (iii) an even greater number of narrowly distributed genes.

(p35.3) This diversity of phyletic (phylogenetic) patterns (a term often used to describe the distribution of genes across organisms) reflects major trends in prokaryotic evolution, namely, extensive horizontal transfer of genes, pervasive gene loss and functional plasticity of many cellular systems (see below).

(p35.4) In the current databases, there is also a large number of archaeal and bacterial genes that encode protein sequences without detectable similarity to any other available protein sequences; accordingly, these genes are often denoted ORFans (43,44). Typically, ORFans comprise 10-15% of the predicted genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes, depending on the availability of closely related genomes ( Figure 7) Figure 5. Coverage of bacterial and archaeal genomes with cluster of orthologous genes. The COGs were from the EggNOG database (41), and the proteins from each genome were assigned to these clusters using a modified COGNITOR method (42). flattering name ELFs, Evil Little Fellows, and it has been argued that many of them are false predictions rather than actual protein-coding genes (45). Furthermore, it has been proposed that the majority of those ORFans that are real genes were derived from bacteriophages and, accordingly, are characterized by high horizontal mobility although, occasionally, they can be recruited for a cellular function and, accordingly, fixed in a bacterial or archaeal lineage (46). Recent estimates from metagenomic surveys of bacteriophages suggest that the diversity of phage sequences is vast and remains, largely, unexplored (47). Therefore, it does seem plausible that a major fraction of bacterial and archaeal ORFans derives from the still poorly explored but, certainly, vast bacteriophage gene pool. Obviously, it is impossible to rule out and, indeed, is most likely that a fraction of the ORFans have orthologs in multiple prokaryotic genomes that avoid detection because of their rapid evolution, a possibility that is not incompatible with the origin of most ORFans in the phage gene pool. When elements of the gene space are represented as clusters of orthologs, it appears that ORFans can be reasonably merged into the 'cloud' of poorly represented, rare genes. This compounded 'cloud' obviously dominates the gene space when each cluster of orthologous genes is taken as a point. This is, however, not the case when individual genomes are considered: in each genome, the majority of the genes belong to the moderately conserved 'shell' (Figure 7). Of course, there is no paradox involved because, although the fraction of 'cloud' genes and ORFans in each genome is relatively small, they are, by definition (nearly) unique and, combined, account for the great majority of points in the gene space.

(p35.5) Detailed extrapolation of the expansion of the gene space with further bacterial and archaeal genome sequencing and a reliable estimate of the actual size of this space are hard to obtain, and such analysis is beyond the scope of the present article. Nevertheless, considering the vast diversity of bacteriophages revealed in metagenomic analyses, it appears most likely that the number of elements of the prokaryotic gene space will increase by orders of magnitude, and almost entirely, through expansion of the 'cloud'.
## (s37) PRINCIPLES OF PROKARYOTIC GENOME ARCHITECTURE AND ITS EVOLUTION
(p37.0) Almost immediately after the release of the first complete genome sequences, it became apparent that the gene order in bacterial and archaeal genomes is relatively poorly conserved (4,67-69), dramatically less so than genes themselves (see above). To analyze conservation of gene orders, one needs to obtain a robust set of orthologous genes between the compared genomes. Once such a set of orthologous genes is defined, it becomes straightforward to assess the gene order conservation by means of a dotplot (one of the earliest representations of nucleotide and protein sequence similarity) where each point corresponds to a pair of orthologs. Examination of these plots reveals rapid divergence of gene order in prokaryotes ( Figure 13) so that, even between closely related organisms, the chromosomal colinearity is broken at several points ( Figure 13a), moderately diverged organisms show only a few extended collinear regions (Figure 13b and c), whereas for any pair of relatively distant organisms, the plot looks like the map of the night sky ( Figure 13d). Disruption of synteny during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes typically shows a clear and striking pattern, with an X-shape seen in the dot-plots (Figure 11b and c). It has been proposed that the X-pattern is generated by symmetric chromosomal inversions around the origin of replication (70). The underlying cause of these inversions could be the high frequency of recombination in replication forks that, in the circular chromosomes of bacteria and archaea, are normally located on both sides of and at the same distance from the origin site (71).

(p37.1) Most prokaryotic genomes contain a single, bidirectional replication origin site, and this origin is a special point in the genome that defines the global genome architecture (72). By definition, a bidirectional origin is the switch point between the leading and lagging strand that in bacteria and archaea are replicated in different modes, continuous and discontinuous, respectively. In most prokaryotes, the leading and lagging strands show substantial asymmetries in nucleotide composition, gene orientation and gene content (73). A diagnostic distinction between the leading and lagging strands is the difference in   GC-and AT-skews, i.e. excess of purines or pyrimidines (violation of Chargaff's second parity rule). The underlying causes of the GC/AT-skews are thought to reflect an interplay of selective and mutational forces, i.e. selection against secondary structure formation in the leading strand and differential increase of different types of mutations in single-stranded DNA (74,75). The GC/AT-skew patterns in the leading and lagging strands of bacterial and archaeal chromosomes are consistent and significant enough to (usually) allow an accurate prediction of the origin position in an uncharacterized prokaryotic genome (76,77). The leading and lagging strands also show asymmetric (to a widely varying degree in different genomes) distributions of genes, with a greater density of genes found on the leading strand. Moreover, a substantial majority of these genes, especially, highly expressed and/or essential ones, e.g. those coding for ribosomal RNAs and proteins, are cooriented with replication (78)(79)(80)(81). Usually, the patterns of gene distribution are explained by different versions of the polymerase collision model that postulates selection for minimizing head-on collision between the replicating DNA polymerase and the transcribing RNA polymerase that are both more likely and more damaging than codirectional collisions (73,78,79). The exact mechanisms that affect the overall layout of bacterial chromosomes require much further analysis and cannot be discussed here in detail but the general conclusion seems clear that the mechanisms and rate of chromosomal replication are important factors that determine the genome architecture.

(p37.2) One of the earliest and central concepts of bacterial genetics is the operon, a group of cotranscribed and coregulated genes (82). Although enormous amount of variation on the simple theme of regulation by the Lac repressor developed by Jacob and Monod (83) has been discovered in the years since, the operon has stood the test of comparative genomics as the principle of organization of bacterial and archaeal genomes (84). Operons, particularly, those that encode physically interacting proteins, are much stronger conserved during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes than large-scale synteny. Comparative analysis of gene order in bacteria and archaea reveals relatively few operons that are shared by a broad range of organisms. As noticed early on, these highly conserved operons typically encode physically interacting proteins (68), a trend that is readily interpretable in terms of selection against the deleterious effects of imbalance between protein complex subunits (85). The most striking illustration of this trend is the ribosomal superoperon that includes over 50 genes of ribosomal proteins that are found in different combinations and arrangements in all sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes (86,87). Analysis of the ribosomal superoperon and other, smaller groups of partially conserved operons led to the notion of an u¨beroperon (88) or a conserved gene neighborhood (89), an array of overlapping, partially conserved genes strings (known or predicted operons). In addition to the ribosomal superoperon, striking examples of conserved neighborhoods are the group of predicted overlapping operons that encode subunits of the archaeal exosomal complex (90) and the Cas genes that comprise an antivirus defense system (see also below) (89,91,92). Analysis of such large, partially conserved neighborhoods has high predictive value and can lead to the identification of novel functional systems, as in the latter two cases. The majority of genes in the u¨beroperons encode proteins involved in the same process and/or complex but highly conserved arrangements including genes with seemingly unrelated functions exist as well, e.g. the common occurrence of the enolase gene in ribosomal neighborhoods or genes for proteasome subunits in the archaeal exosome neighborhood. The presence of these seemingly unrelated genes can be explained either by 'gene sharing', i.e. multiple functionalities of the respective proteins, or by 'genomic hitchhiking', a case when an operon combines genes without specific functional links but with similar requirements for expression (89).

(p37.3) The majority of operons do not belong to complex, interconnected neighborhood but instead are simple strings of two to four genes, with variations in their arrangement (69,86,89,93). Identical or similar, in terms of gene organization, operons are often found in highly diverse organisms and in different functional systems. A case in point is numerous metabolite transport operons that consist of similarly arranged genes encoding the transmebrane permease, ATPase and periplasmic subunits of the so-called ABC transporters (94). The persistence of such common operons in diverse bacteria and archaea has been interpreted within the framework of the selfish operon concept, the notion that operons are maintained not so much because of the functional importance of coregulation of the constituent genes but due to the selfish character of these compact genetic units that are prone to horizontal spread among prokaryotes (95-97) (we will return to this concept in the discussion of horizontal gene transfer subsequently).

(p37.4) A systematic comparison of the arrangements of orthologous genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes revealed a relatively small fraction of conserved (predicted) operons and a much greater abundance of unique directons, i.e. strings of genes transcribed in the same direction and separated by short intergenic sequences (83,86). In benchmark studies, directons have been shown to be surprisingly accurate predictors of operons (98). Thus, the organization of archaeal and bacterial genomes seem to be governed by the operonic principle, with a small number of highly conserved operons and a much larger number of unique or rare ones. In this respect, the pattern of operon conservation is reminiscent of the distribution of clusters of orthologs that includes a small, highly conserved core, a larger, moderately conserved 'shell', and an expansive 'cloud' of (nearly) unique genes ( Figure 6).

(p37.5) The degree of genome 'operonization' widely differs among bacteria and archaea; some genomes, e.g. that of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima, are almost fully covered by (predicted) operons, whereas others, such as those of most Cyanobacteria, seem to contain few operons (86,99). What determines the extent of operonization in an organism remains unclear, although it stands to reason that this degree depends on the balance between intensity of recombination, the horizontal gene flux and selective forces that oppose disruption of operons.

(p37.6) Almost immediately after the release of the first complete genome sequences, it became apparent that the gene order in bacterial and archaeal genomes is relatively poorly conserved (4,67-69), dramatically less so than genes themselves (see above). To analyze conservation of gene orders, one needs to obtain a robust set of orthologous genes between the compared genomes. Once such a set of orthologous genes is defined, it becomes straightforward to assess the gene order conservation by means of a dotplot (one of the earliest representations of nucleotide and protein sequence similarity) where each point corresponds to a pair of orthologs. Examination of these plots reveals rapid divergence of gene order in prokaryotes ( Figure 13) so that, even between closely related organisms, the chromosomal colinearity is broken at several points ( Figure 13a), moderately diverged organisms show only a few extended collinear regions (Figure 13b and c), whereas for any pair of relatively distant organisms, the plot looks like the map of the night sky ( Figure 13d). Disruption of synteny during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes typically shows a clear and striking pattern, with an X-shape seen in the dot-plots (Figure 11b and c). It has been proposed that the X-pattern is generated by symmetric chromosomal inversions around the origin of replication (70). The underlying cause of these inversions could be the high frequency of recombination in replication forks that, in the circular chromosomes of bacteria and archaea, are normally located on both sides of and at the same distance from the origin site (71).

(p37.7) Most prokaryotic genomes contain a single, bidirectional replication origin site, and this origin is a special point in the genome that defines the global genome architecture (72). By definition, a bidirectional origin is the switch point between the leading and lagging strand that in bacteria and archaea are replicated in different modes, continuous and discontinuous, respectively. In most prokaryotes, the leading and lagging strands show substantial asymmetries in nucleotide composition, gene orientation and gene content (73). A diagnostic distinction between the leading and lagging strands is the difference in   GC-and AT-skews, i.e. excess of purines or pyrimidines (violation of Chargaff's second parity rule). The underlying causes of the GC/AT-skews are thought to reflect an interplay of selective and mutational forces, i.e. selection against secondary structure formation in the leading strand and differential increase of different types of mutations in single-stranded DNA (74,75). The GC/AT-skew patterns in the leading and lagging strands of bacterial and archaeal chromosomes are consistent and significant enough to (usually) allow an accurate prediction of the origin position in an uncharacterized prokaryotic genome (76,77). The leading and lagging strands also show asymmetric (to a widely varying degree in different genomes) distributions of genes, with a greater density of genes found on the leading strand. Moreover, a substantial majority of these genes, especially, highly expressed and/or essential ones, e.g. those coding for ribosomal RNAs and proteins, are cooriented with replication (78)(79)(80)(81). Usually, the patterns of gene distribution are explained by different versions of the polymerase collision model that postulates selection for minimizing head-on collision between the replicating DNA polymerase and the transcribing RNA polymerase that are both more likely and more damaging than codirectional collisions (73,78,79). The exact mechanisms that affect the overall layout of bacterial chromosomes require much further analysis and cannot be discussed here in detail but the general conclusion seems clear that the mechanisms and rate of chromosomal replication are important factors that determine the genome architecture.

(p37.8) One of the earliest and central concepts of bacterial genetics is the operon, a group of cotranscribed and coregulated genes (82). Although enormous amount of variation on the simple theme of regulation by the Lac repressor developed by Jacob and Monod (83) has been discovered in the years since, the operon has stood the test of comparative genomics as the principle of organization of bacterial and archaeal genomes (84). Operons, particularly, those that encode physically interacting proteins, are much stronger conserved during evolution of bacterial and archaeal genomes than large-scale synteny. Comparative analysis of gene order in bacteria and archaea reveals relatively few operons that are shared by a broad range of organisms. As noticed early on, these highly conserved operons typically encode physically interacting proteins (68), a trend that is readily interpretable in terms of selection against the deleterious effects of imbalance between protein complex subunits (85). The most striking illustration of this trend is the ribosomal superoperon that includes over 50 genes of ribosomal proteins that are found in different combinations and arrangements in all sequenced archaeal and bacterial genomes (86,87). Analysis of the ribosomal superoperon and other, smaller groups of partially conserved operons led to the notion of an u¨beroperon (88) or a conserved gene neighborhood (89), an array of overlapping, partially conserved genes strings (known or predicted operons). In addition to the ribosomal superoperon, striking examples of conserved neighborhoods are the group of predicted overlapping operons that encode subunits of the archaeal exosomal complex (90) and the Cas genes that comprise an antivirus defense system (see also below) (89,91,92). Analysis of such large, partially conserved neighborhoods has high predictive value and can lead to the identification of novel functional systems, as in the latter two cases. The majority of genes in the u¨beroperons encode proteins involved in the same process and/or complex but highly conserved arrangements including genes with seemingly unrelated functions exist as well, e.g. the common occurrence of the enolase gene in ribosomal neighborhoods or genes for proteasome subunits in the archaeal exosome neighborhood. The presence of these seemingly unrelated genes can be explained either by 'gene sharing', i.e. multiple functionalities of the respective proteins, or by 'genomic hitchhiking', a case when an operon combines genes without specific functional links but with similar requirements for expression (89).

(p37.9) The majority of operons do not belong to complex, interconnected neighborhood but instead are simple strings of two to four genes, with variations in their arrangement (69,86,89,93). Identical or similar, in terms of gene organization, operons are often found in highly diverse organisms and in different functional systems. A case in point is numerous metabolite transport operons that consist of similarly arranged genes encoding the transmebrane permease, ATPase and periplasmic subunits of the so-called ABC transporters (94). The persistence of such common operons in diverse bacteria and archaea has been interpreted within the framework of the selfish operon concept, the notion that operons are maintained not so much because of the functional importance of coregulation of the constituent genes but due to the selfish character of these compact genetic units that are prone to horizontal spread among prokaryotes (95-97) (we will return to this concept in the discussion of horizontal gene transfer subsequently).

(p37.10) A systematic comparison of the arrangements of orthologous genes in archaeal and bacterial genomes revealed a relatively small fraction of conserved (predicted) operons and a much greater abundance of unique directons, i.e. strings of genes transcribed in the same direction and separated by short intergenic sequences (83,86). In benchmark studies, directons have been shown to be surprisingly accurate predictors of operons (98). Thus, the organization of archaeal and bacterial genomes seem to be governed by the operonic principle, with a small number of highly conserved operons and a much larger number of unique or rare ones. In this respect, the pattern of operon conservation is reminiscent of the distribution of clusters of orthologs that includes a small, highly conserved core, a larger, moderately conserved 'shell', and an expansive 'cloud' of (nearly) unique genes ( Figure 6).

(p37.11) The degree of genome 'operonization' widely differs among bacteria and archaea; some genomes, e.g. that of the hyperthermophilic bacterium Thermotoga maritima, are almost fully covered by (predicted) operons, whereas others, such as those of most Cyanobacteria, seem to contain few operons (86,99). What determines the extent of operonization in an organism remains unclear, although it stands to reason that this degree depends on the balance between intensity of recombination, the horizontal gene flux and selective forces that oppose disruption of operons.
## (s38) PRINCIPLES OF REGULATION AND SIGNAL TRANSDUCTION IN BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA: AN OVERHAUL IN THE ERA OF COMPARATIVE GENOMICS
(p38.0) Bacteria and archaea possess distinct, elegantly structured systems of gene-expression regulation, and comparative genomics has dramatically changed the existing views of their organizational principles, distribution in nature and evolution. The operon concept of Jacob and Monod (82), which was introduced above as the organizing principle of the local architecture of bacterial and archaeal genome, is also the paradigm of gene expression regulation and signal transduction in these organisms (84). Under the Jacob-Monod model, the regulator (the lac-repressor in their classic study) is a sensor of extracellular or intracellular cues (in this case, the concentration of lactose) that affect the regulator protein conformation and, indirectly, the expression state of the operon (in the case of the lacoperon, the repressor binds lactose, dissociates from the operator and allows transcription). Over the 47 years that elapsed since Jacob-Monod's breakthrough, numerous variations on this subject have been discovered, including regulators that symmetrically affect transcription of adjacent divergent genes, and global regulators that regulate numerous, dispersed genes and operons, as opposed to specific regulation of a single operon under the Jacob-Monod model (100)(101)(102). The most prominent global regulators are the catabolite repressor protein (CRP) (103,104) and the stress response (SOS) regulator LexA (105). Considering the discovery of these and other global regulators, the operon concept was amended with the notion of a regulon, a set of genes that share the same cis regulatory signal (operator) and are regulated by the same regulator protein (106,107). Comparative genomic analysis of regulons has revealed their extreme evolutionary plasticity, with substantial differences found between regulons seen even among closely related organisms (108)(109)(110). A global transcription regulator, such as LexA, can be widespread and highly conserved in diverse bacteria but the gene composition of the LexA regulon is highly variable. The plasticity of regulons parallels the variability of genome architectures (see above) in support of the notion that regulation of gene expression and genome architecture are tightly linked in the evolution of archaea and bacteria.

(p38.1) In a striking contrast to the variability and plasticity of regulons, there is a remarkable unity in the architecture and structure of bacterial and archaeal transcription regulators (111)(112)(113). Typically, these regulators consist of a small molecule-binding sensor domain and a DNA-binding domain. The overwhelming majority of the DNAbinding domains are variations on the same structural theme, helix-turn-helix (113). Less common DNAbinding domains include ribbon-helix-helix and Zn-ribbon (111).
## (s41) THE PROKARYOTIC MOBILOME
(p41.0) As noted in the preceding section, hardly any COG is refractory to HGT in principle but, certainly, some genes are much more equal than others in that respect. A substantial part of the prokaryotic genetic material consists of selfish elements for which horizontal mobility is the dominant mode of dissemination and that have been aptly termed the mobilome (216). A full-fledged discussion of the mobilome requires a separate article(s) but in order to sketch an emerging coherent view of the prokaryotic world, we must briefly summarize here the salient features of this class of genetic elements. The mobilome consists of bacteriophages, plasmids, transposable elements and genes that are often associated with them and regularly become passengers such as restriction-modification (RM) and toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. It seems natural that, inasmuch as viruses and plasmids are mobile by definition, so are the systems of defense. The mobilome is inextricably connected with the 'main' prokaryotic chromosomes. Viruses (bacteriophages) and many plasmids systematically integrate into chromosomes, either reversibly, in which case they often mobilize chromosomal genes or irreversibly whereby a mobile element becomes 'domesticated', giving rise to resident genes, initially, of the ORFan class (216,217). It is well known since the classic experiments of Jacob and Wollman (218) that conjugative plasmids can mediate the transfer of large segments of bacterial chromosomes. The discovery of the GTAs, that seem to be specialized HGT vectors, further emphasizes the existence of regular channels of communication between the mobilome and the chromosomes.

(p41.1) Transfer of antibiotic resistance and secondary metabolic capabilities on plasmids are textbook examples of bacterial mobilome dynamics but the role of plasmids extends far beyond such relatively narrow biological areas (219). Actually, the boundary between chromosomes and plasmids is fuzzy (220)(221)(222). Plasmids are replicons (typically, circular but in some cases, linear) that, similarly to prokaryotic chromosomes, carry an origin site and encode at least some of the proteins involved in the plasmid replication and partitioning (223). The key proteins involved in plasmid and chromosome partitioning, in particular, ATPases of the FtsK-HerA family are homologous throughout the prokaryotic world, a fact that emphasizes common evolutionary origins and strategies of diverse prokaryotic replicons (224).

(p41.2) The 'canonical' genomes of numerous bacteria and archaea include, in addition to the 'main' chromosome(s), one or more relatively stable, essential, large extrachromosomal elements, often described as megaplasmids (221). Megaplasmids can be remarkably persistent during evolution. For instance, it has been shown that the single megaplasmid of Thermus thermophilus is homologous to one of the two megaplasmids of Deinococcus radiodurans and, by implication, derives from the common ancestor of these related but highly diverged bacteria (225). However, over the course of evolution of this ancient bacterial group, the megaplasmids have accumulated (relative to their size) many more differences in their gene repertoires than chromosomes. Moreover, the megaplasmids carry numerous horizontally transferred genes including genes from thermophilic organisms that apparently were acquired by the Thermus lineage and appear to be important for the thermophylic life style (225). Thus, although megaplasmids can persist in prokaryotic lineages over long evolutionary spans, they display greater genomic plasticity than chromosomes, and appear to be act as reservoirs of HGT.

(p41.3) All sequenced prokaryotic genomes contain traces of integration of multiple plasmids and phages (216). It is particularly notable that most of the archaeal genomes possess multiple versions of the HerA-NurA operon that encodes key component of the plasmid partitioning machinery (224). Thus, replicon fusion is likely to be a relatively common event in prokaryotes, and over the course of evolution, such fusion might have been a major factor in shaping the observed architecture of prokaryotic chromosomes.

(p41.4) Defense and stress response systems, in particular, RM and TA systems can be considered special parts of the mobilome. Comparative analysis of these systems shows evidence of rapid evolution and frequent HGT, and they are frequently found in plasmid and bacteriophage genomes (226). Despite their enormous molecular diversity, RM and TA systems function on the same principle: they are comprised of a toxin, a protein that destroys the chromosomal DNA (restriction enzymes), blocks translation (RNA endonuclease toxins) or kills the cell by making holes in the membrane. Cell death is prevented by specific methylation of the DNA, in the case of RM systems or by neutralization of the toxin by the antitoxin in the case of TA systems, either through toxin proteinantitoxin protein interaction or through abrogation of the translation of the toxin mRNA by the antitoxin antisense RNA. These systems possess properties of selfish elements: when the respective genes are lost from a cell, the cell typically dies either because the toxin is more stable than the antitoxin, and its activity is unleashed once the antitoxin degrades but cannot be replenished (227,228) or because of the differential effects of dilution on the restriction and modification enzymes (229). Because of the same property of TA systems, there is strong selection for plasmids carrying TA genes that ensure plasmid 'addiction' by killing cells that have lost the plasmid. The currently known TA systems are likely to comprise the proverbial tips of the iceberg as bacterial and archaeal genomes carry a great variety of operons whose properties mimic those of TA operons (a pair of genes that encode small proteins and occur as a stable combination in diverse genomes and genomic neighborhoods) but that have not been experimentally characterized (K.S. Makarova, Y.I.W. and E.V.K., unpublished data).

(p41.5) Recently, a novel and highly unusual class of defense systems has been shown to exist in approximately half of bacteria and archaea whose genomes have been sequenced (230). This system is centered around arrays of so-called CRISPR repeats (231) and has been accordingly denoted CAS (CRISPR-Associated System) (92). The CAS systems includes 50 distinct gene families (91,92) and comes across as the second largest, after the ribosomal superoperon, array of connected gene neighborhoods in prokaryotic genomes (89,232). The CAS system protects prokaryotic cells against phages and plasmids via a 'Lamarckian mechanism', whereby a fragment of a phage or plasmid gene is integrated into the CRISPR locus on the bacterial chromosome and is subsequently transcribed and utilized, via still poorly characterized mechanisms, to abrogate the selfish agent's replication (233). The CAS system shows extreme plasticity, even among closely related isolates of bacteria and archaea, and strong evidence of extensive HGT (92,230).

(p41.6) The selected examples discussed here point to enormous, still incompletely understood diversity of the prokaryotic mobilomeand the major contribution that the mobilomes makes to the evolution of the prokaryotic genome space.

(p41.7) As noted in the preceding section, hardly any COG is refractory to HGT in principle but, certainly, some genes are much more equal than others in that respect. A substantial part of the prokaryotic genetic material consists of selfish elements for which horizontal mobility is the dominant mode of dissemination and that have been aptly termed the mobilome (216). A full-fledged discussion of the mobilome requires a separate article(s) but in order to sketch an emerging coherent view of the prokaryotic world, we must briefly summarize here the salient features of this class of genetic elements. The mobilome consists of bacteriophages, plasmids, transposable elements and genes that are often associated with them and regularly become passengers such as restriction-modification (RM) and toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. It seems natural that, inasmuch as viruses and plasmids are mobile by definition, so are the systems of defense. The mobilome is inextricably connected with the 'main' prokaryotic chromosomes. Viruses (bacteriophages) and many plasmids systematically integrate into chromosomes, either reversibly, in which case they often mobilize chromosomal genes or irreversibly whereby a mobile element becomes 'domesticated', giving rise to resident genes, initially, of the ORFan class (216,217). It is well known since the classic experiments of Jacob and Wollman (218) that conjugative plasmids can mediate the transfer of large segments of bacterial chromosomes. The discovery of the GTAs, that seem to be specialized HGT vectors, further emphasizes the existence of regular channels of communication between the mobilome and the chromosomes.

(p41.8) Transfer of antibiotic resistance and secondary metabolic capabilities on plasmids are textbook examples of bacterial mobilome dynamics but the role of plasmids extends far beyond such relatively narrow biological areas (219). Actually, the boundary between chromosomes and plasmids is fuzzy (220)(221)(222). Plasmids are replicons (typically, circular but in some cases, linear) that, similarly to prokaryotic chromosomes, carry an origin site and encode at least some of the proteins involved in the plasmid replication and partitioning (223). The key proteins involved in plasmid and chromosome partitioning, in particular, ATPases of the FtsK-HerA family are homologous throughout the prokaryotic world, a fact that emphasizes common evolutionary origins and strategies of diverse prokaryotic replicons (224).

(p41.9) The 'canonical' genomes of numerous bacteria and archaea include, in addition to the 'main' chromosome(s), one or more relatively stable, essential, large extrachromosomal elements, often described as megaplasmids (221). Megaplasmids can be remarkably persistent during evolution. For instance, it has been shown that the single megaplasmid of Thermus thermophilus is homologous to one of the two megaplasmids of Deinococcus radiodurans and, by implication, derives from the common ancestor of these related but highly diverged bacteria (225). However, over the course of evolution of this ancient bacterial group, the megaplasmids have accumulated (relative to their size) many more differences in their gene repertoires than chromosomes. Moreover, the megaplasmids carry numerous horizontally transferred genes including genes from thermophilic organisms that apparently were acquired by the Thermus lineage and appear to be important for the thermophylic life style (225). Thus, although megaplasmids can persist in prokaryotic lineages over long evolutionary spans, they display greater genomic plasticity than chromosomes, and appear to be act as reservoirs of HGT.

(p41.10) All sequenced prokaryotic genomes contain traces of integration of multiple plasmids and phages (216). It is particularly notable that most of the archaeal genomes possess multiple versions of the HerA-NurA operon that encodes key component of the plasmid partitioning machinery (224). Thus, replicon fusion is likely to be a relatively common event in prokaryotes, and over the course of evolution, such fusion might have been a major factor in shaping the observed architecture of prokaryotic chromosomes.

(p41.11) Defense and stress response systems, in particular, RM and TA systems can be considered special parts of the mobilome. Comparative analysis of these systems shows evidence of rapid evolution and frequent HGT, and they are frequently found in plasmid and bacteriophage genomes (226). Despite their enormous molecular diversity, RM and TA systems function on the same principle: they are comprised of a toxin, a protein that destroys the chromosomal DNA (restriction enzymes), blocks translation (RNA endonuclease toxins) or kills the cell by making holes in the membrane. Cell death is prevented by specific methylation of the DNA, in the case of RM systems or by neutralization of the toxin by the antitoxin in the case of TA systems, either through toxin proteinantitoxin protein interaction or through abrogation of the translation of the toxin mRNA by the antitoxin antisense RNA. These systems possess properties of selfish elements: when the respective genes are lost from a cell, the cell typically dies either because the toxin is more stable than the antitoxin, and its activity is unleashed once the antitoxin degrades but cannot be replenished (227,228) or because of the differential effects of dilution on the restriction and modification enzymes (229). Because of the same property of TA systems, there is strong selection for plasmids carrying TA genes that ensure plasmid 'addiction' by killing cells that have lost the plasmid. The currently known TA systems are likely to comprise the proverbial tips of the iceberg as bacterial and archaeal genomes carry a great variety of operons whose properties mimic those of TA operons (a pair of genes that encode small proteins and occur as a stable combination in diverse genomes and genomic neighborhoods) but that have not been experimentally characterized (K.S. Makarova, Y.I.W. and E.V.K., unpublished data).

(p41.12) Recently, a novel and highly unusual class of defense systems has been shown to exist in approximately half of bacteria and archaea whose genomes have been sequenced (230). This system is centered around arrays of so-called CRISPR repeats (231) and has been accordingly denoted CAS (CRISPR-Associated System) (92). The CAS systems includes 50 distinct gene families (91,92) and comes across as the second largest, after the ribosomal superoperon, array of connected gene neighborhoods in prokaryotic genomes (89,232). The CAS system protects prokaryotic cells against phages and plasmids via a 'Lamarckian mechanism', whereby a fragment of a phage or plasmid gene is integrated into the CRISPR locus on the bacterial chromosome and is subsequently transcribed and utilized, via still poorly characterized mechanisms, to abrogate the selfish agent's replication (233). The CAS system shows extreme plasticity, even among closely related isolates of bacteria and archaea, and strong evidence of extensive HGT (92,230).

(p41.13) The selected examples discussed here point to enormous, still incompletely understood diversity of the prokaryotic mobilomeand the major contribution that the mobilomes makes to the evolution of the prokaryotic genome space.
## (s42) THE NEW, DYNAMIC VIEW OF THE PROKARYOTIC WORLD AND THE DEMISE OF THE TREE OF LIFE
(p42.0) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).

(p42.1) Under the network vision of the prokaryotic world, archaeal and bacterial chromosomes are not envisaged as strictly defined genotypes gradually changing in time but rather as islands of temporary, relative dynamic stability that forms tightly connected (vertically and horizontally) areas of the network. The prokaryotic genome space is, obviously, not limited to chromosomes of cellular life forms but consists of a tremendous diversity of replicons including all components of the mobilome. The importance of these agents cannot be overestimated when one takes into account that metagenomic studies show that viruses are the most common entities in the biosphere, with about 10 virus particles per cell found in marine environments (47). Fusion, fission and recombination between replicons comprise the dominant mode of the genetic dynamics in the prokaryotic world. However, the notion of dynamic stability that is manifest in persistence of distinct structure in the prokaryotic world network extends also to the relationship between the genetic complements of prokaryotic cellular life forms and the mobilome. All their enormous mobility notwithstanding, selfish elements posses a core of 'hallmark' genes that only transiently appear in bacterial and archaeal chromosomes (234).

(p42.2) The ubiquity of HGT and the prominence of the prokaryotic mobilome suggest a novel, extremely dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world ( Figure 17). Under this view, a Tree of Life (TOL) does not adequately represent evolution of prokaryotes (213,214), not even in the previously envisaged form of a 'cobweb' of life where the main vertical flow of genetic information is complemented by functionally important but quantitatively relatively minor horizontal flow (196,201). An image of a dynamic, weighted network graph where the nodes are genomes and edges denote gene flow between them, with the weight proportional to the intensity of the flow, is more adequate (Figure 17). In this network, it still makes sense to differentiate between vertical and horizontal gene flows. Indeed, at the microscopic level, vertical gene flow (transmission of genes to daughter cells via cell division) is readily distinguishable from HGT that constitutes gene transfer between cell via conjugation, transduction or transformation (generally, any means other than cell division). It is in the macroscopic, historical perspective that the distinction between vertical and horizontal transmission becomes conceptually dubious and practically hard to draw. Nevertheless, the network includes areas of substantial coherence of the vertical flow where the tree image is appropriate to depict coherent phylogenies of large groups of genes. Conceivably, these parts of the network, at least on average, also are characterized by intensive horizontal gene flow, emphasizing the interplay between the two directions limited applicability of genomes (154). However, on many occasions, 'highways' of horizontal gene flow (201), i.e. high-weight edges in the network, also connect organisms that are not tightly linked by vertical connections but coexist in the same habitats like hyperthemophilic bacteria and archaea ( Figure 17).

(p42.3) Under the network vision of the prokaryotic world, archaeal and bacterial chromosomes are not envisaged as strictly defined genotypes gradually changing in time but rather as islands of temporary, relative dynamic stability that forms tightly connected (vertically and horizontally) areas of the network. The prokaryotic genome space is, obviously, not limited to chromosomes of cellular life forms but consists of a tremendous diversity of replicons including all components of the mobilome. The importance of these agents cannot be overestimated when one takes into account that metagenomic studies show that viruses are the most common entities in the biosphere, with about 10 virus particles per cell found in marine environments (47). Fusion, fission and recombination between replicons comprise the dominant mode of the genetic dynamics in the prokaryotic world. However, the notion of dynamic stability that is manifest in persistence of distinct structure in the prokaryotic world network extends also to the relationship between the genetic complements of prokaryotic cellular life forms and the mobilome. All their enormous mobility notwithstanding, selfish elements posses a core of 'hallmark' genes that only transiently appear in bacterial and archaeal chromosomes (234).
## (s43) THE PRINCIPAL PROCESSES OF PROKARYOTIC EVOLUTION
(p43.0) Having formulated the notion of the dynamic prokaryotic world, we are now in a position to classify the major processes that affect evolution of prokaryotes. In doing so, one necessarily must take into account the population-genetic theory of evolution of genomic complexity that was recently expounded by Lynch (235,236). The essence of this theory is that genetic changes leading to an increase of complexity such as duplications can be fixed only when purifying selection in a population is relatively weak, i.e. substantial complexification is possible only during population bottlenecks. Under this view, genomic complexity is not adaptive but is brought about by neutral population-genetic processes under conditions when purifying selection is (relatively) ineffective. Thus, complexification starts off as a 'genomic syndrome' although complex features subsequently become subject to adaptive selection. In contrast, in 'highly successful', large populations, purifying selection is intense, and the prevailing mode of evolution is thought to be genome streamlining (237).
## (s44) GENOMIC SIGNATURES OF DISTINCT LIFE STYLES OF BACTERIA AND ARCHAEA
(p44.0) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).

(p44.1) Genomic signatures of more complex phenotypes, such as thermophily or radioresistance, turned out to be much more elusive. The most effort, perhaps, has been dedicated to the quest for signs of thermophilic adaptation. Remarkably, there is a single gene that is found in all sequenced hyperthemrophilic genomes but not in any of the mesophiles, and this gene encodes a protein that is strictly required for DNA replication at extreme high temperatures, reverse gyrase (259). Moreover, the genome of a moderate thermophile T. thermophilus (strainHB27) contains a reverse gyrase pseudogene, whereas the related strain HB8 contains an intact reverse gyrase gene, demonstrating an ongoing process of reverse gyrase elimination after the probable switch from hyperthermophilic to moderate thermophilic life style (225,260). However, search for other thermophile-specific genes yielded limited information, with no genes other than reverse gyrase showing a clean pattern of presence-absence correlated with (hyper)thermophily and only a few showing significant enrichment in thermophilic compared to mesophilic archaea and bacteria (261). Genome-wide searches for thermophilic determinants have been directed also at detecting relevant patterns of differences at the level of nucleotide and protein sequences and structures. Although these studies have revealed several suggestive distinctions of thermophilic proteins, such as higher charge density (262,263) and overrepresentation of disulphide bridges (264), the ultimate significance of each of these features remains uncertain. The overall conclusion from these studies is that so far comparative genomics has failed to reveal 'secrets' of the thermophilic life style (intuitively, one would suspect that there must be major, genome-encoded differences between organisms whose optimal growth temperature exceeds 958C and those that optimally grow at 378C).

(p44.2) The story of the search for genomic correlates of extreme radioresistance and desiccation resistance might be even more illuminating. Some bacteria and archaea, of which the best characterized is the bacterium D. radiodurans, possess extreme radiation resistance that is thought to be a side effect of their adaptive desiccation resistance (265). Extensive genome analysis of D. radiodurans did not immediately reveal any unique features of the genome or of DNA repair systems that could explain the exceptional ability of this organism to survive radiation damage although homologs of plant proteins implicated in desiccation resistance and, at the time, not found in any other bacteria, have been identified (266). Deinococcus radiodurans is a model experimental system, so subsequently, transcriptomic and proteomics studies have been undertaken to characterize the response of this bacterium to high-dose irradiation (267)(268)(269). These studies have generated some excitement because substantial upregulation of several uncharacterized genes whose products were implicated in potentially relevant processes such as double-strand break repair (267). However, knockout of these genes failed to affect radiation resistance, whereas knockouts of a few genes that did not encode any recognizable domains and were not upregulated upon irradiation did render the organism radiationsensitive (270). The recent comparative analysis of two related, radiation-resistant bacteria, D. radiodurans and D. geothermalis, failed to resolve and even further complicated the problem of genomic determinants of radioresistance (270). No genes with clear relevance to radiation resistance were discovered that would be unique to these radioresistant bacteria. Moreover, orthologs of many of the genes that are strongly upregulated in D. radiodurans upon irradiation are missing in D. geothermalis. The careful comparison of operon structure and predicted regulatory sites in the two Deinococcus genomes led to the prediction of a putative radiation-resistance regulon. However, for most of the genes that comprise this putative regulon, the relevance for radiation and desiccation resistance is uncertain. The principal determinants of radioresistance remain elusive, and there is growing evidence that important roles could belong to genes that mediate resistance in unexpected, indirect ways, e.g. through regulation of the intracellular concentrations of divalent cations that affect the level of protein damage resulting from irradiation or desiccation (271,272).

(p44.3) The only possible conclusion on the current state of understanding of the genome-phenotype connections in prokaryotes is that these links are multifaceted, and that distinct sets of genes responsible for complex phenotypes are not readily identifiable despite the existence of clear signatures of certain phenotypes such as reverse gyrase in the case of hyperthermophily. The complexity of this relationship parallels the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene and functional spaces of prokaryotes discussed earlier.

(p44.4) One of the greatest hopes associated with comparative genomics is the possibility, at least, in principle, to delineate 'genomic signatures' of distinct organismal life styles, i.e. sets of genes that are necessary and sufficient to support these lifestyles. In the current, rapidly growing collection of prokaryotic genomes, a lifestyle is often represented by multiple, diverse genomes, so the time seems ripe for studies of the genome-phenotype links to start in earnest. So far, only very modest success can be claimed. In cases where a lifestyle is linked to a welldefined biochemical pathway(s), e.g. in methanogens or photosynthetic organisms, identification of a genomic signature can be a relatively straightforward task (257,258). Even so, for example, the analysis of the genes for proteins involved in photosynthesis illustrates the complex intertwine of lifestyle-specific and lineage-specific features. The most complete set of 'photosynthetic' genes was detected in cyanobacteria, whereas the other groups of photosynthetic bacteria possessed various subsets of these genes (258).

(p44.5) Genomic signatures of more complex phenotypes, such as thermophily or radioresistance, turned out to be much more elusive. The most effort, perhaps, has been dedicated to the quest for signs of thermophilic adaptation. Remarkably, there is a single gene that is found in all sequenced hyperthemrophilic genomes but not in any of the mesophiles, and this gene encodes a protein that is strictly required for DNA replication at extreme high temperatures, reverse gyrase (259). Moreover, the genome of a moderate thermophile T. thermophilus (strainHB27) contains a reverse gyrase pseudogene, whereas the related strain HB8 contains an intact reverse gyrase gene, demonstrating an ongoing process of reverse gyrase elimination after the probable switch from hyperthermophilic to moderate thermophilic life style (225,260). However, search for other thermophile-specific genes yielded limited information, with no genes other than reverse gyrase showing a clean pattern of presence-absence correlated with (hyper)thermophily and only a few showing significant enrichment in thermophilic compared to mesophilic archaea and bacteria (261). Genome-wide searches for thermophilic determinants have been directed also at detecting relevant patterns of differences at the level of nucleotide and protein sequences and structures. Although these studies have revealed several suggestive distinctions of thermophilic proteins, such as higher charge density (262,263) and overrepresentation of disulphide bridges (264), the ultimate significance of each of these features remains uncertain. The overall conclusion from these studies is that so far comparative genomics has failed to reveal 'secrets' of the thermophilic life style (intuitively, one would suspect that there must be major, genome-encoded differences between organisms whose optimal growth temperature exceeds 958C and those that optimally grow at 378C).

(p44.6) The story of the search for genomic correlates of extreme radioresistance and desiccation resistance might be even more illuminating. Some bacteria and archaea, of which the best characterized is the bacterium D. radiodurans, possess extreme radiation resistance that is thought to be a side effect of their adaptive desiccation resistance (265). Extensive genome analysis of D. radiodurans did not immediately reveal any unique features of the genome or of DNA repair systems that could explain the exceptional ability of this organism to survive radiation damage although homologs of plant proteins implicated in desiccation resistance and, at the time, not found in any other bacteria, have been identified (266). Deinococcus radiodurans is a model experimental system, so subsequently, transcriptomic and proteomics studies have been undertaken to characterize the response of this bacterium to high-dose irradiation (267)(268)(269). These studies have generated some excitement because substantial upregulation of several uncharacterized genes whose products were implicated in potentially relevant processes such as double-strand break repair (267). However, knockout of these genes failed to affect radiation resistance, whereas knockouts of a few genes that did not encode any recognizable domains and were not upregulated upon irradiation did render the organism radiationsensitive (270). The recent comparative analysis of two related, radiation-resistant bacteria, D. radiodurans and D. geothermalis, failed to resolve and even further complicated the problem of genomic determinants of radioresistance (270). No genes with clear relevance to radiation resistance were discovered that would be unique to these radioresistant bacteria. Moreover, orthologs of many of the genes that are strongly upregulated in D. radiodurans upon irradiation are missing in D. geothermalis. The careful comparison of operon structure and predicted regulatory sites in the two Deinococcus genomes led to the prediction of a putative radiation-resistance regulon. However, for most of the genes that comprise this putative regulon, the relevance for radiation and desiccation resistance is uncertain. The principal determinants of radioresistance remain elusive, and there is growing evidence that important roles could belong to genes that mediate resistance in unexpected, indirect ways, e.g. through regulation of the intracellular concentrations of divalent cations that affect the level of protein damage resulting from irradiation or desiccation (271,272).

(p44.7) The only possible conclusion on the current state of understanding of the genome-phenotype connections in prokaryotes is that these links are multifaceted, and that distinct sets of genes responsible for complex phenotypes are not readily identifiable despite the existence of clear signatures of certain phenotypes such as reverse gyrase in the case of hyperthermophily. The complexity of this relationship parallels the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene and functional spaces of prokaryotes discussed earlier.
## (s45) ARCHAEA AND BACTERIA IN THE LIGHT OF COMPARATIVE GENOMICS: WHITHER PROKARYOTES?
(p45.0) The very validity of the term and concept of a prokaryote has been challenged as outdated and based on a negative definition, i.e. the absence of a eponymous organelle of the 'higher' organisms (eukaryotes), the nucleus (26,273). Instead of the purportedly inadequate notion of a prokaryote, it has been proposed to classify life forms solely on the basis of phylogenetic divisions that have been derived, primarily, from rRNA trees and supported by trees for a few other (nearly) universal informational genes. The argument on the negative definition of prokaryotes has been countered by defining positive characters such as transcription-translation coupling (274). Regardless of the relative merits of these arguments, comparative genomics throws its own light on the prokaryotic problem. There is little universal conservation in terms of gene composition across archaea and bacteria, and next to none in terms of the organization of specific genes (see above). In trees built on the basis of comparisons of gene composition or conserved pairs of adjacent genes, the split between bacteria and archaea is unequivocal (50). In a stark contrast, the overall genome organization of bacteria and archaea is remarkably uniform. Some exceptions notwithstanding, this general principle of genome organization can be easily captured in a succinct description: bacteria and archaea have compact genomes with short intergenic regions so that many genes form directons that tend to function as operons. The formation of directons many of which become operons can be considered a direct consequence of genome contraction. The persistence of operons is subsequently ensured by a combination of purifying selection and frequent HGT as captured in the selfish operon concept. Thus, the uniform principle of organization of the genomes of bacteria and archaea emerges as a direct consequence of the forces operating in the evolution of these life forms, and these forces themselves are linked to their population structure. Considering this unity, we have to conclude that the concept of prokaryotes as life forms that evolve under a distinct, common mode leading to a common type of genome organization is well justified. Whether or not 'prokaryotes' is a good term to describe this part of the biosphere remains a debatable issue (the problem of the origin of eukaryotes from which this issues hardly can be separated is beyond the scope of this article) but, probably, one of secondary importance.

(p45.1) The very validity of the term and concept of a prokaryote has been challenged as outdated and based on a negative definition, i.e. the absence of a eponymous organelle of the 'higher' organisms (eukaryotes), the nucleus (26,273). Instead of the purportedly inadequate notion of a prokaryote, it has been proposed to classify life forms solely on the basis of phylogenetic divisions that have been derived, primarily, from rRNA trees and supported by trees for a few other (nearly) universal informational genes. The argument on the negative definition of prokaryotes has been countered by defining positive characters such as transcription-translation coupling (274). Regardless of the relative merits of these arguments, comparative genomics throws its own light on the prokaryotic problem. There is little universal conservation in terms of gene composition across archaea and bacteria, and next to none in terms of the organization of specific genes (see above). In trees built on the basis of comparisons of gene composition or conserved pairs of adjacent genes, the split between bacteria and archaea is unequivocal (50). In a stark contrast, the overall genome organization of bacteria and archaea is remarkably uniform. Some exceptions notwithstanding, this general principle of genome organization can be easily captured in a succinct description: bacteria and archaea have compact genomes with short intergenic regions so that many genes form directons that tend to function as operons. The formation of directons many of which become operons can be considered a direct consequence of genome contraction. The persistence of operons is subsequently ensured by a combination of purifying selection and frequent HGT as captured in the selfish operon concept. Thus, the uniform principle of organization of the genomes of bacteria and archaea emerges as a direct consequence of the forces operating in the evolution of these life forms, and these forces themselves are linked to their population structure. Considering this unity, we have to conclude that the concept of prokaryotes as life forms that evolve under a distinct, common mode leading to a common type of genome organization is well justified. Whether or not 'prokaryotes' is a good term to describe this part of the biosphere remains a debatable issue (the problem of the origin of eukaryotes from which this issues hardly can be separated is beyond the scope of this article) but, probably, one of secondary importance.
## (s46) CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVE
(p46.0) By any account, the progress of knowledge of the prokaryotic world brought about by comparative genomics has been enormous. Many of the major trends and patterns discussed here, such as the distinction along with the similarities between archaea and bacteria, the operonic organization of bacterial genes, and the existence of HGT, have been noticed in the pregenomic era, but more as anecdotes than as general patterns. Comparative genomics allows one to actually determine how (un)common is a particular pattern, and the confidence of such inference increases with the growth of the genome collection. In the early days of genomics, a hope for a new suite of 'laws of genomics' has been expressed (275). Certain striking, nearly universal quantitative regularities indeed have been revealed by comparison of prokaryotic genomes. The two best candidates for 'laws of genomics' seem to be the scaling of different functional classes of genes with the genome (147) and the universal distribution of the evolutionary rates in orthologous gene sets (239). On the whole, however, 13 years into the comparative genomic enterprise, it seems more appropriate to speak of regularities, constraints, and perhaps, principles. Indeed, in terms of general organization, the great majority of the archaeal and bacterial genomes are notably similar, and are built according to the same, simple 'master plan' with wall-to-wall protein-coding and RNA-coding genes, preferentially organized in directons, typically, with a single origin of replication. Most of the arcaheal and bacterial genes are simple units, with uninterrupted coding sequence and short regulatory regions. There seems to be a nontrivial connection between gene functions and genome complexity: scaling of the number of genes of different functional classes appears to be (nearly) the same across the wide range of the available genomes, with the nearly constant, 'frozen' set of genes involved in translation and a steep increase in the number of regulators and signaling proteins with genome size. This increased 'burden of bureaucracy' is likely to be one of the important factors that set the upper limit for prokaryotic genome size and, accordingly, complexity. These regularities come as close to 'laws of genomics' as one can imagine although, as always in biology, there are multiple exceptions to any rule. More importantly, within these simple constraints, lie the enormous diversity and intricacy of the content and history of prokaryotic genomes.

(p46.1) Cases in point abound. The demonstration that the great majority of genes in each genome are not ORFans but rather have orthologs is, arguably, the very cornerstone of the genomic enterprise, which underlies all functional annotation of the sequenced genomes as well as evolutionary reconstructions. However, the flip side of the coin, namely, the patchy distribution of COGs in the gene space is no less fundamental. This distribution is the product of the major forces that shape prokaryotic evolution, namely, HGT, genes loss that often reflects genome streamlining, and nonorthologous gene displacement, which reflects the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene space and the functional space. The virtually unlimited flexibility of the architecture of prokaryotic genomes owing to extensive rearrangements, which create diverse variations on the themes of conserved operons, and the discovery of previously unsuspected signaling, regulatory and defense systems, only a few of which are briefly discussed in this article, add to the complexity of the prokaryotic genomescape that is revealed by comparative genomics.

(p46.2) Arguably, the most important conceptual novelty brought about by genomics is the demonstration that HGT is ubiquitous in the prokaryotic world, even as the extent of gene movement between distantly related organisms remains an issue of debate. Regardless of the further developments in these debates, the wide spread of HGT and the apparent absence of impenetrable barriers means that the prokaryotic world is a single connected gene pool, although this pool has a complex, compartmentalized structure, with its distinct parts being partially isolated from each other. Horizontal gene transfer affects different classes of genes to different extents, at least, in part, according to the complexity hypothesis, but no gene seems to be completely immune to HGT. The compartmentalization of the gene pool notwithstanding, the results of comparative genomics refute the TOL concept, at least, as applied to the prokaryotic world, as well as the notion of prokaryotic species. At best, the tree representation of genome evolution might be applicable to subsets of conserved genes from relatively close organisms. Delineation of 'higher taxa' of bacteria and archaea might not be a feasible project, given the erosion of the phylogenetic signal, the cumulative effect of HGT over time and the possibility that the early evolution of prokaryotes involved even more extensive HGT and could have been more akin to partially constrained sampling of the gene pool (214). From a complementary, genome-centric perspective, the results of comparative genomics indicate that the genes in any genome are far from having the same history, and it could be hard even to identify a set of genes that have a coherent history over a substantial evolutionary span. To this, it must added the a substantial fraction of most prokaryotic genomes belongs to the mobilome, the vast set of genes that come and go at striking rates and, generally, might not have any adaptive value for the organisms, even if occasionally recruited by some organisms for specific biological functions.

(p46.3) Taken together, these findings amount to a new, dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world that is best represented as a complex network of genetic elements, which exchange genes at widely varying rates. In this network, the distinction between the relatively stable chromosomes and the mobilome is a difference in degree (of mobility) rather than in kind. The remarkably uniform general organization of prokaryotic genomes appears to be determined by the dynamic nature of the prokaryotic genome space along with the intensive purifying selection underpinned by the large effective population size of most prokaryotes that itself is a function of extensive gene exchange.

(p46.4) The paradox of today's state of the art is that, despite the tremendous progress-but also owing to these advances-the emerging complexity of the prokaryotic world is currently beyond our grasp. We have no adequate language, in terms of theory or tools, to describe the workings and histories of the genomic network. Developing such a language is the major challenge for the next stage in the evolution of prokaryotic genomics.

(p46.5) By any account, the progress of knowledge of the prokaryotic world brought about by comparative genomics has been enormous. Many of the major trends and patterns discussed here, such as the distinction along with the similarities between archaea and bacteria, the operonic organization of bacterial genes, and the existence of HGT, have been noticed in the pregenomic era, but more as anecdotes than as general patterns. Comparative genomics allows one to actually determine how (un)common is a particular pattern, and the confidence of such inference increases with the growth of the genome collection. In the early days of genomics, a hope for a new suite of 'laws of genomics' has been expressed (275). Certain striking, nearly universal quantitative regularities indeed have been revealed by comparison of prokaryotic genomes. The two best candidates for 'laws of genomics' seem to be the scaling of different functional classes of genes with the genome (147) and the universal distribution of the evolutionary rates in orthologous gene sets (239). On the whole, however, 13 years into the comparative genomic enterprise, it seems more appropriate to speak of regularities, constraints, and perhaps, principles. Indeed, in terms of general organization, the great majority of the archaeal and bacterial genomes are notably similar, and are built according to the same, simple 'master plan' with wall-to-wall protein-coding and RNA-coding genes, preferentially organized in directons, typically, with a single origin of replication. Most of the arcaheal and bacterial genes are simple units, with uninterrupted coding sequence and short regulatory regions. There seems to be a nontrivial connection between gene functions and genome complexity: scaling of the number of genes of different functional classes appears to be (nearly) the same across the wide range of the available genomes, with the nearly constant, 'frozen' set of genes involved in translation and a steep increase in the number of regulators and signaling proteins with genome size. This increased 'burden of bureaucracy' is likely to be one of the important factors that set the upper limit for prokaryotic genome size and, accordingly, complexity. These regularities come as close to 'laws of genomics' as one can imagine although, as always in biology, there are multiple exceptions to any rule. More importantly, within these simple constraints, lie the enormous diversity and intricacy of the content and history of prokaryotic genomes.

(p46.6) Cases in point abound. The demonstration that the great majority of genes in each genome are not ORFans but rather have orthologs is, arguably, the very cornerstone of the genomic enterprise, which underlies all functional annotation of the sequenced genomes as well as evolutionary reconstructions. However, the flip side of the coin, namely, the patchy distribution of COGs in the gene space is no less fundamental. This distribution is the product of the major forces that shape prokaryotic evolution, namely, HGT, genes loss that often reflects genome streamlining, and nonorthologous gene displacement, which reflects the nonisomorphous mapping between the gene space and the functional space. The virtually unlimited flexibility of the architecture of prokaryotic genomes owing to extensive rearrangements, which create diverse variations on the themes of conserved operons, and the discovery of previously unsuspected signaling, regulatory and defense systems, only a few of which are briefly discussed in this article, add to the complexity of the prokaryotic genomescape that is revealed by comparative genomics.

(p46.7) Arguably, the most important conceptual novelty brought about by genomics is the demonstration that HGT is ubiquitous in the prokaryotic world, even as the extent of gene movement between distantly related organisms remains an issue of debate. Regardless of the further developments in these debates, the wide spread of HGT and the apparent absence of impenetrable barriers means that the prokaryotic world is a single connected gene pool, although this pool has a complex, compartmentalized structure, with its distinct parts being partially isolated from each other. Horizontal gene transfer affects different classes of genes to different extents, at least, in part, according to the complexity hypothesis, but no gene seems to be completely immune to HGT. The compartmentalization of the gene pool notwithstanding, the results of comparative genomics refute the TOL concept, at least, as applied to the prokaryotic world, as well as the notion of prokaryotic species. At best, the tree representation of genome evolution might be applicable to subsets of conserved genes from relatively close organisms. Delineation of 'higher taxa' of bacteria and archaea might not be a feasible project, given the erosion of the phylogenetic signal, the cumulative effect of HGT over time and the possibility that the early evolution of prokaryotes involved even more extensive HGT and could have been more akin to partially constrained sampling of the gene pool (214). From a complementary, genome-centric perspective, the results of comparative genomics indicate that the genes in any genome are far from having the same history, and it could be hard even to identify a set of genes that have a coherent history over a substantial evolutionary span. To this, it must added the a substantial fraction of most prokaryotic genomes belongs to the mobilome, the vast set of genes that come and go at striking rates and, generally, might not have any adaptive value for the organisms, even if occasionally recruited by some organisms for specific biological functions.

(p46.8) Taken together, these findings amount to a new, dynamic picture of the prokaryotic world that is best represented as a complex network of genetic elements, which exchange genes at widely varying rates. In this network, the distinction between the relatively stable chromosomes and the mobilome is a difference in degree (of mobility) rather than in kind. The remarkably uniform general organization of prokaryotic genomes appears to be determined by the dynamic nature of the prokaryotic genome space along with the intensive purifying selection underpinned by the large effective population size of most prokaryotes that itself is a function of extensive gene exchange.

(p46.9) The paradox of today's state of the art is that, despite the tremendous progress-but also owing to these advances-the emerging complexity of the prokaryotic world is currently beyond our grasp. We have no adequate language, in terms of theory or tools, to describe the workings and histories of the genomic network. Developing such a language is the major challenge for the next stage in the evolution of prokaryotic genomics.
