# Patient Preference and Adherence Dovepress A review of denosumab for the treatment of osteoporosis

CorpusID: 11945783 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/995c5c846d5a86afb2ba7aec69b5a966050ca4bb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/995c5c846d5a86afb2ba7aec69b5a966050ca4bb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Clinical development of denosumab as a prophylactic and/or therapeutic agent for osteoporosis
(p6.0) To evaluate whether inhibition of RANKL has clinical utility, 52 healthy postmenopausal women were given single doses of an osteoprotegerin-immunoglobulin Fc segment complex (Fc:OPG) (0.1, 0.3, 1.0, or 3.0 mg/kg) in a Phase I randomized placebo-controlled study. 49 Urinary levels of the cross-linked N-telopeptide of type I collagen (NTX), a specific marker of bone resorption, and bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BSAP), an index of bone formation, were subsequently monitored for 84 days. Within 12 hours of receiving Fc:OPG, a dose-dependent decrease in NTX/ creatinine ratios was observed. Furthermore, this ratio decreased by 70% to 80% within 5 days for the highest doses of Fc:OPG. After several weeks, levels of NTX/creatinine returned to baseline. A significant decrease in levels of BSAP were also observed for the 1.0 mg/kg and 3.0 mg/kg doses. For the latter group, inhibition of BSAP occurred more slowly, with levels 30% below baseline observed after 60 days. There were also no serious adverse events reported in this study. In one patient, a transient neutralizing antibody to OPG was detected, although this did not have any obvious clinical effect. These data provide evidence that inhibition of RANKL by its natural inhibitor, OPG, can result in clinically measurable effects. However, the development of OPG as a therapy for osteoporosis was not further pursued due to its potential immunogenicity, and because immunologic resistance to OPG could have negative effects on the skeleton. 50 Since denosumab specifically binds RANKL, 47 it is less likely to affect the immune system or other regulatory systems. Moreover, denosumab does not have the potential for autoimmunization against a vital regulatory protein and is characterized by a longer half-life, which permits less frequent dosing. 51 Each of these attributes makes denosumab a more attractive therapeutic agent than forms of OPG. To evaluate the safety, pharmacokinetics (PK), and possible bone resorption effects of denosumab, a Phase I study was conducted. Subcutaneous administration of various concentrations of denosumab (0.01 mg/kg to 3.0 mg/kg) were administered to 49 healthy postmenopausal women. 51 The PK of denosumab were found to be nonlinear with dose. A prolonged absorption phase also occurred, with maximum serum concentrations reached between 5 days and 21 days after the women received the initial dose. Conversely, the disappearance of denosumab from the serum occurred in two phases: a slow phase and a fast phase. The initial slow phase was associated with half-lives of approximately 20 days for the lower doses of denosumab, and approximately 32 days for the higher doses. When circulating levels of denosumab were ∼1,000 ng/mL, clearance occurred more rapidly. Urinary NTX levels were also found to decrease within 12 hours of dosing. Overall, the magnitude of the initial response was similar among the doses, although the duration of the effect was dose-dependent. These results are consistent with the pharmacokinetic data. By the end of the 9-month follow-up period, NTX levels had returned to baseline for all of the doses. Alternatively, serum levels of BSAP remained stable for the first two weeks following dosing, then decreased in a dose-dependent manner. Taken together, these results suggest that the effect of denosumab on bone formation is indirect.
## (s16) Conclusion
(p16.0) The inhibition of RANKL by denosumab has been shown to significantly affect bone metabolism. Correspondingly, this highly specific antibody for RANKL appears to be a promising treatment for osteoporosis and other bone diseases characterized by increased bone turnover. Freemantle et al showed that denosumab was more effective at reducing the occurrence of vertebral fractures than raloxifene, risedronate, and alendronate. 79 The cost-effectiveness of denosumab in postmenopausal osteoporotic women has been evaluated by estimating expected cost and quality-adjusted life-years. Analyses have shown that denosumab represented good value-for-money in postmenopausal women with low bone mass compared with no treatment 80 or treatment with oral bisphosphonates, [81][82][83] and, therefore, has the potential to be a first-line treatment for postmenopausal osteoporotic women. In addition, the cost-effectiveness of denosumab is favorable, particularly for patients at high risk of fracture and low expected adher ence to oral treatments. 84 The long-term efficacy and toxicity of denosumab remains to be confirmed with studies that include longer follow-up periods. This is particularly relevant since postmenopausal women are increasingly experiencing a longer life expectancy, and, thus, the potential for anti-osteoporosis therapy to span multiple decades is a growing consideration.
