# Reducing industrial energy demand in the UK: A review of energy efficiency technologies and energy saving potential in selected sectors

CorpusID: 117159736 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9375f5ff521fc859e34181aadfdd5f50e6856f45](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9375f5ff521fc859e34181aadfdd5f50e6856f45)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Engineering, Business

## (s27) Engineering-Procurement-Construction (E-P-C)
(p27.0) E-P-C is a popular business model in industry. Energy service providers undertake the system planning and design, civil construction, equipment procurement, equipment installation, system commissioning, and are fully responsible for the quality, safety, duration, and cost of a project [169]. The entire system is handed over to the energy users on completion thus turnkey operates. The E-P-C business model has some derivative forms. For the Engineering (E) service model [170], the ESCO provides technical solutions and design, but the energy users arrange their own equipment procurement, construction, and management. In the E model, the ESCO occupies only one value chain position, so some of the large ESCOs are reluctant to provide this model of service, thus the proportion of this business model is declining year by year. For the Engineering-Procurement (E-P) service model, the ESCO not only provides technical solutions and design, but also arrange equipment procurement, construction, and management for the energy users. The E-P service is widely used for energy efficiency projects or non-core business. Other energy users adopt the E-P-C service model in the project phase and then commission the ESCO to operate the energy system in the operation phase, that is, the E-P-C & Commission service model. The application and promotion of the E-P-C & Commission service model has some inevitability as energy efficiency projects often have different technical requirements compared to the energy users' core business. They are often complicated in structure and have a wide range of highly technical content. After project completion, the operation, maintenance and management of the new energy system require personnel with high technical capabilities. Due to the lack of relevant professional and technical personnel as well as other organisation barriers as discussed in Section 4.2, in most cases energy users cannot operate the energy system under optimum conditions. Furthermore, due to technical barriers and other reasons, when determining the general contractor, it is difficult for the energy user to determine the pros and cons of E-P-C project work and the effect this will have on operational efficiency from the written materials. In either case, the E-P-C & Commission service model allows the project risk to be handed over to the operations contractor and the energy user can concentrate on its core business.
