# Molecular Sciences Pathophysiological, Molecular and Therapeutic Issues of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: An Overview

CorpusID: 128359346 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f11076ff4a97f43b6b9bf4fdbb6d9f11b0400c06)

Fields: Medicine

## (s5) Pathophysiological Features
(p5.0) The pathogenesis of NAFLD is multifactorial. Genetic factors cooperate with metabolic and environmental factors to promote the accumulation of fat in hepatocytes. In the last decade of the 20th century, the most corroborated theory was the "two hit pathogenesis". It stated that insulin resistance leads to TG deposition in the liver, thus steatosis, rendering it more susceptible to the action of second hits, such as oxidative stress, ATP depletion and endotoxins, finally leading to inflammation, fibrosis and cancer. Nowadays, this theory has been replaced by the "multiple hit pathogenesis". This states that multiple etiopathogenic factors act in a parallel or sequential and somehow synergic way on a genetically predisposed subject, to cause NAFLD and thus defining the spectrum of the disease phenotype ( Figure 1) [110]. Particularly, some patients will develop NAFL and consequently NASH, but others will directly present inflammation and fibrosis, probably because of the influence of genetic and epigenetic factors.  [86,110,111]. Genetic factors cooperate with metabolic and environmental factors to promote the accumulation of fat in hepatocytes and successively cause inflammation, cellular death and fibrosis. Anatomically, besides the liver, the main factors are insulin sensitive organs such as adipose tissue and muscle, which respectively produce adipokines and myokines, and also promote inflammation and oxidative stress in the liver. The gut microbiota releasing PAMPs, the bile acid system and the presence of iron deposits contribute to liver damage. Finally, all these mechanisms are modulated by the brain, particularly by circadian rhythm.
## (s10) Other Metabolic Factors: The Role of Notch and The Skeletal Muscle
(p10.0) Notch signaling has been shown to influence virtually every metabolic organ, thus being involved in liver steatosis and fibrosis [159]. Notch signaling is an evolutionally highly conserved mechanism composed of ligands, receptors and intracellular proteins, regulated at different levels [160]. This pathway is a key mediator of cellular proliferation, differentiation and intercellular communication, especially during embryogenesis. During adulthood, it plays a role in organ regeneration and cancer [161,162]. Bi, in a recent review, analyzed the different influence of Notch signaling in metabolic organs: liver, adipose tissue, muscle, including central nervous system and the interaction with the immune system and angiogenesis [159]. Particularly, Notch signaling endorses gluconeogenesis and DNL, having a key role in hepatic insulin resistance. Notch signaling stimulates white adipose tissue differentiation, which is the main factor responsible for energy storage during hypercaloric diet. Moreover, it maintains cellular quiescence in the central nervous system and in the muscle, preserving stem cells but limiting tissue regeneration, and it favors the differentiation of an M1 macrophage phenotype, which is the main factor responsible for systemic inflammation, thus exacerbating peripheral insulin resistance. Finally, Notch signaling has been found to regulate angiogenesis, with a possible role in favoring atherosclerosis. All these mechanisms explain the concrete role of Notch signaling in NAFLD development, which is fundamentally mediated by the promotion of an insulin resistant phenotype. Confirming this concept, several animal studies show that Notch inhibition leads to an increased insulin sensitivity and novel drugs targeting Notch signaling are currently under evaluation with extremely promising results [163][164][165][166]. However, further studies are still needed to better understand Notch signaling and to definitely confirm the efficacy and safety of novel drugs targeting this pathway.
## (s22) Drugs Acting on Bile Acids System
(p22.0) Obeticholic acid, a potent activator of the above-mentioned FXR already registered for the treatment of primary biliary cholangitis, has been tested for use in NASH patients in the FLINT (Farnesoid X Receptor Ligand Obeticholic Acid in NASH Treatment) trial. This study has been stopped for superiority, since the drug significantly improved necro-inflammation, reducing lipogenesis, increasing VLDL clearance but also through direct anti-inflammatory effects [267,268]. In a phase 2 RCT in NAFLD diabetic patients, obeticholic acid not only reduced markers of liver inflammation and fibrosis, but it also reduced insulin resistance [269]. Two phase 3 studies evaluating the role of obeticholic acid in non-cirrhotic NASH with liver fibrosis (REGENERATE ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT02548351) and in compensated cirrhosis due to NASH (REVERSE ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT03439254) are now ongoing. The adverse events of this drug are pruritus and increased LDL cholesterol. On the contrary, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a natural bile acid, did not prove to be superior to placebo in reducing steatosis, inflammation or fibrosis [270], even though it reduced serum transaminase levels and improved liver histology when used in combination with vitamin E [271].
