# Risk, Liability, and Economic Issues with Long-Term CO 2 Storage-A Review

CorpusID: 156263858 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01293f2c73e6de674401963a6f0b1cd575771e6d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/01293f2c73e6de674401963a6f0b1cd575771e6d)

Fields: Environmental Science, Economics, Law

## (s1) GCS AND RISK
(p1.0) Geologic carbon storage (GCS) can isolate CO 2 from the atmosphere for hundreds to thousands of years (or even longer) through injecting it into permeable and porous rock formations deep (1-4 km [km]) underground. During the process of CCS, the CO 2 is captured, concentrated to a supercritical (fluid) state, and injected deep into a suitable geologic formation. The injected CO 2 has lower viscosity and density than oil, water, or other formation fluids, and it will tend to rise upward owing to its buoyancy relative to that of typical in situ fluids. However, pressurized CO 2 will also flow along channels of least resistance, such as fractures and avenues of higher permeability and porosity in the rock. These subsurface conduits can divert the CO 2 in any direction. As it flows, CO 2 can be trapped in rock pores by capillary forces (residual trapping), immobilized by some other trapping mechanism, or continue to meander in a generally upward direction until it encounters impermeable rocks. The layer of impermeable rock that forms the primary seal against the CO 2 escaping into the upper geological strata or to the surface is the caprock. If there are no lateral seals in addition to this primary seal, the CO 2 can still migrate more or less horizontally along the underside of the caprock until it is trapped or finds a pathway to escape the storage reservoir (Szulczewski et al. 2012;Birkholzer et al. 2015). Geologic uncertainty concerning the pathways that injected CO 2 and pressurized or displaced formation fluids will take is a major contributor to uncertainty in estimates of potential risk (Oldenburg et al. 2009;Pawar et al. 2015).

(p1.1) Fluids and gasses (such as oil, natural gas, and saline water [brines]) already occupy the geologic pore space of the potential CO 2 storage reservoir. As greater volumes of CO 2 are injected, the increase in fluid volume can create a buildup of pressure in the storage reservoir and beyond. The extent of pressure buildup will depend on geologic parameters (like permeability), the degree to which the reservoir is open, and other geologic formation characteristics (including temperature, fracturing, and salinity of formation fluids). If the in situ fluids and(or) gasses have been previously extracted during the production of hydrocarbons, and other formation fluids have not yet invaded the vacated pore space, then the current reservoir pressure may be significantly less than its fracture pressure. If so, the risks of injecting CO 2 into such depleted reservoirs could also be reasonably low, even without any new fluid extraction. For a deep saline-filled formation (DSF) without a history of fluid extraction, the pressure at the beginning of CO 2 injection could be closer to fracture pressure, and the storage operator may need to extract formation fluids to keep the risk below an acceptable level and(or) pressure buildup below a regulatory level Birkholzer et al. 2015). Unwanted pressure buildup could be the most important limitation on CO 2 storage capacity in DSFs (Schrag 2009).
