# Glycopeptide Resistance in Gram-Positive Cocci: A Review

CorpusID: 15734319 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d578af0cc189461ff7a94b2e7f0ad0a0bcfd4beb](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d578af0cc189461ff7a94b2e7f0ad0a0bcfd4beb)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Antimicrobial Agents Effective against VRE and Emerging
(p7.0) Resistance. Linezolid is a member of a class of synthetic antimicrobials, the oxazolidinones. Although it is more expensive than vancomycin, linezolid has the advantage of not requiring testing for adequate serum drug concentrations or dose adjustment in renal or hepatic failure. It is therefore a valuable drug in the hands of clinicians and can be used in situations where vancomycin use is either contraindicated or ineffective. Linezolid was licensed for clinical use in the United States in 2000. It was approved for use in United Kingdom a year later. The first isolates of Enterococcus resistant to Linezolid were reported from the United Kingdom in 2002 [35]. Two of the isolates were E. faecium; one was E. faecalis. All the isolates were from patients who had been previously treated with Linezolid. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) analysis of the isolates indicated that resistance developed in previously susceptible strains via point mutations in the 23SrRNA [35]. Linezolidresistant and vancomycin-resistant enterococci have also been isolated from patients without any prior therapy with Linezolid [36].

(p7.1) Kainer et al. performed a case-control study during a hospital outbreak of linezolid-resistant enterococci (LRE) and tried to find out putative risk factors for acquiring this infection [37]. Important risk factors which came up in the study were culture positive for MRSA, increased hospitalization duration before index culture and duration of preceding linezolid therapy [37].
## (s9) Vancomycin Intermediate S. aureus (VISA).
(p9.0) Increasing prevalence of MRSA infections has led to the extensive use of vancomycin for treating these conditions. Infact, vancomycin is the treatment of choice for MRSA infections. However, the overuse of this antibiotic has led to the emergence of S. aureus strains with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. Hiramatsu et al. from Japan were the first to report a clinical strain of methicillin-resistant S. aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin. This strain, named Mu50, was isolated from pus from the sternal incision site of a 4-monthold male infant with pulmonary atresia [2]. Such strains have now been reported from many other countries. Tiwari and Sen were the first to report strains of S. aureus with reduced susceptibility to vancomycin (VISA) from the Indian subcontinent. Strains of S. aureus in the intermediate range of vancomycin susceptibility have also been reported from the southern part of India [47].
## (s16) Vancomycin Tolerance in Streptococcus pneumoniae
(p16.0) Although vancomycin resistance is not known in Streptococcus pneumoniae, the phenomenon of vancomycin tolerance has been observed in a few strains. Though this phenomenon has also been described in some strains of S. aureus, it is with regards to S. pneumoniae that it is considered most alarming. Vancomycin tolerance has been defined as a minimum bactericidal concentration (MBC) 32-fold higher than the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) [75,76]. Another definition used by workers in the field considers pneumococcal strains showing more than 1% survival after four hours of growth in the presence of vancomycin concentration more than 10 times the minimum inhibitory concentration as showing tolerance [77]. Vancomycin tolerance in S. pneumoniae has been linked to treatment failure in many cases. Vancomycin tolerant S. pneumoniae has been found to be difficult to eradicate in animal models of meningitis and clinical instances of treatment failure with vancomycin in cases of meningitis have also been reported [78]. Vancomycin tolerance in case of S. pneumoniae is important not only because it can lead to treatment failure but also because tolerance is considered a precursor phenotype to resistance [79]. The first strain of vancomycin tolerant S. pneumoniae to be isolated from the CSF of a patient with meningitis was named the Tupelo strain after the local hospital where the patient was admitted.
