# Gastric cancer: Overview

CorpusID: 16275797 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/06a03445f8ba07257899657108640c19217a0761)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Host factors
(p3.0) Genetic polymorphisms. A great variety of genetic polymorphisms have been associated with gastric cancer risk, mainly in some inflammation-related genes, such as IL-1B,IL-1RN,IL-10 and TNF. Interleukin (IL)-1β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α are potent pro-inflammatory cytokines with suppressive properties for the production of gastric acid. IL-10 is an anti-inflammatory cytokine that counteracts the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and variants have been identified in IL-10 that influence its production. The colonization of the gastric mucosa by H. pylori elicits an immune response that includes a wide variety of pro-and antiinflammatory cytokines. It is believed that the gastric acid suppression caused by IL-1β and TNF-α favors the spread of H. pylori from the antrum to the gastric body and fundus, leading to a more extensive and severe gastritis that results in gastric atrophy and subsequently in cancer. In addition, an animal model has demonstrated that elevated levels of IL-1β are sufficient to induce dysplasia and gastric cancer 32 . Subjects carrying the IL1B-511T allele are high producers of IL-1β 33 , and multiple studies confirm this polymorphism as a risk factor for intestinal-type gastric adenocarcinoma in Caucasian populations (or in non-Asian populations) but not in Asian populations 34,35 . Carriers of IL1RN2 of non-Asian origin have shown an increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma (intestinal and diffuse types) predominantly for distal tumors 35 . Also associated with increased risk of gastric cancer are: the allele TNF-308A in Caucasian populations and the IL8-251AA genotype in Asian populations. A reduced risk of gastric cancer has been found in carriers of IL1B-31C of Asian origin and in carriers of IL10-592A (including all ethnic groups).
## (s4) Classification Systems
(p4.0) Gastric adenocarcinomas are classified into two main groups: early and advanced, which are associated with prognosis. The 5-year survival rate in patients with early gastric cancer is between 85 and 100%, while it is only 5-20% for advanced gastric cancer. Early gastric carcinoma is defined as limited to the mucosa or submucosa, regardless of lymph node invasion 39 . Advanced gastric cancer is classified based on the gross appearance into four types: I) polypoid, II) ulcerated with well-defined borders, III) ulcerated with irregular and infiltrative borders, and IV) diffuse infiltrative, with no evidence of mass or ulcer 39 . The last type is usually observed in diffuse type adenocarcinomas and it is known as linitis plastica.
## (s6) Prevention and early detection
(p6.0) General measures for gastric cancer prevention are the adequate consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables, the avoidance of excessive salt intake and the avoidance of exposure to tobacco smoke. Treatment and eradication of H. pylori infection is recommended in patients with gastritis, and there are a number of studies showing the benefit of anti-H. pylori treatment in reducing both the progression of precancerous lesions and the risk of gastric cancer [50][51][52] . Large-scale H. pylori eradication as a preventive measure for gastric cancer has been the object of controversy. This measure is not recommended due to the risk of the appearance of antimicrobial-resistant strains, not only for H. pylori but for other infectious agents as well. Furthermore, although the efficacy of treatment regimens have shown recent improvements, virtually all schemes present some margin of failure in eradicating the bacteria and the rates of re-infection are often high. Moreover, since H. pylori has accompanied human beings from ancient times, strong arguments exist that consider this bacterium as part of the human gastric microbiome and its elimination as the cause of the increase in prevalence of diseases such as gastroesophageal reflux, Barrett's esophagus, and esophageal and cardia adenocarcinoma 10 .
