# Dry, aligning, dilute, active matter: A synthetic and self-contained overview

CorpusID: 189762178 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d08bbeeff21d452cb1516762c761dd200bf8198)

Fields: Physics, Computer Science

## (s2) Modern viewpoint on DADAM
(p2.0) DADAM, as we will see below, is arguably one of the most advanced areas of active matter physics in terms of knowledge of the phenomena at play and of their theoretical description. The class represented by the Vicsek model is only one of a few basic classes (see below). generally of orientational order, was approached as an order/disorder transition: at strong noise local alignment is too weak to produce order ( Fig. 0.1a), whereas decreasing the noise one sees collective motion, i.e. order ( Fig. 0.1c). In 1995, and over the following years, Vicsek and collaborators studied the order/disorder transition numerically at moderate system sizes and number of particles, concluding to a continuous phase transition at a critical point representing a new universality class (Vicsek et al., 1995;Czirók et al., 1997). This view held until it was discovered that, at finite but larger system sizes, the transition is discontinuous (Fig. 0.1d) and that, near onset of global order, active particles spontaneously organize themselves into a number of high-density high-order bands traveling in a sparse disordered gas (Fig. 0.1b) (Grégoire and Chaté, 2004;Chaté et al., 2008). The idea of phase-separation, of some coexistence phase separating the disordered phase from a homogeneous ordered one, started being mentioned here and there (Mishra et al., 2010;Marchetti et al., 2013), but it is the work of Solon & Tailleur on the active Ising model (Solon and Tailleur, 2013;Solon and Tailleur, 2015) that triggered a change of perspective from an order/disorder problem to a phase separation framework akin to a liquid-gas transition. In this framework, detailed below, the traveling bands of the Vicsek model are characteristic of the coexistence phase separating the disordered gas from an ordered liquid.
