# A Systematic Literature Review on Image Captioning

CorpusID: 181562553 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92ccf5a39c63cb5e1639be518e6db2e357acd58e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92ccf5a39c63cb5e1639be518e6db2e357acd58e)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Ever since researchers started working on object recognition in images, it became clear that only providing the names of the objects recognized does not make such a good impression as a full human-like description. As long as machines do not think, talk, and behave like humans, natural language descriptions will remain a challenge to be solved. There have been many variations and combinations of different techniques since 2014-the very first application of neural networks in image captioning is in ref. [1]. Four successful articles [2][3][4][5], which now are the most cited articles researchers rely on, were published in 2015. There was not much interest in this area in 2014 and 2015, but it is clear from this review how exponentially the popularity is growing-57 articles found were published in 2017-2018 and already 17 were published during the first three months of 2019. The advantages and the future of human-like technologies are undoubtable; from enabling computers to interact with humans, to specific applications for child education, health assistants for the elderly or visually disabled people, and many more. While having so many opportunities for meaningful applications in society, not surprisingly many studies have already tried to obtain more accurate descriptions and make machines think like humans. However, machines still lack the natural way of human communication and this continues to be a challenging task to tackle. Our work is meant to summarize the newest articles and to give insight on the latest achievements and the highest number of results to ease the work of new researchers who would like to utilize their efforts to build better methods. This paper is a systematic literature review (SLR) of the newest articles in order to provide a summarized understanding of what has been achieved in this field so far and which techniques have performed the best. Special attention was given to result collection and year to year comparison. We hope this work will help further researchers to find more innovative and newer ways to achieve better results. The following paper has been divided into four additional parts. First, we present the research methods which have been used to make this SLR. Second, we introduce readers to summarized tables of all the articles and results achieved in them. The purpose of the discussion section is to introduce readers to the most popular methodologies and innovative solutions in image captioning. Finally, the paper is concluded with some open questions for future studies.
## (s14) Comparison of Results
(p14.0) This study found many articles in which the results of their models had been compared with state of the art models, such as refs. [2][3][4][5]. As these models were built some years ago, they have been more cited so are easier to find during a search on the digital libraries. For example, ref. [5] has been cited 2855 times, according to Google Scholar from Google, while most of the newest articles found have not been cited at all yet, or the ones written in 2018 have usually been cited less than 10 times. Not surprisingly the newer the articles are, the further at the bottom of the search they appear, so most researchers might not even find them if not enough time has been dedicated for a literature review. Figures 1-6 confirm that results are not steadily increasing-there are many results which are not higher than the ones from a year ago. This can undoubtedly be due to the topic difficulty, but also lack of details can lower the goals of researchers so they do not improve knowing that there are higher results already even though a very important part for researchers is to compare their work results with similar approaches. In this study the results from the newest models are presented so upcoming researchers can compare their models with regard to the newest achievements. We hope this research will help further researchers to save their time on detailed literature reviews and to keep in mind the importance of checking for the newest articles.
