# The critical success factors of GDPR implementation: a systematic literature review -Source link Topics: General Data Protection Regulation, Critical success factor and European union Related papers: EU general data protection regulation : changes and implications for personal data collecting companies Privacy Impact Assessment: Comparing methodologies with a focus on practicality Success Factors of Artificial Intelligence Implementation in Healthcare. Barriers and strategies applying Cleaner Production: a systematic review International experience with performance-based risk-sharing arrangements: implications for the Chinese innovative pharmaceutical market. Repositório ISCTE-IUL Deposited in Repositório

CorpusID: 195516596 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9017318dc3a0df9025a2e339c55e19b22f6563ee](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9017318dc3a0df9025a2e339c55e19b22f6563ee)

Fields: Law, Business, Computer Science

## (s15) GDPR Implementation
(p15.0) The enforcement of the General Data Protection Regulation has dictated the need for organizations to comply with its requirements and obligations. Since Supervisory Authorities may impose sanctions whenever non-compliance is detected, organizations need to review their processes and procedures to ensure compliance and avoid sanctions (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). For organizations, this requires the implementation of complex technological solutions, as well as new organizational duties and extensive changes in the organization's business model, which may also affect resource usage (Skendzic et al., 2018;Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). Although many organizations understand the importance of complying with the new Regulation, the uncertainty around GDPR has led to some divided approaches (Sirur et al., 2018) because GDPR is not prescriptive regarding solutions to achieve compliance, not providing specific guidelines to implement its requirements (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018). Therefore, every organization must find and implement organizational and technological solutions to put the provisions in practice (Tikkinen-Piri et al., 2018;Freitas and Mira da Silva, 2018). For that, and to achieve compliance, it is very important to design an implementation strategy and roadmap.
