# A review of the application of deep learning in medical image classification and segmentation

CorpusID: 214224742 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f217e5faf34498df5f90ceb081652c2d934cb0b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/3f217e5faf34498df5f90ceb081652c2d934cb0b)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s17) Gastric cancer pathological
(p17.0) Pathological diagnosis is the "gold standard" of various cancer diagnosis methods, which plays an important role in the medical field (40). The contradiction between a large number of market demands and a shortage of talents in the field of pathology gives a great opportunity for deep learning in this field, and digital pathology technology also makes computer-assisted diagnosis possible (41). Nowadays, deep learning technology has been applied to the pathological diagnosis of lung cancer, breast cancer and gastric cancer. Its application mainly includes early tumor screening and benign and malignant diagnosis of tumor. In the field of lung cancer pathology, Zhang et al. established the "early computer diagnosis system for lung cancer" to detect lung cancer pathological sections, so that several major types of lung cancer can be detected (42). In the field of breast cancer pathology, Qaiser et al. established a CNN-based intelligent image diagnosis system with a judgment result of pathological sections (cancer and noncancer tissue) as high as 0.833, four cancer classifications (normal tissue, benign tumor, original The accuracy of the results of both cancer and invasive cancer is as high as 0.778, which can reach the level of pathologists (43). Hanna and others based on the deep learning artificial intelligence automatic human epidermal growth factor receptor scoring system to score human epidermal growth factor receptor, the results are better than pathologists (44 (46). In the field of gastric cancer pathology our research team has established a benign and malignant diagnostic system based on gastric cancer pathology based on deep learning, with a sensitivity of over 97% (47). However, the above methods include that the initial work of of the left ventricular contour image of GNNI U-net in six different scales of the two data sets. The green area is the correctly divided contour area, the blue area is the mis-segmented area, and the red area is the leak-divided area.
