# diagnostics Mucinous Cancer of the Ovary: Overview and Current Status

CorpusID: 210870359 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cdea50a9d4d6e6b6adc9288079e2fde0eb4e333c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s9) Magnetic Resonance Images (MRI)
(p9.0) A computed tomography (CT) scan is an essential part of evaluating the possibility of carcinoma. It aids in identifying the primary carcinoma and in evaluating the extent of disease. An MRI may provide additional information to differentiate primary MOC from metastatic mucinous carcinoma [38]. In MRI, an MOC tumor appears as a multilocular cystic lesion containing a solid part of intermediate intensity on T2-weighted MR images, hyperintense on diffusion-weighted images, and, with a type-3 enhancement curve, earlier enhancement relative to the myometrial curve. Extra-ovarian spread indicates malignancy [39].
## (s17) Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy (HIPEC)
(p17.0) HIPEC has been a therapeutic option to treat peritoneal carcinomatosis from different primary sites. The role of HIPEC in managing EOCs has been emerging in recent years. A recent phase III multicenter randomized control trial by Van Driel et al. exhibited improvement in OS and PFS when HIPEC, using cisplatin 100 mg/m 2 , was added to the standard interval debulking surgery (IDS) in stage III EOC. There was no increased rate of perioperative complications in the HIPEC arm. The majority of patients had the HGSC subtype, with only 3 patients having MOC [58]. This publication resulted in a change in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) 2019 guideline to include HIPEC at the time of IDS as a level 2A recommendation. Two meta-analyses also showed a superior survival advantage among EOC treated with HIPEC in both the primary and recurrent settings [59,60]. However, a large multicenter retrospective analysis on the benefit of HIPEC with cytoreductive surgery in rare ovarian cancer subtypes showed no therapeutic benefit in the MOC subtype [61]. Multiple trials are ongoing or have completed recruitment to further investigate the benefit of HIPEC in managing both primary and recurrent EOC [59,62].
## (s25) Anti-HER2 Therapy
(p25.0) Anti-HER2 therapy has been proven to be successful in managing HER2-amplified breast cancer [94]. Trastuzumab, a HER2 monoclonal antibody, showed benefits to OS in HER2-positive gastric carcinoma [95]. McAlpine et al. reported the anecdotal efficacy of trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy in 2 out of 3 patients with MOC who had HER2 amplification [96]. Jain et al. published a single case of successful treatment of progressive HER2-positive MOC with trastuzumab and lapatinib [97]. Nevertheless, more data on anti-HER2 therapy in HER2-amplified MOC is needed.
