# Therapeutic Advances in Reproductive Health Laboratory and clinical management of leukocytospermia and hematospermia: a review

CorpusID: 219967396 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/038dc67fc99c3719ac4079eedc19d2ab435fe9e6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/038dc67fc99c3719ac4079eedc19d2ab435fe9e6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) Leukocytospermia and infertility
(p2.0) Leukocytospermia is found more often in infertile men than in fertile men. 14 However, the Cryoprotectant-free journals.sagepub.com/home/reh 3 relationship between the condition and sperm quality remains controversial. Some studies have shown leukocytospermia to be a negative prognostic factor for fertility, 4 and the reasons are multifactorial. For example, leukocytospermia can impair spermatogenesis and sperm maturation. 15 Subclinical genital tract inflammation can lead to impairment of spermatogenesis by altering cytokine levels, which, in turn, impair Sertoli cell function. 11 Furthermore, polymorphonuclear neutrophils, the predominant type of leukocytes in semen, generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) that can impair sperm motility. 12,13 A significant correlation is detected between leukocytospermia and defects in the tail function of sperm. 11 In addition, teratoasthenozoospermia and necrozoospermia are more common in leukocytospermic men than in normospermic men. 13 However, a meta-analysis which evaluated the impact of leukocytospermia in men attending a fertility clinic found no association between the condition and reduced fertility after ART and with altered semen quality. 16 It has been demonstrated that leukocytospermia hinders the fertilization potential of spermatozoa by interfering with the acrosome reaction and the fusion of sperm and egg. 11,17,18 Due to this, the presence of WBCs in seminal plasma is considered a significant prognostic factor for failed in vitro fertilization and embryo transfer (IVF-ET). 19 Leukocytes in seminal fluid produce high concentrations of ROS and interferon-γ, which can inhibit sperm function and decrease the rate of IVF. 14 Moreover, high concentrations of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) in the plasma membrane of sperm increases their vulnerability to oxidative stress. 18,20 Lipid peroxidation of these membranes may result from sperm mitochondrial dysfunction as they make a significant contribution to the oxidative stress of the spermatozoa environment. 21,22 Furthermore, sperm DNA fragmentation has been implicated as an important factor in male infertility; however, the impact of leukocytes on sperm DNA fragmentation has been debated. Some studies have found leukocytes to induce DNA fragmentation, 23 while others have found that DNA damage is not related to different leukocyte subpopulations in the ejaculate. 24 Another possible mechanism of sperm function impairment by leukocytes is ROS-induced crossdamage, which may occur when sperm and leukocytes co-migrate from the seminiferous tubules to the epididymis. 11
