# remote sensing Remote Sensing of River Discharge: A Review and a Framing for the Discipline

CorpusID: 216210358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/84c4a6cf4f45eb56d6ada9cf88d12f0de3fde5ea](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/84c4a6cf4f45eb56d6ada9cf88d12f0de3fde5ea)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Geography, Computer Science

## (s13) Calibration/Assimilation of an RS Signal into a Hydrologic Model
(p13.0) We first consider RSQ as seen again from a hydrologic perspective, yet this time we focus on RS as the sole source of calibration data, as opposed to use of RS data in conjunction with an in situ calibrated model as in Section 2.1. The balance of these fluxes is water excess, and so a valid RSQ approach is to emulate a hydrologic model solely from outer space. Various authors have investigated RS of each of these specific components in an effort to better constrain each one. Parr et al. ( [112]; 2015) used RS ET and leaf area index products in conjunction with the VIC model, while Lopez-Lopez et al. ( [113]; 2018) explored downscaling and in 2017 calibrated the PCR GLOBWB model for a basin in Morocco with RS ET and soil moisture, and both concluded that their approach is viable and improves discharge accuracy [114]. However, Mendiguren et al. ( [115]; 2017) and Bowman et al. ( [116]; 2016) explicitly compared RS ET energy balance models against traditionally calibrated hydrological models and found low correlation between the two products. These authors further argued that the spatial component of errors in ET are important and well-suited to remote sensing. Remote sensing of precipitation is a huge field given the importance of precipitation to flood forecasting, and thus this literature is not covered here despite providing important grounding and uncertainty analysis to RSQ; see Lettenmaier et al. ( [2]; 2015) for a recent review. While this precipitation literature is certainly germane, any satisfactory review would render this manuscript overlong. The GRACE signals covered in Section 2.1.1 can provide the final storage term, and thus a simple water balance may be made at very large spatial footprints for totally and politically ungauged basins from RS estimates of precipitation, ET, and storage.

(p13.1) Moving beyond a simple water balance, Sun et al. ( [117]; 2015) provide a basin-scale approach that seeks to use no in situ data to calibrate their hydrologic model, instead using river width observations as a calibration target. This decision required a reconfiguration of traditional model physics to represent width as the state variable (i.e., rearranging the discharge equation so width is on the left hand side). Sun et al. then attempt to force their hydrology model with only globally available data, using the dynamic river width signal to calibrate.  [14]; 2019) paper discussed earlier: that study used over 10,000 in situ gauges to produce the best possible global discharge estimates at almost 3 million river reaches. These Lin et al. data are globally available and consistent, and offer a starting point for any model assimilation/calibration study, be it hydrologic, hydraulic, or both. However, using these outputs necessarily invokes the gauges used to produce them: even discharge information in gauge-sparse locations like Siberia implicitly relies on gauge knowledge via coupling with well-gauged basins. Thus, we expect future work to struggle with what it means for a basin to be ungauged when all global basins have been modelled in a fully coupled land surface framework. We leave further discussion for Section 3.
