# Time Series Data Imputation: A Survey on Deep Learning Approaches

CorpusID: 227126654 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c88ee84b150ce0d3be164fd4cbaeeda7d151e3b3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c88ee84b150ce0d3be164fd4cbaeeda7d151e3b3)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s5) GRU-D
(p5.0) GRU-D is proposed by [7] as one of the early attempts to impute time series with deep learning models. It is the first one among the 5 researched paper to systematically model missing patterns into RNN for time series classification problems. It is also the first research to exploit that, RNN can model multivariable time series with the informativeness from the time series. Former works like [23,8] attempted to impute missing values with RNN by concatenating timestamps and raw data, i.e., regard timestamps as one attribute of raw data. But in [7], the concept time lag is first proposed. In this paper, Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) is first adopted to generate missing values. In each layer of GRU, since the input can contain missing values, they replace the input x j ti with a combination of 4   The main contribution of this paper is the GRU based model GRU-D and the proposition of decay rate. To address the imputation of the missing values, they discover that • The missing variables tend to be close to some default value if its last observation happens a long time ago.
## (s7) BRITS
(p7.0) Unlike former methods, BRITS [6] is totally based on RNN structure and proposes imputation with unidirectional dynamics. Time lag (corresponding to "time gaps" in [6]) is also employed since the time series may be irregular. Similar to the idea of decay rate γ from GRU-D introduced in Section 4.2, they propose temporal decay  factor γ t = exp (−max (0, W γ δ t + b γ )). Compared to GRU-D where the time lags are considered in input and serve as the decay rate, in BRITS the hidden states update with the decay rate γ. It means when updating the hidden state, the old hidden state decays according to the time duration recorded in the time lags. Hence, the model is updated by:
## (s14) Consistent Query Answering
(p14.0) Following [22], query answering without determining the specific imputation of each missing value is crucial in probabilistic databases [10], when data from many sources can be inconsistent and uncertain. Therefore, consistent query answering (CQA) is needed. Missing values data in CQA problem increase the difficulty of answering the query consistently. Both the inconsistent data from different sources and missing values should be considered. Therefore, a combination of data imputation methods and CQA methods can be a potential approach.
