# APPLIED MATHEMATICS AND MECHANICS (ENGLISH EDITION) A review of computational modeling and deep brain stimulation: applications to Parkinson's disease *

CorpusID: 227015687 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/69ea9fc6cd9f150282b977c5c699ab59489b4d16)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s7) Summary and outlook
(p7.0) We systematically summarize the dynamic modeling analysis and control strategies related to PD in recent decades. According to the records and analysis of clinical experiments, the nucleus within the BG in the parkinsonian network exhibits bursting a discharge behavior, and the synchronization level increases. Through the power spectral density analysis, it is found that the energy of STN and GPi nucleus increases significantly in the beta-band. Using the neuron model and the field model, these dynamic characteristics are well reflected. Models are generally based on CTBG circuits. Except for the striatum, we generally consider other nuclei as a whole in modeling. Recently, optogenetics has been used to specifically stimulate the neuron population in GPe [84] , where targeted interventions reliably induce long-term exercise rescue in PD mouse models. Studies have developed molecular and genetic strategies to subdivide GPe neurons into subgroups, which have different physiological and anatomical projections [85][86] . In the prototype population, neurons can be further subdivided according to the expression of parvalbumin (PV)-GPe and Lim homeobox 6 (Lhx6)-GPe [85][86] . The long-lasting recovery of the movement of PD mice can be achieved by selective excitatory stimulation of PV-GPe or inhibitory stimulation of Lhx6-GPe [84] . Therefore, the identification of different cell types in the BG is essential for us to understand the function of the BG and treat neurological disorders, especially PD. At present, in terms of modeling study, the specific modeling of the nucleus within the BG is blank, which will be an important node for subsequent study. Because certain dynamic effects are only achieved by limiting the operation of specific neuron subgroups, rather than by regulating all neurons at the same time. The specific modeling of neurons helps us to further understand the dynamic mechanism of PD [5] .
