# OVERVIEW OF THE COMPLEMENT SYSTEM

CorpusID: 222421325 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/796c252b81285941df58fb5e56efaee240801dc5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/796c252b81285941df58fb5e56efaee240801dc5)

Fields: Medicine

## (s2) The complement system participates in alcoholic hepatitis
(p2.0) Different from AFLD, except for the deposition of triglycerides in hepatocytes, AH is also characterized by the infiltration of inflammatory cells, elevated inflammatory cytokine levels, increased serum transaminase levels, and liver injury. Previous studies have shown that inflammatory cytokines play an important role in the occurrence and development of ALD. 33,34 In AH, inflammatory cytokine levels were elevated, leading to liver cell dysfunction and continued tissue damage. 35 The complement system is also associated with the pathogenesis of AH. Cohen et al. 36 reported that C1q deficiency abolishes the activation of the CP, reduces the expression of inflammatory cytokines, and attenuates liver tissue injury. These results were further confirmed in a study of an alcoholic liver model in mice by Smathers et al. 34 Moreover, in AH patients, C1q and C5 levels were significantly increased, and the expression of C5aR was also upregulated in the Mallory-Denk body forming cells, which are the major features of ongoing inflammation in AH. 37,38 These studies showed that complement activation is involved in the occurrence of AH and the impairment of liver function. The underlying mechanism may be that there is a crosstalk between toll-like receptors (TLRs) and C3aR and C5aR in AH. 21,37,39,40 TLRs belong to the pattern recognition receptor family, which can bind to damage-associated molecular patterns or pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). PAMPs mainly refer to bacterial metabolites, including bacterial lipopolysaccharide, peptidoglycan, RNA, and DNA, which can reach the liver upon alcohol-induced intestinal microecology imbalance, subsequently initiating the innate immune response and inducing the expression of inflammatory cytokines (such as TNF-α and interleukin-6). In addition, PAMPs increase lipid deposition and inflammatory infiltration in hepatocytes. McCullough et al. 41 found that complement FD promotes the clearance of apoptotic cells and maintains tissue homeostasis in AH and suggested that inappropriate complement activation likely delays the clearance of apoptotic cells and impairs healing/recovery in ALD. Fan et al. 42 found that complement activation is expected to be a diagnostic and prognostic indicator for patients with AH. However, the detailed mechanisms of complement function in AH need to be further clarified.
