# foods Mycotoxin Occurrence, Exposure and Health Implications in Infants and Young Children in Sub-Saharan Africa: A Review

CorpusID: 226242842 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27f5ec0e72066425fb3284143f9b92c34283b844](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27f5ec0e72066425fb3284143f9b92c34283b844)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s8) Country
(p8.0) Sample   Gong et al. [34], using serum AF-albumin adducts, reported the high AF exposure of children in Benin, West Africa, with AF-albumin levels as high as >1100 pg AF-lysine equivalents per milligram of albumin. There were strong variations in the levels of AF exposure depending on the village and geographical region. This is possibly linked to the climatic conditions (temperature and humidity) of the environment, which favours the growth of fungi and subsequently mycotoxin production. The pre-and post-agricultural practices, which differ from region to region, may also be a contributory factor [135]. This is evident in the variation of AF-albumin prevalence (February (98%), June (99.5%), and October (100%)) observed by the authors as a result of seasonal changes, even though the variation was not significant [34]. Earlier studies by this group of authors observed a remarkable increase in IYC exposure to AFs following the introduction of and increase in the consumption of weaning foods [34,126]. Similar results were reported in a South African study on non-breastfed infants [136]. Significant levels of OTA were detected in the plasma of non-breastfed infants at 6 weeks old as compared to breastfed infants. The authors also highlighted a progressive trend in the exposure up until the 8th week. Further studies originating from other countries in SSA using serum and plasma biomarkers have also indicated the exposure of IYC to AFs and FBs [33,36,[126][127][128][129]137].
## (s13) Postulated Mechanism for Growth Impairment
(p13.0) Although the mechanism by which mycotoxins influence child growth is yet to be fully understood, Smith et al. [151] suggested two possible pathways by which these toxins may contribute to stunting, including the induction of environmental enteric dysfunction and systemic immune activation, resulting in the interruption of the insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) axis. Castelino et al. [152] investigated the relationship between AF and IGF1 in 199 Kenyan schoolchildren, and observed that AF-albumin concentrations were inversely associated with both IGF1 and IGF-binding protein-3 (IGFBP3). IGF facilitates most of the growth-promoting effects of growth hormone, and thus plays a major role in the growth of a child [153]. AFs may also induce stunting by exerting an immunosuppressive effect, which often increases the susceptibility of infants to infection, loss of appetite, and reduced nutrient absorption [154]. In addition, AFs may exert infant growth impairment by mediating intestinal damage through the inhibition of protein synthesis [151]. Other mycotoxins like DON have also been postulated to exert growth impairment through this mechanism.
## (s14) Child Immune and Nervous Systems
(p14.0) Exposure to mycotoxins has been shown to hamper immune responses in humans and animals, thus leading to a decrease in resistance to infectious diseases [35]. The mechanism through which mycotoxins exert immunosuppressive or immunostimulatory effects on humans and animals may vary depending on toxin type and exposure dose, as well as the investigated parameters highlighted in several reviews [161][162][163]. Bondy and Peska [162] highlighted the ability of mycotoxins to promote the expression of a diverse array of cytokines through inflammatory responses, with a potential to upregulate and downregulate a wide array of immune functions. While mycotoxins impair cell-mediated immunity and phagocytic cell function, exposure to AFs increases the T cell proliferation-inducing capacity of porcine monocyte-derived dendritic cells, therefore enhancing the antigen-presenting capacity of the cell [164]. The inhibition of humoral, cellular, and innate immunity by AFs, OTA, and FBs, leading to a reduced response to vaccines, has been reported in animal species [162,165].

(p14.1) Notwithstanding the evidence that IYC, especially in SSA, are most vulnerable to mycotoxin exposure, only a few scientific studies, mostly focusing on AFs, have been conducted to elucidate the effects of these fungus metabolites on the immunity of IYC. Allen et al. [166] investigated the relationship between AF exposure, hepatitis B infection, and the prevalence of malaria in 391 Gambian children between the age of 3 and 8 years, and found that a higher AF-albumin adduct concentration was associated with increased Plasmodium falciparum parasitaemia (p = 0.01) and hepatitis B surface antigen (p=0.04) carrier status of the children. However, the authors observed no consistent association between AF-albumin level, malaria infections, malaria-specific antibody, or lymphoproliferative responses. A later cross-sectional study from the same country, using a cohort of 472 children, studied the effect of dietary AF exposure on immune parameters, including secretory IgA in saliva (sIgA) and cell-mediated immunity, as well as antibody response to rabies and pneumococcal vaccines [35]. A remarkably lower sIgA level of children with detectable AF-albumin in their blood was seen compared to no AF-albumin detectable children (p < 0.0001). However, out of the four pneumococcal serotypes, only one response was weakly associated with higher levels of AF-albumin adducts. On the other hand, no association was observed between AF-albumin and cell-mediated immunity or rabies [35].
