# molecules A Review on Graphene-Based Light Emitting Functional Devices

CorpusID: 221770997 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08aa02d2c0f5552b2de3dfdd5192a31b11987770](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/08aa02d2c0f5552b2de3dfdd5192a31b11987770)

Fields: Medicine, Physics, Materials Science

## (s3) Plasmons-Assisted Emissions from Graphene
(p3.0) There is increased interest on highly integrated optoelectronic devices with surface plasmons polarities and nanoscale light emitters [108]. In recent studies, it has been demonstrated that the ability of graphene plasmons (GPS) can be utilized as a platform for strong light-matter interaction [109][110][111]. Furthermore, the dynamics of highly confined light with tunable GPS makes the graphene an extremely promising candidate for the design of light emitters at the nanoscale [112,113]. Besides, the strongly-confined and high momentum graphene plasmons can enable the development of tunable, monochromatic, highly directional, and high frequency (10 14 -10 15 Hz) light-emitting sources with relativity low energy electrons [114]. Additionally, the high-quality light emitter with a small footprint with X-ray and extreme ultraviolet radiation is extremely exciting in the research perspective of medical engineering and natural science. However, the graphene plasmons-based short-wavelength emitter has not been investigated, as compared to other graphene-based promising applications [115].

(p3.1) Besides, the tunable, monochromatic, and highly directional light emission from the graphene layer with the interaction of electrons and plasmons has been reported by Liang and colleagues [116]. The schematic diagram of the graphene plasmon-based radiation source is shown in Figure 7a,b. The generation of highly directional X-ray emissions from modestly relativistic electrons is presented, which does not require additional neutron shielding. Moreover, the low energy electrons are possibly generated in a device on-chip for the frequency conversion mechanism. In design configuration, the graphene sheet was staked on a dielectric substrate with a grating structure, wherein the dielectric substrate was utilized to sustain graphene plasmons. The graphene layer was excited by coupling a focused beam when the electron beam was launched in parallel with the surface of the graphene. The consequent interaction between the graphene plasmons field and low energy electrons induce transverse electrons oscillations [116]. Therefore, soft and hard X-ray radiation from the graphene surface was accomplished without any further acceleration stage; the various frequency conversion regions are shown in Figure 7c,d. Specifically, the plasmons are quasiparticles interacting with modestly relativistic electrons, which govern by the electron-phonon interaction, the same as fundamental rules for the radiation process. However, different results have been reported because the graphene plasmons generate much higher momentum than the energy of photons at the present state. Additionally, graphene plasmons have longitudinal field components, which photons do not have. Consequently, the electron-plasmons scattering was different from the electron-photon scattering, as stated by the standard Thomson or Compton effect [116].
## (s6) Electroluminescence (El) from Graphene
(p6.0) Only a few studies have been explored EL emissions from graphene, where the EL measurement was either limited to the few-layered graphene or nano-scale photonic crystals [142]. In related research, Ryan Beam et al. reported STM (scanning tunneling microscope) induced hot electroluminescence from single-layer graphene at ambient conditions. Explicitly, the emission radiations depend on the number of graphene layers and the relative energy of the injected carriers. In the case of pristine graphene, the electron-hole pair can be excited by the incident photons [143], where the non-radiative combination of electron-holes occurs in the valence band due to the unavailability of energy states [144]. However, in the case of the doped graphene layer, the incident photon can produce a radiative effect due to the presence of the energy states [145]. Therefore, the EL effect requires a doping level within a limit range of ω L > 2|E F ≥ ω E |, where ω L and ω E are the relative photon energy of laser emissions [146]. Moreover, EL emissions from graphene can be transformed into the STM vision by replacing incident photons with electron injection, as demonstrated in Figure 10a. Moreover, the energy of injected charge carriers can be controlled by applying base voltage V B ; the experiment setup is illustrated in Figure 10b. Besides, in the experimental setup, initially, the glass substrates were cleaned with plasma oxygen and then coated with ITO, where the P-type graphene layer with a maximum bandgap of~0.5 eV was obtained through the doping effect of contact leads. with ITO, where the P-type graphene layer with a maximum bandgap of ~0.5 eV was obtained through the doping effect of contact leads. In addition, the change in the Fermi energy of the graphene layer can be due to two possible reasons: first, the high work function of the AU tip material, which raises the P-doping level, and secondly, the bias voltage VB, which can also induce the capacitive effect. These two possible doping effects can induce a bandgap from ~0.5 to 0.65 eV [147]. The induced bandgap in graphene is enough for an electroluminescent effect at near IR and visible emissions. Likewise, the electroluminescence effect was experimented in the graphene layer for energies level ≤ 2EF, as shown in Figure 10c with the grey shaded area. Besides, if the injected carrier has energy less than 2EF, then electrons lose their energy before the process of radiative decaying. The output radiation spectrum for single-layer graphene is shown in Figure 10d.
