# Molecular Sciences Pathophysiology of Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD): A Review on Oxidative Disorders

CorpusID: 220046334 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7fecc86481319eba9f16bb3b114a774df5fa38](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cf7fecc86481319eba9f16bb3b114a774df5fa38)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s6) Antioxidants, and Heme Oxygenase 1 in Peripheral Artery Disease
(p6.0) PAD patients suffer from modified acetyl-CoA ester accumulation when the concentration of carnitine in muscle cells lowers [62]. In PAD patients there is inadequate ATP generation. Thus, cell respiratory activity worsened. PAD patients show increased levels of esterified derivatives of acyl-CoA, which may be closely related to lowered blood perfusion [63].

(p6.1) This metabolic imbalance occurs when muscle and plasma levels of carnitine are low, as, e.g., in patients suffering from progressed PAD [64]. The results of studies suggest that carnitine stimulates glucose disposal and oxidation, leading to the efficient utilization of glucose under ischemia as occurs in PAD patients. The anti-oxidative drug propionyl L-carnitine was shown to modify OxS in PADs [64][65][66].
## (s9) Discussion
(p9.0) OxS is involved both in triggering and developing the atherosclerosis. Consequently, any agents, drugs and strategies must counteract its deleterious effects on arterial functions. The efficacy of medical strategies in treating PAD is currently debated. The most important objectives of the following long-term outcomes of PAD patients are the reduction in CVD events, and the potency of open peripheral arterial circulation as result of open or interventional procedures. On the other hand, OxS produced by chronic peripheral ischemia induced by haemodynamic imbalance must be fought to restore cell and tissue metabolism. New medical strategies must be directed towards achieving objectives such as improving oxygen tissue extraction and creating angiogenesis or arteriogenesis. In this regard, the regular supervised PE has shown interesting effects in treating PAD patients: it improves physical and muscle performance and acts on cell and tissue metabolisms, such that regulated physical exercise seems to counteract OxS. There is great interest in the vaso-protective effects of HO-1, which is largely attributable to its end products, being a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory and also by affecting the proliferation, migration and adhesion of smooth vascular muscle cells, endothelial cells, and leukocytes [94][95][96][97][98]. It is known that the redox capability of HO-1 is regulated by Nrf2 [95]. The protective role of HO-1 in several atherosclerotic diseases was still released; however, a few data were still released concerning HO-1 in PAD. Poor attention to this field could be caused by low prevalence of PAD compared to other atherosclerotic diseases. Consequently, it seems there is less attention paid to PAD in searching and in diagnosing other atherosclerotic diseases (coronary, carotid diseases)
## (s10) Discussion
(p10.0) OxS is involved both in triggering and developing the atherosclerosis. Consequently, any agents, drugs and strategies must counteract its deleterious effects on arterial functions. The efficacy of medical strategies in treating PAD is currently debated. The most important objectives of the following long-term outcomes of PAD patients are the reduction in CVD events, and the potency of open peripheral arterial circulation as result of open or interventional procedures. On the other hand, OxS produced by chronic peripheral ischemia induced by haemodynamic imbalance must be fought to restore cell and tissue metabolism. New medical strategies must be directed towards achieving objectives such as improving oxygen tissue extraction and creating angiogenesis or arteriogenesis. In this regard, the regular supervised PE has shown interesting effects in treating PAD patients: it improves physical and muscle performance and acts on cell and tissue metabolisms, such that regulated physical exercise seems to counteract OxS. There is great interest in the vaso-protective effects of HO-1, which is largely attributable to its end products, being a potent antioxidant and anti-inflammatory and also by affecting the proliferation, migration and adhesion of smooth vascular muscle cells, endothelial cells, and leukocytes [94][95][96][97][98]. It is known that the redox capability of HO-1 is regulated by Nrf2 [95]. The protective role of HO-1 in several atherosclerotic diseases was still released; however, a few data were still released concerning HO-1 in PAD. Poor attention to this field could be caused by low prevalence of PAD compared to other atherosclerotic diseases. Consequently, it seems there is less attention paid to PAD in searching and in diagnosing other atherosclerotic diseases (coronary, carotid diseases).
