# The Impact of Covid-19 on the Livestock Industry and the Way Forward: A Review

CorpusID: 236820200 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5715827ea6e49fa4d267c7ac767fc930e33bfe7c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5715827ea6e49fa4d267c7ac767fc930e33bfe7c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Agricultural And Food Sciences, Business

## (s4) thE COnCEpt OF COVid-19
(p4.0) The coronavirus (CoV) which causes Covid-19 was named SARS-CoV-2 by the international committee on taxonomy of viruses as the scientific name (OIE, 2020). Coronavirus is a family of RNA (ribonucleic acid) viruses. They are called coronaviruses because the particles shows a 'corona' (crown) trait of spike proteins around its lipid envelope. Coronavirus infections are common in animals and humans (El-Sabrout et al., 2020), while, some strains of coronavirus are zoonotic, but many strains are not zoonotic (OIE, 2020). Coronaviruses (CoV) has four genera that infect a variety of domestic and wild animals, as well as humans (Fan et al., 2019). Mammals particularly bats are the natural hosts of Alpha (α) -and Beta (β) -CoVs, while pigs and birds are the natural hosts of Gamma (γ) -and Delta (δ) -CoVs (Velavan and Meyer, 2020). Coronaviruses can mutate, which in turn increases their rate of transmission from animals to humans (Woo et al., 2020). SARS-CoV-2 is a novel beta coronavirus (β-coronavirus) that belongs to the subgenus sarbecovirus of the coronaviridae family (Mahdy, 2020;Li et al., 2020b). Coronavirus is among a large group of viruses, the coronaviruses affecting humans can cause a range of symptoms, including fever, headache, runny nose, cough, sore throat, etc (Li et al., 2020a). Most of them are mild, but others tends to cause pneumonia and these kind of viruses are usually transmitted through direct contact with an infected host (Chen, 2020). According to OIE (2020), coronavirus can cause illness in humans, ranging from the common cold to more severe diseases such as Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (caused by MERS-CoV), and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (caused by SARS-CoV). Detailed research showed that SARS-CoV was transmitted from civets to humans, while MERS-CoV is transmitted from dromedary camel to humans (El-Sabrout et al., 2020). An unknown origin of pneumonia was detected on humans, in the Wuhan city of Hubei Province of China, in December 2019 . A new coronavirus was identified as the causative agent by the Chinese authorities. Since then, the coronavirus cases in human has been reported by almost all the countries of the world and the Covid-19 event has been declared by the World Health Organization to be a pandemic (OIE, 2020; WHO, 2020).
## (s8) Advances in Animal and Veterinary Sciences
(p8.0) June 2021 | Volume 9 | Issue 6 | Page 944 (aerosols). It was reported that the infectious droplets or aerosols can gain access to human lungs through natural orifices such as the nose or mouth (Phan et al., 2020;Riou et al., 2020;Parry, 2020;Li et al., 2020a). The infectious droplets (aerosols) of SARS-CoV-2 can maintain its infectiousness for hours and survive on hard surfaces for a few days (Chauhan, 2020). In the aerosols of SARS-CoV-2, the median half-life is approximately 1.1 hours. Its survival on stainless steel is 5.6 hours and 6.8 hours on plastic (Van Doremalen et al., 2020). The virus could not be isolated from cardboard after 24 hours exposure with infectious droplets, while no virus was found on plastics and stainless steel after 72 hours exposure with infectious droplets (depending on the inoculum shed). This confirms the fact that fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is possible since the virus can survive and remain infectious for hours and days on surfaces Van Doremalen et al., 2020). Apart from the fomite transmission of SARS-CoV-2, the mode of transmission of the virus is significant for human contamination to dogs and cats (EC, 2020). Even though the contamination routes are not clear, the main route of the virus transmission is mainly through droplets emitted during coughing, sneezing, talking or breathing. It has been established that transmission can occur through fomites by hand-to-mouth, conjunctiva or by touching the nose with hands contaminated with infectious droplets or saliva (Chen, 2020; . However, it is important to note that most of the common habits such as licking and kissing increases or facilitates the transmission of the virus between sick people and their pets. Public health officials now recognize that people may spread the disease before they become symptomatic. The newly revised estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggested that 40 % of Covid-19 cases are asymptomatic, and half of all the current cases are transmitted by incubatory carrier (Groth, 2020).
