# Avian Eggshell Membrane as a Novel Biomaterial: A Review

CorpusID: 237938241 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/9e46d89902b4bc5023b229c22d515dc5b04316b1)

Fields: Materials Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s3) ESM for Joint Health
(p3.0) Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent chronic joint disease, affecting significantly the patients' ability to function and quality of life. Very often, patients rely on dietary supplements for pain relief. The eggshell membrane has been tested as a natural therapeutic for joint and connective tissue disorders and was reported to exert some beneficial effects on joint pain, stiffness, and cartilage turnover induced by overexercise [69]. In a randomized study, postmenopausal women were assigned to a placebo and intervention group, with thirty women taking orally a commercial product, Natural Eggshell Membrane (NEM ® ), 500 mg once per day for 2 weeks while conducting regular exercise on alternate days. The results showed that the cartilage turnover was significantly reduced in the intervention group. The consumption of the eggshell membrane product rapidly improved the recovery from exercise-induced joint pain and stiffness as well as reduced the discomfort immediately after exercise [69].
## (s6) ESM for Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant Activity
(p6.0) The anti-inflammatory effects of ESM have been also investigated in several studies. After being processed by cryo-grinding and homogenization into particles approaching submicron dimensions, ESM powder exerted some anti-inflammatory activity, while its antimicrobial activity against skin-associated pathogens was also enhanced [84]. The aqueous extract of ESM can also affect signaling events during responses to the T cell-specific mitogen phytohemagglutinin and pokeweed mitogen. This influence may be mediated through a decrease in the level of the pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α, providing some insights into the use of ESM as an anti-inflammatory product [85]. Vuong et al. also confirmed that both processed ESM power and EMS-derived soluble fractions demonstrated antiinflammation and immunomodulation properties in lipopolysaccharide-triggered human monocytes and macrophage-like cells through the intervention of NF-κB [86]. Yoo et al. treated ESM with acetic acid and divided hydrolysate into fractions of different molecular weights. They found that the whole ESM hydrolysate and the fractions with more than 10 kDa presented some anti-lipopolysaccharide and anti-IFN-γ-induced inflammation activities as well as an outstanding effect on suppressing skin inflammation [87]. Ovocalyxin-36 is a protein from ESM with immuno-modulating effects. In vivo, peptides derived from ovocalyxin-36 are more effective at reducing LPS-induced inflammatory symptoms and inhibiting the local production of pro-inflammatory mediators in the small intestine [42]. Hence, ESM hydrolysates offer some promising leads as an oral anti-inflammatory product.
