# Software Engineering for Blockchain Based Software Systems: Foundations, Survey, and Future Directions

CorpusID: 233739792 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a0aa95edeeb2d8f836f1e92150dec5fab60788d8)

Fields: Engineering, Computer Science

## (s4) Surveys on Engineering Internet-Based Computing Systems
(p4.0) Broadly-related surveys focus on intersections and synergies between Internet-based computing technologies such as blockchain, service computing, cloud computing, and IoTs. They are theoretically grounded on distributed architecture engineering that provides a backbone and virtually unlimited computational resources on-demand services to develop and deploy software systems. Surveys of Fahmideh et al., [9], [10], Lane et al., [28], and Razavian and Lago [29] are categorized under the broadly-related surveys. For example, cloud computing empowers the scalability and performance of blockchain platforms by providing service delivery models such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), or Platform as a Service (PaaS). Fahmideh et al. in their initial work [30] that is later elaborated in [9] compare the characteristics of 43 reengineering approaches, published between 2007 and 2015, to make legacy software systems as cloud-enabled. Their survey synopsizes the status quo and presents a rich set of development tasks and recommendations commonly incorporated into typical migration processes to cloud platforms upon service delivery models such as IaaS, SaaS, or PaaS. Blockchain is used as an enabling technology for IoT-based applications as it provides a secured decentralized network for data management and communication of sensors and devices. Fahmideh and Zowghi [10] present a generic development process lifecycle for IoT-based applications by mapping 63 approaches, published between 2008 and 2019. They conclude that development roles, requirements analysis, modelling, testing, and tailorability of development processes are not addressed in the existing approaches to engineer IoT-based applications.
