# Article title: Monitoring bias and fairness in machine learning models: A review Monitoring bias and fairness in machine learning models: A review

CorpusID: 235510937 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c05b1777a44fb6403636ebeff0a631794f0bcfd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7c05b1777a44fb6403636ebeff0a631794f0bcfd)

Fields: Psychology

## (s4) c) Sample bias
(p4.0) Another issue is sample bias, which happens when the data sample used to train the algorithm is not representative of the entire population due to systemic data collection errors. Any decisionmaking system based on this sample will be biased in either direction, favoring or opposing the over-or underrepresented party [12]. There are numerous explanations for a group's over-or underrepresentation in the results.

(p4.1) Another issue is sample bias, which happens when the data sample used to train the algorithm is not representative of the entire population due to systemic data collection errors. Any decisionmaking system based on this sample will be biased in either direction, favoring or opposing the over-or underrepresented party [12]. There are numerous explanations for a group's over-or underrepresentation in the results.
## (s5) d) Algorithm development bias
(p5.0) Apart from data bias as a source of unfairness, there are prejudices introduced during the algorithm's preparation. Throughout the process of developing an algorithm, researchers are confronted with a plethora of decisions that can steer the outcome in a variety of directions, including the selection of the dataset, the selection and encoding of features extracted from the dataset, the selection and encoding of the outcome variable, the rigor in which sources of bias in the data are identified, and the selection and specification of specific auxiliary variables [13]. Each decision is based on an implicit assumption. These assumptions are silent because they appear to be concealed behind an emphasis on mathematical precision and procedural rigor during the algorithm's development. Additionally, in many situations, the underlying assumptions are normative in nature.
## (s11) d) Approaches to Binary Classification
(p11.0) The majority of strategies for mitigating unfairness, bias, or discrimination are focused on the concept of protected or sensitive variables (we will use the words interchangeably) and (un)privileged classes: groups (often identified by one or more sensitive variables) that are statistically (less) more likely to be rated positively. Before delving into the critical components of the fairness system, it is necessary to address the essence of protected variables. Protected variables identify the characteristics of data that are socio-culturally precarious for machine learning applications. Sex, ethnic origin, and age are often used examples (as well as their synonyms) [17]. However, the term "protected variable" may refer to any aspect of data that includes or concerns humans.
## (s16) g) Regularization and Optimization of Constraints
(p16.0) Regularization has traditionally been used in machine learning to penalize the difficulty of the learned hypothesis in order to prevent over-fitting [22]. Regularization techniques, when applied to fairness, apply one or more penalty words that penalize the classifier for discriminator y practices. Thus, it is not hypothesis-driven (or learned model-driven), but data-driven and founded on the considered notion(s) of justice. Most of the literature extends or augments the classifier's (convex) loss function with fairness terms, usually in an attempt to strike a balance between fairness and accuracy. Frequently, approaches to fair machine learning are not stable, i.e., small changes in the training data have a major effect on results (comparatively high standard deviatio n). During model training, constraint optimization approaches often incorporate notions of fairness into the classifier loss function operating on the confusion matrix.
## (s27) c) Sample bias
(p27.0) Another issue is sample bias, which happens when the data sample used to train the algorithm is not representative of the entire population due to systemic data collection errors. Any decisionmaking system based on this sample will be biased in either direction, favoring or opposing the over-or underrepresented party [12]. There are numerous explanations for a group's over-or underrepresentation in the results.

(p27.1) Another issue is sample bias, which happens when the data sample used to train the algorithm is not representative of the entire population due to systemic data collection errors. Any decisionmaking system based on this sample will be biased in either direction, favoring or opposing the over-or underrepresented party [12]. There are numerous explanations for a group's over-or underrepresentation in the results.
## (s28) d) Algorithm development bias
(p28.0) Apart from data bias as a source of unfairness, there are prejudices introduced during the algorithm's preparation. Throughout the process of developing an algorithm, researchers are confronted with a plethora of decisions that can steer the outcome in a variety of directions, including the selection of the dataset, the selection and encoding of features extracted from the dataset, the selection and encoding of the outcome variable, the rigor in which sources of bias in the data are identified, and the selection and specification of specific auxiliary variables [13]. Each decision is based on an implicit assumption. These assumptions are silent because they appear to be concealed behind an emphasis on mathematical precision and procedural rigor during the algorithm's development. Additionally, in many situations, the underlying assumptions are normative in nature.
## (s34) d) Approaches to Binary Classification
(p34.0) The majority of strategies for mitigating unfairness, bias, or discrimination are focused on the concept of protected or sensitive variables (we will use the words interchangeably) and (un)privileged classes: groups (often identified by one or more sensitive variables) that are statistically (less) more likely to be rated positively. Before delving into the critical components of the fairness system, it is necessary to address the essence of protected variables. Protected variables identify the characteristics of data that are socio-culturally precarious for machine learning applications. Sex, ethnic origin, and age are often used examples (as well as their synonyms) [17]. However, the term "protected variable" may refer to any aspect of data that includes or concerns humans.
## (s39) g) Regularization and Optimization of Constraints
(p39.0) Regularization has traditionally been used in machine learning to penalize the difficulty of the learned hypothesis in order to prevent over-fitting [22]. Regularization techniques, when applied to fairness, apply one or more penalty words that penalize the classifier for discriminator y practices. Thus, it is not hypothesis-driven (or learned model-driven), but data-driven and founded on the considered notion(s) of justice. Most of the literature extends or augments the classifier's (convex) loss function with fairness terms, usually in an attempt to strike a balance between fairness and accuracy. Frequently, approaches to fair machine learning are not stable, i.e., small changes in the training data have a major effect on results (comparatively high standard deviatio n). During model training, constraint optimization approaches often incorporate notions of fairness into the classifier loss function operating on the confusion matrix.
