# Integron and its role in antimicrobial resistance: A literature review on some bacterial pathogens

CorpusID: 233865798 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/44bd79b396cc51ab795e11b7cabb06b26350f453)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s1) Classification of integrons
(p1.0) Integrons can be discriminated based on the relative homology of intI, although the cutoff point is not clear (2). Initially, it was suggested that integrons can be divided into two categories: 1) mobile integrons: have a small number of cassettes, usually encode antibiotic resistance, have different attC sites and their mobility is dependent on transposons or plasmids, 2) super integrons: have many cassettes, homogenous attC sites and located on the chromosome (4). Also, phylogenetic studies showed that a branch of integrons is associated with organismal phylogeny. These integrons are divided into three groups based on the phylogeny of the integrase genes: (i) a group of isolated Proteobacteria from freshwater and soil, including clinical integrons in classes I and III. (ii) a group found in Gamma-Proteobacteria in marine environments that includes class II, SXT integrative conjugative elements integrons and pRSV1 plasmids in Vibrio; and (iii) the integrons whose integrase genes are inverted. These inverse integrons have been found in Spirochaetes, Planctomycetes, Cyanobacteria, and Chlorobi spp. (4). Up to now, more than 9 classes of integrons have been identified based on 16 amino acids conserved in Gram-negative bacteria (5), but only 4 main classes are associated with clinical isolates. As stated above, the amino acid sequencing of the integrase gene is used as a marker for the classification of integrons Integrons and antimicrobial resistance Sabbagh et al. into different classes, and members having the same integrase have the same class but can carry different gene cassettes. Of all the different classes of integrons, the class I integrons and then class II are the most common classes among clinical isolates (6). Classes I to III are also integrons with multiple resistance. The class IV integrons are considered a distinct type of integron called super integron, which is found on the small chromosome Vibrio cholera (7).
## (s10) Integrons in various bacteria
(p10.0) Escherichia coli E. coli is known as the head of the large family of Enterobacteriaceae. Based on diversity in pathogenesis and clinical symptoms, the strains of E. coli are divided into two intestinal and extra-intestinal. E. coli is one of the most important causes of gastrointestinal and urinary tract infections in humans that has been resistant to a wide range of antibiotics over the past years (25). Acquiring mobile elements, including plasmids, transposons, and integrons among Gram-negative bacteria, it plays an important role in the development of antibiotic resistance (2). Class I integron was reported in 1973 (26). Common cassettes in this class of integron result in resistance to aminoglycosides (aadA1, aadA2, aadB, aadA5), trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA5, dfrA7,  dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrB2, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2), erythromycin (ere2) and broad-spectrum beta-lactams (ESBL) (bla OXA-101 -aac(6')-Ib) (27). Also, class II integron has been reported less frequently. This integron contains gene cassettes dfrA1-sat1-aadA1, dfrA1-sat2-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 (28). Also, recently, a new class II integron has been identified (29), which includes two gene cassettes. One of them is the dfrA14 gene. There are also reports available on the availability of Class III integrons that are commonly seen with class I and III integrons in this bacterium (30). (Table 1) in our study in 2015, we collected E. coli from clinical isolates of patients in the north of Iran, which showed 22% of E. coli isolates carried class I integron ( Table 2) (31).
## (s12) Salmonella spp.
(p12.0) Salmonella spp. are intestinal pathogens that are usually transmitted by contaminated food, especially animals such as meat, poultry, eggs, and milk. Multidrugresistant (MDR) salmonella has been a major public health issue since 1990. Salmonella spp. is associated with different classes of integrons, usually containing one to three gene cassettes (35). Class I integrons play a major role in antibiotic resistance in Salmonella spp. This class has several types of gene cassettes resistant to aminoglycosides (aadA, aadA1, aadA2, aadA5, aadB), beta-lactams (bla CARB-2 ) and trimethoprim (dfrA1, dfrA7, dfrA12, dfrA17, dfrA1-gcuC, dfrA1-aadA1, dfrA17-aadA5, dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2) (27). Although the percentage of class II integrons is relatively lower in this bacterium, it appears in different serotypes of salmonella spp. with dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 and estX-sat2-aadA1 cassettes. Class III integrons are not yet found in this bacterium (Table  1)(36). In our study in 2015, the prevalence of Class I integrons in Salmonella infantis was 36% (Table 2) (37).
## (s14) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(p14.0) P. aeruginosa is one of the most important factors in hospital infections, especially in burn patients and patients with cystic fibrosis. Due to increased MDR bacteria, treatment for this bacterium is difficult to find. Class I integron is an important factor for the development of antibiotic resistance and the emergence of MDR strains (41). This class of integrons includes some gene cassettes such a aadB and aadA2 (resistance to aminoglycosides), dfrA17-aadA5 and dfrA12-gcuF-aadA2 (resistance to trimethoprim), bla CARB-2 (resistance to carbenicillin) (27). Class II integrons in P. aeruginosa include dfrA1-sat1-aadA1 (Table 1) (16). Our studies in 2012 and 2013 on P. aeruginosa isolates showed 37-40% of isolates had the intI1 gene (Table 2) (41,42).
