# Donor quality of life after living donor liver transplantation: a review of the literature HHS Public Access

CorpusID: 244268211 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/440127f317a9558394c03ffc98b529e417f163d8](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/440127f317a9558394c03ffc98b529e417f163d8)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Overall Physical and Mental HRQOL
(p3.0) In studies that implemented the SF-36, donor HRQOL including both physical (PCS) and mental composite scores (MCS) were typically higher than the general population prior to donation (21)(22)(23)(24)(25). Ladner et al. (23) evaluated the A2ALL cohort and found mean PCS and MCS scores to be close to one standard deviation higher than the normative means before donation. Prior to donation, potential candidate donors and eventual donors were found to have higher PCS scores (57.6 and 58.0 respectively) than the general population and the healthy reference sample (25). Eventual donors also had higher MCS scores than potential candidate donors (51.8 vs. 46.8), but these scores were not significantly different from the general population or the healthy reference sample.
## (s7) Financial impact of donation
(p7.0) Studies revealed that a significant portion of donors felt that donation-related expenditures were burdensome and that LDLT impacted their employment and health insurance. In one illustrative example (33), 40% of donors reported that donation-related costs were burdensome at 3 months post-donation and 19% reported feeling similarly at 2 years post-donation. Cumulatively, 24% of donors found donation-related costs to be more than expected in this study. Furthermore, 34% of donors changed jobs or modified their work because of donation at 3 months post-donation, though only 1% reported changes in employment 2 years later. In this study, those with lower household incomes were at higher risk of poorer financial outcomes. Dew et al. (38) assessed financial burden approximately 6 years after donation and found that 15% of donors reported that donation expenses were burdensome; a portion of these donors changed jobs and experienced permanent income reductions. In this study, 11% of donors also experienced health or life insurance problems due to donation.
