# Molecular Sciences Review ACE2 and Innate Immunity in the Regulation of SARS-CoV-2-Induced Acute Lung Injury: A Review

CorpusID: 240053239 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc830a6ec5a4e403ac7890cb0477628fa0f97bf5](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/dc830a6ec5a4e403ac7890cb0477628fa0f97bf5)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s8) cGAS/STING Pathway
(p8.0) The cGAS/STING pathway stimulates type-I IFN during DNA and RNA viral infections, an essential factor in resisting viral infections [136,137]. DNA viruses, including adenovirus and vaccinia virus, can activate cGAS/STING, mice deficient in this pathway are more susceptive to viral infection [138]. During SARS-CoV-2 infection, cGAS binds with dsDNA to catalyze its transformation into cGAMP. cGAMP acts as a second messenger and it interacts with the adaptor protein STING on the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane [139] to activate downstream kinase complex TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and inhibitor of κB protein kinase (IKK), resulting in nuclear translocation of IRF3 and NF-κB [140][141][142].

(p8.1) The cGAS/STING pathway protects host cells against RNA viruses. Fiachra et al. [143] found that in K18-hACE2-transfected mice with or without SARS-CoV-2 infection, intranasal administration of diazi-4 could activate STING, and inhibit viral replication in lung epithelial cells. Knockout of cGAS or STING genes in vitro or in vivo promoted largescale replication of RNA viruses [144,145]. Applying STING agonist to influenza vaccine could improve its ability to resist multiple influenza viruses [146]. ORF3a of SARS-CoV-2 bound to STING and inhibited downstream signaling, restraining the nuclear accumulation of p65, preventing type-I IFN expression [137,[147][148][149][150]. Berthelot et al. [151] found that the combination of SARS-CoV2 and ACE2 induced Ang II in mice, leading to overactivation of the STING pathway, which promoted tissue damage via monocyte-macrophage releasing interferon-β and tissue factors. cGAS-STING could not recognize viral RNA directly, but it could be activated by damaged host dsDNA, inducing the expression of type-I IFN and participating in the defense against SARS-CoV-2 infection with TLR3 and RIGI-MDA5 pathways [152][153][154].
## (s10) The Potential Therapeutic Role of ACE2 in COVID-19
(p10.0) Currently, there is no specific drug or vaccine for COVID-19. According to statistics, the mortality rate of severe COVID-19 patients is as high as 22-44% [72,167]. There is an urgent need for more effective treatments in the clinic. ACE2, as a binding protein of SARS-CoV2, not only plays a vital role in viral infection [168,169], but its dysfunction also leads to the weakness of the inflammatory inhibitory effect of ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/MASR axis, resulting in the aggravation of lung injury [170]. In addition, ACE2 is also a receptor protein for SARS-CoV-2-infected cells. Considering the potential treatment of ACE2-mediated COVID-19, some feasible treatments will be very important [171,172]. Therefore, ACE2 may play a certain therapeutic role on COVID-19 (Table 1).
## (s13) Recombinant ACE2
(p13.0) Recombinant ACE2, a recombinant soluble receptor that has a potential therapeutic effect on ALI, as it blocks the binding of SARS-CoV-2 to ACE2-expressing cells, thus avoiding viral infection [40,[192][193][194][195]. Hoepel et al. [196] constructed recombinant proteins using an Fc fragment of human IgG1 together with the extracellular domain of either normal or mutant ACE2. Both recombinant proteins could interact with SARS-CoV-2 spike protein and therefore obstruct viral invasion. Monteil et al. [197] reported that human recombinant ACE2 (rhACE2) significantly prevented SARS-CoV-2 invasion, indicating that rhACE2 plays a role in the initial stage of the disease. However, whether this kind of drug is effective only for early infection remains uncertain [193]. Huang et al. [198] suggested that recombinant ACE2-Fc proteins not only worked as antibodies to block viral invasion and generate long-term immunity, but they could also act as a complement to decrease pulmonary ACE2 during infection, which improved the pathologic conditions of ARDS directly.
