# Online hemodiafiltration (HDF) versus high-flux hemodialysis (hf-HD): A review

CorpusID: 247569626 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb8b775f00a5c1545fa2f25551c8a09f04f1281f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/eb8b775f00a5c1545fa2f25551c8a09f04f1281f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s8) Middle molecules
(p8.0) Middle molecules are mainly composed of peptides larger than 500 Da (Vanholder & Glorieux, 2003). Examples of this group are β2-microglobulin (11,818 Da), interleukin-6 (IL-6; 24,500 Da), complement factor D (26,750 Da), fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23; 32,000 Da), parathyroid hormone (PTH; 9,225 Da), and others. Studies have shown that the type of dialyzer could influence the removal of middle molecular weight uremic toxins (Maduell et al., 2014;Wolley et al., 2018).

(p8.1) More recently, MCO dialyzers were developed to obtain optimized permeability, with larger pores which allow the passage of middle molecules (up to about 50 kDa) and minimal albumin loss (Boschetti-De-Fierro et al., 2015;Wolley et al., 2018). Some clinical studies have shown that MCO-HD and HDF is able to more effectively remove middle molecules and a wider range of middle-molecule uremic toxins compared to HF-HD and HD (Belmouaz et al., 2020;Kirsch et al., 2017;Locatelli et al., 2015;Weiner et al., 2020). Belmouaz et al. (2020) demonstrated that MCO-HD had reduction rates of β2-microglobulin and FGF-23 of 73% and 41%, respectively, which is significantly higher than hf-HD. However, the use of MCO membranes in large populations and their possible clinical effects remain to be elucidated.
## (s10) Biocompatibility of Hemodialysis Membranes
(p10.0) Hemodialysis is a procedure performed in extracorporeal circulation, and the lack of biocompatibility may induce significant clinical and biochemical responses. Due to blood contacting with the components of the hemodialysis circuit, such as dialysis membranes, drains and intravenous fluids administered during the procedure, activation of inflammatory and immune pathways may occur, leading to dialysis-induced oxidative stress and membrane-induced inflammation, which are related to cardiovascular problems (Chang et al., 2014;Gomółka et al., 2020;Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco et al., 2018;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018). This activation occurs via the alternative pathway of the complementary system, leading to anaphylatoxins being released into the bloodstream, activation of the coagulation cascade and of different cell types (monocytes, neutrophils, basophils, and platelets), and elevating plasma pro-inflammatory cytokine levels such as interleukin-1β (IL-1), IL-6, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and stimulating the production of proteolytic enzymes by granulocytes Due to the exposure time of the blood to the dialysis membrane surface, the biocompatibility of this HD component is crucial. Membranes have the function of removing water and solutes through various mass separation processes such as diffusion, convection and adsorption (Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018). These membranes can be traditionally classified according to their composition and permeability, being made of cellulose (modified or unmodified) or synthetic.

(p10.1) Unmodified cellulose membranes were the most common in the past, but they were eradicated from the market, and the same has been observed for modified cellulose membranes which have good performance and functionality when compared to synthetic ones; however, their biocompatibility and permeability are limited, preventing their application in convective therapies (Clark et al., 1999;Gomółka et al., 2020;Kalantar-zadeh et al., 2018;Ojeda et al., 2020;Claudio Ronco & Clark, 2018).

(p10.2) These limitations have been surpassed with the advance of biomaterials and with the improvement in the production of fibers that have resulted in new membranes with specific characteristics and refined properties, which have begun to present greater biocompatibility and permeability, in addition to expanding their categorization. Factors such as permeability index, hydrophilic index, adsorption capacity, and electric potential are now considered to define the membrane category Ronco & Clark, 2018). Studies show that the use of synthetic high-flux membranes have greater biocompatibility by reducing chronic inflammation and oxidative stress, as in the case of membranes used in hf-HD and HDF (Clark et al., 1999;Gomółka et al., 2020;Ojeda et al., 2020;Pieroni et al., 2015;Tomo, 2016).
