# AI-Enabled Opportunities and Transformation Challenges for SMEs in the Post-pandemic Era: A Review and Research Agenda

CorpusID: 248424867 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a6d462c4b5e5ce4d7088c432488b188d15f9202b)

Fields: Environmental Science, Business, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are the main driving force of employment and economic growth (1). The outbreak of COVID-19 in 2020 and resultant (regional) pandemic control and lockdown policies have made SMEs vulnerable (2). Compared with large corporations, SMEs are facing greater challenges and uncertainties (3,4), which will likely continue to the postpandemic era (5,6). Despite the rapid response of governments to curb business closures by providing mitigation measures such as loans, wage support and subsides, the financial difficulties of SMEs have not been significantly improved. Some mitigation measures to reduce this burden are not as effective as expected, therefore its vital to find urgent measures to properly resolve the difficulties of SMEs and subsequently promote their continuous development.
## (s19) Technology Compatibility
(p19.0) Compatibility is the degree to which technology is assimilated and integrated within an organization's existing processes and available infrastructure (40). Currently, there is a lack of unified standards amongst products, equipment, software, and systems related to AI. The implementation of AI is down to the quality of data; however, AI applications face a variety of challenges in this area. These challenges include an insufficient size of data availability, data collection standards, format, integration, continuity, transparency, repeatability, quantity, quality of data input, and dimensional obstacles (11). The data challenges are more obvious to SMEs, especially standards and data structures. Generally, SMEs lack data, or the standardized formats required to verify limited data to gain a real benefit from AI solutions. Simply AI requires the need to create a consistent format that is able to share data among different organizations or industries (11). However, it is questionable whether different algorithms for an SME can solve problems based on different organizations or industries.
## (s21) Social Challenges
(p21.0) The successful adoption of AI technology requires the cooperation of many stakeholders. Thereby creating a digital service-oriented business model of organizations with a highquality data ecosystem. However, bringing stakeholders together can be challenging, a shared ecosystem of digitization can affect the business model of any single organization, therefore, requires the business models of other organizations to be consistent (10). In an AI innovation business model, the AI capabilities are assimilated into business activities that create and deliver value to capture and ensure scalable growth (36). This innovative process requires expanding AI services from initial proof of concept through to a larger customer base using AI business models that demonstrate the value of the products, so as to jointly create customer interactions (38). From a value delivery perspective, an organization must act as an entity cooperating with suppliers to adopt and take advantage of emerging opportunities of AI function discovery (9,38,51). However, many organizations fail to fully consider the dimension of value delivery (37).

(p21.1) Successful transformation of AI within SMEs needs the support of the government and other organizations. The government can play a key role in supporting the SMEs, by improving the existing legal and regulatory systems, raising the awareness of digital transformation, providing technical and financial support, strengthening data communication infrastructure (3,45). There is an urgent need in terms of technology and data communication infrastructure for the government to intervene and provide financial support. Equally, due to the wide variety of technical and financial support required, it may become a challenge from a policy point of view.
## (s22) Ethical and Trust Risks
(p22.0) The collection of large data sets, its storage and sharing of that data derived from AI technology and raises ethical issues related to governance, quality, security, standards, privacy, and data ownership (60). Therefore, SMEs need to take certain measures to reduce these risks when using AI. For example, trust is an important factor in the diffusion of AI technology (11,41). Individuals and organizations may lack trust and worry about the moral dimension of the AI systems and the use of shared data (43). This is prevalent when there are analyses before decisionmaking based on the AI system. However, it is not clear how to solve moral and legal problems (11,33). Developing solutions based on AI requires a large amount of data, creating an element of risk due to user privacy, especially when the government issues user privacy laws that propose data collection cannot be at the expense of user privacy. The data collection based on protecting user privacy may limit the development of AI within SMEs, particularly "specialized and new" organizations who would worry about potential risks such as core technology leakage caused by data sharing.
