# Multimodal Learning with Transformers: A Survey

CorpusID: 249642175 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/622428f5122ad12a40229e1768ecb929fd747ee7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/622428f5122ad12a40229e1768ecb929fd747ee7)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) The initial inspiration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is to imitate human perception, e.g., seeing, hearing, touching, smelling. In general, a modality is often associated with a specific sensor that creates a unique communication channel, such as vision and language [1]. In humans, a fundamental mechanism in our sensory perception is the ability to leverage multiple modalities of perception data collectively in order to engage ourselves properly with the world under dynamic unconstrained circumstances, with each modality serving as a distinct information source characterized by different statistical properties. For example, an image gives the visual appearance of an "elephants playing in water" scene via thousands of pixels, whilst the corresponding text describes this moment with a sentence using discrete words. Fundamentally, a multimodal AI system needs to ingest, interpret, and reason about multimodal information sources to realize similar human level perception abilities. Multimodal learning (MML) is a general approach to building AI models that can extract and relate information from multimodal data [1].
## (s10) Discussion How to understand position embedding to
(p10.0) Transformers is an open problem. It can be understood as a kind of implicit coordinate basis of feature space, to provide temporal or spatial information to the Transformer. For cloud point [164] and sketch drawing stroke [163], their token element is already a coordinate, meaning that position embedding is optional, not necessary. Furthermore, position embedding can be regarded as a kind of general additional information. In other words, from a mathematical point of view, any additional information can be added, such as detail of the manner of position embedding, e.g., the pen state of sketch drawing stroke [163], cameras and viewpoints in surveillance [165]. There is a comprehensive survey [166] discussing the position information in Transformers. For both sentence structures (sequential) and general graph structures (sparse, arbitrary, and irregular), position embeddings help Transformers to learn or encode the underlying structures. Considered from the mathematical perspective of self-attention, i.e., scaled dot-product attention, attentions are invariant to the positions of words (in text) or nodes (in graphs), if position embedding information is missing. Thus, in most cases, position embedding is necessary for Transformers.
## (s30) Discussion
(p30.0) In spite of the recent advances, multimodal pretraining Transformer methods still have some obvious bottlenecks. For instance, as discussed by [208] in VLP field, while the BERT-style cross-modal pretraining models produce excellent results on various down-stream visionlanguage tasks, they fail to be applied to generative tasks directly. As discussed in [208], both VideoBERT [7] and CBT [107] have to train a separate video-to-text decoder for video captioning. This is a significant gap between the pretraining models designed for discriminative and generative tasks, as the main reason is discriminative task oriented pretraining models do not involve the decoders of Transformer. Therefore, how to design more unified pipelines that can work for both discriminative and generative down-stream tasks is also an open problem to be solved. Again for instance, common multimodal pretraining models often underperform for fine-grained/instance-level tasks as discussed by [137].
