# SYSTEMATIC REVIEWS AND META-ANALYSES Machine learning to guide clinical decision-making in abdominal surgery-a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 240157389 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be4203eeb80b9d371fe20cbb42731c9499c4404e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/be4203eeb80b9d371fe20cbb42731c9499c4404e)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s2) Identification and selection of studies
(p2.0) We performed a systematic literature search to assess the evidence of ML's use for CDM in abdominal surgery. To establish a relevant query, the PICO framework was applied [13]. Insufficient evidence in CDM in abdominal surgery depicts the addressed problem. We aimed to evaluate ML's use as intervention and compared it to conventional decision-making. Outcome of interest was a more precise determination of either benefits or risks of abdominal operations for a subsequently more personalized CDM. Assessed risks included mortality and morbidity and benefits were assumed if a desired effect of a given operation (i.e., cancer survival, cure of disease, positive effect of surgery) was given. A distinct search algorithm was applied using the PubMed database, whereas the search was guided by The PRISMA Statement for systematic reviews [14]. The query was conducted January 2021 by inserting the keywords "surgery machine learning" into PubMed. Each article was processed using a standardized procedure: We considered articles between 1 st of January 1990 and 31 st of December 2020 that were published in peer-reviewed journals in the English language. Reviews, comments, and any other articles representing no original research were excluded. Articles were then screened for their contribution to CDM in abdominal surgery, whereas only articles that aimed for assessment of perioperative risk or benefits for surgery were included. At first, titles were analyzed and in case of interest associated abstracts were extracted and examined. Secondly, full-text review was undertaken whenever the abstract fulfilled our criteria and addressed the search question. References of every article included were scrutinized for additional research studies of interest. Figure 1 shows the PRISMA flow diagram of our query.
