# Integrating Multiple Inputs Into an Artificial Pancreas System: Narrative Literature Review

CorpusID: 247083479 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d68eb2f2d0738233cff1fb95037447afdaa23f7)

Fields: Engineering, Medicine

## (s1) Background
(p1.0) In health, pancreatic islet β-cells respond to metabolic and neurohormonal signals to secrete insulin into the portal vein at finely controlled variable rates to ensure that blood glucose level and overall metabolic homeostasis are maintained. Diabetes is a metabolic disease characterized by elevated blood glucose concentrations as a consequence of an absolute deficiency of insulin secretion or inadequate insulin secretion to compensate for ineffective insulin action. Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is caused by the autoimmune destruction of the islet β-cells and results in absolute insulin deficiency [1]. An inability to match insulin delivery with an individual's changing insulin requirements results in either hypoglycemia (low blood glucose level) or hyperglycemia (high blood glucose level). Hypoglycemia, if severe, may result in loss of consciousness, seizures, or even death. Long-term exposure to hyperglycemia results in complications such as blindness, limb amputations, and cardiovascular disease. Maintaining blood glucose levels in a healthy range is essential for the avoidance of severe shortand long-term complications of diabetes [1].
## (s14) Invasive Inputs
(p14.0) People with T1D who choose not to conduct multiple daily blood glucose level tests and use multiple daily injections are currently compelled to use minimally invasive CGM and CSII devices. This requires users to take necessary steps to regularly change the sensors [26,[58][59][60][61]. Hence, an additional invasive sensor might be identified as practically burdensome. However, there exists the possibility of integrating additional sensors in currently used devices such as CGM and CSII to avoid additional user burden. Previous studies have identified relationships between invasive inputs and T1D (eg, ketone sensors to identify diabetic ketoacidosis [62]). Although rich relationships exist, progress is stunted because of the lack of sensors for carrying out continuous measurements. At present, real-time interstitial insulin sensors and ketone sensors are being developed [63].
