# Female dietary patterns and outcomes of in vitro fertilization (IVF): a systematic literature review

CorpusID: 246002062 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/687c51328abda63bc7c3105864dac017a44a197d)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) 'Profertility' diet
(p10.0) The 'profertility' diet was examined alongside the Med-Diet in Gaskins 2019. The 'profertility' diet is based on findings from the EARTH study and comprises higher intake of supplemental folic acid, vitamin B12, vitamin D, low-pesticide fruits and vegetables, whole grains, seafood, dairy, and soy foods; and lower intake of high pesticide fruits and vegetables [32,48] (Table 2). Higher adherence to the 'profertility' diet was positively associated with biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and probability of live birth (probability of live birth as an adjusted proportion Q1 vs Q4 (95% CI) = 0.33 (0.26-0.40), 0.56 (0.47-0.64) (Gaskins, 2019) ( Table 4). Findings were largely attributed to intake of micronutrients and pesticide residues on fruits and vegetables, however an indirect approximated measure of pesticide intake was used to assess exposure [48]. The sample included 357 women participating in the EARTH study and the 
## (s16) Dietary patterns and components
(p16.0) Across studies, the exposure under investigation (dietary pattern) was selected using two different methods (Supplemental Table 2). In two studies, an α-posteriori approach was utilized [51,54]. Results from participant questionnaires or FFQ were examined and the exposure was derived based on which dietary pattern best fit the data. In the remaining studies, investigators used a hypothesis driven α-priori approach. An exposure was chosen before dietary intake information was obtained and a FFQ or questionnaire appropriate for the respective pattern administered.
## (s20) Study characteristics likely leading to methodological challenges Exposure assessment
(p20.0) All studies utilized questionnaires to assess exposure, with most utilizing a validated self-administered semiquantitative FFQ (number of items ranging from 6 to 131) [48,49,51,54] (Supplemental Table 2). No questionnaire was validated prospectively in a population of women experiencing infertility and/or undergoing IVF treatment. In all studies, for exposure classification, participants were grouped into categories of adherence (e.g., low, intermediate, high) to the dietary pattern under investigation in relation to other participants' adherence based on questionnaire responses. In all studies, exposure used for analyses and covariates were assessed once at baseline and not reassessed during the follow up period for changes. Studies including participants who utilized cryopreserved embryos or oocytes did not assess exposure at both the time of cryopreservation and the time of attempted use/transfer into a uterus [48,50].
## (s24) Associations between dietary patterns and IVF outcomes
(p24.0) Nine different dietary patterns from seven observational studies were examined among participants. Higher adherence to the MedDiet, a Dutch 'preconception' diet, and a 'profertility' diet were associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, or live birth in at least one study. Amongst studies of the MedDiet, findings were inconsistent and dose-response associations were only found in one study. Within the study, associations were modified by age and present only among women age < 35 and only for the outcomes of clinical pregnancy and live birth. Although examined in one relatively small population, increased adherence to a 'profertility' diet was associated with improvements in biochemical pregnancy, clinical pregnancy, and live birth. Likewise, higher adherence to a Dutch 'preconception diet' was associated with improvements in clinical pregnancy in a single small study. The aHEI-2010 diet, 'Fertility Diet' , 'health-conscious low processed' dietary pattern, 'vegetable and seafood' dietary pattern, 'Western' dietary pattern, and 'rice and miso soup' dietary pattern were not materially associated with improved IVF outcomes. Explanations for differences in findings across and within studies on the MedDiet put forth by study authors include the escalating and overshadowing influence of age on fertility [49], lack of accounting for dietary supplements [50], and insufficient statistical power [51]. Likewise, authors of studies investigating remaining dietary patterns hypothesize that differences may be attributed to intake of substances such as pesticides [48] and linoleic acid [54]. However, causative conclusions are difficult to draw due to the high degree of heterogeneity across studies and potential bias resulting from methodological issues which may mask true associations.
