# Different Respiratory Samples for COVID-19 Detection by Standard and Direct Quantitative RT-PCR: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 244602955 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c8e2858d3cae2bb28faa00078e92147696a3baec)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s1) Nasopharyngeal swab and Oropharyngeal swab
(p1.0) According to CDC guidelines, NPS and OPS are suitable respiratory specimens for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA (12). NPS and OPS are the most widely used samples for COVID-19 detection using RT-qPCR (13). NPS is collected from the nasopharynx by slightly elevating the tip of the nose, inserting the swab into the nasal cavity and then rotating the swab in the nasopharynx for several seconds. For the collection of oropharyngeal secretions, the tip of the swab must be placed at the posterior oropharyngeal wall, and touching the tongue should be avoided. To absorb respiratory secretion, NPS, as well as OPS, should be left at the appropriate site for a few several seconds. Immediately after sampling, the swabs should be located into transport media, and then the tube caps should be tightened. The swab samples should be kept at 2-8 ºC and immediately submitted to the laboratory (2). It was found that foam swabs have a superior ability to collect the virus compared to polyester swabs and have lower Ct values than polyester swabs. However, due to the high correlation between polyester and foam Ct values, polyester swabs stored in viral transport medium (VTM) or saline can be used as an alternative to foam swabs, especially in times of shortages (14). Nevertheless, NPS as the reference respiratory specimen has some disadvantages such as: requiring close contact between HCWs and patients and also personal protective equipment in sample collection, high risk of virus transmission, not being adequate for serial virus monitoring, being difficult to perform in children, causing discomfort in patients, frequent reflex sneezing or coughing as well as worldwide deficiency of swabs and transport medium (15,16).
## (s3) Country
(p3.0) No  video-instructed self-collected oropharyngeal as well as nasal samples and HCW-collected oropharyngeal samples (9). In another study, the sensitivity and specificity of self-collected midnasal swabs and clinician swabs were reported 80.0% and 97.9%, respectively. Furthermore, false-negative results in patients with low primary viral loads were seen (17). However, Abdollahi et al. reported moderate agreement between RT-qPCR results of the NPS and OPS samples obtained by the patients and those collected by the lab technicians (18). Overall, future studies should examine the diagnostic accuracy and cost-effectiveness of self-testing methods in a larger and more heterogeneous cohort of patients (9).
## (s5) Saliva samples
(p5.0) SARS-CoV-2 can be presented in saliva via three potential routes, including upper respiratory tract, blood and infection of the major and minor salivary glands (15). Some studies have suggested the application of saliva samples for COVID-19 detection by RT-qPCR, which compared to swabs, are less invasive, simpler, and can be collected quickly by HCWs with less contact or by own patients or children's parents. Therefore, the risk of infection can be potentially reduced. In addition, this method is less costly due to the absence of swabs or viral transport media in saliva collection (15). Additionally, saliva can be used as a possible sample for screening and detecting COVID-19 in children (21). It was also found that viral RNA load in saliva samples is stable when stored at room temperature (RT) for 1 day (22) or 2 days (23). Saliva storage at RT did not affect the test sensitivity (24). However, the sensitivity of saliva samples for SARS-CoV-2 detection in literature is variable and further studies in larger cohorts are required. Clear protocols for saliva sample collection may eliminate some of the variations reported in different studies. Furthermore, consistent results of different studies support the clinical application of saliva samples in a healthcare setting (25).
## (s6) Mouth rinse/gargle
(p6.0) The anatomic region in the pharynx gargle is the same as throat swabs. Application of pharynx gargle samples is an accepted method for molecular detection of common respiratory infections. Pharynx gargle samples can be easily self-collected without close contact between patients and HCWs (26). The users are explained to squeeze the contents of the sterile vial containing saline into their open mouth. Next, they are asked to perform a swish/gargle cycle three times and then throw the saline out into a sterile empty container (23). It was reported that detection of viral RNA in saline mouth rinse/gargle is stable after 2 days storage at RT (23).
## (s8) Sputum
(p8.0) A higher level of viral load can be detected in samples from LRT compared to NPS and OPS. Furthermore, positive relation between sputum viral load and severity of COVID-19 as well as the risk of progression was reported (35). However, coughing up is necessary to collect sputum from the lower airways. Therefore, all patients, especially elderly or asymptomatic patients, cannot produce sputum (35). CDC stated that LRT samples, such as sputum, are allowed for patients with a productive cough or under particular situations (e.g., invasive mechanical ventilation). Due to the production of aerosols during sputum acquisition, induced sputum was not suggested by the CDC. However, endotracheal sputum aspirates or self-collected sputum (with proper instructions) can be beneficial. Sputum samples can be suitable for patients with a traumatic fracture or anatomic anomaly in the facial/nasal area and patients with productive cough and negative test results using NPS. The presence of mucus in sputum samples is problematic, which can be overcome by CDC guidelines for sputum preparation (36). CDC has suggested pretreating sputum with DTT for COVID-19 detection. In the study of Peng et al., sputum pretreatment using saline, N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NALC), proteinase K (PK), and DTT were compared. A higher COVID-19 detection rate was achieved by pretreatment of sputum samples using PK and DTT compared to their pretreatment with NALC or saline (37). Taken together, PK or DTT pretreated sputum samples can be validated on both manual and automated platforms (36,37).
## (s10) Different methods for COVID-19 detection using direct RT-qPCR
(p10.0) Generally, COVID-19 testing is performed when symptoms are apparent. At that time, viral load is usually high (42). Direct RT-qPCR, which eliminates the viral RNA isolation step, is performed faster and simpler than tests requiring an initial RNA extraction step ( Figure 2). Therefore, direct RT-qPCR can be used in resource-limited regions with moderate access to RNA purification kit. This approach will cause widespread testing in these regions while saving time and cost (11). However, due to the presence of inhibitors of RT-qPCR in biological samples and RNA loss caused by heating and/or RNases, the use of pre-treated samples directly in RT-qPCR is challenging (43). Therefore, many studies focused on developing different direct RT-qPCR methods to obtain equivalent results to the established method that involves RNA extraction (Table 5).
