# A scoping research literature review to explore bereavement humor

CorpusID: 247928625 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/f4627597f6ffa5945137c63e11c08f73375a4b18)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s0) Materials and Methods
(p0.0) After consultation with a university librarian, nine academic library databases were searched for published English-language research reports with abstracts using the keywords "grief or loss or mourning or bereavement" and "humor or humour or comedy or laughter or jokes," and "research." These nine databases were considered the most likely to contain relevant research articles for review: CINAHL, Directory of Open Access (online) Journals, Humanities Index, Journal Storage (JSTOR), Medline (Ovid), PsychInfo, Scopus, SocIndex, and Web of Science. Reports of all kinds of research investigations were sought, in keeping with the established methodology of scoping literature reviews (Arksey & O'Malley, 2005;Whittemore & Knafl, 2005). As this project involved a systematic search for and analysis of published literature, it did not require research ethics committee approval to proceed. Scoping reviews are a common type of literature review, although they are distinguished from other types as they gather and assess all types of research reports, and they typically focus on new topics or emerging questions of interest (Armstrong et al., 2011;Grant & Booth, 2009;Levac et al., 2010;Munn et al., 2018). Like other reviews, scoping reviews are done to assess how much research has already been done on a defined topic or question, and to determine what evidence and evidence gaps exist. However, scoping reviews do not include an assessment of the quality of the research articles that are identified for review, as all published research reports that are identified on a specific topic are considered likely to contain information of benefit. No efforts are made then to limit the review to only comprehensively-written reports of high-quality studies. Accordingly, this scoping review was carried out to identify all published English-language research reports that focused in whole or in part on bereavement humor, and explore and describe the findings to identify evidence and evidence gaps. No limit was placed on the year of publication, in keeping with our plan to scope the research conducted to date on bereavement humor. One final consideration is that this review only sought evidence on bereavement humor, as compared to humor associated with other challenging life events, such as divorce or retirement. It is possible that humor findings may be similar across them, but bereavement humor could be entirely distinct as humor is not generally associated with death, dying, or bereavement.
