# Citation: Dominic, D.; Baidurah, S. Recent Developments in Biological Processing Technology for Palm Oil Mill Effluent Treatment-A Review

CorpusID: 247861731 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/52d25e4c5affac33d153d877f24ec09aee179808)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s10) Biological Treatment of POME Using Bacteria
(p10.0) This subtopic highlights the effective biological processing technologies in the presence of bacteria applicable to POME treatment, as delineated in Table 4. Karim et al. (2019) successfully treated POME biologically using Bacillus cereus MF 661,883 with the highest COD removal efficiency at 79.35%, BOD removal efficiency at 72.65%, 0.2 L working volume at 35 • C, and HRTs of six days [117]. The highest COD removal efficiency was recorded for the 50% diluted POME prior to biological treatment by B. cereus MF 661883. The remaining COD and BOD in the treated POME were equivalent to 4859 ± 605 mg/L and 4054 ± 368 mg/L. The POME contained an enormous amount of organic compounds that were primarily composed of cellulolytic material originating from cellulose fruit debris. Cellulase-producing bacteria are needed to degrade cellulose, such as B. cereus; a sporeforming bacteria that has the capability to produce cellulase and perform the degradation of cellulose-based agro-industry waste. Bala et al. (2015) has also reported that cellulolytic activity in a liquid medium could be facilitated by B. cereus due to the ability of B. cereus to excrete enzymes [113]. The COD and BOD in POME reduced significantly after being biologically treated with B. cereus MF 661883. This observation indicated that the bacteria had degraded the cellulolytic material using cellulase by reducing it into sugar. The B. cereus MF 661,883 also utilized carbon from the POME for growth, therefore the abundance of organic compounds in POME that is responsible for the BOD and COD makes POME itself a suitable substrate for the cultivation of the various growth of microorganisms [93]. • C = degree Celsius; HRT = hydraulic retention time; COD = chemical oxygen demand; BOD = biochemical oxygen demand; TSS = total suspended solids; OLR = organic loading rate; L = litre; SVI = sludge volume index; NH 3 -N = ammoniacal nitrogen; ND = no data.
