# molecules Emerging Strategies for Enhancing Propionate Conversion in Anaerobic Digestion: A Review

CorpusID: 258542025 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef5de5a42559a391ea2de653bd4013ca18ab9c92](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ef5de5a42559a391ea2de653bd4013ca18ab9c92)

Fields: Environmental Science, Chemistry, Medicine

## (s5) Metabolism of Propionate
(p5.0) Propionate cannot be directly used by methanogenic bacteria, but it has to be converted to acetate and H 2 by acetogens at first. The metabolism route of propionate is as stated in the equations (i), (M), and (i + M) in Table 1. The Gibbs free energy of propionate oxidation is +76.1 kJ/mol, which is thermodynamically unfavorable [45]. Only when coupled with the oxidation reaction of H 2 does the overall reaction of propionate become exothermic (equation i + M), which means the H 2 generated should be consumed synchronously and be maintained at a very low partial pressure (lower than 10 −4 atm). This co-operative relationship between propionate-oxidizing bacteria and H 2 -consuming bacteria is called syntrophic association. The first syntrophic propionate-oxidizing bacteria were reported by Boone [46] based on the co-culture experiment of syntrophobacter wolinii with the H 2 -consuming bacteria Desulfovibrio sp. Since then, some other species have been identified, which mainly are assigned to Syntrophobacter, Pelotomaculum, and Smithella propionica, with two pathways of propionate metabolism, as shown in Figure 4. One is the methyl-malonyl-CoA pathway (MMC), which is similar to the reversion process of propionate formation and prevails in most propionate-oxidizing bacteria. In the MMC process, propionate is converted to the intermediates succinate, fumarate, malate, oxaloacetate, and pyruvate, which are further catalyzed by malate degydrogenase (MDH) and phosphotransacetylase-acetate kinase (PTA-ACK) into acetate. The Gibbs free energy of the oxidation of succinate to fumarate is +55.96 kJ/mol, which is thermodynamically unfavorable and is considered the limiting step. The other route of propionate decomposition is the dismutation pathway (Di-pathway), which was found in a syntroph Smithella propionica by Liu et al. [47] and was verified using 13 C-NMR spectroscopy by de Bok et al. [48]. This route includes the condensation of the C 2 of propionate to the carboxyl of another propionate molecule or its derivative, the rearrangement of the methyl group, the transfer of the oxygen to the C 3 of the intermediate, and the cleavage of 3-ketohexanoate, yielding butyrate and acetate [48]. 
