# Ophthalmic imaging in diabetic retinopathy: A review

CorpusID: 252220547 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6426bc3bbb30385a72e671720f758720db71ef03](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6426bc3bbb30385a72e671720f758720db71ef03)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) | Adaptive optics
(p7.0) Adaptive optics (AO) is an imaging technique to improve the transverse resolution of optical imaging systems by F I G U R E 1 3 Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) intensity (top row) and fluorescence lifetime imaging ophthalmoscopy (FLIO) lifetime images of the right macula of a healthy subject (left column) and a non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) patient (right column), showing both the FLIO short-wavelength spectral channel (SSC, 498-560 nm, middle row) and the FLIO long-wavelength spectral channel (LSC, 560-720, bottom row). FLIO imaging showed prolongations of fluorescence lifetimes in the NPDR eye compared with the healthy control. Image courtesy of Dr. Lydia Sauer, Moran Eye Center, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah reducing the effect of ocular aberrations and resultant wavefront distortion. AO has been developed and implemented in a variety of imaging systems including flood-illumination ophthalmoscopy (FIO), scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (SLO) and OCT. When combining AO with these imaging techniques, the higher transverse resolution offers better visualisation of a small features including individual cells. 89 To put this into context, adaptive optics scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (AO-SLO; Figure 14) provides up to 2.5 μm transverse resolution compared to a resolution of only 20 μm for a conventional fundus camera. 89,90 When applying AO to OCT (adaptive optics OCT or AO-OCT), it is possible to achieve isotropic resolution with 2 μm resolution in all dimensions. 91 A study of AO-SLO compared with conventional OCT in NPDR showed improved visualisation of various retinal features including retinal vessels in the inner retinal layers, extensive capillary remodelling despite mild or moderate NPDR, clinically undetected intraretinal vessel remodelling and varying blood flow patterns, and regions of bright cones and dark regions in the photoreceptor layer with dark regions corresponding to areas of overlying vascular remodelling. 92 Compared with healthy controls, perifoveal capillary diameters were larger (p < 0.01) and small arteriolar walls were thicker (p < 0.05). 92 
