# Citation: Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria Eliminate the Effect of Drought Stress in Plants: A Review

CorpusID: 251497951 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64cafd97d363291f12c7d81cc021231e7b97db3c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/64cafd97d363291f12c7d81cc021231e7b97db3c)

Fields: Environmental Science, Biology, Medicine

## (s0) INTRODUCTION
(p0.0) Water is the most indispensable requirement for the growth and development of agricultural crops (Javed et al., 2016). The term drought generally implies a lower supply of irrigation water than the demand (Ali et al., 2016). Osmotic stress has been ranked as the most harmful environmental stress factor worldwide (Marchin et al., 2020). Changing climatic conditions have triggered drought stress in several parts of the world (Javed et al., 2016;Naumann et al., 2018). An increase in drought-prone areas has adversely affected the productivity of agricultural crops. By 2050, water shortage is expected to cause serious plant growth problems in arable lands and affect the two-thirds population of the world (Naumann et al., 2018). This problem is being addressed on priority by changing and improving the genetic makeup of crop plants (Awan et al., 2015;Ilyas et al., 2020).

(p0.1) Five different types of soil microbes, namely, bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, protozoa, and nematodes, play an important role in increasing plant and soil health Msimbira and Smith, 2020). Microbial presence in plant soil depends on the soil's temperature, pH, availability of water, and nutrients. A symbiotic relationship exists between plants and beneficial soil microorganisms wherein the microbes help the plants in nitrogen acquisition, water uptake, and survival during stress (Msimbira and Smith, 2020;Xiong et al., 2021). According to estimates, rhizobia contribute to 50% of the biological nitrogen fixation on earth (Msimbira and Smith, 2020). Various functions performed by beneficial soil microorganisms include accumulation and cycling of organic compounds, stimulation of nutrient mineralization, and production of plant growth hormones. Plants release carbon in their root systems by rhizodeposition in the form of root exudates that sustain the soil microbiome in plant roots . Studies have reported that 5-21% of the carbon fixed during photosynthesis is released into the rhizosphere, which can be defined as the area of soil under the biochemical influence of plant roots (Hartman and Tringe, 2019;Gontia-Mishra et al., 2020), and constitutes an important nutrient source for soil microbial community (Xiong et al., 2021).
## (s13) Rice
(p13.0) Over expression of water permeability (OSPiP), drought adaptation (DHN) and dehuderation genes (DREB) Singh et al., 2020 Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org only help in plant growth but also prevent pathogens of bacterial and fungal nature along with nematodes while promoting resistance against phytopathogens in plants (Cordovez et al., 2018). Genera of specific bacterial species, including Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Arthrobacter, Stenotrophomonas, and Serratia, can produce VOCs that influence plant growth. Two very active VOCs, 2, 3-butanediol, and acetoin, produced by Bacillus spp. not only constrain fungal growth but also enhance the plant biomass (Massalha et al., 2017;Backer et al., 2018). VOCs are factors for provoking plant ISR stated that the VOCs from PGPR strains regulate disease resistance, abiotic stress tolerance, and plant growth (Tahir et al., 2017). Production of VOCs, comprising cyclohexane, 2-(benzyloxy) ethanamine, benzene, methyl, decane, 1-(Nphenylcarbamyl)-2-morpholinocyclohexene, dodecane, benzene (1-methylnonadecyl), 1-chlorooctadecane, tetradecane, 2,6,10trimethyl, dotriacontane, and 11-decyldocosane, has been reported for various soil microorganisms; however, their concentrations and uniqueness varies among the species (Tahir et al., 2017;Cordovez et al., 2018).
