# Microgripper design and evaluation for automated l-wire assembly: a survey

CorpusID: 254050894 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e757420918c9d0be9d4410e9b4ef032a358c2167](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e757420918c9d0be9d4410e9b4ef032a358c2167)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) In recent decades, demands for micromanipulation have increased in industrial assembly fields due to the nature of technology progressing to micro scales components assembly. Micromanipulation is the study of positioning micro-objects ranging from 1 to 100 lm in size. These micro-sizes can be a challenge task to manoeuvre without the use of micromanipulator tools due to additional attractive forces, viewing difficulties, high precision, and accuracy requirements (Adriaens et al. 2000;Yuan et al. 2015;Duc et al. 2006). To improve product quality and lead times, the use of robotic automation is being investigated to support micromanipulation equipment. There are two major techniques used for micromanipulation known as contact and non-contact methods, examples of these technologies are the electromagnetic fields, piezoelectric materials, electrostatic forces, electro thermal effect, shape memory alloys, magnetic guiding systems, and optical technologies (Nikoobin and Niaki 2012). These technologies can be utilised in the form of probes, needles, grippers and contactless devices. These methods have various advantages and disadvantages and are all at different stages of continuous development within research domain. The following section will discuss and review these methods.
## (s12) Transmission systems
(p12.0) Different forms of transmission systems have been studied for use in surgical robotic systems between controller and gripper, such transmission systems use include cable, fluid, smart material and magnetic. Each of these types have been stated to have multiple advantages and disadvantages with continuing research being conducted for each. Cable-actuated systems are capable of producing high gripping force however they often involve complicated and expensive fabrication processes, hysteresis issues and a short lifespan of ten surgical procedures due to the repetitive bending of the system (Le et al. 2016). Fluid-actuated transmission systems are able to supply a high force particularly at microscale and also achieve large bending angles, on the other hand they also involve a complicated system, require a high power supply and have hysteresis issues (Le et al. 2016). Another form of actuator uses shape memory alloys which are capable of applying a large force and displacement, but also can apply the force along three axis (Le et al. 2016). This form of transmission however has a low frequency response to controls and is stated to have issues with accurate control (Le et al. 2016). The final actuator type reviewed uses a magnetic system which is capable of transferring motion wirelessly, however hysteresis and linearity issues do occur (Le et al. 2016). Therefore, it is not clear what the most recommended system to utilize is when producing a tele-operated surgical robotic system as each transmission method has various advantages and disadvantages associated to them. It is recommended that further research should be conducted to overcome or alleviate the disadvantages of the selected system (Le et al. 2016). Despite the amount of research studied in this area, it is important to note that these types of grippers are designed to handle biological material that are relatively large compared to microscale objects as discussed in previous chapters. For example, the smallest diameter of a human arteries is around 100 lm, which is stated as the maximum limit of microscale objects.
