# Carry-Over of Aflatoxin B1 from Feed to Cow Milk-A Review

CorpusID: 257383922 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8292a4886457ffad59b952bcc34d9b737d930356)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s8) Source of Intake
(p8.0) Some articles highlight that the source of intake matters regarding the carry-over value. Applebaum et al. (1982) [18] studied aflatoxin transfer using 10 Holstein cows; 6 cows received pure aflatoxin for 7 days, while 3 cows received a preparation containing AFB1 and other aflatoxins and metabolites produced by an Aspergillus culture. One cow received a higher dose of pure aflatoxin. The effects on feed consumption and milk production were also studied during the treatment and for 5 days before and 8 days after it. While differences in total feed intake were not significant, milk production was significantly reduced and, consequently, AFM1 level was increased in the milk of cows consuming preparations containing impure (13 mg/day) AFB1 toxin. The authors hypothesized that this could be due to the effect of other metabolites produced by the mold, since the amount of AFB1 administered was the same as the amounts of pure AFB1 administered [18].

(p8.1) Regarding the source of contamination, Van Eijkeren et al. (2006) [56] highlighted the role the carrier of contamination played in the absorption through the gut wall. They explained that as natural contamination is expressed in terms of AFB1 equivalents and only AFB1 will be transformed to AFM1, feed composition and source type will lead to varying quantitative outcomes in different experiments and, thus, different recommendations regarding the maximum level of feed contamination leading to still-acceptable milk contamination levels [56]. Frobish et al. (1986) [14] found that the source of contamination (cottonseed meal or corn) influenced the extent of carry-over (1.73 vs. 1.32%). At the same time, AFM1 concentrations in milk were not significantly different.

(p8.2) Bervis and co-authors (2021) [26] compared the AFB1 contamination level and AFM1 carry-over values of feeds from two different cow feeding systems (TMR-total mixed ration unifeed and compound feed) in 2015-2016. AFM1 occurred more frequently in the milk of cows fed compound feed. It was suggested that certain raw materials used during its production (e.g., cottonseed) were more susceptible to aflatoxin contamination [26]. They mentioned, in their article, that several studies reported lower levels of aflatoxin in the milk of animals fed by grazing than in animals fed compound feed and stored feed. The seasonal variation in the occurrence and concentration of AFM1 was likely due to the differences in the specific feeds [26].
## (s30) Appendix A. Carry-Over Studies with Adsorbents
(p30.0) Appendix A.1. Activated Carbons and HSCAS Galvano et al. (1996) [29] studied the effect of using two activated charcoals, CAC1 and CAC2, and hydrated sodium calcium aluminosilicate (HSCAS) on the aflatoxin carry-over values in 12 Friesian cows in late lactation. The applied adsorbents were effective. When adding CAC1, the AFM1 concentration in milk was reduced to a higher extent (45.3%) than with HSCAS (32.5%). On the other hand, CAC2 reduced AFM1 content in milk by only 22%. Pelleting was unsuccessful in the case of CAC2, which could explain the observed lower performance of CAC2.
## (s32) Appendix A.3. Addressing Potential Side Effects of Clay-Combined Addition of Clay and Yeast or Natural Compounds
(p32.0) Considering that clay products have not consistently prevented decreases in milk yield caused by AFB1 ingestion [42], later studies on the effects of adsorbents focus on combined applications, including clay and yeast. Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation products (SCFPs) were reported to have potential to improve animal performance parameters [42]. Jiang et al. (2018) [42] studied the effects of a bentonite clay added to the diet of cows, with or without a high level of Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, and found that both treatments reduced the AFM1 concentration in milk and the transfer of AFB1 into milk AFM1 (1.01% and 0.94% compared to 1.65%). Although the carry-over decreasing effect was comparable between the two treatments using clay with and without Saccharomyces cerevisiae fermentation product, the authors found that adding the yeast fermentation product along with clay was better at maintaining milk production during an aflatoxin challenge than using the clay alone [42].
