# Approximate Query Processing: What is New and Where to Go? A Survey on Approximate Query Processing

CorpusID: 256478111 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/da27323e1456ee41dbc198a14af3d37d45c29946)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a core functionality in data management and analytics systems [33]. The performance of OLAP is crucial for many applications that need to use OLAP to make online decisions, e.g., business intelligence. However, it is rather costly to support OLAP for large datasets, especially big data. Many systems have been proposed to support OLAP on big data, e.g., Pig, Hive, Spark SQL, and they usually take tens of minutes or even hours to answer an OLAP query. However, many applications have online requirement of OLAP that want to get results in seconds.
## (s1) Online Aggregation Methods
(p1.0) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 

(p1.1) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 
## (s3) Error Estimation
(p3.0) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).

(p3.1) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).
## (s49) Introduction
(p49.0) Online analytical processing (OLAP) is a core functionality in data management and analytics systems [33]. The performance of OLAP is crucial for many applications that need to use OLAP to make online decisions, e.g., business intelligence. However, it is rather costly to support OLAP for large datasets, especially big data. Many systems have been proposed to support OLAP on big data, e.g., Pig, Hive, Spark SQL, and they usually take tens of minutes or even hours to answer an OLAP query. However, many applications have online requirement of OLAP that want to get results in seconds.
## (s50) Online Aggregation Methods
(p50.0) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 

(p50.1) In this section, we survey the online AQP methods. The basic idea is to first select a sample S and then use S to estimate the results. We introduce how to select S in Sect. 2 
## (s52) Error Estimation
(p52.0) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).

(p52.1) The confidence interval is widely used to estimate the result quality in most of the random-sampling methods [2], where each confidence interval gives users a numerical interval and a corresponding confidence based on the statistical theory. Initially, a set S of samples is computed based on sampling techniques in Sect. 2.1. Then if the data distribution is known in advance, S can be utilized to estimate the distribution and then the error can be estimated based on the distribution (Sect. 2.2.1). If the data distribution is unknown, it needs to first estimate the distribution of sampling data and then estimate the error (Sect. 2.2.2).
