# Interactions between the neuromodulatory systems and the amygdala: exploratory survey using the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas

CorpusID: 253970592 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e57e8a9669874840e27ef39271198bc458e3c616](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e57e8a9669874840e27ef39271198bc458e3c616)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Neuromodulatory systems, composed of relatively small nuclei of neurons, are located in the sub-cortical region of the brain and control fundamental behaviors through interactions with broad areas of the nervous system (Briand et al. 2007;Krichmar 2008). These systems have distinct neurotransmitters, which include norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine, and distinct sources of those neurotransmitters. When a biological organism experiences an important event in the environment, the activation of the neuromodulatory system contributes to the organism's ability to commit an action accordingly. These actions include mitigating responses to risks, rewards, attentional effort, and novelty. Thus, it is important to understand the underlying structure of these neuromodulatory systems as it plays a role in higher-order cognition and in an organism's survival.
## (s18) Introduction
(p18.0) Neuromodulatory systems, composed of relatively small nuclei of neurons, are located in the sub-cortical region of the brain and control fundamental behaviors through interactions with broad areas of the nervous system (Briand et al. 2007;Krichmar 2008). These systems have distinct neurotransmitters, which include norepinephrine, dopamine, serotonin, and acetylcholine, and distinct sources of those neurotransmitters. When a biological organism experiences an important event in the environment, the activation of the neuromodulatory system contributes to the organism's ability to commit an action accordingly. These actions include mitigating responses to risks, rewards, attentional effort, and novelty. Thus, it is important to understand the underlying structure of these neuromodulatory systems as it plays a role in higher-order cognition and in an organism's survival.
