# OPEN Epidemiology Proactive breast cancer risk assessment in primary care: a review based on the principles of screening

CorpusID: 256577100 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81658a3f602bd8751d4aaacbc4c373e3f787f6a6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/81658a3f602bd8751d4aaacbc4c373e3f787f6a6)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) TEST/INTERVENTION PRINCIPLES Screening test performance characteristics
(p3.0) In the context of breast cancer risk assessment, the test is the estimation of an individual's risk of breast cancer. Several risk prediction models exist. Table 2 summarises the risk factors included in some of the most recently developed and widely used models [21,[31][32][33][34][35].  Table 2. Risk factors included in some of the most recently developed and widely used models and currently available tools to support risk calculation.

(p3.1) BCSC [33] BOADICEA [21] Gail [34] Tyrer-Cuzick/IBIS [31] iCARE [32] QCancer10 [36] Genetic/familial risk factors  It is important that risk prediction models are well calibrated (i.e., the predicted risks agree with the observed risks within different risk categories), and that they have good discriminatory ability for distinguishing between those who will develop the disease and unaffected women in the target population. Studies assessing the performance of these models have consistently shown that model performance is maximised when the joint effects of risk factors are considered in multifactorial breast cancer risk prediction [21,36,37]. Population-based studies of multifactorial risk models that include polygenic scores in premenopausal women or those under the age of 50 have shown that the BOADICEA and Tyrer-Cuzick models have moderate-togood discrimination with AUCs or c-indices of 0.68-0.69 [38,39] and the iCARE model an AUC of 0.64. BOADICEA and iCARE are also well calibrated with a ratio of expected to observe the number of cases (E/O) of 0.97 [39] and 0.9 [36], respectively, while the Tyrer-Cuzick model shows evidence of overestimating risk amongst those in the highest-risk decile (E/O: 1.54) [39].

(p3.2) The benefits of multifactorial risk assessment are particularly seen when considering the effects on risk classification. For example, a population aged 40 with unknown family history would without risk assessment be considered at near-population risk. Using the full set of risk factors within the BOADICEA model, 86.4% of women in the population would be classified at nearpopulation risk of developing breast cancer and 13.6% at moderate or high risk. Using questionnaire-based risk factors alone would classify only 1.8% of those women at moderate risk and none as high risk [21]. The absolute numbers, however, differ between risk models [40]. A further major limitation at present of these risk models, particularly those incorporating PGS, is that to date they have all been developed using data primarily from individuals of European ancestry. As a result, they perform less well in other ancestral groups [41] and have the potential to increase inequalities in care. Further research to develop or adapt risk models for use within other ancestral groups is needed before breast cancer risk assessment can be offered to the population at large. Whichever risk prediction model is chosen, obtaining accurate estimates requires accurate data on relevant risk factors. Many of the risk factors included in multifactorial risk models, particularly those relating to genetic/familial risk and reproductive factors, are not routinely available within primary care. With the exception of the QCancer10 model, all the risk models in Table 2 require additional data collection. Mechanisms to collect this additional data are, therefore, needed. Several tools have been designed to support this [42][43][44][45][46]. Each varies in the time they take to complete due to variations in the complexity of the family history required and different user interfaces. Models including genetic risk factors also require biological samples. Currently, almost all germline cancer genetic testing in the NHS is done using blood samples. However, saliva is an equally good alternative for most testing and has the advantage of allowing the sample to be taken at home, making it more acceptable for women [47], and is more straightforward to transport. Incorporating breast density is more challenging in this age group as most women will not have had breast imaging. Research is ongoing to define the magnitude of breast cancer risk associated with mammographic density in young women and the acceptability of low-dose mammography for risk assessment in this group [48]. However, this introduces significant additional challenges in terms of clinical workflow and the service model.
## (s6) Screening programme co-ordination and integration
(p6.0) One of the biggest challenges raised by healthcare professionals in a focus group study of incorporating cancer risk within primary care was finding the best time and place for risk assessment [61]. Several studies in the US have shown that risk assessment is feasible in primary care waiting rooms prior to annual health check or new patient visits [73][74][75][76]. However, until genetic testing is widespread within mainstream healthcare settings, this does not allow for genetic testing to be incorporated in the risk assessment prior to discussion with the primary care professional. In a recent interview study exploring the barriers and facilitators to implementing CanRisk in UK general practice, GPs and practice nurses cited appointments around the prescription/review of contraception and hormone replacement therapy as being potentially the most appropriate opportunities, due to standard discussion around the impact of these medications on breast cancer risk [paper in preparation: SA, FSD, Carver, Yue, Cunningham, Ficorella, MT, DFE, ACA, JE, JUS, FMW. Exploring the barriers and facilitators of implementing CanRisk in primary care: a qualitative thematic framework analysis]. Some suggested that a risk assessment could also be conducted or mentioned during cervical cancer screening appointments, but there were concerns about adding additional stress and/or anxiety to these already challenging healthcare appointments. There is also evidence that women prefer information by email or online rather than during GP consultations [47]. Research evaluating different implementation strategies and the impact on primary care and uptake is needed.
