# Medicine ® Treatment of Alzheimer's disease by combination of acupuncture and Chinese medicine based on pathophysiological mechanism A review

CorpusID: 255226022 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/6bea3825c6e030713e38feaf3762e7663e6ffe9e)

Fields: Medicine

## (s3) Inheritance
(p3.0) Approximately 0.1% of AD cases are caused by genetics, which affects people who develop symptoms between the ages of 30 and 50 years. This is due to the autosomal dominance of one of the 3 genes encoding presenillins 1 and 2 and the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Mutations in any of these genes result in erroneous cleavage of APP to form Aβ42 instead of Aβ40. [13] The accumulation and aggregation of Aβ42 forms senile plaques, which are one of the main causes of AD. ABCA7 and SORL1 are other autosomal dominant genes responsible for inherited AD. [14] However, only a small proportion of AD cases exhibit autosomal dominant inheritance. Differences in genetic predisposition and environmental factors constitute a risk factor in most cases, with the presence of the ε4 allele of apolipoprotein E (APOE ε4) in heterozygotes and homozygotes increasing the risk by 3% and 15%, respectively. TREM2 is another gene involved in increasing the risk of AD when white blood cells do not control the amount of Aβ40 in the brain due to some variation in the allele of this gene. ABCA7, BIN1, CASS4, CD2AP, CELF1, CLU, CR1, EPHA1, FERMT2, HLA-DRB5, INPP5D, MEF2C, MS4A, NMES, PICALM, PTK2B, S1C24A4, SORL1, and ZCWPW1. A total of 19 genes were reported by the Genome Wide Association Study to clearly influence risk. [15] 
## (s6) Tau
(p6.0) Tau is phosphorylated at 3 different positions, threonine, serine, and an amino acid residue adjacent to proline. It attaches to microtubules at these residues. Protein hyperphosphorylation occurs mainly at T231, S235, and S265. Thereafter, proteins lose their ability to attach to microtubules and form neurofibrillary tangles. [21] Neurofibrillary tangles formed by the aggregation of hyperphosphorylated tau threads disrupt the microtubule network of nerve cells. This leads to the inhibition of any biochemical communication between the inside and outside of the cell and destruction of the cytoskeleton. Although neurofibrillary tangles constitute one of the main pathophysiological conditions of AD, some studies have shown that inhibition of neurofibrillary tangles alone cannot be a potential target; therefore, any therapeutic approach must be multi-targeted to make a real difference in the treatment of AD, and tau-targeted drugs often target amyloid plaques as well. [22,23] 
## (s7) Excitotoxicity
(p7.0) Glutamate is another neurotransmitter present in the brain, and excessive glutamate levels can cause excitotoxicity, eventually leading to cell death. Minocycline is the only commercialized drug that targets the glutamate system to treat AD. It is a noncompetitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist that controls glutamate overstimulation. It regulates Ca2 + influx and efflux at the cell membrane via NMDA receptors. Minocycline also acts as an antagonist of the nACh and 5-HT3 receptors. Inhibition of NMDA can inhibit the expression of α-secretase, thereby reducing the production of Aβ. [21,24] 
## (s8) Vitamin B5 deficiency
(p8.0) Some studies have investigated the role of vitamin B5 in AD. [25] Studies have found that the main and acute deficiency of vitamin B5 occurs in AD, and acute deficiency is considered to occur in AD. Areas thought to present with acute brain injury, including the middle temporal gyrus, entorhinal cortex, and hippocampus, experience more severe vitamin B5 deficiencies. Vitamin B5 is the precursor of acetyl-CoA and indirectly plays a key role in the metabolism of all organs, including the brain. Acetyl-Coa, the precursor of the neurotransmitter ACH, as well as complex fatty acyl groups that regulate the important insulating function of the myelin sheath, malfunctions in AD. Additionally, the concentration of vitamin B5 in the brain region coexists throughout the white matter. Therefore, researchers speculate that vitamin B5 deficiency may produce AD and ATN, which can be avoided or even reversed in the initial stage by oral administration of appropriate doses of vitamin B5. [26] 
## (s11) Fyn
(p11.0) Fyn has been reported to promote inhibition of Aβ oligomer-induced synaptic plasticity in vitro. [46] Overexpression of Fyn in rodents accelerates the onset of cognitive impairment and the loss of prominence, whereas blocking Fyn expression inhibits synaptic loss. Histological studies of brain sections from patients with AD have shown a higher degree of Fyn staining in hyperphosphorylated neurons. [47] Activation of tyrosine kinases by NMDAR-promoted calcium influx is required for intact long-term potentiation (LTP). [48] A major study in mice with mutations in the non-receptor tyrosine kinases Fyn, Src, Abl, and Yes showed that Fyn has an important regulatory function in LTP induction. [49] The NMDAR subunits NR2A and NR2B are phosphorylated by activated Fyn, but membrane stabilization and increased trafficking selectivity of NR2B result in enhanced transmission of the receptor and improved synaptic expression. [50] Following these results, the activation of NR2B at Tyr1472 was clearly enhanced in Fyn-overexpressing rodents. At the site of Fyn, NR2B is regulated through its association with Postsynaptic Density Protein 95, a synaptic scaffold protein, [51] and Aβ certainly does not affect LTP in the absence of Tau expression. Impairments in synaptic function and spatial memory were reversed. In the absence of tau protein overexpression, Fyn dissociates from NMDARs, and Aβ-induced synaptic toxicity is avoided. As existing evidence shows, not only the presence of Tau protein, but also its phosphorylated residues regulate the interaction of Fyn, Tau, NMDAR, and postsynaptic density protein 95. [52] 2.11. Reactive astrocyte Reactive astrocytes are an early sign of AD and play both beneficial and detrimental roles in the pathogenesis of AD. The clearance of Aβ oligomers and aggregates is considered a positive response by astrocytes. Therefore, drugs that reduce Aβ toxicity by inducing autophagy or the ubiquitin system or that activate the antioxidant system, such as nuclear factor (erythrocyte-derived 2) transcription in astrocytes, could have therapeutic potential for AD. However, this may lead to metabolic changes in neurons that overproduce toxic metabolites, ROS, and/or inhibitory transmitters. These factors accumulate and chronically alter the properties of astrocytes, thereby rendering them neurotoxic. Therefore, stimulation of antioxidant systems and ROS-producing metabolites should be appropriately adjusted to adhere to a suitable oxidative state. In addition, manipulating the activity of MAO-B to regulate the GABA level of astrocytes could repair the cognitive impairment of AD. [53] 
## (s13) The prediction accuracy of pure biological definition is low
(p13.0) A major limitation of the biological definition of Alzheimer's is its low predictive accuracy. Some studies have shown [57] that the presence of tau and amyloid beta positivity is insufficient to unambiguously predict the occurrence of symptoms (MCI or dementia) in individuals without clinical impairment. (Fig. 4) Another challenge in the diagnosis of AD using pure biomarkers is that the presence of biomarkers of AD lesions in the body can be used as a primary indicator for the diagnosis of AD, as such lesions are commonly found in patients with other neurodegenerative diseases, most commonly Lewy body dementia. [58] This comorbid feature of dementia with Lewy bodies in this setting confuses the acceptance of biomarker-based diagnoses. Experienced clinicians determine the pathology of Lewy body dementia based on clinical signs and symptoms (such as hallucinations and parkinsonism) or indirect biomarkers (such as DaTscan innervation) to confirm the diagnosis of Lewy body dementia.
