# Pretraining in Deep Reinforcement Learning: A Survey

CorpusID: 253397510 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c90a33f1f0049d524e9b5b3174d35611fd9a8096](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c90a33f1f0049d524e9b5b3174d35611fd9a8096)

Fields: Computer Science

## (s11) Data Coverage Maximization
(p11.0) Previously we have discussed how to obtain knowledge or skills, measured by the agent's own capability, from unsupervised interaction. Albeit indirectly related to the agent's ability, data diversity induced by online pretraining plays an essential role in deciding how well the agent obtains prior knowledge. In the field of supervised learning, recent advances have shown that diverse data can enhance out-of-distribution generalization (Hendrycks et al., 2020b) and robustness (Hendrycks et al., 2020a). Another supporting evidence is that most of the famed datasets are large and diverse (Deng et al., 2009;Wang et al., 2019). Motivated by the above considerations, it is desired to use data coverage maximization, usually measured by state visitation, as an objective to stimulate unsupervised learning.
## (s27) POLICY INITIALIZATION
(p27.0) Recent advances bridge the gap between reinforcement learning and sequential modeling (Chen et al., 2021a;Janner et al., 2021;Zheng et al., 2022;Furuta et al., 2022), opening up opportunities to borrow sequential models to RL tasks. Despite the clear distinction, pretrained LLMs could arguably provide reusable knowledge via weight initialization. Reid et al. (2022) investigate whether pretrained LLMs can provide good weight initialization for Transformer-based offline RL models, and conclude with very positive results. Li et al. (2022b) also demonstrate that pretrained LLMs can be used to initialize policies and facilitate behavior cloning as well as online reinforcement learning for embodied tasks. They also suggest using sequential input representations and fintuning the pretrained weights for better generalization.
## (s31) Representation Transfer
(p31.0) In the field of supervised learning, recent advances (Devlin et al., 2019;He et al., 2020;Chen et al., 2020) have demonstrated that good representations can be pretrained on large-scale unlabeled dataset, as evidenced by their impressive downstream performances. The most common practice is to freeze the weights of the pretrained feature encoder and train a randomly initialized task-specific network on top of that during adaptation. The success of this paradigm is essentially based on the promise that related tasks can usually be solved using similar representations.

(p31.1) For RL, it has been shown that directly reusing pretrained task-agnostic representations can significantly improve sample efficiency on downstream tasks. For instance, Schwarzer et al. (2021b) conduct experiments on the Atari 100K benchmark and find that frozen representations pretrained on exploratory offline data already form a basis of data-efficient RL. This success also extends to the cases where domain discrepancy exists between upstream and downstream tasks (Shah & Kumar, 2021;Parisi et al., 2022). However, the issue of negative transfer in the face of domain discrepancy might be exacerbated for RL due to its complexity (Shah & Kumar, 2021).
