# Plant Disease Diagnosing Based on Deep Learning Techniques: A Survey and Research Challenges

CorpusID: 256602521 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a950057affdf14740bf843e3d760768758b41f11)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Computer Science

## (s13) E. Challenges of Plant Diseases
(p13.0) Plant disease management and pathology are faced with ever-growing challenges. On the one hand, agricultural productivity has reduced due to depleting natural resources and diminishing arable lands. On the other hand, due to increasing global population, requests for high quality and varied food have increased. In addition, the evolution and epidemics of plant diseases have globally increased due to intensification, resources such as water, fertilizer, and pesticides (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016). Plant diseases and pests are the major reason that lead to substantial economic losses and reduced plant yields. In technological advancements, the theories of plant diseases and pest diagnoses such as detection and classification have been developed from symptoms and signs of the diseases (Balodi, et al., 2017).

(p13.1) In the future, plant disease management plans, such as an accurate plant disease recognition, are important and must be emphasized more for societal development, food security globalization, climate change, and disease prevention. In the field of plant pathology advancements, some new avenues for specific and sensitive plant diagnosis procedures have been developed that are coupled with molecular biology, bioinformatics, and biotechnology (He, Zhan and Xie, 2016;Balodi, et al., 2017).
