# International Journal of Molecular Sciences Hypophysitis: Defining Histopathologic Variants and a Review of Emerging Clinical Causative Entities

CorpusID: 257676480 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b580221b306877486d7fd6de9eea112f693d17f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/1b580221b306877486d7fd6de9eea112f693d17f)

Fields: Medicine

## (s10) Immunotherapy
(p10.0) The first reported case of immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI)-induced hypophysitis is from the National Cancer Institute in 2003, in a patient with metastatic melanoma managed with ipilimumab, the monoclonal antibody for CTLA4 [10]. The growing popularity of novel cancer treatments has led to an increase in adverse immune-related events including hypophysitis [4]. Immunotherapeutic drugs can cause hypophysitis and functional deficits in one or more pituitary axes with subtle or no changes on MRI [10]. ICIs can treat malignant tumors as a standalone therapy or an adjunct to surgery, radiosurgery, chemotherapy. [28] Two targets of ICI are CTLA4 and PD1. CTLA4 is a member of the immunoglobulin family expressed in regulatory T cells that resides on the cell surface, and its activation increases immune cell proliferation and production of immunosuppressive cytokines [10]. PD1 is a member of the immunoglobulin family. It is expressed on effector T cells, and it attenuates T cell function. [10] These monoclonal antibody treatments modulate the immune system, augment the T cell response, and prevent cancer invasion in difficult-to-treat tumors [29,30]. The ensuing immune-related adverse events are driven by cytokine dysregulation [29].
## (s11) COVID-19
(p11.0) Pituitary apoplexy is a known rare phenomenon that can occur after infection with COVID-19. Additionally, there are several case reports of DI that have been described in patients weeks after COVID-19 infection [33]. Recently, there have been reports in the literature of hypophysitis related to the SARS-CoV-2 virus as well as the vaccine. Ankireddypalli et al. [34] reported a woman who experienced severe, persistent headache, myalgias, polyuria, and polydipsia two days after COVID-19 vaccination. MRI was obtained, and a thickened pituitary stalk was identified. The patient was diagnosed with DI and hypophysitis. Symptoms improved on 3-month follow-up, however, the thickened pituitary stalk remained. Additionally, there are reports of hypophysitis occurring between 2 weeks and 2 months after COVID-19 infection. Patients began experiencing headaches, laboratory-identified hypothyroidism, hypocortisolism, hypogonadism, and MRI supported a diagnosis of hypophysitis [35,36]. Although this is a rare complication, signs and symptoms of hypophysitis after a recent COVID-19 infection or vaccine should warrant appropriate investigation.
