# Homogenizing Responses to Different Survey Questions on the Same Topic: Proposal of a Scale Homogenization Method Using a Reference Distribution

CorpusID: 255001988 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/bf40554629a2508aa229c63a7a767618699c41b1)

Fields: Sociology

## (s12) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
(p12.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p12.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
## (s57) Later Scale Homogenization Method Using Semantic Judgement of Word Value in Context (SHM-SJC)
(p57.0) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.

(p57.1) The weaknesses of these early transformation methods also appeared when the transformed scores were compared to average ratings on 0-10 numerical scales in the same country in the same year (Kalmijn et al. 2011). These weaknesses instigated two further innovations.
