# DYADIC MODELS FOR FLUID EQUATIONS: A SURVEY

CorpusID: 252408511 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c91c0f3f5e4f9b1d85a1cbbba30d5179dbf6d3e3)

Fields: Mathematics

## (s23) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p23.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p23.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2
## (s61) Dyadic models for magnetohydrodynamics
(p61.0) The PDEs for the incompressible magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) u t + (u · ∇)u − (B · ∇)B + ∇P = ν∆u, B t + (u · ∇)B − (B · ∇)u = µ∆B, ∇ · u = 0, ∇ · B = 0 (5.1) describe electrically conducting fluids in geophysics and astrophysics. In system (5.1), u, B and p are the unknowns, denoting respectively the velocity field, magnetic field and scalar pressure function. The constants ν and µ represent the kinetic viscosity and magnetic diffusivity respectively. Despite many similar features with the NSE, the MHD system (5.1) is more challenging due to the intricate interactions of the velocity field and magnetic field. The open questions for the pure fluid equations discussed in Subsection 1.3 remain open for the MHD system. Inspired by the fruitful results for the dyadic models for the NSE and Euler equation, it is possible to advance the understanding of the MHD by studying reduced models. In particular, a class of dyadic models were introduced by Dai in [30] including both of the Desnyansky-Novikov and Obukhov types of nonlinear structures. Particular case of these models are consistent with some dyadic models suggested by physicists, for instance, see the work [82] of Plunian, Stepanov and Frick. We point out that the majority of the work from the physics community concerns numerical study of these dyadic models.

(p61.1) We recall two particular models from [30] which contain Desnyansky-Novikov nonlinear terms and exhibit different energy cascade mechanisms, d dt a j + νλ 2 j a j + λ θ j a j a j+1 − λ θ j−1 a 2
