# Fungal Infection in Co-infected Patients With COVID-19: An Overview of Case Reports/Case Series and Systematic Review

CorpusID: 250329219 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f3c29e9d9ae3402878a768f149357a5d0dd6810](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/2f3c29e9d9ae3402878a768f149357a5d0dd6810)

Fields: Environmental Science, Medicine

## (s10) DISCUSSION
(p10.0) This systematic review is a detailed description of fungal coinfections in patients with COVID-19. There is a special concern  for fungal infections, before or after COVID-19 exposure, which leads to treatment failure and deterioration of disease and imposes high healthcare costs on patients and hospitals. Overall, it is well established that all genders and ages are at risk for COVID-19 infection (Kalantari et al., 2020;Song et al., 2020;Talento and Hoenigl, 2020). In this systematic review, we analyzed 181 fungal patients with COVID-19 from 23 countries, and co-infection in the age group of over 50 years was higher than under 50 years (66.2 vs. 23.7%) which is in agreement with studies that exhibited elderly patients have a higher risk of COVID-19 infection and mortality. Our data are in concordance with a study conducted in the United Kingdom on co-infection patients with COVID-19 symptoms, which reported that the highest prevalence of co-infection patients was in the age group of 55-81 years (Hughes et al., 2020). In this connection, Senok et al. (2021) found that the mean age of patients with co-infections was 49.3 ± 12.5 years in the United Arab Emirates. These observations indicated that declined immune system ability and increasing comorbid conditions with age could be a rational justification for the observed increased infection in older patients. The patients' gender was assessed in 71 studies that indicated COVID-19 infection in men (72.9%) was higher than that of women (25.9%). A research performed by Senok et al. (2021) on patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the United Arab Emirates notified that the most cases (84.2%) were men. Garcia-Vidal et al. (2021) found that the majority of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in Spain were in the age of 62 years and also the most cases (55.8%) were men. In a single-center experiment performed by Jin et al. (2020), in China, out of 43 patients with COVID-19, 51.2% were found to be men. As a finding, it can be inferred that sex hormones and X chromosomes as factors involved in innate and adaptive immunity may have an important role in less susceptibility to COVID-19 infection among women. Overall, the high occurrence of many diseases in men compared to women could likely indicate a shorter life expectancy in this sex. Consequently, gender would be considered a risk factor for higher morbidity and severity in patients with COVID-19.
