# Microbial Biosystems Microbiota and its relationship with Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: An overview

CorpusID: 259652716 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d514b5c0abfd7ae570454c79274c2e91d10f6ae2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d514b5c0abfd7ae570454c79274c2e91d10f6ae2)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s2) Composition of the human microbiota
(p2.0) Humans are exposed to microbiota and chemicals that it releases intra-arterially, and this exposure increases significantly after birth. The gut of a new-born can become colonized by any environmental microbe that satisfies the physicochemical conditions of that environment, in particular, by organisms in the mother's vaginal fluids, skin microbiota, and/or breastmilk (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2010). Vaginal birth and breastfeeding thus promote the proliferation of beneficial microbes in new-born (Milani et al., 2017). Accordingly, for babies delivered through cesarean section, exposure to the mother's vaginal fluid can partially restore the microbiota (Dominguez-Bello et al., 2016). The sialylated milk oligosaccharides in breastmilk can promote the growth and development of infants by encouraging the spread of beneficial microflora (Charbonneau et al., 2016), while the synergistic interplay of breastfeeding and saliva in the infant's mouth improves innate immunity by modifying the oral microbiota (Sweeney et al., 2018).
## (s4) Microbiota and genetic susceptibility
(p4.0) The genetic susceptibility of individuals to various conditions such as antibiotics is influenced by their surroundings as well as by the relationship between their intestinal microbiota and their immune systems (Caviglia et al., 2019;Khan et al., 2019). Environmental variables may play a significant role in causing or determining the progress of disease, as variations in the epidemiology of IBD over time and across geographic regions demonstrate (Ribaldone et al., 2019). Urbanization has been linked to dietary modifications, the use of antibiotics, distinct sanitary conditions, exposure to distinct microbes, and pollution, all of which are potential environmental risk factors for IBD. In large part, dysbiosis appears to be a side effect of the Westernization of lifestyle. Thus, for example, patients with Crohn's disease have less microbial diversity than individuals without the disease (Mirsepasi-Lauridsen et al., 2018;Ribaldone et al., 2019).
