# Interventions to Increase Patient Safety in Long-Term Care Facilities-Umbrella Review

CorpusID: 253783401 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/706b3e5cdc7fb0b7e8ecb7da1e34a69d3c80538c](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/706b3e5cdc7fb0b7e8ecb7da1e34a69d3c80538c)

Fields: Medicine

## (s7) Increasing the Safety of Use of Medications
(p7.0) The last group of studies included in this review was the analysis of interventions aimed at increasing the safety of use of medications. The Kruse 2021 [17] systematic review assessed the relationship between the use of information technology in health care and increasing the quality of services provided in long-term care facilities. The obtained results of research from Australia, analysing the use of electronic databases, showed no statistically significant reduction in the time needed for completing medical records by nurses. At the same time, improvements in prescribing adequacy have been demonstrated. Completing the documentation in electronic form has also contributed to increasing its completeness. In turn, studies conducted in Sweden, analysing electronic medication management systems, showed a reduction in the level of stress among medical staff related to the risk of adverse events. Additionally, these types of tools have improved the attitude to conducting administrative activities. Other studies included in the review showed a positive effect of the use of information technology on the quality of information provided during staff shifts [17]. The Alldred 2016 [21] systematic review assessed the effect of interventions to optimize the medication administration process for elderly people living in nursing homes. The research found in the review identified problems with medication administration and prescribing. However, only five RCTs using verification of medication prescription by pharmacists and interdisciplinary discussion meetings of medical staff indicated a benefit from the use of strategies aimed at improving the correctness of medication use. According to the results of the review, a pharmacist's coordination of medication administration (RR = 1.05 [95% CI 0.66; 1.68]) and the decision support system (aRR = 1.06 [95% CI 0.92; 1.23]) did not statistically significantly affect the occurrence of adverse medication reactions. In the case of the primary endpoint of hospitalization, it was shown that coordinating medication administration by a pharmacist, combined with informing medical staff about medications taken by patients, statistically significantly reduces the number of hospitalizations (RR = 0.38 [95% CI 0.15; 0.99]) in the case of people who were alive at the time of the study. In the analysis of patients who died during the study period, no statistically significant relationship was found-RR = 0.58 [95% CI 0. , also did not statistically significantly affect reducing the risk of death among patients. The authors of the review emphasize that no meta-analysis was performed due to the high level of heterogeneity of the studies [21]. The Marasinghe 2015 [25] systematic review analyzed computerized clinical decision support systems. The results of the individual studies included in the review varied. One study did not show any effect of interventions on the number of adverse events. On the other hand, another study did not show any influence of the undertaken actions on the adequacy of prescribing medications. Most of the studies, however, focused on the detection of elements warning against medication misuse. In one of the studies, computerized decision support systems detected 9414 situations that could have a negative impact on the adequacy of medication administration (a total of 47,977 medication orders were registered). Prescribers receiving alerts from the system were more likely to make optimal treatment decisions-RR = 1.11 [95% CI 1.00; 1.22]. The authors of the review emphasize that such tools may be helpful in increasing the safety of medications, even though they were not often used in long-term care facilities [25].
