# Differential diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis: a review

CorpusID: 258619536 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d642f999aee2c301c97b687e5ea6428b6afff1cc)

Fields: Medicine

## (s35) Other infections
(p35.0) Other bacteria that may cause symptoms and chest-imaging findings suggestive of pulmonary sarcoidosis are very rare. Q fever is usually diagnosed indirectly, by serological or PCR testing. Whipple's disease is an infection by the Gram-positive bacillus Tropheryma whipplei. Patients usually present with weight loss (93%), diarrhea (81%), and arthralgia (73%). Pulmonary involvement is extremely rare and produces diffuse pulmonary ground-glass opacities predominating in the lower subpleural areas, pleural involvement, and noncaseating pulmonary granulomas (70,72,110,111). The diagnosis relies on the identification of T. whipplei in various samples, including BAL fluid, using quantitative PCR (111). The BAL fluid shows neutrophilia and eosinophilia, as opposed to lymphocytosis, and stains with periodic acid-Schiff. As indicated above (section 3.1.5.2.), syphilis is an exceedingly rare cause of lung granulomatosis.
## (s37) When is the differential diagnosis most difficult?
(p37.0) The circumstances of the diagnosis vary widely. Chronic beryllium disease is readily diagnosed when the manifestations are detected during routine workplace monitoring of workers exposed to beryllium. However, individuals may be unaware of the exposure. Unless a systematic and detailed occupational history is obtained, sarcoidosis is often erroneously diagnosed at first, given the similarities in radiological, serum angiotensin-converting enzyme assay, BAL, and histopathology findings (120,121). Moreover, the tuberculin test is often negative in chronic beryllium disease. Interestingly, gene expression patterns in peripheral-blood mononuclear cells were not different between patients with chronic beryllium disease and sarcoidosis (122). The only reported differences are rare extrapulmonary manifestations and rare voluminous hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy in chronic beryllium disease (118). In one study, among 84 patients with potential beryllium exposure and suspected or diagnosed sarcoidosis, 34 were diagnosed as having chronic beryllium disease instead, based on a positive beryllium lymphocyte proliferation test (120). Of these 34 patients, 28 had first been diagnosed with sarcoidosis, the median time between the two diagnoses being 3 [0.  years.
## (s40) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
(p40.0) Hypersensitivity pneumonitis, notably in its nonfibrotic form, is caused by exposure to airborne environmental or occupational antigens and can share features with sarcoidosis. However, differentiation from sarcoidosis is generally easy, as shown by a study of the Sarcoidosis Diagnostic Scores (7). The onset may be acute, subacute, or insidious, and recurrent episodes may develop. Crackles are common and squawks may be heard. Although many patients have constitutional symptoms including weight loss, the disease is limited to the lungs, without extrapulmonary organ involvement. At least 40% of patients have either exposure to or serum IgG against an environmental or occupational inciting agent (e.g., avian antigens, bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, isocyanates). The imaging findings typically differ from those in sarcoidosis (section 3.1.3.) (76,126). Although BAL fluid lymphocytosis occurs in both hypersensitivity pneumonitis and sarcoidosis, a relative lymphocyte count above 50% has been reported in half the patients with the former versus almost none with the latter (80). In BAL fluid, the total cell count, percentages of neutrophils and eosinophils, and percentage of mast cells -this last having the greatest discriminating power -tend to be higher in hypersensitivity pneumonitis than in sarcoidosis, whereas the CD4/ CD8 T-cell ratio tends to be above normal in sarcoidosis and below normal in hypersensitivity pneumonitis (80,127). Combining the history with blood-test, imaging-study, and BAL findings usually suffices to differentiate hypersensitivity pneumonitis from sarcoidosis. The granulomas found in transbronchial lung-biopsy specimens in hypersensitivity pneumonitis are typically small and poorly formed and tend to predominate in the peribronchiolar interstitium (section 3.1.3.). This finding combined with those of the above-listed investigations is highly discriminating.
## (s53) Pulmonary manifestations in adults with chronic granulomatous disease
(p53.0) Chronic granulomatous disease is a rare inherited primary immunodeficiency caused by a mutation in the NADPH oxidase gene. The respiratory manifestations are major complications. The diagnosis is usually made in early childhood upon the evaluation of recurrent infections. The pulmonary infections are often chronic and may be asymptomatic, notably when caused by Aspergillus fumigatus. A biopsy of persistent pulmonary nodules or consolidations is often required and frequently shows noncaseating granulomas. Radiological presentations mimicking sarcoidosis are very rare (165,166). The repeated infections starting at a very young age combined with the radiological presentation usually make sarcoidosis very improbable.
