# Persimmon Leaves: Nutritional, Pharmaceutical, and Industrial Potential-A Review

CorpusID: 257059369 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/481230ccb798ecfa8e2dc6ef9f84d90e20b74c59](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/481230ccb798ecfa8e2dc6ef9f84d90e20b74c59)

Fields: Agricultural And Food Sciences, Medicine

## (s14) Antidiabetic Effects
(p14.0) Persimmon leaves have demonstrated potential hypoglycemic effects, mainly by inhibiting/controlling α-amylase and α-glucosidase enzymes. For example, Hong et al. [66] suggested that Korean PL showed α-amylase and α-glucosidase inhibitory activities, possibly due to the presence of phenolics in the leaves. Similarly, PL compounds, mainly proanthocyanidins, decreased blood glucose levels in Wistar rats in a dose-dependent manner, which could be linked to the inhibition of pancreatic α-amylase [33]. Moreover, aqueous extract of PL inhibited α-glucosidase activity and enhanced glucose tolerance, improved blood lipid parameters, reduced body weight gain, suppressed fat accumulation in the liver, and maintained islet structure in db/db mice [41]. In addition, the novel glucosidase inhibitor, vomifoliol 9-O-α-arabinofuranosyl (1→6)-β-D-glucopyranoside, isolated from PL exhibited strong α-glucosidase inhibitory activity in HepG2 cells, suggesting that the PL could augment peripheral glucose as an insulin-sensitizing agent against Type 2 diabetes mellitus. In addition, addition of PL powder (5%, w/w) to a normal diet of C57BL/KsJ-db/db mice for 5 weeks decreased homeostatic index of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), blood glucose, total cholesterol, and plasma triacylglycerol (TAG) levels, and also hepatic lipid droplets and liver weight, while increasing adiponectin and plasma highdensity lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels [69]. The anti-hyperglycemic potential was associated with the decreased effect of gluconeogenic enzymes and increased glucokinase activity and glycogen content in the liver, suggesting the potential for PL activity against type 2 diabetes. Furthermore, Khan et al. [7] developed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic approach to determine proteomic molecular signatures that could be applied to investigate the therapeutic potential of PL amelioration of diabetes. It was found that the salivary proteomic profile was changed after incorporating PL extract in prediabetic subjects, which could be used as potential protein signature candidates.
