# Clinical applications of gene therapy for rare diseases: A review

CorpusID: 258677712 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/ad7c526080b645dfc566f2130f34aa737bda3afd)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s7) | Retroviral vectors for ex vivo gene therapy: chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T cells
(p7.0) Retroviruses are enveloped single-stranded RNA viruses, whose life cycle involves converting their RNA genome into double-stranded DNA and stably integrating it into the host genome. [63][64][65] Their RNA-containing capsid is surrounded by a lipid bilayer derived from the host cell plasma membrane and containing the envelope protein, a transmembrane host cell invasion factor. Gammaretroviruses 66 and Lentiviruses 67 are most used as viral vectors. Figure 8 shows a brief summary of the retroviral/lentiviral life cycle. Retroviruses use special sequences called long terminal repeats (LTRs) to direct packaging of their genome into virions. 66,67 The LTRs contain signals facilitating several steps in the virus life cycle and act as powerful promoters. Retroviral vectors are made from an LTR-flanked transgene cassette by supplying the virus structural proteins in trans.
## (s17) Onpattro RNAi and Tegsedi ASO
(p17.0) Familial transthyretin amyloidosis is a rare genetic disease of the Transthyretin (TTR) gene that causes the protein to misfold. [161][162][163] The misfolded protein forms amyloids that deposit into and damage tissues. This is a slow gradual process, so the symptoms typically begin in adulthood. The exact onset age is variable and correlates with disease progression. The peripheral nervous system is particularly vulnerable, so neuropathies are among the earlier symptoms, but as the disease progresses, eyes, kidney, heart, and CNS typically become involved. FTA is eventually fatal on average 10 years after the onset of symptoms, with a younger onset being associated with more aggressive disease. The prognosis in patients presenting with early cardiac involvement is extremely poor. Few patients survive for longer than 5 years.

(p17.1) Genetically, FTA mutations are autosomal dominant, but progression and penetrance vary depending on the exact genetic defect. 161 Most patients are heterozygotes. The global prevalence of FTA is of the order of 1 in 10,000, 164 though clusters have been observed within certain ethnic groups or populations, such as in certain areas of Portugal, Sweden, Japan, and West Africa. 162,164 The current gold standard treatment for FTA is liver transplantation [161][162][163] since the liver is a major source of TTR. Liver transplantation arrests the development of polyneuropathies and slows but does not prevent progressive degeneration of the eyes, heart, and kidney.
