# Promising Highly Targeted Therapies for Cholangiocarcinoma: A Review and Future Perspectives

CorpusID: 260035251 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/c96243a4c2f155a405f81ae2d35d4c47fa27d733)

Fields: Medicine

## (s6) Light Sources for PDT
(p6.0) Light sources for PDT have evolved over time. Initially, non-laser light sources such as conventional lamps were used, which involved water-cooled incandescent lamps with output defined by filters. However, these light sources had limitations, such as a significant thermal component, making it challenging to accurately calculate the delivered light dose [71]. In recent years, there has been a shift towards more efficient lasers that can produce monochromatic light of a known wavelength and easily perform light dosimetry. Laser light can also be supplied via an optical fiber for localized treatment. The appropriate wavelength for PDT is determined according to the photosensitizer used: 630 nm for HpD, 635 nm for 5-ALA-induced protoporphyrin IX, and 652 nm for tetra (m-hydroxyphenyl) chlorin (Table 2). Moreover, recent advances in semiconductor diode technology have enabled laser systems to be more compact and cheaper [45]. Thus, at present, lasers might be the first choice for a PDT light source. Meanwhile, it has been reported that the use of light emitting diodes (LEDs) of specific wavelengths (610 nm) is effective for PDT of CCA [72,73] and gastrointestinal cancers [74]. Therefore, LEDs can be another light source because of their smaller batteries and lower cost compared to conventional lasers.
## (s8) Photoimmunotherapy
(p8.0) Photoimmunotherapy (PIT) is a novel anti-cancer therapy developed in 2011 by Kobayashi H. et al. that theoretically selectively kills targeted cancer cells with no damage to normal cells [90]. PIT comprises a unique photosensitizer called "IR700." This watersoluble photo dye consists of silicon phthalocyanine and hydrophilic side chains (IRDye 700DX N-hydroxysuccinimide ester) ( Table 2). In addition, PIT incorporates a specific molecule that enables binding to a target cell, which can be an antibody or a low-molecularweight compound. Examples include the combination of IR700 with an anti-EGFR antibody or an affibody combined with IR700 as antibody/affibody-photosensitizer conjugates (APCs) [91,92]. IR700 is different from photosensitizers used in PDT because IR700 has a more than five-fold higher extinction coefficient (2.1 × 10 5 M −1 cm −1 at the absorption maximum of 689 nm) [93] than that of conventional photosensitizers, such as the HpD (1.2 × 10 3 M −1 cm −1 at 630 nm), meta-tetrahydroxyphenylchlorin (2.2 × 10 4 M −1 cm −1 at 652 nm), and mono-L-aspartylchlorin e6 NPe6 (4.0 × 10 4 M −1 cm −1 at 654 nm) [94]. Although PIT also requires a light source emitting near-infrared light (NIR) with a wavelength of 689-700 nm (NIR wavelength is usually defined as 650-1700 nm) [90,95], its mechanism differs from that of PDT ( Figure 1C). In PIT, the destruction of the target cell starts with a chemical change of IR700 in APCs bound to the cell due to the release of hydrophilic side chains of IR700 after NIR irradiation. This process forms water-insoluble aggregates of APCs or APC-antigen complexes on the cell surface molecules, leading to physicochemical changes within the APC-antigen complex that reduce cell membrane integrity because of damage to transmembrane target proteins. Subsequently, water flows into the cytoplasm, causing cell swelling [96]. In contrast, the mechanism of PDT is based on inner cell destruction by ROS ( Figure 1B). In addition, PIT also results in further immunogenic cell death that is initiated by the maturation of immature dendritic cells with released tumor antigens from the treated cancer cell in the adjacent microenvironment. After cancer cell-targeted PIT, CD8+ T cells newly primed by a larger repertoire of cancer antigens proliferate in the treated tumor beds. Finally, anticancer host immunity can be strengthened after cancer-cell-targeted PIT [96]. Although many investigations of PIT and clinical PIT for head and neck cancer use lasers as an NIR light source as well as PDT, LEDs can also produce NIR and yield a PIT effect on CCA cells [88]. As described above, CCA can develop in the extrahepatic and intrahepatic bile ducts that cannot be approached/visualized by an endoscope, while a special catheter with LEDs, such as a biliary drainage tube, can be placed for PIT at the peripheral CCA [88]. Therefore, a dedicated PIT device for CCA would shed light on PIT for CCA.
## (s9) Antibody and Low Molecular Weight (LMW) Compound for Targeting Cancer Cells with IR700
(p9.0) IR700 can covalently bind to any kind of antibody (IR700:antibody = approximately 3:1), forming a highly flexible theranostic platform [90]. The selected antibody or low-weight molecule for PIT depends on the cell surface antigen or molecules on the target cancer cell. Various agents, including many APCs and some LMW compound-IR700 conjugates, have been reported in preclinical and clinical settings. EGFR is a representative target on cancer cells for antibodies, followed by HER2, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), VEGFR2, cadherin-17, and ICAM-1 in PIT [97]. In addition to the antibody, a partner of IR700 for a conjugate of PIT that has been reported so far includes an affibody (a small protein mimetic [6-7 kDa]) for HER2-overexpressing breast cancer [92], an LMW ligand composed of Glu-Urea-Lys for prostate cancer with prostate-specific membrane antigen [98], and a lection for CEA-expressing pancreatic cancer [99,100]. For CEA, a novel approach with affimer proteins and cubosomes has also been reported in colorectal cancer cell lines [89]. For PIT of CCA, there have been two preclinical reports: one used anti-EGFR and HER2 antibodies [88], while another used an antibody against trophoblast cell surface antigen 2/tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2 (TROP2), which is overexpressed in trophoblast cancer and many epithelial cancers, including pancreatic cancer and CCA [101]. In both studies, PIT specifically killed the target-expressing CCA cells in vitro and significantly suppressed the growth of CCA in murine xenograft models after NIR irradiation.
