# Characterization and potential of periosteum-derived cells: an overview

CorpusID: 260153974 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cae29a41c97dcc5c9d276ce5e7f95b4d3b77a434](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cae29a41c97dcc5c9d276ce5e7f95b4d3b77a434)

Fields: Biology, Medicine

## (s5) Chondrogenic capacity
(p5.0) As a highly specialized tissue helping synovial joints articulate under low friction, articular cartilage presented limited potential due to its avascular, aneural and lymphatic nature (47). Allografts may be applied for larger cartilage defects, but this method displayed the potential to trigger an immune response (48). Accordingly, there is growing interest in cell-based approaches used to repair or regenerate cartilage. Current studies have demonstrated the chondrogenic capacity of the periosteum (49-53). Using two different animal models, Mendes et al. indicated that stable cartilage can be formed when combined with PDCs, which can form ectopic cartilage (49). Another study concluded that the cartilage formation capacity of the periosteum for repairing cartilage defects can be enhanced with a pre-treatment of PDCs cultures with TGFβ3 in vitro (50). In addition, culture coatings comprising decellularized cartilage extracellular matrix drive robust and rapid chondrogenic differentiation of human PDCs (51). Although the numbers and potential of PDCs may decline with age, periosteum obtained from elderly samples still exhibits cartilage formation capacity and remains a promising source in cartilage regeneration (52). Furthermore, PSCs have been shown to have an impact not only on intramembranous bone formation but also on growth plate maintenance and prolonged longitudinal bone growth (53).
## (s7) Other potential applications of PDCs
(p7.0) In addition to the osteogenic, chondrogenic and adipogenic capacity of PDCs, other potential applications for PDCs have also been demonstrated in current studies due to their stem cell attributes including self-renewal and multipotency. For example, researchers evaluated the influence of PDCs in ischemia-reperfusion-mediated renal fibrosis and concluded that PDCs presented stronger renoprotection and immunoregulation compared to BMSCs due to the promotion of PDCs for Treg differentiation through inhibiting the mTOR pathway (68). In addition, the potential application of the periosteum in combination with other tissues such as the epidermis and dermal papilla for tissue regeneration has also been demonstrated in previous studies (69). Recently, the antler-lineage periosteum also supplements the characteristics of the periosteum, which is capable of initiating ectopic organ formation upon transplantation and full mammalian organ regeneration when interacting with the covering skin (70). Moreover, the clinical investigations utilizing PDCs in maxillary sinus floor augmentation have shown lamellar bone formation within 3 months after transplantation, which provides a reliable basis for simultaneous or secondary insertion of dental implants and proves the therapeutic potential of PDCs (71). However, further trials are necessary to provide more comprehensive evidence for the efficacy of PDCs in different clinical settings.
