# OncoTargets and Therapy Dovepress Clinical response to sunitinib as a multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKi) in solid cancers: a review of clinical trials

CorpusID: 264630056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cede514596eaa484056e6799f029cd145d342ce2)

Fields: Medicine

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Sunitinib (Sutent ® ; Pfizer, New York, NY, USA) is a multitargeted tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI) with activity against the stem cell-factor receptor (Kit) and plateletderived growth-factor receptor (PDGFR), vascular endothelial growth-factor receptor (VEGFR), glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor receptor (rearranged during transfection [RET]), colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor (CSF1R), and Fms-like tyrosine kinase-3 receptor (FLT3). 1,2 Several clinical trials have demonstrated that sunitinib has an objective response rate (ORR) as high as 40% in the treatment of metastatic renal cell carcinoma (mRCC), and have recommended sunitinib as a first-line therapeutic option. 3 Another TKI, imatinib, is used in first-line therapy for unresectable and metastatic gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), but in patients who are intolerant to imatinib therapy, sunitinib is recommended as the second-line option in GIST. Results from a Phase I/II study showed that sunitinib had promising clinical activity in patients with imatinib-resistant GIST. 4 Furthermore, sunitinib has potential antitumor activity in various malignant tumors, such as lung cancer, pancreatic cancer, pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (PNET), esophageal cancer, bladder cancer, glioma, and sarcoma. [5][6][7][8][9][10] This review examines the antitumor efficacy of sunitinib in solid cancers, and summarizes both its preclinical activity and clinical development, including early and latest clinical trials. We discuss the mechanism of sunitinib's antiangiogenic activity and drug-resistance and toxicity studies. We conclude with an examination of the role of sunitinib as a single-agent therapy, combination with chemotherapy or radiotherapy, and its future directions.
## (s8) Resistance of sunitinib
(p8.0) The development of sunitinib resistance is accompanied by evasion of antiangiogenic effects and by increased expression of tumor-derived interleukin (IL)-8. 73 IL-8 expression was elevated in human RCC tumors with intrinsic resistance to sunitinib therapy, indicating that IL-8 levels may serve as a predictive biomarker for clinical response to sunitinib. 74 Obviously, IL-8 plays an important role in the resistance of RCC to sunitinib, and suggests that IL-8 may potentially serve as both a therapeutic target for the treatment of sunitinib-resistant RCC and as a clinical biomarker for both acquired and intrinsic sunitinib resistance. The best marker gene, AMFR, is highly downregulated in sunitinib-sensitive patients. The AMFR gene is associated with angiogenesis and tumor cell motility, and its identification may improve outcome prediction and improve our understanding of the mechanisms of submit your manuscript | www.dovepress.com
## (s12) Toxicity of sunitinib
(p12.0) A recent study suggested that grade 3-4 clinical TKI-related toxicities, namely digestive, cardiac, dermatologic, and asthenia, are associated with a significant improvement of OS. 77 Several studies reported that the occurrence of overall grade 3-4 toxicities was significantly associated with age, body surface, and sex. Another study reported that the most common toxicities experienced at both initial treatment and rechallenge were fatigue, diarrhea, and hand-foot syndrome. 78 A retrospective study showed that stomatitis (63.2%) and diarrhea (60.5%) were the most commonly reported dose-related adverse events. 79 In mRCC (n=132), the most common adverse events were stomatitis (66.7%), fatigue (52.3%), hand-foot syndrome (49.2%), and anorexia (48.5%). 80 Moreover, the most frequent laboratory abnormality was thrombocytopenia (75%), and 37.8% of patients experienced grade 3 or 4 thrombocytopenia. Other common laboratory abnormalities included increased serum creatinine (75.6%) and elevated alanine aminotransferase (53.5%). Chen et al reported that sunitinib-induced hypothyroidism was observed as a side effect in 12% of GIST patients. 17 The molecular mechanisms of sunitinib-induced hypothyroidism are currently unknown, but one possible mechanism may be via inhibition of VEGFR and/ or PDGFR in the thyroid tissue. 81
