# Edinburgh Research Explorer a review of the tools used for marine monitoring in the UK Citation for published version

CorpusID: 28523414 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/71965057c5aa9e83d7700cf1ec734f29f0a22c31)

Fields: Environmental Science, Engineering, Political Science

## (s11) Satellite
(p11.0) Earth observation (EO) data have the potential to provide considerable support to in situ and/or field-based marine monitoring; offering synoptic observations of systems at relatively high temporal frequencies. Indeed, ocean color EO data are becoming widely used to provide information on indicators of water quality at increasingly relevant spatiotemporal scales (Tyler et al., 2016). The uncertainties associated with EO products have raised concerns about their applicability to monitoring activities under official directives, such as MSFD. However, in the UK's optically-complex coastal and shelf sea waters, satellite retrievals of chlorophyll-a (Chl-a), suspended particulate matter (SPM), turbidity (Kd) and colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM) have benefited substantially from the recent development and validation of tailored algorithms (Mitchell et al., 2016;Tilstone et al., 2017). Integration of EO data with in situ data from research vessels, AUVs and ROVs, fixed point marine observing systems, SOO and subsurface floats is essential for validation of EO products. Recent validation studies of MERIS chlorophyll (Cristina et al., 2015) support the feasibility of integrating EO data for marine monitoring, specifically for MSFD Descriptor 5 (minimizing eutrophication).

(p11.1) In continuity of MERIS, the ESA has launched the Sentinel-3 OLCI instrument for improved and complete coverage of oceans at 300 m full resolution every 1-4 days. EO measurements from next-generation satellites have the potential to improve data collection for a range of current and future monitoring requirements, including identification and differentiation of phytoplankton functional types for harmful algal bloom detection, measuring of total suspended particulate materials, pigmented fraction of dissolved organic matter, and changes to systems in response to changes in climate (Cristina et al., 2015;Tyler et al., 2016).
## (s14) Acoustics
(p14.0) Acoustic technology products are used to ensonify the seabed and water column, and interpret the returning signal. This provides and information to help construct habitat maps and topographic visualizations of bed forms, of hydrographic properties and to provide information on the abundance, (vertical) distribution and behavior of biota such as fish and zooplankton in the water column. Various systems are available, with single or multiple beams and range from lightweight towed or pole mounted gears to larger hull mounted arrays. A multi-beam echosounding (MBES) sonar utilizes a focused swathe of beams (of a single frequency) to measure depth across a ribbon of sea bed. As the vessel moves forwards, this cross section of seabed is linked together and can be assembled into a bathymetric map, that accounts for vessel movement and changing water depths resulting from ebbing and flooding tides. MBES also provides limited information on the seabed type by interpreting the strength of the returning signal. MBES is currently used on all UK research vessels as the primary remote sensing method of sea-bed mapping (Kenny et al., 2003), is heavily utilized for assessment of MSFD descriptor 6 (The sea floor integrity ensures functioning of the ecosystem) and is widely employed in monitoring the UKs Marine Protected Areas. Side-scan sonar (SSS) typically uses a towed torpedo-shaped device that emits a conical/ fan shaped beam into the water column providing greater detail of objects and formations protruding from the seabed (Kenny et al., 2003). Fisheries acoustic methods traditionally use single beam echosounders to measure objects in the water-column. Pelagic fish are particularly suited to be studied acoustically as many pelagic species tend to display highly aggregative behavior and the resulting patchy distribution suggests that trawling alone, would provide unrepresentative data on the target species' distribution and abundance. Acoustic backscatter strength from fish and zooplankton is frequency-dependent and this frequency dependence, i.e., frequency response, can be used to make inferences about the species composition and size distribution of the acoustic scatterers (e.g., Holliday and Pieper, 1995 and references therein). A more recent development in commercial echo sounders, broadband, further utilizes this concept by chirping across a broader band width. Advantages include the combination of a controlled transmit signal, more suitable transmit repetition rate, and pulse-compression processing, resulting in much higher vertical resolution (Stanton et al., 2010(Stanton et al., , 2012.
## (s25) Fisheries Stock Assessment
(p25.0) The primary objective of fisheries monitoring is to underpin management to achieve maximum sustainable yields (MSYs) for all commercial fish and shellfish species. This has been an integral part of the EU's Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), which was first implemented in 1983. It has been gradually acknowledged that commercial fisheries have dramatically changed the structure of marine ecosystems and that fish stocks should be managed as part of the ecosystem. Currently, a policy framework to support the integration of European environmental and fishery management is largely in place (Jennings and Le Quesne, 2012). The main policies driving this integration are the Habitats Directive (Council Directive 92/43/EEC), the CFP (Council Regulation (EC) No, 2371/2002) and more recently the MSFD (Council Directive, 2008/56/EC). The CFP aims to fulfill its objectives by defining regional fisheries multi-annual management plans that take account of species and fishery interactions in establishing conservation and technical measures to achieve the targets (Lynam and Mackinson, 2015).
## (s39) THE FUTURE OF MONITORING Total Ecosystem Approach
(p39.0) The "total ecosystem approach" to monitoring is a coherent evidence-to-advice package, supported by a fully-integrated ecosystem monitoring programme, and potentially a way to implement many of the new approaches identified above (Borja et al., 2016;Kupschus et al., 2016). At the center of this package is a dynamic model of the ecosystem function and its responses to pressures based on process relationships. Monitoring data help to parameterize the relationships with individual states that contribute to one or more parameter estimates (Kupschus et al., 2016). Ideally, legislative assessments of ecosystem state are produced from results of this model, and future states are predicted for different sets of pressure and environmental trajectories. Such an idealized system offers several benefits and improvements over the current monitoring approach: 1) Ecosystem processes are fixed over evolutionary timescales;
