# A review of genetic methods and models for analysis of coronavirus-induced severe pneumonitis

CorpusID: 39192185 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f16ce53df97707203bb8c5384403a27c054f699](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/8f16ce53df97707203bb8c5384403a27c054f699)

Fields: Medicine, Biology

## (s0) Introduction
(p0.0) Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is a novel human CoV that caused the first major pandemic of the new millennium in (Baas et al., 2008Drosten et al., 2003). Bats have been a source of a number of emerging zoonotic diseases, including Nipha and Hindra Wang et al., 2006), and the animal source of the novel human SARS-CoV is thought to be Chinese horseshoe bats (Rhinolophus sinicus) Wang et al., 2006). It is believed that a bat CoV adapted to infect civet cats and in civet cats the virus further adapted, enabling it to infect humans Li, 2008). The receptor utilized by these SARS-like CoVs was shown to be angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (Li et al., 2003). Recently, a bat SARS-like CoV has been recovered from R. sinicus that can utilize human ACE2 as a receptor, underlining the ongoing threat of reemergence (Ge et al., 2013). Until the 2003 SARS-CoV pandemic there was little urgency to study CoV-related human disease because the disease was usually a selflimiting upper respiratory infection (Abdul-Rasool & Fielding, 2010;Kuri et al., 2011). The SARS-CoV pandemic spurred a search for additional human CoVs and several new human respiratory CoVs, HCoV-HKU1 and HCoV-NL63, were discovered (Abdul-Rasool & Fielding, 2010;Zhou et al., 2013). These viruses, as well as previously known human CoVs, HCoV-OC43 and HCoV-229E, can cause significant human respiratory disease in the elderly and in infants, and mild upper respiratory infections in otherwise healthy children and adults (Mesel-Lemoine et al., 2012;Zhou et al., 2013). Infection with the four different human CoVs typically takes place during childhood (Zhou et al., 2013).
## (s7) Non-transgenic models
(p7.0) Mice are capable of being infected by human SARS-CoV (Chen et al., 2010). The virus replicates in lungs and nasal turbinates of BALB/c mice aged 4-6 weeks and is cleared by 7 days post-infection. However, these mice do not develop significant pulmonary lesions when challenged with a human SARS-CoV isolate, limiting their usefulness . Aged BALB/c mice infected with SARS-CoV show evidence of alveolar damage and interstitial pneumonitis similar to human cases (Roberts et al., 2005a). Recently, a novel non-transgenic approach to creating a mouse model for MERS-CoV utilized transduction of BALB/c mice with adenoviral vectors expressing the human host cell receptor for MERS-CoV, dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (Zhao et al., 2014). Infection with MERS-CoV was not fatal, but did produce a perivascular and peribronchiolar lymphoid infiltration, progression to an interstitial pneumonia, and viral clearance occurring 6-8 days post-infection.
