# Critical Reviews in Oral Biology & Medicine A Review of the Impact of Implant Biomaterials on Osteocytes

CorpusID: 46929501 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/92b27c6ad80703b9f5488c140f05da97da47d88e)

Fields: Chemistry, Engineering, Materials Science, Medicine

## (s1) Osteocytes and Implant Biomaterials
(p1.0) Through the presence of osteocytes adjacent to the implant surface after prolonged healing periods, early investigators demonstrated that peri-implant bone around metals is indeed a living tissue (Serre et al. 1994). The inner wall of the osteocyte lacuna exhibits basophilic staining properties similar to the osteoid-like matrix interposed between mineralized bone and the implant surface (Piattelli et al. 1994). Bioactive coatings such as hydroxyapatite enhance the biological response to not only metal implants (Ti6Al4V; Merolli et al. 2000) but also polymer implants (polyether ether ketone; Johansson et al. 2016), giving rise to tightly interlocked lamellar bone, with osteocytes in close apposition to the coating. Also supporting the formation of osteocyte-containing mineralized tissue are thin (≈10 nm) graphene oxide coatings on cp-Ti (Jung et al. 2016); multilayer coatings consisting of chitosan and hydroxyapatite, with the capacity for controlled release of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (Shah et al. 2013); degradable particulates such as synthetically produced α-tricalcium phosphate/ octacalcium phosphate (Elgali et al. 2014); deproteinized bovine bone (Elgali et al. 2014); and autogenous bone fragments generated during implant site preparation (Shah and Palmquist 2017). This may be an important parameter to conclusively demonstrate whether newly formed tissue adjacent to a given biomaterial is bone or calcified cartilage-although the 2 processes are not mutually exclusive, since chondrocytes may contribute to the overall osteocyte pool (Hinton et al. 2017).

(p1.1) Preparation of the implant site with drilling tools creates a zone of apoptotic osteocytes around the osteotomy (Chen et al. 2017), the extent of which correlates directly with the drilling speed and the resulting thermal injury (Wang et al. 2017). Evidence suggests that, being mechanosensors, osteocyte-like MLO-Y4 cells induce osteoclastic differentiation under supraphysiologic loading (Fahlgren et al. 2018). The argument, therefore, is that at intermediate and/or long healing periods, osteocytes play an active role in the continued maintenance of osseointegration of (dental) implants. Here, we review the current knowledge regarding the adaptations of the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network in the vicinity of implant biomaterials (Table).
## (s2) Direct Attachment to the Implant Surface
(p2.0) More recent evidence of osteocyte attachment has been provided with resin cast etching (Fig. 2). However, certain artifacts (e.g., tissue shrinkage attributable to sample preparation routines) induce the development of a narrow space between the implant surface and bone, which is subsequently filled by a thin film of the embedding medium, thus obscuring the direct osteocyte-implant contact (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Such artifacts are more frequent in relation to relatively smooth machined surfaces that afford little mechanical interlocking. With increasing complexity of the implant surface, osteocytes adjacent to topologically modified but micrometersmooth (S a = 456 nm) implants tend to become aligned with their long axes parallel to the implant surface, extending up to 20-µm-long canaliculi toward it (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016). Adjacent to microrough implants (R a = 1.55 µm), osteocytes form an interconnected lacuno-canalicular system and attach to the implant surface through canaliculi . Direct attachment of osteocytes to minimally rough (S a = 519 nm) and microrough (S a = 906 nm) implants has also been demonstrated in ovariectomized and sham-operated conditions . Where the dimensions of implant surface features are appropriate (e.g., submicron topography achieved through acid etching), canaliculi may become closely interdigitated with the topographic features (Shah, Stenlund, et al. 2016).
## (s7) Future Perspectives
(p7.0) In addition to being indicators of bone quality, osteocytes are important structural markers of osseointegration and can prove exceptionally valuable in characterizing the biological response to currently available and novel materials for loadbearing applications in dental rehabilitation and orthopedics. Despite a clinical success rate >95%, knowing the status of the host bed prior to implant placement may be advantageous in certain situations. In compromised conditions, for instance, could radiologic assessment be accompanied by another parameter? Recent developments in third harmonic generation microscopy have made label-free (Genthial et al. 2017), intravital (Tokarz et al. 2017) imaging of the osteocyte lacunocanalicular network possible. We therefore propose that evaluation of peri-implant osteocytes should be a necessary component in future investigations of osseointegration. Particular emphasis must be placed on investigating the physical and chemical interactions among osteocytes and more recently developed bioceramics, polymers, and composites. Specifically, questions to address include the following: 1) How do osteocytes respond to stimuli other than mechanical loading (e.g., bacteria) on the molecular level? 2) Could sudden high-impact trauma lead to a cascade of structural deterioration and implant loosening? 3) What is the role of osteocytes in bone maintenance around biomedical implants in disease states? 4) Is peri-implantitis associated with changes in the osteocyte lacuno-canalicular network?
