# Machine Learning in Orthopedics: A Literature Review

CorpusID: 49428358 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/a44b5cfc5223e88977667b07e68ce3371f50033d)

Fields: Medicine, Computer Science

## (s6) Nearest Neighbors (NN)
(p6.0) In Ashinsky et al. (2015) and Ashinsky et al. (2017), a weighted neighbor distance method was used with a compound hierarchy of algorithms first introduced in Shamir et al. (2008) representing morphology (a technique abbreviated with the acronym WND-CHRM) and applied to the problem of OA detection in MRIs of articular cartilage scans. This tool is an image classifier that extracts features from a training set of images, and weights them by discriminating order (for example, through LDA). The features extracted by WND-CHRM are numerical image content descriptors-such as image textures, pixel statistics, polynomial decomposition and high-contrast features-as well as image transforms and pair-wise combinations of these transforms. In the first of the two studies, this technique was used for binary classification. The authors used the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) score (Pritzker et al., 2006) as the final output of a multiple linear least-squares regression model to score each cartilage plug, apart from the previous binary classification. This score was assessed manually by two human experts on the same set of images, and both scores were used as the basis for the linear regression procedure. The best separation task was obtained by extracting features with WND-CHRM from T2-weighted (T2W) measurements (among the different scan measurements taken from the original MRI), with an accuracy of 97%, sensitivity of 94%, specificity of 100%. With regard to the regression task, the best performance was given for the same set of features as above (T2W), with the lowest root-mean square (RMS) value of 1.6.
## (s12) LDA and other similar techniques
(p12.0) LDA was used in orthopedics for automating the diagnosis of OA and the prognosis of cartilage loss risk (Marques et al., 2013). The authors analyzed MRI scans of both knees, taken before and after two years, of approximately 150 subjects aged between 30 and 72 years of age. The same scans were manually assessed by an expert radiologists who scored them using Kellgren Lawrence (KL) grades (Kellgren and Lawrence, 1957). The medial tibial cartilage volume was estimated in both the sets of images, after a segmentation procedure and the extraction of the ROIs representing the trabecular bone structure. The extracted features were used to train an LDA classifier able to select the best combination of them for relating the bone structure markers to the prediction of cartilage volume loss. The results of the ML output were evaluated with an ROC of 0.92 for correct classification of healthy vs OA affected ones, and with odds ratio (OR) for the prediction of cartilage loss volume by quantifying bone structure. It was shown that the vertical trabecularization was the most related to cartilage loss progression (with an OR of 16).
## (s16) CONCLUSION
(p16.0) In this paper, we defined ML as a powerful set of computational tools, as this is the most common meaning of this expression within the medical community. Moreover, we advocated that the assessment of these tools must be strictly related to the main aim for which researchers develop and apply them to medical fields, that is, to support physicians in their main tasks, whose essence is the need to make decisions "in the absence of certitude" (Groopman and Prichard, 2007), and translate these decisions into choices of care for the betterment of patients. This perspective is a pragmatic one and it can contribute to deflating the current rhetoric regarding the coming of age of "artificial intelligence" in medicine (Miller and Brown, 2017), of which ML "rides atop the peak of inflated expectations" (Obermeyer and Emanuel, 2016;Chen et al., 2017), as it urges to ground any expectation on studies conducted in clinical settings and sufficiently powered pilot programs (Steinhubl and Topol, 2018).

(p16.1) Discourses regarding the replacement of human doctors and, similarly extremist stances advocating their intelligence augmentation (Hainc et al., 2017), must not attract the interest of the serious practitioner and must not receive further coverage in the medical literature, where already "too much of the publicized work [. . . in regard to digital health] is characterized by irrational exuberance and excessive hype" (Steinhubl and Topol, 2018). We also concur that these discourses are not useful to twenty-first century medicine (Obermeyer and Lee, 2017), which has to face an increasing demand for its services (also due to population aging) by consumers who have an increasing profile of morbidity and, worse yet, greater and greater expectations on the outcome of their health condition.

(p16.2) Further, the following aspect must also be highlighted: the capability to link a large amount of data and variables together is the main advantage of ML techniques and models with respect to traditional rule-based approaches (Obermeyer and Emanuel, 2016) and conventional regression models  that have been commonly used in medicine to estimate prognostic scores or suggest diagnostic hypotheses until the recent past. However, while the power of "capturing complex, nonlinear relationships in the data"  is an unquestionable capability of ML models, this capability is not the entire solution to any inquiry a medical doctor could formulate at the point of care. As also noticed in Obermeyer and Emanuel (2016), ML "algorithms might "overfit" predictions to spurious correlations in the data" and identify accurate predictors that, despite their predictive power, "are not causes."
