# a section of the journal Frontiers in Microbiology Overview of Virus Metagenomic Classification Methods and Their Biological Applications

CorpusID: 5034390 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/38b6634cd639fcb94166d9492b84bc9fef380f7e)

Fields: Biology, Medicine, Computer Science

## (s7) Database Searching
(p7.0) In the search step, sequences (either reads or contigs) are matched to a reference database. Twenty-six of the workflows we found search with the well-known BLAST algorithms BLASTn or BLASTx (Altschul et al., 1990; Table 2). Other oftenused programs are Bowtie (Langmead, 2010;Langmead and Salzberg, 2012), BWA (Li and Durbin, 2009), and Diamond (Buchfink et al., 2015). These programs rely on alignments to a reference database and report matched sequences with alignment scores. Bowtie and BWA, which are also popular programs for the filtering step, align nucleotide sequences exclusively.

(p7.1) Diamond aligns amino acid sequences and BLAST can do either nucleotides or amino acids. As analysis time can be quite long for large datasets, algorithms have been developed to reduce this time by using alternatives to classical alignment. One approach is to match k-mers with a reference, as used in FACS (Stranneheim et al., 2010), LMAT (Ames et al., 2013), Kraken (Wood and Salzberg, 2014), Taxonomer , and MetLab (Norling et al., 2016). Exact k-mer matching is generally faster than alignment, but requires a lot of computer memory. Another approach is to use probabilistic models of multiple sequence alignments, or profile hidden Markov models (HMMs). For HMM methods, protein domains are used, which allows the detection of more remote homology between query and reference. A popular HMM search program is HMMER (Mistry et al., 2013). ClassyFlu (Van der Auwera et al., 2014) and vFam (Skewes- Cox et al., 2014) rely exclusively on HMM searches, while VMGAP (Lorenzi et al., 2011), Metavir (Roux et al., 2011), VirSorter (Roux et al., 2015), and MetLab can also use HMMER. All of these search methods are examples of similarity search-homology or alignment-based methods. The other search method is composition search, in which oligonucleotide frequencies or k-mer counts are matched to references. Composition search requires the program to be "trained" on reference data and it is not used much in viral genomics. Only two workflows discussed here use composition search: NBC (Rosen et al., 2011) and Metavir 2 (Roux et al., 2014), while Metavir 2 only uses it complementary to similarity search (Data Sheet 1).
