# 06+ MILLION TOP 1% MOST CITED SCIENTIST 12.2% AUTHORS AND EDITORS FROM TOP 500 UNIVERSITIES 8 Electroless and Electrochemical Deposition of Metallic Coatings on Magnesium Alloys Critical Literature Review

CorpusID: 53609552 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea486955859cfaa0b621baa06225c055ed22b33](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea486955859cfaa0b621baa06225c055ed22b33)

Fields: Engineering, Materials Science

## (s1) www.intechopen.com
(p1.0) Before the electroless plating or the electrodeposition on magnesium alloys, a copper strike layer, usually cyanide bath, is electrodeposited on zinc layer in order to provide a uniform coverage. Yu studied the deposition (displacement + electrodepositon) of copper from a pyrophosphate solution over a zinc transition layer deposited from pyrophosphate solution (Yu et al., 2005). In another study, a protective copper film on AZ31 magnesium alloy, without zinc pretreatment, was proposed. The aqueous solution containing 0.4M Na 4 P 2 O 7 + 0.08M Cu 2 P 2 O 7 + 0.24M CuSO 4 + 0.05M NaF was used. A galvanic displacement reaction occurrs between copper and magnesium, then copper film is formed on magnesium substrate. After that, electroplating is carried out applying direct current and pulse current using the same copper solution. Yang proposed a procedure in which a copper layer is deposited onto AZ91D, by immersion plating, before EN plating. The solution was optimized in term of temperature, pH and fluoride content by searching the maximum coverage (Yang et al., 2005(Yang et al., , 2005b(Yang et al., , and 2006. Ultrasonication was found effective in improving the copper immersion coating process, particularly during extended deposition times, beyond the initial stages (Yang et al., 2005c). Higher coverage of magnesium alloy surface (> 80%) by copper immersion coating were also achieved by using an alkaline bath. The procedure proposed by Yang is schematically represented in Fig. 3 (Yang et al., 2006). Fig. 3. Flowchart of the procedure for copper immersion coating on the AZ91D magnesium alloy (Yang et al., 2006).
