# An Overview on Current Non-invasive Diagnostic Devices in Oral Oncology

CorpusID: 53086247 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfbed99e74a6de5b232b4939d94f91011c3a8aa6](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/cfbed99e74a6de5b232b4939d94f91011c3a8aa6)

Fields: Materials Science, Engineering, Medicine

## (s2) VELscope R
(p2.0) VELscope R (LED Medical Diagnostics, White Rock, BC, Canada) is a hand-held non-magnifying device for direct visualisation of oral mucosa autofluorescence that became commercially available after FDA approval in 2006 (Ayoub et al., 2015). No need of technical measures, such as the use of dimmed light, pre-rinse or lesion-marking solutions, make VELscope R easy to use. It uses a 120 W arc-lamp and a series of philtres and reflectors optimised for producing 400-460 nm wavelength light. The light emitted reaches oral mucosa and excites endogenous autofluorescence substances, called fluorophores (Yamamoto et al., 2017). Preliminary studies, regarding small groups of patients, gave encouraging results ( Table 1). In the first reported study, 44 patients with confirmed oral dysplasia or OSCC were evaluated with both COE and VELscope R . The results showed that the device can differentiate PMD and OSCC from normal oral mucosa, with high sensitivity and specificity levels (Lane et al., 2006). These results were confirmed in a small OSCC cohort study, in which the use of autofluorescence-guided examination was able to identify subclinical high-risk fields with cancerous changes . In a study conducted on 60 patients using a semi-quantitative grading system for autofluorescence, VELscope R demonstrate good sensitivity and a better ability to recognise high-grade lesions than COE (Jayaprakash et al., 2009). Another study evaluated 65 subjects with VELscope R , using a specific algorithm based on the ratio of red-to-green fluorescence. The authors found that 405 nm wavelength light was able to discriminate neoplastic and non-neoplastic tissue with high sensitivity and specificity (Roblyer et al., 2009).
## (s3) Identafi R
(p3.0) Identafi R (StarDental -DentalEZ, Lancaster, PA, United States) is a probe-like device designed for multispectral screening of PMD, approved by FDA in 2009 as oral screening device (Vigneswaran et al., 2009). Identafi R has three light sources of different wavelengths: white, violet (405 nm), and green-amber (545 nm) lights, that can be sequentially used in oral examination. While white light provides classical visualisation of oral mucosa, violet light excites endogen fluorophores, enabling the assessment of mucosa autofluorescence, like VELscope R . Green-amber light, through the reflectance spectroscopy, excites haemoglobin molecules in the blood, with the aim to visualise the vasculature (Messadi et al., 2014). A mirror is attached to the probe to help visualise relatively obscure areas in oral cavity.
