# Analysis Methods in Neural Language Processing: A Survey

CorpusID: 56657817 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/668f42a4d4094f0a66d402a16087e14269b31a1f](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/668f42a4d4094f0a66d402a16087e14269b31a1f)

Fields: Linguistics, Computer Science

## (s11) Scale
(p11.0) The size of proposed challenge sets varies greatly (Table SM2). As expected, datasets constructed by hand are smaller, with typical sizes in the hundreds. Automatically built datasets are much larger, ranging from several thousands to close to a hundred thousand (Sennrich, 2017), or even more than one million examples (Linzen et al., 2016). In the latter case, the authors argue that such a large test set is needed for obtaining a sufficient representation of rare cases. A few manually constructed datasets contain a fairly large number of examples, up to 10 thousand (Burchardt et al., 2017).
## (s12) Construction Method
(p12.0) Challenge sets are usually created either programmatically or manually, by handcrafting specific examples. Often, semi-automatic methods are used to compile an initial list of examples that is manually verified by annotators. The specific method also affects the kind of language use and how natural or artificial/synthetic the examples are. We describe here some trends in dataset construction methods in the hope that they may be useful for researchers contemplating new datasets. Several datasets were constructed by modifying or extracting examples from existing datasets. For instance, Sanchez et al. (2018) and Glockner et al. (2018) extracted examples from SNLI (Bowman et al., 2015) and replaced specific words such as hypernyms, synonyms, and antonyms, followed by manual verification. Linzen et al. (2016), on the other hand, extracted examples of subject-verb agreement from raw texts using heuristics, resulting in a large-scale dataset. Gulordava et al. (2018) extended this to other agreement phenomena, but they relied on syntactic information available in treebanks, resulting in a smaller dataset.
