# medical sciences Review Current Advances in Palliative & Hospice Care: Problems and Needs of Relatives and Family Caregivers During Palliative and Hospice Care-An Overview of Current Literature

CorpusID: 78092056 - [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/569e8651b032d5f20c8b59021dd8f19a3a90009e](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/569e8651b032d5f20c8b59021dd8f19a3a90009e)

Fields: Medicine, Psychology

## (s10) Anxiety and Depressive Symptoms
(p10.0) At admission to a palliative care ward, moderate to severe anxiety and depression were prevalent in 43% and 41% of family caregivers of advanced cancer patients, respectively [43], which is in line with two larger new studies: Dionne-Odom et al. presented rates of 23% for high depression and 34% for borderline or high anxiety in 294 family caregivers of advanced cancer patients [9] and Goetze et al. reported high anxiety levels of 32% and high depression levels of 29.2% in family caregivers of palliative cancer patients during home care [43]. Using other measurements, Areia et al. observed a high risk of anxiety in 72% and a high risk of depression in 69% in 112 family caregivers of patients with terminal cancer. In addition, 51% of family caregivers reported high levels of somatization [47]. In a randomized controlled study, the group of Jennifer Temel evaluated psychological morbidity in patients and family caregiver dyads in early palliative care for patients with newly diagnosed advanced lung or non-colorectal gastrointestinal cancer. They showed that patients reported more depressive symptoms and caregivers reported more anxiety symptoms. Dyads' anxiety and depression symptoms were both positively associated [10]. Other parameters associated with family caregivers' psychological morbidity were younger age, female gender, relationship to the patient, the caregiving role played, satisfaction with health care professionals, shorter nighttime sleep, less physical activity, family functioning, and low engagement in self-care practices [9,11,39,47]. Death anxiety was associated with dysfunctional attitudes in 173 caregivers of advanced lung cancer patients [56].
## (s15) Relatives' Confidence and Sense of Security, Preparedness and Self-Efficacy
(p15.0) Soroka et al. qualitatively analyzed family caregivers' confidence during hospice home care and observed four "storylines" contextualizing caregivers' confidence which were: "values/relationships", "stories of terminal illness", "needs", and "support" [14]. Lower caregiver decision-making confidence was associated with less engagement in spiritual growth self-care, more use of avoidant coping, low emotional social support, and younger care recipient age in a large evaluation in 294 family caregivers of advanced cancer patients with the strongest associations for low spiritual growth self-care and high use of avoidant coping [15]. The same working group had observed that lower decision-making self-efficacy and preparedness were more frequent in advanced cancer patients' family caregivers with lower health responsibility, spiritual growth, interpersonal relation, and stress management scores [9]. Control over decision making for patient care and communication were also reported to have an impact on family conflicts during end-of-life care. At least one family conflict was reported by 42% of family members, although absent family members reappearing unexpectedly reduced family conflict [59]. Family members' sense of security in caregiving also seems to be positively influenced by the availability of attachment figures. Both nonphysical and physical contact with the attachment figures promote a sense of security and facilitate the diversion of attention from the patients' illnesses to other things in everyday life. This study identified four relevant types of attachment figures: "family and friends, health care practitioners, pets and God" [35]. In a qualitative analysis exploring family caregivers' preparation for the patient's death in the context of palliative care, caregivers emphasized "the complexities of trying to prepare while feeling overwhelmed with demands of caregiving throughout an unpredictable illness trajectory". Cognitive preparedness was feasible for most of them, behavioral preparedness for some, but emotional preparedness remained challenging [63].
## (s18) Patient-Relative-Dyads and Quality of Life
(p18.0) In addition to these factors, related to the relatives themselves, three studies analyzed patientrelative-dyads effects in relation to their quality of life. In a cohort of 275 dyads of patients with newly diagnosed cancer, younger, spousal caregivers, who cared for patients with low emotional well-being, also indicated worse mental health themselves. Further, family caregivers with low educational attainment, who cared for patients with low social well-being, reported worse physical health themselves [17]. Another study focusing on lung cancer patient-caregiver-dyads demonstrated that caregiver quality of life was associated with dependency, patient self-control and achievement. Patient self-control and family caregiver dependency mediate between patient death anxiety and caregiver quality of life [58]. A third study on cancer patient-caregiver-dyads demonstrated that "the use of positive thinking and future/present-hedonistic perspectives" was also associated with higher quality of life. "The use of avoidance" and "past-negative perspective" were related with lower quality of life. When caregivers used social support and experienced openness, the patients' quality of life was higher. On the other hand, when patients used social support, avoidance strategies and experienced future perspective, the caregivers' quality of life was lower [68].  [53]. This might either demonstrate that relatives' quality of life depends on the patients' care setting or might again strengthen effects between patients' hope for future perspective facilitated by active treatment and relatives' quality of life. A mixed-method study, which explored links between quality of life and self-reported caregiver communication identified four caregiver communication types: "manager", "carrier", "partner", and "lone caregiver". "Manager" reported the lowest physical quality of life, while "carrier" felt least prepared and "partner" and "lone caregivers" reported lowest psychological distress [20].
## (s23) Specification of Relatives' Needs Related to Transitions
(p23.0) Three studies present further details on relatives' needs regarding the patients' disease and care transitions [20,21,68]. Interviews with older caregivers of cancer patients one and two weeks after the patient's discharge from hospital addressed three main themes which were "connection of caregiver and patient wellness", "caregivers' struggle with control issues" and "communication with health professionals" [20]. Maintaining normality turned out to be the central need during transitions in families of patients receiving palliative care in a large qualitative meta-analysis. The authors also observed that transitions are often experienced unconsciously until occurrence of crisis, when active responses are needed which could encourage families to develop coping strategies. With progressive disease, family caregivers have to repeatedly reprioritize and balance their caregiving roles [68]. Norton et al. qualitatively analyzed relatives' needs resulting from different transition patterns and identified three different types of transitions experienced by family caregivers of cancer patients when stopping chemotherapy and transiting to end-of-life care. First, "we pretty much knew" (explicit discussions about end-of-life care with shared understanding about prognosis and seamless transitions), second "beating the odds" (explicit discussions about disease-directed treatment and end-of-life care, but no shared understanding about prognosis and often chaotic transitions) and finally, "left to die" (no end-of-life discussion with transitions resulting in crisis) [21].
## (s24) Quantification of Needs
(p24.0) Regarding the number of needs of relatives, Halkett et al. demonstrated that the mean numbers of moderate to high needs did not change, but specific needs changed over time in family caregivers of glioma patients. The most frequently reported needs included the impact of caring on their working life or usual activities, decision making in the context of uncertainty, reducing the patient's stress, and understanding the patient's experience [61]. Family caregivers of cancer patients scored a mean number of 16 out of 20 needs as very or extremely important, however, 20% of these important needs were unmet in at least half of the family caregivers at first admission to a palliative care ward. These unmet needs were: "feel there is hope", "know when to expect symptoms to occur", "have somebody be concerned with my health", and "be told about people who could help with problems" [43].
## (s28) Preferences of Being Involved in and Educated about Patient Care
(p28.0) A large Italian study investigated the desired involvement in patient education and empowerment activities of cancer patients and their caregivers. Almost half of them, mainly caregivers, indicated that they would like to be involved. The preferred educational activities were "classes on cancer-related topics with health care professionals" and "cancer information service" on a face-to-face modality [53]. Support for home hospice family caregivers might be grouped in four categories including "skilled communication", "building authentic relationships", "expert teaching", and "teamwork". From the perspective of family caregivers, "expert teaching" might be the most important [25]. An analysis of 101 statements of hospice nurses describing caregivers' pain management challenges revealed that 30% of these statements addressed communication and teamwork issues and 27% caregivers' medication skills and knowledge. Hospice nurses responded to caregivers' pain management challenges with a validating statement in 52% and with further information in 42% [26].
## (s31) Supporting Relatives by Development of Support Plans
(p31.0) The Carer Support Needs Assessment Tool (CSNAT) approach aims to expand the focus of discharge planning on caregivers' support needs, to strengthen the carers' role in end-of-life care and to prevent patients from hospital readmission due to decompensation of home care, which was deemed feasible by carers and health care professionals [41]. In addition, the CSNAT intervention seems to reduce early grief, improve psychological and physical health as well as the perception that the "place of death was the right" in family carers compared to the control group, and to increase the rate of patients dying at home [41]. Thomsen et al. evaluated a four-step process evaluation of systematic risk and needs assessment for caregivers in specialized palliative care. They were able to include 46% of their family caregivers in the intervention. The first steps, an interdisciplinary risk assessment and documentation of a support plan could be performed in 75%, whilst the final step, a separate medical record according to the intervention blueprint, could be completed in 62% of caregivers. The palliative care staff perceived that this intervention was useful and acceptable, but efficacy data are pending [35].
## (s37) Effects of Hospice Care
(p37.0) Regarding potential effects of hospice care in relatives of patients with life-limiting diseases, a prospective cohort study observed that family caregivers of cancer patients receiving hospice care reported significantly lower quality of life scores in the mental component and higher general and physical health than those of patients during active cancer treatment [38]. As discussed above, this might be caused by hospice care or by the psychological effects of active treatment. A large study asked family members of deceased patients with advanced cancer about their perspectives on the patient's hospice care experiences. It was demonstrated that families of patients in a hospice context reported more pain for the patient compared with those without hospice care. However, they reported more frequently that the patients had received "just the right amount of pain medicine" (80% vs. 73%), more help with dyspnea (78% vs. 70%), that patients' wishes on end-of-life care were followed (80% vs. 74%) and that quality of end-of-life care was "excellent" (57% vs. 42%) [31].
