# A review of levosimendan in the treatment of heart failure

CorpusID: 10419254
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7a8cdf3828096c401a9f05661e4dfb813ce64777](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7a8cdf3828096c401a9f05661e4dfb813ce64777)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

A review of levosimendan in the treatment of heart failure
2006

Hulya Akhan 
Siyami Ersek Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Center
Posta kutusu 9 Avcilar34840Istanbul, Istanbul-TurkeyTurkey

Kasikcioglu Nese 
Siyami Ersek Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Center
Posta kutusu 9 Avcilar34840Istanbul, Istanbul-TurkeyTurkey

Cam 
Siyami Ersek Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery Center
Posta kutusu 9 Avcilar34840Istanbul, Istanbul-TurkeyTurkey

A review of levosimendan in the treatment of heart failure

Vascular Health and Risk Management
22006389 R E V I E W Correspondence: Hulya Akhan Kasikcioglu Resitpasa caddesi Salkim sokak No=2/5,heart failurepositive inotropic therapylevosimendan
Heart failure is a relatively important public health problem due to its increasing incidence, poor prognosis, and frequent need of re-hospitalization. Intravenous positive inotropic agents play an important role in treating acute decompensation of patients with heart failure due to left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Although frequently used, the inotropic agents β-adrenergic agonists and phosphodiesterase inhibitors seem effective for improving symptoms in the short term; it has been shown that they increase morbidity and mortality by elevating intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) and calcium levels. Levosimendan is a new positive inotropic agent having ATP-dependent potassium-channelopening and calcium-sensitizing effects. In studies on its effects without increasing intracellular calcium concentrations and on its effects that depend on available intracellular calcium levels, it has been shown to have favorable characteristics different from those of current inotropic agents, which exert their effects by increasing calcium concentrations. This study aims to review other important studies about levosimendan by revealing the underlying mechanisms of its activity, efficiency, and safety.

## Introduction

Heart failure is a growing problem for both individuals and public health especially as the elderly population is increasing (McKee et al 1971;Mosterd et al 1999). According to the World Health Organization, it is estimated that there are 22.6 million heart failure patients worldwide (McMurray et al 2000;Cleland et al 2001). Especially, in European countries, myocardial dysfunction due to coronary heart disease is the most frequent reason for heart failure in patients under the age of 75 (Sutton 1990).

Moreover, regardless of the underlying cause, the prognosis of heart failure patients is relatively poor. For example, nearly 40% of severe heart failure patients die within a year of acute exacerbation (Cowie et al 2000). Furthermore, it is a relatively important public health problem with respect to re-hospitalization and prolonged hospitalization frequency.

In the treatment of acute decompensation of heart failure caused by left systolic dysfunction, intravenous positive inotropic agents are playing an important role in eliminating hemodynamic abnormalities and improving symptoms (Cowie et al 2000;Slawsky et al 2000).

Indeed, currently the most used intravenous inotropic agents in clinical practice include β-adrenergic agonists and phosphodiesterase inhibitors. β-adrenergic receptor agonists trigger calcium influx into the myocytes by increasing intracellular cAMP levels through cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) production. Phosphodiesterase inhibitors do the same thing by inhibiting its degradation (Colucci et al 1986;Cody 1988;Packer 1993). Increased intracellular calcium levels increase cellular energy need, resulting in an increase of myocardial oxygen consumption (Colucci et al 1986;Slawsky et al 2000). Moreover, it is reported that increased intracellular cAMP and Ca + concentration are cardiotoxic (Lee and Downing 1980;Kasikcioglu and Cam Stevenson 1998). Elevated intracellular calcium concentrations trigger arrhythmias by affecting myocytes' electrophysiology (Packer and Leier 1987;Ferric et al 1990). As a result, this condition further increases cellular energy need and myocardial oxygen consumption (Hasenfuss et al 1989;Haikala et al 2000). Although these agents seem useful during the acute exacerbation of heart failure in the short term, it was reported that they cause progression in and increased mortality from the disease (Dies et al 1986;Ferrick et al 1990;Felker et al 2003;Abraham et al 2005).

Thus, in the meantime, attention is focused on the calcium-sensitizing agents that enhance cardiac performance without increasing intracellular calcium and cAMP levels. Among these groups of agents, levosimendan and pimobendan are known as calcium sensitizers that are available for clinical practice.


## Mechanism of action

Levosimendan has a dual mechanism of action: (1) This agent sensitizes troponin C to calcium in a manner dependent on the calcium concentration, thereby increasing the effects of calcium on cardiac myofilaments during systole and improving contraction at low energy cost (Hasenfuss et al 1998;Janssen et al 2000).

(2) During diastole, sensitization is diminished due to a plunge in calcium concentration level which does not cause a deterioration of diastolic relaxation but, on the contrary, does cause an improvement Janssen et al 2000;Tachibana et al 2005). Since levosimendan does not cause any diastolic calcium overload, unlike other inotropic agents, it is also does not cause any cardiac myocyte dysfunction, arrhythmia, or an increase of energy consumption (Hasenfuss et al 1995). The enhanced calcium myofilament responsiveness mediated by levosimendan results in increased cross bridge formation and greater contractility. Because levosimendan-enhanced cross bridge formation depends on the presence of calcium, there is no impairment of myocardial relaxation during diastole (Haikala and Linden 1995;Gheorghiade et al 2005). In addition, preclinical studies indicate that levosimendan may enhance myocardial relaxation and diastolic function (Gheorghiade et al 2005;Tachibana et al 2005).

Moreover, levosimendan also opens ATP-dependent potassium (K) channels in myocytes and vascular smooth muscle cells, which results in vasodilatation (Yokoshiki et al 1997;Pataricza et al 2000;. This reduces preload and afterload, and increases coronary and other organ blood flow (Harkin et al 1995;Yokoshiki and Sperelakis 2003;Michaels et al 2005).


## Cardio protective effect

During the acute exacerbation of heart failure, accelerated cellular loss occurs due to deterioration of ischemia, mechanical strain, neurohormones production, inflammation and oxidative stress, and progressive myocardial failure. It is suggested that on these patients, levosimendan exerts its cardio protective effect by activation of ATP-dependent K (K ATP ) channels which inhibit mitochondrial apoptotic pathway (Maytin and Colluci 2005).

Furthermore, in a study by Nieminen et al (2000), it was shown that levosimendan did not increase troponin T levels which were manifestations of myocardial injury. In addition to its well-described hemodynamic effects, levosimendan also activates K ATP channels both in plasma membrane and in mitochondrial matrix of cardiac myocytes (Maytin and Colluci 2005;Kopustinskiene et al 2001). It is now recognized that the activation of mitochondrial K ATP channels in cardiac myocytes is an important and potent cardio protective mechanism (O'Rourke 2004). Apoptosis is an energy-dependent process mediated by a highly organized biochemical cascade. Although ischemia is an important cause of apoptosis, several additional apoptotic stimuli, including oxidative stress, mechanical strain, and neurohormones (eg, norepinephrine and angiotensin) have been identified and are believed to contribute to progressive myocyte loss during chronic heart failure (Rossig et al 2004;Maytin and Colluci 2005).


## Anti-inflammatory effect

It has been reported that elevated circulatory levels of proinflammatory cytokines (TNF-α, IL-6, and IL-1β) increase the apoptosis of cardiac myocytes and endothelial cells by increasing oxidative stress and lead to the suppression of myocardial contractility, and that they have a role in the clinical and hemodynamic deterioration of heart failure (Seta et al 1996;Sasayama et al 1999). Elevated levels of TNF-α and IL-6 have been associated with increased morbidity and mortality in patients with advanced heart failures (Levine et al 1990;Torre-Amione et al 1996;Tsutamoto 1998;Plenz et al 2001). Recent studies show that therapies that decrease cytokine levels may improve the clinical picture and ventricular functions in patients with congestive heart failure (Gullestad et al 2001;Skudicky et al 2001).

Some other studies indicate that levosimendan exerts anti-apoptotic and anti-inflammatory effects by decreasing the circulatory pro-inflammatory cytokines and soluble Levosimendan in heart failure apoptosis mediators (Parissis et al 2004;Avgeropoulou et al 2005;Kyrzopoulos et al 2005).


## Effects on matrix metalloproteinase

It has been concluded that levosimendan decreases the levels of matrix metalloproteinases, which regulate extracellular matrix metabolism, and play an important role in the left ventricular remodeling in chronic heart failure (McMurray and Pfeffer 2002;Tziakas et al 2005). Therefore, it is suggested that levosimendan may show pleiotropic effects that may affect myocardial remodeling (Tziakas et al 2005).


## Neurohormonal effect

It is known that neurohormonal changes occur in acute heart failure and strong vasoconstrictors, epinephrine and norepinephrine, are increased as a response to the decreased cardiac output. In fact, increased epinephrine and norepinephrine levels are prognostic markers showing a decrease in survival rates (Cohn et al 1984;Kaye et al 1995;Bristow et al 2004). Also, it has been shown that levosimendan in therapeutic dosages does not increase epinephrine and norepinephrine concentrations (Nicklass et al 1999;Nieminen et al 2000). In addition, it has been determined that levosimendan decreases plasma endotelin-1 concentrations in patients with severe heart failure (Nicklas et al 1999).

B type natriuretic peptide level (BNP) is one of the best prognostic markers in heart failure. It has been demonstrated that during treatment of decompensated chronic heart failure, the changes in BNP levels were strongly predictive for mortality and early re-hospitalization (Cheng et al 2001). It has been proved that levosimendan leads to a marked decrease in BNP levels and supports clinical improvement in these patients (Avgeropoulou et 


## Effects on coronary circulation

It has been determined that administration of intravenous levosimendan has a direct vasodilator effect on conductance and resistance of coronary arteries (Gruhn et al 1998). It has been suggested that levosimendan exerts this effect by opening ATP-sensitive K channels in vascular smooth muscles (Gruhn et al 1998;. It has been demonstrated that coronary artery flow was increased and coronary artery resistance was reduced during levosimendan infusion (Michaels et al 2005).

Also, in another study conducted with positron emission tomography imaging in heart failure patients, levosimendan increased myocardial blood flow compared to placebo (Ukkonen et al 2000).

In a study by De Luca et al (2005) on patients with LV dysfunction following myocardial infarction just after primary percutaneous coronary intervention, it was determined that levosimendan infusion improved hemodynamic parameters and coronary flow reserve.


## Anti-stunning effect

Abnormal calcium homeostasis and decreased sensitivity of contractile proteins against calcium are important factors for the development of myocardial stunning (Bolli 1990;Bolli and Marban 1999). Therefore, it is suggested that calcium-sensitizing agents may improve the functions of stunned myocardium (Soei et al 1994). To clarify, Sonntag et al (2004), in a study in which the patients undergoing angioplasty following acute coronary syndrome were examined, showed that levosimendan improved systolic performance of the stunned myocardium without worsening diastolic functions.


## Hemodynamic effects/influence on systolic function/influence on diastolic function

Although levosimendan causes vasodilatation by opening ATP-dependent K channels in vascular smooth muscle cells, this does not only result in a reduction of preload and afterload but it also creates a positive inotropic effect (Harkin et al 1995). It was determined in multicenter large scale studies conducted on patients with heart failure that levosimendan reduced pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP), right atrial, pulmonary arterial and mean arterial pressures, and peripheral vascular resistance (PVR), whereas it increased cardiac index (Nieminen et al 2000;Slawsky et al 2000;Follath et al 2002).

As is the case with other drugs having potent vasodilator activity, levosimendan increases intrapulmonary shunting. However, in contrast to these drugs, it does not reduce arterial oxygen saturation (Lilleberg et al 1998).

In a study by Sonntag et al (2004) with patients undergoing percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty due to acute coronary syndrome, levosimendan infusion after 10 minutes following successful intervention reduced the number of hypokinetic segments. As an indicator of improved systolic functions, increase of ejection fraction, and decrease of end diastolic volume, single-beat elastance, and upward/leftward shift of the systolic part of the pressurevolume loop have been observed.

One of the most important indicators of improved contractile functions with levosimendan infusion is the increase in exercise capacity. In a tissue Doppler echocardiography study conducted by Kasikcioglu et al (2005), there was a significant increase in the exercise capacity assessed by 6 minute walking test parallel to the increase of systolic myocardial velocity for mitral annulus as an indicator of the increase in contractile functions.

Calcium-sensitizing agents may not have negative effects on diastolic functions although they improve systolic function by increasing the affinity of troponin C to calcium both in systole and diastole (Haikala and Linden 1995). Sensitization is calcium-concentration dependent; sensitization of contractile apparatus is done in systole but not in diastole. This leads to an inotropic effect without impairing diastolic relaxation (Hasenfuss 1998;Haikala and Pollesello 2000;Cleland et al 2004;Sonntag et al 2004). Indeed, unlike the effects of other calcium sensitizers, the effect of levosimendan is dependent on intracellular calcium levels, and it does not worsen diastolic functions even though there are studies showing its positive effects on diastolic functions (Haikala et al 1995;Sonntag et al 2004;Kasikcioglu et al 2005;Parissis et al 2005). Also, levosimendan decreases the index of diastolic relaxation, indicating that levosimendan seems to improve the systolic performance of stunned myocardium without impairing diastolic function (Hasenfuss 1998;Haikala and Pollesello 2000;Sonntag et al 2004;De Luca et al 2006) Anti-arrhythmic effect Another study, in which the patients with normal cardiac functions were examined, showed that levosimendan shortened atrial, atrioventricular node, and ventricular effective refractory period (Toivonen et al 2000). On patients with atrial fibrillation, it is reported that levosimendan may not only increase ventricular rate by accelerating atrioventricular conduction but it may also induce an increase in heart rate by shortening the sinus node recovery time (Toivonen et al 2000). Although it has no influence on the uncorrected QT interval it is reported that it may prolong corrected QT interval in doses higher than the therapeutic levels (Singh et al 1999).

Ambulatory electrocardiographic and electrophysiological evaluation did not detect any pro-arrhythmic effect of intravenous levosimendan (Singh et al 1999). On the other hand, the REVIVE study showed that the rate of ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, and ventricular extra-systoles in the levosimendan group were increased compared with placebo (Packer et al 2005).


## Pharmacokinetics and metabolism

Levosimendan has an elimination half-life of 1 hour (Kivikko et al 2002a(Kivikko et al , 2002b. However, the half-lives of its two circulating metabolites, OR-1855 and its acetylated form OR-1896, range between 70 and 80 hours (Kivikko et al 2002a(Kivikko et al , 2002b. These metabolites reach their maximum serum concentration 2 days after completion of a 24-hour intravenous levosimendan infusion (Sundberg et al 1998).

Since the OR-1896 metabolite is hemodynamically active, with properties similar to those of levosimendan, the hemodynamic effects of levosimendan should theoretically persist for at least 7-10 days following the intravenous infusion (Kivikko et al 2002a(Kivikko et al , 2002b.


## Combinations with other drugs

It was demonstrated that the combination of levosimendan and dobutamine is relatively safe and effective on patients with severe heart failure (Nanas et al 2004(Nanas et al , 2005. It can be combined with norepinephrine in patients with initially low systolic blood pressure to maintain adequate organ and tissue perfusion (Delle Karth et al 2003; Lehmann et al 2004). Although beta blocker use decreases the inotropic and vasodilator effects in patients taking dobutamine, no reduction in levosimendan level was reported (Follath et al 2002). It is reported that concomitant use of levosimendan with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and nitrates may increase the hypotension and tachycardia effects of levosimendan (Antila et al 1996;Sundberg et al 2000) Clinical studies

The studies demonstrate that the efficacy and safety of levosimendan and are important and guiding factors for the current clinical practice. The results are summarized in Table  1.

A multicenter, placebo-controlled, randomized study conducted by Nieminen et al (2000) to determine the therapeutic dose range of levosimendan enrolled 151 patients with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class II-IV heart failure with ischemic origin. Five different dose regimes of levosimendan (10-minute loading dose of 3, 6, 12, 24, or 36 µg kg -1 followed by a 24-hour infusion of 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, or 0.6 µg kg -1 min -1 ) were compared with placebo and dobutamine (6 µg kg -1 min -1 ). When all levosimendan groups were evaluated, it was determined that reported hemodynamic targets were attained in more than 50% of the patients. At all doses of levosimendan, response rates were significantly greater than those of placebo (p=0.038 at the lowest dose and p≤0.005 at all other doses). This study concluded that 6-24 µg kg -1 loading dose of levosimendan for 10 minutes followed by 0.05-0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 infusion was well tolerated, with favorable hemodynamic effects.

A multicenter, double-blind, placebo-controlled, randomized study conducted by Slawsky et al (2000), with the objective of determining the short-term hemodynamic and clinical effects of levosimendan, enrolled 146 NYHA class III-IV heart failure patients with pulmonary capillary wedge pressure ≥15 mmHg and a cardiac index of ≤2.5 L min -1 m -2 . In this study, patients were randomized 2:1 to receive intravenous levosimendan or placebo. Levosimendan was initiated as a bolus of 6 µg kg -1 , followed by a continuous infusion, initially at a rate of 0.1 µg kg -1 min -1 . At hourly intervals, a repeat bolus (6 µg kg -1 ) was given and the infusion rate was increased by increments of 0.1 µg kg -1 . Uptitration was continued until a maximum dose of 0.4 µg kg -1 min -1 was achieved or until a dose-limiting event occurred. Patients were administered 6-hour infusions and hemodynamic measurements were obtained at baseline, at the end of each hourly uptitration for hours 1-4, and at hours 5.5 and 6. The symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue were evaluated by the patient and the physician at baseline and at the sixth hour. Levosimendan was associated with dosedependent increases in stroke volume and cardiac index that were significantly different from the effects of placebo at all doses tested. In addition, levosimendan was associated with dose-dependency, which significantly decreased PCWP at all doses. Assessments of dyspnea and fatigue at the sixth hour demonstrated that levosimendan was associated with significantly improved dyspnea and a trend towards improved fatigue. The results of this study showed that levosimendan causes a rapid dose-dependent improvement in hemodynamic functions and in clinical picture without any significant increase in adverse events in patients with decompensated heart failure.

After completion of 6-hour infusions, 85 patients were completely infused as open label for 24 hours and the patients were randomized 1:1 in a double-blind manner. In one group, the infusion was discontinued and then maintained with placebo whereas levosimendan was maintained for 24 hours in the other group (Kivikko et al 2003). The objective of this study was to determine whether the hemodynamic effects of levosimendan were sustained during a long-term infusion and beyond the discontinuation of infusion. At the conclusion of the study, it was demonstrated that hemodynamic effects continued at least 24 hours after 24-hour infusion. A series of adverse events may be seen in infusions prolonged for more than 24-48 hours due to excess metabolite accumulation, and the 24-hour duration is safe and effective.

The Levosimendan Infusion versus Dobutamine in severe low-output heart failure (LIDO) study is a multicenter, double-blind, double-dummy, randomized study in low-output heart failure patients. It was designed to compare the clinical and hemodynamic effects of levosimendan and dobutamine (Follath et al 2002). A total of 203 patients with severe low-output heart failure (left ventricular ejection fraction [LVEF] <0.35, cardiac index (CI) <2.5 L min -1 m -2 , and PCWP<15 mmHg) were included in the study. A levosimendan 24 µg kg -1 loading dose is maintained with a 24-hour infusion with 0.1 µg kg -1 min -1 dose. Dobutamine was administered in 5 µg kg -1 min -1 dose. Infusion rates were doubled after 2 hours on 69 patients randomized to levosimendan and on 40 patients randomized to dobutamine whose cardiac output had not risen by more than 30%. Among the doses used in this study, the cardiacoutput-enhancing effect (29% increase over baseline for levosimendan compared with a 22% increase for dobutamine, p=0.05) and PCWP-lowering effect of levosimendan (28% decrease over baseline for levosimendan compared with a 13% decrease for dobutamine, p=0.03) were greater than those of dobutamine. In this study, it was shown that 6 hours after the infusion had been completed, the effects of levosimendan were still continuing whereas dobutamine hemodynamic effects had disappeared. Clinical symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue tended to improve more with levosimendan than they did with dobutamine but these differences were not significant.

It was also demonstrated that 180-days mortality was lower in the levosimendan group compared with dobutamine group (mortality rate in levosimendan and dobutamine patients were 26% and 38% respectively, p=0.029).

The Randomized Study on Safety and Effectiveness of Levosimendan in Patients with Left Ventricular Failure Due to an Acute Myocardial Infarct (RUSSLAN) evaluated different doses of levosimendan versus placebo in subjects with heart failure following an acute myocardial infarction (Moiseyev et al 2002). This study was double-blind and placebo-controlled. This is the first and the largest study, conducted with 504 patients comprising four different levosimendan dose groups and a placebo group. No significant differences among the five treatment groups were observed in the proportion of patients experiencing hypotension or ischemia (primary endpoint). Nonetheless, a greater incidence of arterial hypotension and ischemia was observed among patients who received the highest doses of levosimendan (bolus, 24 µg kg -1 ; infusion, 0.4 µg kg -1 min -1 ) compared with the patients who received the highest doses of placebo. In 14 days, the mortality rate in the levosimendan group was 11.7% compared with 19.6% in the placebo group (p=0.03). However, there was no statistically significant difference between two dose groups in terms of 180-day mortality (p=0.053). In this study, although there is no significant improvement in patients' complaints during levosimendan infusion periods, the worsening of heart failure in 6 hours (p=0.033) and in 24 hours (p=0.044) were significantly less when compared with those of placebo group. The Calcium Sensitizer or Inotrope or None in Low-Output Heart Failure Study (CASINO) is a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, and parallel-group study (Zairis et al 2004). This study was designed to compare the safety and efficacy of levosimendan, dobutamine, and placebo on patients with decompensated heart failures. Patients with NYHA class IV heart failure and LVEF ≤35% were recruited for the study in which levosimendan, dobutamine, or placebo infusions were administered. The study was originally designed to recruit 600 patients; however, it was stopped prematurely after 299 patients had been enrolled, due to a clear mortality benefit in favor of the levosimendan group. Levosimendan showed a significant survival benefit on these patients whereas dobutamine appeared to increase mortality. After 1 month, the mortality rates were 6.1% for levosimendan (p=0.1 compared with placebo and p=0.04 compared with dobutamine), 12.8% for dobutamine, and 8.2% for placebo treatment. After 6 months, the mortality rates were 15.3% for levosimendan (p=0.0001 compared with dobutamine and p=0.04 compared with placebo), 39.6% for dobutamine, and 24.7% for placebo treatment. However, it should be noted that these data have not yet been published by a peerreviewed journal.

The Randomized Multicenter Evaluation of Intravenous Levosimendan Efficacy Versus Placebo in the Short-Term Treatment of Decompensated Heart Failure (REVIVE) was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, large-scale study (Packer et al 2005). Patients with acute decompensated heart failure, LVEF<35%, and having resting dyspnea despite intravenous diuretics were included in this study. Patients were randomized to receive either a levosimendan bolus (6-12 µg kg -1 ) followed by a stepped dose regimen of levosimendan (0.1-0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 ) for 24 hours plus standard therapy, or a placebo infusion for 24 hours plus standard therapy. The REVIVE-1 study is the pilot study consisting of the first 100 patients of this study. This pilot study was designed to compare the intensive care unit and hospital stays between levosimendan and placebo groups and to test the feasibility of clinical composite endpoint instead of hemodynamic measurement which was employed as an endpoint in previous studies in this patient group (Garrat et al 2004;Johansson et al 2004). This study concluded that for the patients with acute heart failures, the intensive care unit stay in levosimendan group is 1 day shorter than that of the standard treatment group. This clearly shows that the hospitalization costs may be reduced by adopting levosimendan treatment.

After the completion of the REVIVE-1 enrollment, the REVIVE-2 study enrolled 600 patients (Packer et al 2005). The objective of new endpoints used in this study is to detect the alterations of patients' symptoms and clinical conditions. Thus, the patients were divided in three groups as worsening, stable, and improving according to their clinical picture. In this study, on the fifth day 33% more patients in the levosimendan group had improved and 30% fewer of them had worsened compared with patients in the control group (p=0.015 for both differences). Worsening acute heart failure requiring rescue intravenous therapy developed in 15% of patients in the levosimendan group and 26% of patients in the control group. The secondary endpoint of 90-day allcause mortality rate was 15.1% in the levosimendan group and 11.6% among other control groups.

The Survival of Patients with Acute Heart Failure in Need of Intravenous Inotropic Support Study (SURVIVE) is a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy, prospective, controlled study (Mebazaa 2005;Mebazaa et al 2005). A total of 1327 patients hospitalized for acute decompensated heart failure, LVEF≤30%, not responding to intravenous diuretics and vasodilator therapy were included in the study. The primary endpoint of SURVIVE was all-cause mortality in 180 days, and the study was also designed to demonstrate a 25% lower mortality rate in the levosimendan group than that of the dobutamine group, following a single intravenous infusion. This study is the first trial using mortality as the primary endpoint in evaluating the efficacy (Mebazaa 2005; Levosimendan in heart failure Mebazaa et al 2005). Secondary endpoints for this trial include the number of days alive and out of the hospital during the 180 days of the trial, all-cause mortality during 31 days, cardiovascular mortality during 180 days, and global assessment at 24 hours. Patients were randomized to either dobutamine (minimum dose 5 µg kg -1 min -1 ) or levosimendan bolus (12 µg kg -1 ) followed by a stepped dose regimen of levosimendan (0.1-0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 ). Both treatment groups also received standard care. After 5 days, 2 weeks, 1 month, and 6 months following the study drug infusion, mortality rate in the levosimendan group was reduced by 27%, 14%, 13%, and 6.4%, respectively, compared with that of the dobutamine group. These differences did not reach statistical significance. A secondary endpoint of BNP was significantly reduced in the levosimendan arm compared with the dobutamine arm.


## Tolerability

Levosimendan is generally well tolerated. Most of its adverse effects are dose-related and due to its vasodilator effect (Lehtonen et al 1995). The most frequent adverse events associated with levosimendan include headache (5%), hypotension (5%), dizziness (1%-10%), and nausea (1%-10%) (Nieminen et al 2000;Slawsky et al 2000;Follath et al 2002;Moiseyev et al 2002;Sandel et al 2004). Among laboratory parameters, slight decreases of red blood cell count, hematocrit, and hemoglobin (10%), and, particularly in higher doses group, a slight decrease of serum K levels have been reported (Nieminen et al 2000). Serum creatinine levels were affected positively even among the patients with baseline renal function impairment (Follath et al 2002;Franco et al 2003).

Overall, studies demonstrated that levosimendan did not deteriorate or trigger myocardial ischemia (Follath et al 2002). However, excess reductions of blood pressure may decrease coronary perfusion pressure and provoke ischemia (Cleland et al 2004).

Although less arrhythmia was reported in clinical studies comparing levosimendan and dobutamine with placebo, ventricular tachycardia (25% vs 17%) and atrial fibrillation (8% vs 2%) were more frequent in the levosimendan group compared with the standard treatment group in the REVIVE II study (Nieminen et al 2000;Follath et al 2002;Moiseyev et al 2002;Packer et al 2005). In the SURVIVE study, atrial fibrillation (9.1% vs 6.1%) and ventricular tachycardia (7.9% vs 7.3%) were more frequent in the levosimendan group compared with the dobutamine group (Mebazaa 2005).


## Dose recommendations

If rapid onset of action is desired, 6-24 µg kg -1 min -1 is administered in 10-20 minutes according to the clinical picture of the patient. In patients with systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg, a loading dose should be avoided. An optimum maintenance dose of 0.05-0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 is recommended. In doses above 0.2 µg kg -1 min -1 , adverse events may be seen more frequently (Moiseyev et al 2002). Since the half-life of its metabolites is longer, it was shown that the accumulation of metabolites during prolonged infusions enhances the adverse events. Therefore, infusions longer than 24 hours are not recommended (Kivikko et al 2003).


## Place in clinical practice

Clinical studies have show that the use of levosimendan is safe and effective in postponing heart failure and in heart failure following acute myocardial infarction (Moiseyev et al 2002;Sonntag et al 2004). Although some studies have shown that levosimendan may be used in patients with shock, acute heart failure guidelines published by the European Society of Cardiology recommend its use on patients having symptomatic, low-output heart failure secondary to systolic dysfunction which is not accompanied by severe hypotension (Delle Karth et al 2003; Lehmann et al 2004;Nieminen et al 2005). Use on patients with a systolic blood pressure below 85 mmHg is not recommended (Nieminen et al 2005).


## Conclusion

Levosimendan is a new inodilator agent for the therapy of end-stage heart failure, acting by calcium sensitization; it also causes vasodilatation by opening K channels. However, several recent studies showed different unexpected results, contrary to mechanism of its action. Further clinical trials may help to clarify its effects on mortality and use in clinical practice.

## al 2005 ;
2005Kyrzopoulos et al 2005; Moertl et al 2005; Parissis et al 2005).

## Table 1
1Several aspects concerning levosimendan and guidelines for its current clinical practiceTrial 

Enrollment 

Aim 

Primary endpoint 
Secondary endpoint Selected results 

Conclusion 

Nieminen et al 

Dobutamine: 20 
Define the therapeutic Achieving 

≥1 of the 

Changes in 
Primary endpoint: all levo 
Dosing of levo with a 10-min bolus of 

(2000) 
Levo: 95 (5 different dose 

dose range of levo 

following: 
hemodynamic indices groups 

≥50% vs placebo 

6-24 
µg kg -1 
followed by an infusion of 

groups) 

≥15% increase in SV, 

(HR, PAP, PVR, RAP, 

27% (p<0.001) 

0.05-0.2 
µg kg -1 

min -1 
is well tolerated and 

Placebo: 21 

≥40% increase in CO, 

MBP and total 

leads to favorable hemodynamic effects 

Vehicle: 15 

≥25% decrease in PCWP, peripheral resistance) 
or 
≥50% decrease in 
PCWP during 2 
consecutive measures. 

Slawsky et al 

Levo: 98 

Short-term 
% of patients with an 
The change in SV and SV: levo 56% vs placebo 

Levo causes a rapid dose-dependent 

Placebo: 48 

hemodynamic and 

increase in SV or a 

PCWP over time 

4% (p<0.001)PCWP: 
improvement in hemodynamic function in 

clinical effects of levo 

decrease in PCWP of 

and change in the 
levo 43% vs placebo 15 % 
patients with decompensated heart failure 

≥25% at 6 h 
symptoms of dyspnea (p<0.001) 

or fatigue as assessed Change in SV: levo increased 
by patient and 
13±1 mL vs placebo decreased 

clinician 

-1±2 mL (p<0.001) 

Kivikko et al 

Levo: 98 (for 6 

h) 

Determine whether 

Hemodynamic effects 

CO: levo continuation 
After a 24 h infusion, the hemodynamic 

Placebo: 48 (up to 24 h) 

the hemodynamic 

of levo and metabolite 

increased 0.5±0.2 L min -1 
effects are maintained for at least an 

Levo: 43 

effects of levo are 

(OR-1896) at 24 

h 

vs levo withdrawal 
additional 24 h. In most cases, the infusion 

Placebo: 42 

sustained during 

0.2±0.2 L min -1 

(p=0.333) 
of levo need not to be extended beyond 

continuous infusion 

PCWP: levo continuation 

24 h 

for up to 48 h 

decreased 0.3±0.8 mmHg 

vs levo withdrawal increased 
0±0.8 mmHg (p=0814) 

LIDO 

Levo: 103 

To compared the 

Hemodynamic 

Other 
Levo (28%) vs dobutamine 

Levo improved hemodynamic 

Dobutamine: 100 

effects of levo and 

improvement at the 

hemodynamic 

(15%) achieved 

performance more effectively than 

dobutamine on 

end of infusion 
measures (SV, CI, PAP, hemodynamic endpoint 

dobutamine. This benefit was 

hemodynamic 

(≥30% increase in 

RAP, HR, BP, TPR) 

(p=0.022) 
accompanied by lower mortality in the 

performance and 

CO, 
≥25% decrease 

Mortality at 31 and 

mortality at 180d: levo 
levo group than in the dobutamine group 

clinical outcome 

in PCWP) 

180 d 

(26%) vs dobutamine 

for up to 180 d 

(38%) (p=0.029) 

RUSSLAN 

Levo: 402 

To evaluate the safety 

Hypotension or 

Combined risk of 
Hypotension or ischemia was Levo at doses 0·1-0·2 

µg kg -1 

min -1 
did not 

Different doses groups: 

and efficacy of levo in 

myocardial ischemia 

death or worsening 
similar all groups (p=0.319) induce hypotension or ischemia and 

I: 6 
µg kg -1 

+ 0.1 
µg kg -1 

min -1 
patients with left 

at 6 h 

HF at 6 and 24 h , 

death or worsening HF at 
reduced the risk of worsening HF and death 

II: 12 
µg kg -1 

+0.2 
µg kg -1 

min -1 
ventricular failure 

clinical change at the 
24 h: levo 4% vs placebo 8.8% in patients with left ventricular failure 

III: 24 
µg kg -1 

+0.2 
µg kg -1 

min -1 
complicating AMI 

end of the infusion, 

(p=0.044)mortality at 14d: 

complicating AMI 

IV: 24 
µg kg -1 

+0.4 
µg kg -1 

min -1 

and mortality at 

levo 11.7% vs 19.6% 

Placebo 102 

14 and 180 d 

(p=0.031) 
mortality at 180d: levo 
22.6%, vs placebo 31.4% 
(p=0.053) 

Abbreviations: ADHF, acute decompensated heart failure; AMI, acute myocardial infarction; BP, blood pressure; BNP, B-Type natriuretic peptide; CI, cardiac index; CO, cardiac output; d, days; EF, ejection fraction; h, hours; HF, heart 

failure; HR, heart rate; h, hour; levo, levosimendan; mo, months; TPR, total periferic resistance; PAP, pulmonary artery pressure; PCWP, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure; RAP, right atrial pressure; SV, stroke volume. 


In-hospital mortality in patients with acute decompensated heart failure requiring intravenous vasoactive medications. An analysis from the acute decompensated heart failure national registry (ADHERE). W T Abraham, K F Adams, G C Fonarow, J Am Coll Cardiol. 46Abraham WT, Adams KF, Fonarow GC, et al. 2005. In-hospital mortality in patients with acute decompensated heart failure requiring intravenous vasoactive medications. An analysis from the acute decompensated heart failure national registry (ADHERE). J Am Coll Cardiol, 46:57-64.

Haemodynamic interactions of a new calcium sensitizing drug levosi-mendanand captopril. S Antila, J Eha, M Heinpalu, Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 49Antila S, Eha J, Heinpalu M, et al. 1996.Haemodynamic interactions of a new calcium sensitizing drug levosi-mendanand captopril. Eur J Clin Pharmacol, 49:451-8.

The Ca 2+ -sensitizer levosimendan improves oxidative damage, BNP and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in patients with advanced decompensated heart failure in comparison to dobutamine. C Avgeropoulou, I Andreadou, Sophia Markantonis-Kyroudis, T , Eur J Heart Fail. 7Avgeropoulou C, Andreadou I, Sophia Markantonis-Kyroudis T, et al. 2005.The Ca 2+ -sensitizer levosimendan improves oxidative damage, BNP and pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in patients with advanced decompensated heart failure in comparison to dobutamine. Eur J Heart Fail, 7:882-7.

. Cam Kasikcioglu, Kasikcioglu and Cam

Mechanism of myocardial 'stunning'. Circulation. R Bolli, 82Bolli R. 1990. Mechanism of myocardial 'stunning'. Circulation, 82:723- 38.

Molecular and cellular mechanisms of myocardial stunning. R Bolli, E Marban, Physiol Rev. 79Bolli R, Marban E.1999. Molecular and cellular mechanisms of myocardial stunning. Physiol Rev, 79:609-34.

Effect of baseline or changes in adrenergic activity on clinical outcomes in the β blocker evaluation of survival trial. M R Bristow, H Krause-Steinrauf, R Nuzzo, Circulation. 110Bristow MR, Krause-Steinrauf H, Nuzzo R, et al. 2004.Effect of baseline or changes in adrenergic activity on clinical outcomes in the β blocker evaluation of survival trial. Circulation, 110:1437-42.

A rapid bedside test for Btype peptide predicts treatment outcomes in patients admitted for decompensated heart failure: a pilot study. V Cheng, R Kazanagra, A Garcia, J Am Coll Cardiol. 37Cheng V, Kazanagra R, Garcia A, et al. 2001. A rapid bedside test for B- type peptide predicts treatment outcomes in patients admitted for decompensated heart failure: a pilot study. J Am Coll Cardiol, 37:386- 91.

The heart failure epidemic: exactly how big is it?. Jgf Cleland, A Khand, A Clark, Eur Heart J. 22Cleland JGF, Khand A, Clark A. 2001. The heart failure epidemic: exactly how big is it? Eur Heart J, 22:623-6.

Levosimendan: first in a new class of inodilator for acute and chronic severe heart failure. Jgf Cleland, N Nikitin, J Mcgowan, Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther. 2Cleland JGF, Nikitin N, McGowan J. 2004. Levosimendan: first in a new class of inodilator for acute and chronic severe heart failure. Expert Rev Cardiovasc Ther, 2:9-19.

Plasma norepinephrine as a guide to prognosis in patients with chronic congestive heart failure. J N Cohn, T B Levine, M T Olivari, N Engl J Med. 311Cohn JN, Levine TB, Olivari MT, et al. 1984. Plasma norepinephrine as a guide to prognosis in patients with chronic congestive heart failure. N Engl J Med, 311:819-23.

Do positive inotropic agents adversely affect the survival of patients with chronic congestive heart failure? I: introduction. R J Cody, J Am Coll Cardiol. 12Cody RJ. 1988. Do positive inotropic agents adversely affect the survival of patients with chronic congestive heart failure? I: introduction. J Am Coll Cardiol, 12:559-61.

Survival of patients with a new diagnosis of heart failure: a population based study. M R Cowie, K F Fox, D A Wood, Heart. 83Cowie MR, Fox KF, Wood DA, et al. 2000. Survival of patients with a new diagnosis of heart failure: a population based study. Heart, 83:505-10.

New positive inotropic agents in the treatment of congestive heart failure: mechanisms of action and recent clinical developments. W S Colucci, R F Wright, E Braunwald, N Engl J Med. 314Colucci WS, Wright RF, Braunwald E. 1986. New positive inotropic agents in the treatment of congestive heart failure: mechanisms of action and recent clinical developments. N Engl J Med, 314:349-58.

Evidence-based use of levosimendan in different clinical settings. L De Luca, W S Colucci, M S Nieminen, Eur Heart J. Epub ahead of printDe Luca L, Colucci WS, Nieminen MS, et al. 2006. Evidence-based use of levosimendan in different clinical settings. Eur Heart J, Apr 27; [Epub ahead of print].

Levosimendan improves hemodynamics and coronary flow reserve after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with acute myocardial infarction and left ventricular dysfunction. L De Luca, P Proietti, A Celotto, Am Heart J. 150De Luca L, Proietti P, Celotto A, et al. 2005. Levosimendan improves hemodynamics and coronary flow reserve after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with acute myocardial infarction and left ventricular dysfunction. Am Heart J, 150:563-8.

Hemodynamic effects of a continuous infusion of levosimendan in critically ill patients with cardiogenic shock requiring catecholamines. G Delle Karth, A Buberl, A Geppert, Acta Anaesthesiol Scand. 47Delle Karth G, Buberl A, Geppert A, et al. 2003.Hemodynamic effects of a continuous infusion of levosimendan in critically ill patients with cardiogenic shock requiring catecholamines. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand, 47:1251-56.

Intermittent dobutamine in ambulatory outpatients with chronic cardiac failure. F Dies, M J Krell, P Whitlow, Circulation. 742389SupplDies F, Krell MJ, Whitlow P, et al. 1986. Intermittent dobutamine in ambulatory outpatients with chronic cardiac failure. Circulation, 74(Suppl 2):389.

Heart failure etiology and response to milrinone in decompensated heart failure: results from the OPTIME-CHF study. G M Felker, R L Benza, A B Chandler, J Am Coll Cardiol. 41Felker GM, Benza RL, Chandler AB, et al. 2003. Heart failure etiology and response to milrinone in decompensated heart failure: results from the OPTIME-CHF study. J Am Coll Cardiol, 41:997-1003.

Effect of milrinone on ventricular arrhythmias in congestive heart failure. K J Ferrick, S A Fein, A M Ferrick, Am J Cardiol. 66Ferrick KJ, Fein SA, Ferrick AM, et al. 1990. Effect of milrinone on ventricular arrhythmias in congestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol, 66:431-4.

Levosimendan is efficacious in acute heart failure independent of renal function (abstract). F Franco, F Gonçalves, G Castro, Eur Heart J. 24408SupplFranco F, Gonçalves F, Castro G, et al. 2003.Levosimendan is efficacious in acute heart failure independent of renal function (abstract). Eur Heart J, 24(Suppl):408.

Efficacy and safety of intravenous levosimendan compared with dobutamine in severe low-output heart failure (the LIDO study): a randomised double-blind trial. F Follath, J G Cleland, H Just, Lancet. 360Follath F, Cleland JG, Just H, et al. 2002. Efficacy and safety of intravenous levosimendan compared with dobutamine in severe low-output heart failure (the LIDO study): a randomised double-blind trial. Lancet, 360:196-202.

Development of a comprehensive new endpoint for the evaluation of new treatments for acute decompensated heart failure: results with levosimendan in the REVIVE 1 study. (Abstract). C Garratt, M Packer, W Colucci, Crit Care. 889Suppl 1Garratt C, Packer M, Colucci W, et al. 2004. Development of a comprehensive new endpoint for the evaluation of new treatments for acute decompensated heart failure: results with levosimendan in the REVIVE 1 study. (Abstract). Crit Care, 8 (Suppl 1):89.

Pharmacology of New Agents for Acute Heart Failure Syndromes. M Gheorghiade, J R Teerlink, A Mebazaa, Am J Cardiol. 96Gheorghiade M, Teerlink JR, Mebazaa A. 2005. Pharmacology of New Agents for Acute Heart Failure Syndromes. Am J Cardiol, 96:68-73.

Coronary vasorelaxant effect of levosimendan, a new inodilator with calciumsensitizing properties. N Gruhn, J E Nielsen-Kudsk, S Theilgaard, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 31Gruhn N, Nielsen-Kudsk JE, Theilgaard S, et al. 1998. Coronary vasorelaxant effect of levosimendan, a new inodilator with calcium- sensitizing properties. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 31:741-9.

Immunomodulating therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with chronic heart failure. L Gullestad, H Aass, J G Fjeld, Circulation. 103Gullestad L, Aass H, Fjeld JG, et al. 2001. Immunomodulating therapy with intravenous immunoglobulin in patients with chronic heart failure. Circulation, 103:220-5.

Mechanisms of action of calcium-sensitizing drugs. H Haikala, I B Linden, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 26Haikala H, Linden IB. 1995. Mechanisms of action of calcium-sensitizing drugs. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 26:S10-19.

Calcium sensitivity enhancers. H Haikala, P Pollesello, Drugs. 3Haikala H,Pollesello P. 2000. Calcium sensitivity enhancers. Drugs, 3:1199-205.

The role of cAMP and cGMP-dependent protein kinases in the cardiac actions of the new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan. H Haikala, P Kaheinen, J Levijoki, Cardiovasc Res. 34Haikala H, Kaheinen P, Levijoki J, et al. 1997.The role of cAMP and cGMP-dependent protein kinases in the cardiac actions of the new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan. Cardiovasc Res, 34:536-46.

Systemic and coronary hemodynamic actions and left ventricular functional effects of levosimendan in conscious dogs. C P Harkin, P S Pagel, J P Tessmer, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 26Harkin CP, Pagel PS, Tessmer JP, et al. 1995. Systemic and coronary hemodynamic actions and left ventricular functional effects of levosimendan in conscious dogs. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 26:179- 88.

Myocardial energetics in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. G Hasenfuss, C Holubarsch, H W Heiss, Circulation. 80Hasenfuss G, Holubarsch C, Heiss HW, et al. 1989. Myocardial energetics in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation, 80:51-64.

Influence of the novel inotropic agent levosimendan on isometric tension and calcium cycling in failing human myocardium. G Hasenfuss, B Pieske, M Castell, Circulation. 98Hasenfuss G, Pieske B, Castell M, et al. 1998. Influence of the novel inotropic agent levosimendan on isometric tension and calcium cycling in failing human myocardium. Circulation, 98:2141-7.

Effects of calcium sensitizers on intracellular calcium handling and myocardial energetics. G Hasenfuss, B Pieske, B Kretschmann, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 261SupplHasenfuss G, Pieske B, Kretschmann B, et al. 1995.Effects of calcium sensitizers on intracellular calcium handling and myocardial energetics. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 26(Suppl 1):S45-51.

Intracoronary levosimendan enhances contractile function of stunned myocardium. I N Jamali, J R Kersten, P S Pagel, Anesth Analg. 85Jamali IN, Kersten JR, Pagel PS, et al. 1997. Intracoronary levosimendan enhances contractile function of stunned myocardium. Anesth Analg, 85:23-9.

Levosimendan improves diastolic and systolic function in failing human myocardium. P M Janssen, N Datz, O Zeitz, Eur J Pharmacol. 404Janssen PM, Datz N, Zeitz O, et al. 2000Hasenfuss G. Levosimendan improves diastolic and systolic function in failing human myocardium. Eur J Pharmacol, 404:191-9.

Effect of levosimendan treatment on length of hospital and intensive care stay in the REVIVE I study. S Johansson, M Apajasalo, T Sarapohja, Crit Care. 888Suppl 1Johansson S, Apajasalo M, Sarapohja T, et al. 2004. Effect of levosimendan treatment on length of hospital and intensive care stay in the REVIVE I study. Crit Care, 8(Suppl 1):88.

Levosimendan increases diastolic coronary flow in isolated guinea-pig heart by opening ATP-sensitive potassium channels. P Kaheinen, P Pollesello, J Levijoki, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 37Kaheinen P, Pollesello P, Levijoki J, et al. 2001. Levosimendan increases diastolic coronary flow in isolated guinea-pig heart by opening ATP-sensitive potassium channels. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 37:367-74.

Effects of levosimendan on left ventricular functional remodelling and exercise 1´ntolerance: a tissue doppler study. H A Kasikcioglu, S Unal, Z Tartan, J Int Med Res. 33Kasikcioglu HA, Unal S, Tartan Z, et al. 2005. Effects of levosimendan on left ventricular functional remodelling and exercise 1´ntolerance: a tissue doppler study. J Int Med Res, 33: 397-405.

Adverse consequences of high sympathetic nervous activity in the failing human heart. D M Kaye, J Lefkovits, G L Jennings, J Am Coll Cardiol. 26Kaye DM, Lefkovits J, Jennings GL, et al. 1995. Adverse consequences of high sympathetic nervous activity in the failing human heart. J Am Coll Cardiol, 26:1257-63.

Levosimendan increases diastolic coronary flow in isolated guinea-pig heart by opening ATPsensitive potassium channels. P Kaheinen, P Pollesello, J Levijoki, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 37Kaheinen P, Pollesello P, Levijoki J, et al. 2001.Levosimendan increases diastolic coronary flow in isolated guinea-pig heart by opening ATP- sensitive potassium channels. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 37:367-74.

Pharmacokineticsof levosimendan and its metabolites during and after a 24-hour continuous infusion in patients with severe heart failure. M Kivikko, S Antila, J Eha, Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 40Kivikko M, Antila S, Eha J, et al. 2002a.Pharmacokineticsof levosimendan and its metabolites during and after a 24-hour continuous infusion in patients with severe heart failure. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther, 40:465- 71.

Pharmacodynamics and safety of a new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, and its metabolites during an extended infusion in patients with severe heart failure. M Kivikko, S Antila, J Eha, J Clin Pharmacol. 42Kivikko M, Antila S, Eha J, et al. 2002b. Pharmacodynamics and safety of a new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, and its metabolites during an extended infusion in patients with severe heart failure. J Clin Pharmacol, 42: 43-51

Sustained hemodynamic effects of intravenous levosimendan. M Kivikko, L Lehtonen, W S Colucci, Circulation. 107Kivikko M, Lehtonen L, Colucci WS, et al. 2003. Sustained hemodynamic effects of intravenous levosimendan. Circulation, 107:81-6.

Levosimendan is a mitochondrial K(ATP) channel opener. D M Kopustinskiene, P Pollesello, N E Saris, Eur J Pharmacol. 428Kopustinskiene DM, Pollesello P, Saris NE. 2001. Levosimendan is a mitochondrial K(ATP) channel opener. Eur J Pharmacol, 428:311- 14.

Levosimendan reduces plasma B-type natriuretic peptide and interleukin 6, and improves central hemodynamics in severe heart failure patients. S Kyrzopoulos, S Adamopoulos, J T Parissis, Int J Cardiol. 99Kyrzopoulos S, Adamopoulos S, Parissis JT, et al. 2005. Levosimendan reduces plasma B-type natriuretic peptide and interleukin 6, and improves central hemodynamics in severe heart failure patients. Int J Cardiol, 99:409-13.

Cyclic AMP and the pathogenesis of myocardial injury. J C Lee, S E Downing, Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 27Lee JC, Downing SE. 1980. Cyclic AMP and the pathogenesis of myocardial injury. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol, 27:305- 18.

Levosimendan in patients with cardiogenic shock undergoing surgical revascularization: a case series. A Lehmann, J Lang, J Boldt, Med Sci Monit. 10Lehmann A, Lang J, Boldt J, et al. 2004. Levosimendan in patients with cardiogenic shock undergoing surgical revascularization: a case series. Med Sci Monit, 10:MT89-MT93.

Safety of levosimendan and other calcium sensitizers. L Lehtonen, P Mills-Owens, J Akkila, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 261SupplLehtonen L, Mills-Owens P, Akkila J. 1995. Safety of levosimendan and other calcium sensitizers. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 26 (Suppl 1):70- 6.

Levosimendan in heart failure. Levosimendan in heart failure

Elevated circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor in severe chronic heart failure. B Levine, J Kalman, L Mayer, N Engl J Med. 323Levine B, Kalman J, Mayer L, et al. 1990.Elevated circulating levels of tumor necrosis factor in severe chronic heart failure. N Engl J Med, 323:236-41.

Effects of a new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, on haemodynamics, coronary blood flow and myocardial substrate utilization early after coronary artery bypass grafting. J Lilleberg, M S Nieminen, J Akkila, Eur Heart J. 19Lilleberg J, Nieminen MS, Akkila J, et al. 1998. Effects of a new calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, on haemodynamics, coronary blood flow and myocardial substrate utilization early after coronary artery bypass grafting. Eur Heart J, 19:660-8.

Epidemiology, aetiology, and prognosis of heart failure. J J Mcmurray, S Stewart, Heart. 83McMurray JJ, Stewart S. 2000. Epidemiology, aetiology, and prognosis of heart failure. Heart, 83:596-602.

New therapeutic options in congestive heart failure: Part II. J Mcmurray, M A Pfeffer, Circulation. 105McMurray J, Pfeffer MA. 2002. New therapeutic options in congestive heart failure: Part II. Circulation, 105:2223-8.

The natural history of congestive heart failure: The Framingham study. P A Mckee, W P Castelli, P M Mcnamara, N Engl J Med. 285McKee PA, Castelli WP, McNamara PM, et al.1971.The natural history of congestive heart failure: The Framingham study. N Engl J Med, 285:1441-6.

Cardioprotection: A new paradigm in the management of acute heart failure syndromes. M Maytin, W S Colucci, Am J Cardiol. 96SupplMaytin M, Colucci WS. 2005. Cardioprotection: A new paradigm in the management of acute heart failure syndromes. Am J Cardiol, 96(Suppl):26G-31G.

The SURVIVE-W trial: comparison of dobutamine and levosimendan on survival in acutely decompensated heart failure. A Mebazaa, American Heart Association Scientific SessionsDallas, TXMebazaa A. 2005. The SURVIVE-W trial: comparison of dobutamine and levosimendan on survival in acutely decompensated heart failure. American Heart Association Scientific Sessions, Dallas, TX, November 16 2005.

Randomized clinical trials with levosimendan. A Mebazaa, D Barraud, S Welschbillig, Am J Cardiol. 96SupplMebazaa A, Barraud D, Welschbillig S. 2005. Randomized clinical trials with levosimendan. Am J Cardiol, 96(Suppl):74G-79G.

Effects of intravenous levosimendan on human coronary vasomotor regulation, left ventricular wall stress, and myocardial oxygen uptake. A D Michaels, B Mckeown, M Kostal, Circulation. 111Michaels AD, McKeown B, Kostal M., et al. 2005. Effects of intravenous levosimendan on human coronary vasomotor regulation, left ventricular wall stress, and myocardial oxygen uptake. Circulation, 111:1504-9.

Short-term effects of levosimendan and prostaglandin E1 on hemodynamic parameters and B-type natriuretic peptide levels in patients with decompensated chronic heart failure. D Moertl, R Berger, M Huelsmann, Eur J Heart Fail. 7Moertl D, Berger R, Huelsmann M, et al. 2005. Short-term effects of levosimendan and prostaglandin E1 on hemodynamic parameters and B-type natriuretic peptide levels in patients with decompensated chronic heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail, 7:1156 -63.

Safety and efficacy of a novel calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, in patients with left ventricular failure due to an acute myocardial infarction: a randomized, placebocontrolled, double-blind study (RUSSLAN). V S Moiseyev, P Poder, N Andrejevs, Eur Heart J. 23Moiseyev VS, Poder P, Andrejevs N, et al. 2002. Safety and efficacy of a novel calcium sensitizer, levosimendan, in patients with left ventricular failure due to an acute myocardial infarction: a randomized, placebo- controlled, double-blind study (RUSSLAN). Eur Heart J, 23:1422-32.

Prevalence heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction in the general population. A Mosterd, A W Hoes, M C De Bruyne, Eur Heart J. 20Mosterd A, Hoes AW, de Bruyne MC, et al. 1999. Prevalence heart failure and left ventricular dysfunction in the general population. Eur Heart J, 20:447-55.

Hemodynamic effects of levosimendan added to dobutamine in patients with decompensated advanced heart failure refractory to dobutamine alone. J N Nanas, P Papazoglou, J V Terrovitis, Am J Cardiol. 94Nanas JN, Papazoglou P, Terrovitis JV, et al. 2004. Hemodynamic effects of levosimendan added to dobutamine in patients with decompensated advanced heart failure refractory to dobutamine alone. Am J Cardiol, 94:1329-32.

Efficacy and safety of intermittent, long-term,concomitant dobutamine and levosimendan infusions in severe heart failure refractory to dobutamine alone. J N Nanas, P Papazoglou, E P Tsagalau, Am J Cardiol. 95Nanas JN, Papazoglou P, Tsagalau EP, et al. 2005. Efficacy and safety of intermittent, long-term,concomitant dobutamine and levosimendan infusions in severe heart failure refractory to dobutamine alone. Am J Cardiol, 95:768-71.

Hemodynamic and neurohumoral effects of continuous infusion of levosimendan in patients with congestive heart failure. M S Nieminen, J Akkila, G Hasenfuss, J Am Coll Cardiol. 36Nieminen MS, Akkila J, Hasenfuss G, et al. 2000. Hemodynamic and neurohumoral effects of continuous infusion of levosimendan in patients with congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol, 36:1903-12.

The Task Force on Acute Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology. Executive summary of the guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of acute heart failure. M S Nieminen, M Bohm, M R Cowie, Eur Heart J. 26Nieminen MS, Bohm M, Cowie MR, et al. 2005. The Task Force on Acute Heart Failure of the European Society of Cardiology. Executive summary of the guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of acute heart failure. Eur Heart J, 26: 384-416.

Effects of intravenous levosimendan on plasma neurohormone levels in patients with heart failure: relation to hemodynamic response. J M Nicklas, J C Monsur, B E Bleske, Am J Cardiol. 83Nicklas JM, Monsur JC, Bleske BE. 1999. Effects of intravenous levosimendan on plasma neurohormone levels in patients with heart failure: relation to hemodynamic response. Am J Cardiol, 83:I12-I15.

Evidence for mitochondrial K + channels and their role in cardioprotection. B O&apos;rourke, Circ Res. 94O'Rourke B. 2004. Evidence for mitochondrial K + channels and their role in cardioprotection. Circ Res, 94:420-32.

The search for the ideal positive inotropic agent. M Packer, N Engl J Med. 329Packer M. 1993.The search for the ideal positive inotropic agent. N Engl J Med, 329:201-2.

REVIVE II: Multicenter placebo-controlled trial of levosimendan on clinical status in acutely decompensated heart failure. M Packer, American Heart Association Scientific SessionsDallas, TXPacker M, et al. 2005. REVIVE II: Multicenter placebo-controlled trial of levosimendan on clinical status in acutely decompensated heart failure. American Heart Association Scientific Sessions, Dallas, TX, November 14 2005.

Survival in congestive heart failure during treatment with drugs with positive inotropic actions. M Packer, C V Leier, Circulation. 75Suppl 4Packer M, Leier CV. 1987. Survival in congestive heart failure during treatment with drugs with positive inotropic actions. Circulation, 75 (Suppl 4):55-63.

Levosimendan enhances left ventricular systolic and diastolic function in conscious dogs with pacing-induced cardiomyopathy. P S Pagel, M F Mcgough, D A Hettrick, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 29Pagel PS, McGough MF, Hettrick DA, et al. 1997. Levosimendan enhances left ventricular systolic and diastolic function in conscious dogs with pacing-induced cardiomyopathy. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 29:563- 73.

Effects of levosimendan on circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines and soluble apoptosis mediators in patients with decompensated advanced heart failure. J T Parissis, S Adamopoulos, C Antoniades, Am J Cardiol. 93Parissis JT, Adamopoulos S, Antoniades C, et al. 2004.Effects of levosimendan on circulating pro-inflammatory cytokines and soluble apoptosis mediators in patients with decompensated advanced heart failure. Am J Cardiol, 93:1309-12.

Effects of levosimendan on markers of left ventricular diastolic function and neurohormonal activation in patients with advanced heart failure. J T Parissis, F Panou, D Farmakis, Am J Cardiol. 96Parissis JT, Panou F, Farmakis D, et al. 2005. Effects of levosimendan on markers of left ventricular diastolic function and neurohormonal activation in patients with advanced heart failure. Am J Cardiol, 96:423-26.

Comparison of the vasorelaxing effect of cromakalim and the new inodilator, levosimendan,in human isolated portal vein. J Pataricza, J Hohn, A Petri, J Pharm Pharmacol. 52Pataricza J, Hohn J, Petri A, et al. 2000.Comparison of the vasorelaxing effect of cromakalim and the new inodilator, levosimendan,in human isolated portal vein. J Pharm Pharmacol, 52:213-17.

Calcium sensitizer agents: A new class of inotropic agents in the treatment of decompensated heart failure. S V Perrone, E J Kaplinsky, Int J Cardiol. 103Perrone SV, Kaplinsky EJ. 2005. Calcium sensitizer agents: A new class of inotropic agents in the treatment of decompensated heart failure. Int J Cardiol, 103:248-55.

Activation of the cardiac interleukin-6 system in advanced heart failure. G Plenz, Z F Song, Tdt Tjan, Eur J Heart Fail. 3Plenz G, Song ZF, Tjan TDT, et al. 2001. Activation of the cardiac interleukin-6 system in advanced heart failure. Eur J Heart Fail, 3:415- 21.

The pro-apoptotic serum activity is an independent mortality predictor of patients with heart failure. L Rossig, S Fichtlscherer, C Heeschen, Eur Heart J. 25Rossig L, Fichtlscherer S, Heeschen C, et al. 2004. The pro-apoptotic serum activity is an independent mortality predictor of patients with heart failure. Eur Heart J, 25:1620-5.

A meta-analysis on the safety of the calcium sensitizing agent levosimendan. E P Sandell, E Wesby-Van Swaay, P Põder, Heart Failure Update Meeting. Sandell EP, Wesby-van Swaay E, Põder P, et al. 2004. A meta-analysis on the safety of the calcium sensitizing agent levosimendan. Heart Failure Update Meeting (European Society of Cardiology);

New insights into the pathophysiological role for cytokines in heart failure. S Sasayama, A Matsumori, Y Kihara, Cardiovasc Res. 42Sasayama S, Matsumori A, Kihara Y. 1999. New insights into the patho- physiological role for cytokines in heart failure. Cardiovasc Res, 42:557-64.

Basic mechanisms in heart failure: the cytokine hypothesis. Y Seta, K Shan, B Bozkurt, J Card Fail. 3Seta Y, Shan K, Bozkurt B, et al. 1996. Basic mechanisms in heart failure: the cytokine hypothesis. J Card Fail, 3: 243-9.

Acute hemodynamic and clinical effects of levosimendan in patients with severe heart failure. M T Slawsky, W S Colucci, S S Gottlieb, Circulation. 102for the Study InvestigatorsSlawsky MT, Colucci WS, Gottlieb SS, et al, for the Study Investigators.2000. Acute hemodynamic and clinical effects of levosimendan in patients with severe heart failure. Circulation, 102: 2222-7.

Effects of levosimendan on cardiac arrhythmia: Electrophysiologic and ambulatory electrocardiographic findings in phase II and phase III clinical studies in cardiac failure. B N Singh, J Lilleberg, E P Sandell, Am J Cardiol. 83Singh BN, Lilleberg J, Sandell EP, et al. 1999. Effects of levosimendan on cardiac arrhythmia: Electrophysiologic and ambulatory electrocardiographic findings in phase II and phase III clinical studies in cardiac failure. Am J Cardiol, 83:16-20.

Beneficial effects of pentoxifylline in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and carvedilol. D Skudicky, A Bergemann, K Sliwa, Circulation. 103Skudicky D, Bergemann A, Sliwa K, et al. 2001. Beneficial effects of pentoxifylline in patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy treated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors and carvedilol. Circulation, 103:1083-8.

Myofibrillar Ca 2+ sensitization predominantly enhances function and mechanical efficiency of stunned myocardium. L K Soei, L M Sassen, D S Fan, Circulation. 90Soei LK, Sassen LM, Fan DS, et al. 1994. Myofibrillar Ca 2+ sensitization predominantly enhances function and mechanical efficiency of stunned myocardium. Circulation, 90:959-69.

The calcium sensitizer levosimendan improves the function of stunned myocardium after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in acute myocardial ischemia. S Sonntag, S Sundberg, L A Lehtonen, J Am Coll Cardiol. 43Sonntag S, Sundberg S, Lehtonen LA, et al. 2004. The calcium sensitizer levosimendan improves the function of stunned myocardium after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in acute myocardial ischemia. J Am Coll Cardiol, 43:2177-82.

Integrated pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the novel calcium sensitizer levosimendan as assesed by systolic time intervals. S Sundberg, S Antila, H Scheinin, Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 36Sundberg S, Antila S, Scheinin H, et al. 1998. Integrated pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of the novel calcium sensitizer levosimendan as assesed by systolic time intervals. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther, 36:629-35.

Haemodynamic interactions between the novel calcium sensitiser levosimendan and isosorbide-5-mononitrate in healthy subjects. S Sundberg, L Lehtonen, Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 55Sundberg S, Lehtonen L. 2000. Haemodynamic interactions between the novel calcium sensitiser levosimendan and isosorbide-5-mononitrate in healthy subjects. Eur J Clin Pharmacol, 55:793-9.

Epidemiologic aspects of heart failure. G C Sutton, Am Heart J. 120Sutton GC. 1990. Epidemiologic aspects of heart failure. Am Heart J, 120:1538-40.

. Cam Kasikcioglu, Kasikcioglu and Cam

Levosimendan improves left ventricular systolic and diastolic performance at rest and during exercise after heart failure. H Tachibana, H Cheng, T Ukai, Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 288Tachibana H, Cheng H, Ukai T, et al. 2005. Levosimendan improves left ventricular systolic and diastolic performance at rest and during exercise after heart failure. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol, 288:H914-H922.

Electrophysiologic effects of a calcium sensitizer inotrope levosimendan administered intravenously in patients with normal cardiac function. L Toivonen, M Viitasalo, S Sundberg, J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 35Toivonen L,Viitasalo M, Sundberg S, et al. 2000. Electrophysiologic effects of a calcium sensitizer inotrope levosimendan administered intravenously in patients with normal cardiac function. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol, 35:664-9.

Proinflammatory cytokine levels in patients with depressed left ventricular ejection fraction: a report from the studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD). G Torre-Amione, S Kapadia, C Benedict, J Am Coll Cardiol. 27Torre-Amione G, Kapadia S, Benedict C, et al. 1996. Proinflammatory cytokine levels in patients with depressed left ventricular ejection fraction: a report from the studies of left ventricular dysfunction (SOLVD). J Am Coll Cardiol, 27:1201-6.

Interleukin-6 spillover in the peripheral circulation increases with the severity of heart failure, and the high plasma level of interleukin-6 is an important prognostic predictor in patients with congestive heart failure. T Tsutamoto, T Hisanaga, A Wada, J Am Coll Cardiol. 31Tsutamoto T, Hisanaga T, Wada A, et al. 1998. Interleukin-6 spillover in the peripheral circulation increases with the severity of heart failure, and the high plasma level of interleukin-6 is an important prognostic predictor in patients with congestive heart failure. J Am Coll Cardiol, 31:391-8.

Levosimendan use reduces matrix metalloproteinase-2 in patients with decompensated heart failure. D N Tziakas, G K Chalikias, H I Hatzinikolaou, Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 19Tziakas DN, Chalikias GK, Hatzinikolaou HI, et al. 2005. Levosimendan use reduces matrix metalloproteinase-2 in patients with decompensated heart failure. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther, 19:399-402.

Myocardial efficiency during calcium sensitization with levosimendan: a noninvasive study with positron emission tomography and echocardiography in healthy volunteers. H Ukkonen, M Saraste, J Akkila, Clin Pharmacol Ther. 61Ukkonen H, Saraste M, Akkila J, et al. 1997. Myocardial efficiency during calcium sensitization with levosimendan: a noninvasive study with positron emission tomography and echocardiography in healthy volunteers. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 61:596-607.

Myocardial efficiency during levosimendan infusion in congestive heart failure. H Ukkonen, M Saraste, J Akkila, Clin Pharmacol Ther. 68Ukkonen H, Saraste M, Akkila J, et al. 2000. Myocardial efficiency during levosimendan infusion in congestive heart failure. Clin Pharmacol Ther, 68:522-31.

Levosimendan, a novel Ca 2 sensitizer, activates the glibenclamide-sensitive K-channel in rat arterial myocytes. H Yokoshiki, Y Katsube, M Sunagawa, Eur J Pharmacol. 333Yokoshiki H, Katsube Y, Sunagawa M, et al. 1997.Levosimendan, a novel Ca 2 sensitizer, activates the glibenclamide-sensitive K-channel in rat arterial myocytes. Eur J Pharmacol, 333:249-59.

Vasodilating mechanism of levosimendan. H Yokoshiki, N Sperelakis, Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 17Yokoshiki H, Sperelakis N. 2003.Vasodilating mechanism of levosimendan. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther, 17:111-13.

Comparison of the effect of levosi-mendan,or dobutamine or placebo in chronic low output decompen-sated heart failure. CAlcium Sensitizer or Inotrope or NOne in low output heart failure (CASINO) study. Program and abstracts of the European Society of Cardiology. M N Zairis, C Apostolatos, F Anastassiadis, Heart Failure Update. Zairis MN, Apostolatos C, Anastassiadis F, et al. 2004. Comparison of the effect of levosi-mendan,or dobutamine or placebo in chronic low output decompen-sated heart failure. CAlcium Sensitizer or Inotrope or NOne in low output heart failure (CASINO) study. Program and abstracts of the European Society of Cardiology, Heart Failure Update 2004; June 12-15, Wroclaw, Poland.