# Radiochemical Approach to the JCO Criticality Accident in Tokai-mura, 1999 -An Overview of the Radiochemistry Group

CorpusID: 1060220
 
tags: #Medicine, #Environmental_Science, #Chemistry

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27621da6ea04301818711bd8c15a7bae893e2db1](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/27621da6ea04301818711bd8c15a7bae893e2db1)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Radiochemical Approach to the JCO Criticality Accident in Tokai-mura, 1999 -An Overview of the Radiochemistry Group
2001

Kazuhisa Komura komurak@po.incl.ne.jp 
Leader of Monbusho Research Group for the Environmental Impact of the JCO Criticality Accident


Low Level Radioactivity Laboratory
Kanazawa University
Wake, Tatsunokuchi923-1224IshikawaJAPAN

Radiochemical Approach to the JCO Criticality Accident in Tokai-mura, 1999 -An Overview of the Radiochemistry Group

J. RADIAT. RES
422001*Corresponding author:


## INTRODUCTION

At 10:35 on September 30,1999, a criticality accident occurred in the precipitation tank of the uranium conversion building of JCO in Tokai-mura, Japan, located about 120 km north-east of Tokyo. This kind of accident was not expected even by nuclear engineers as well as nuclear and radio-chemists. The total number of fission events during 20 hours was evaluated to be 2.5 × 10 18 by analyses of the fission products in the uranium solution in the precipitation tank 1) . In spite of the best possible medical care, two workers who were severely exposed to fission neutrons and gamma-rays, died 3 and 7 months after the accident.

Within one week after the accident, apart from the actions by a governmental Investigation Committee, two investigation teams were organized to evaluate the environmental impacts of the accident and to assess the radiation effects on the local residents. A brief history and results obtained by the first group are overviewed in this report together with further tasks which remain to be performed in the near future.


## ORGANIZATION OF RESEARCH GROUP

On October 2, an urgent E-mail massage was issued from researchers of the Meteorological Research Institute (MRI) in Tsukuba to the participants of The 1 st Summer School on Environmental Radioactivity and Radiation 3) held on July 28~30, 1999 at the Low Level Radioactivity Laboratory (LLRL), Kanazawa University. In this message, they emphasized the importance of an investigation to assess the environmental impact of the JCO criticality accident. This idea originated from experiences in a similar accident that occurred at the former Power and Nuclear Fuel Development Company (PNC) in Tokai-mura in March, 1997. They detected 134 Cs and 137 Cs derived from an accident in an airborne dust sample collected at Tsukuba, located at about 60 km southwest of PNC 4) .

On October 4, the mailing list for the investigation group of the JCO accident was opened by LLRL. On the other hands, the president of the Radiation Research Society of Japan (Prof. M. Sasaki), started negotiation with the Ministry of Education, Science, Sports and Culture of Japan (Monbusho), Nuclear Safety Commission of Japan (NSCJ), Japanese Science and Technology Agency (STA) and Tokai-mura town office to initiate scientific research by organizing a university investigation team. More than 20 proposals were sent to him by October 6. The investigation team was organized in two groups: the first one which was to evaluate the environmental impact of the JCO accident, consisted mainly of radiochemists (environmental research group); the second one which was to assess the radiation effects on residents, consisted of radiation biologists (biological research group).

The environmental research group headed by the author (K. Komura) was composed of 9 principal members from 7 universities and 40 collaborators from 11 universities, 5 national institutes and 2 local governmental institutes. On the other hand, the biological research group headed by Prof. Sasaki consisted of 3 principal members of 3 universities and 3 collaborators from 1 university and 2 national institutes. The proposal was accepted by Monbusho on October 22, 1999. More than 600 E-mail massages were exchanged during 12 months after the JCO accident through mailing lists organized by LLRL and MRI.


## SAMPLING CAMPAIGN

A brief history of the environmental research group is summarized in Table 1. Six sampling campaigns at the JCO campus were conducted before February of 2000. Most of our requests were accepted by the JCO, though the sampling time was limited to only 3~4 hours in all cases.

The main object of the survey was the collection of appropriate samples to assess the environmental impact of the accident. The samples collected at the JCO campus were soils, plants, reagents at the laboratory, ceramics, fluorescent lamps etc. Beside sampling, various kinds of investigations were conducted, such as in-situ gamma spectrometry using a portable Ge detector, a beta-ray survey along the building walls and the boundary fence, and neutron measurement using 3 He counter.     During the 1 st and 2 nd JCO survey campaigns, a number of environmental samples were collected in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi within 7 km from the JCO site. The total effort in these sampling campaigns exceeded 60 man-days. The samples collected were sugar, table salt, a dry battery, stainless-steel products, coins, gold and silver items, fluorescent lamps, steel and iron products, ceramics, fertilizers, matches etc. Over 400 samples were collected with the courtesy of the JCO, town offices of Tokai-mura and Naka-machi and residents in both towns. Details of the sampling points for stainless-steel, gold items and table salts are illustrated in Figs. 1, 2 and 3. The main research activities conducted by each groups are summarized in Table 2.


## PURPOSE OF MEASUREMENTS MADE BY THE ENVIRONMENTAL


## RESEARCH GROUP

Immediately after the outbreak of the accident, JCO, JAERI (Japan) and JNC (Japan) conducted intensive monitoring actions to evaluate the neutron and gamma-ray doses. The Ibaraki prefectural Institute of Public Health and Environmental Radioactivity conducted monitoring of vegetables and surface soils. The number of fission events that occurred during 20 hr before the cease of the criticality was evaluated by the JAERI team using a uranium solution collected from the precipitation tank in the Uranium Conversion Building. They also measured the concentration of neutron-induced radionuclides in the stainless-steel net of the cooling tower located 1.8 m from the precipitation tank to evaluate slow and fast-neutron fluence. These measurements were conducted under the supervision of governmental authorities. Their data were adopted in the official report of committee 1,2) .

On the other hand, our team, which was composed of members of a number of universities as well as national and prefectural institutes, tried to assess the environmental impact of the accident from NGO-like policy. A variety of techniques were applied, such as in-situ Ge spectrometry 6) , gamma-and beta-ray measurements of neutron-induced nuclides and fission products in various samples collected in the JCO campus and in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi [7][8][9][10][11][12][13][14][15] , TL measurement 16) etc. The measured data were used for theoretical simulation based on neutron transfer model 12,17,18) . It is also noted that the uranium isotopic ratio in surface soils and plant leaves were measured to assess the possibility of leakage of 235 U-enriched uranium 19,20) .


## TOPICAL RESULTS OBTAINED BY THE ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH GROUP

(a) Evaluation of the total fission events by passive in-situ gamma spectrometry using a portable Ge detector 7) In-situ Ge spectrometry is known to be the most powerful method for the rapid identification of radionuclides released by nuclear accidents. It is unbelievable that no spectrometry attempt was conducted immediately after the accident, though many portable Ge systems are equipped at JAERI, JNC and/or Ibaraki Prefecture for emergency cases of nuclear accidents.

On October 26 (2 nd survey of JCO) an in-situ measurement by a portable Ge detector was first performed at the JCO campus by university group members. The Ge detector was set at the top of the northwest corner of a shielding wall made of sandbags heaped up around the Uranium Conversion Building. In this measurement they detected intense γ -ray peaks from 140 La in radioactive equilibrium with precursor 140 Ba (half-life 12.75 d). They invented a very sophisticated method to estimate the total fission events (TFE) using the fission yield of 140 Ba, the emission probability of γ -rays from 140 La and the detection efficiency of the Ge detector. This technique was applied more comprehensively in a 3 rd survey (November 9). Thus-estimated TFE was (3.1 ± 0.4) × 10 18 with 3σ of uncertainty by using γ -rays from 95 Zr, 103 Ru and 140 La-140 Ba. This value is in fairly good agreement with the value obtained by a direct measurement of a uranium solution 1,2) .


## (b) Measurement of neutron-induced nuclides in gold items, stainless-steel products, and table salts

It seemed most important to evaluate the range-dose relationship. In order to evaluate this, various neutron-induced nuclides were measured at many laboratories of research groups for the samples collected by the 1 st and 2 nd sampling campaigns.

Among the nuclides measured, 198 Au induced by 197 Au (n,γ ) 198 Au was found to be the most useful to assess the range-dose relation, because of the high neutron-capture cross section of 197 Au (99 barns for thermal neutrons) and the appropriate half-life of 198 Au (2.7 d). Measurements of gold samples were performed by using extremely low-background Ge detectors set in the Ogoya Underground Laboratory 21) . As a result, 198 Au induced by the JCO criticality accident was detected up to 1400m from the JCO campus. Also the production rate of 198 Au could be well reproduced by a theoretical calculation based on the DOT-3.5 code 12) .

The range-dose relation was also measured for the slow neutron product, 51 Cr, in stainlesssteel samples collected from a range of 130-450m 9,18) and a fast neutron product, 32 P, induced by 35 Cl (n, α) 32 P and/or 32 S(n, p) 32 P reactions in table salt and sulfur containing reagent collected from a range of 70 to 360 m from the site 11) . The result of 32 P showed a strong directional dependence on the fast neutron fluence in a close vicinity (130-170 m) extended in the south-west direction. This observation was supported by beta-ray survey along the concrete fence boundary (Matsuzawa, T., private communication, 1999). These facts indicated that fast neutrons were shielded by the nearest buildings and some other materials between the precipitation tank and the sampling points (see Fig. 1   and a calculation by the DOT 3.5 Model. Measurement of neutron-induced nuclides were made by many groups: soils 14,15) , chemical reagents 13) , gas cylinder 22) , stainless steel net 23) and table salt 24,25) .

(c) Visualization of the distribution of radioactivity in plant leaves using an imaging plate 26) An imaging plate was applied to visualize the distribution of radionuclides in plant leaves. By this technique it was found that the concentration of radioactivity is higher in the veins of leaves. By gamma-ray measurements, 131 I, 133 I, 137 Cs and 140 Ba-140 La were detected in these samples. All of these nuclides detected are volatile, or descendant of short-lived gaseous products 137 Xe and 140 Xe, probably leaked through an HEPA filter of the Uranium Conversion Building. Besides fission products, 32 P was detected by a radiochemical analysis, followed by low-background beta-ray counting at the Ogoya Underground Laboratory. The existence of 32 P indicates in-situ production by either 31 P(n,γ ) 32 P or 32 S(n,p) 32 P reactions from phosphorus and/or sulfur in the leaf.

(4) Discovery of 235 U-enriched uranium leacage 19,20) One of the interesting results is the finding of 235 U-enriched uranium in surface soils and plants collected inside and outside of the JCO campus. The maximum value of the 235 U/ 238 U isotopic ratio observed was 0.0218 19) , which is 3-times higher than 0.0072 of natural uranium. Contamination by 235 U was also confirmed by non-destructive gamma spectrometry (see Fig. 5). The leakage of enriched 235 U is considered to be not by the criticality accident, but by some other accidents that occurred before.


## IMPORTANCE OF A NUMBER OF LOW-BACKGROUND COUNTING FACILITIES


## AND OF INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION

As mentioned above, more than 400 environmental samples were collected, mostly during the 1 st and 2 nd sampling campaigns. These samples were distributed to 5~7 groups for gamma-ray measurements, mainly by Ge detectors. Unfortunately, the number of Ge detectors available to the environmental radioactivity group was too low (probably less than 30 Ge detectors); therefore, many of the samples could not be measured before the decay-out of short-lived nuclides. Furthermore, the background count of most of the Ge detectors are rather high for measuring the extremely low-level rationuclides produced by the accident. Without an extremely low-background Ge system and Si beta-ray counter in the Ogoya Underground Laboratory 27) , the detection of 198 Au in gold samples collected from more than 500 m distance and 32 P in table salts could not be detected. At least 3 to 5 ultra-low-background counting facilities like Ogoya should be constructed at various locations in Japan to prepare for future nuclear accidents.

Scientist of EC-JRC-IRMM in Belgium (IRMM) belonging to the European Commission offered to measure stainless-steel samples exposed by the JCO accident. In IRMM, 4 extremely low-background Ge systems are installed in an underground laboratory at 500 meters water equivalent of depth 27) . Before sending the samples, a preliminary experiment was made to assess the contribution of cosmic-ray neutrons during 12 hrs of air-flight from Japan to Belgium. The productions of 51 Cr and 60 Co during flight were found to be negligibly low, even if the samples were not wrapped in cadmium sheet to suppress the contribution of cosmic-ray neutrons. The stainless-steel samples were sent to IRMM in January of 2000. The results of 51 Cr and 60 Co measurements will be published in the near future 28) . This kind of international collaboration should be organized for future nuclear accidents like in the case of JCO. 


## OUR REMAINING TASKS CONCERNING THE JCO ACCIDENT

Although most short-lived nuclides induced by the JCO accident have already decayed out, some nuclides with a half-life longer than several hundred days still remain at detectable levels in the soil, fluorescence lamps, coins, stainless-steel products etc., though the activity levels are expected to be extremely low, and can hardly be detected without using an ultra-low-background counting system. Candidates of residual nuclides expected to be detectable in the JCO samples are summarized in Table 3. As an example, the gamma-ray spectrum of a soil sample measured 14 months after the accident is shown in Fig. 5, which clearly shows the neutron-induced 54 Mn, 65 Zn, 60 Co, 134 Cs, 152 Eu, 154 Eu and 155 Eu and fission product 137 Cs. Most of the 137 Cs may be derived from past global fallout, but partly derived from the leakage of the short-lived precursor 137 Xe. Gamma-ray peaks from 235 U indicate a leakage of 235 U-enriched uranium, as mentioned above. The measurements of long-lived nuclides are still considered to be very important to assess an accident. Some radionuclides cannot be detected without radiochemical purification before a measurement. Fig. 6 shows the effectiveness of chemical separation in the case of a 54 Mn measurement in a soil sample.

Except for uranium solution, no sample could be collected from the Uranium Conversion Building, because the building is under the control of judicial police. Details of the neutron fluence, energy spectrum and directional dependence of neutron emission, which are most essential to from uranium precipitation vessel. The sample was measured by an ultra-low-background well-type Ge detector in the Ogoya Underground Laboratory.

assess more details of the accident, will be obtained by analyses of samples collected directly in the Uranium Conversion Building. The samples of concern are cores of a concrete wall, ceiling and floor, fluorescent lamps, door knobs, electric wires and stainless-steel products at various distances and direction from the precipitation tank.

## Fig. 1 .
1Sampling points of stainless-steel samples in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi.

## Fig. 2 .
2Sampling points of gold items in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi.

## Fig. 3 .
3Sampling points of table salts in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jrr/article-abstract/42/Suppl/S17/932172 by guest on 26 July 2018


of Ref. 10). The range-dose (activity) relations obtained by 198 Au, 51Cr and 32 P measurements are compared inFig. 4together with the result of the neutron counter

## Fig. 4 .
4Distance-dose (activity) relations of 198 Au (340-1400m), 51 Cr (70-270m), 32 P (70-360m) and neutron counter (90-2000m).

## Fig. 5 .
5Gamma-ray spctrrum 14 months after the criticality accident for soil collected 6m from the accident. T: thorium series nuclides, U: uranium series nuclides.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jrr/article-abstract/42/Suppl/S17/932172 by guest on 26 July 2018

## Fig. 6 .
6Effectiveness of chemical separation for the measurement of extremely low-level 54 Mn in soil sample at 12m

## Table 1 .
1Diary of the environmental research group.Date 
Actions of research group 

7-Oct-99 
1st survey in JCO campus 
8-Oct-99 
Sampling in Tokai-Mura and Naka-Machi 

15-Oct-99 
Presentation of preliminary results in annual meeting of Japan Society of 
Nuclear and Radiochemiical Sciences. 

15-Oct-99 
Press conference at Tsukuba concerning Monbusho Research Group on 
the JOC accident 

22-Oct-99 
Courtesy visit to Monbusho, STA and Atomic Safety Committee 
23-Oct-99 
2nd survey in JCO campus 
24-Oct-99 
Sampling in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi 
9-Nov-99 
3rd survey in JCO campus (sampling and In-situ gamma ray measurement 
27-Nov-99 
4th survey in JCO campus 
28-Nov-99 
Sampling in Tokai-mura and Naka-machi 
11-12. Dec. 99 
1st meeting on JCO research group at Tatsunokuchi 
14-Dec-14 
Due date of paper for JER 
18-Dec-99 
Recovoring of gold samples set in JCO 
23-Dec-99 
Send revised version of paper to Baxter 
24-Dec-99 
Mr. Ouchi has died 
26-Dec-99 
Funeral of Mr. Ouchi 
22-Jan-00 
5th survey in JCO campus 
12-Feb-00 
6th survey in JCO campus 



## Table 2 .
2Task sharing of the environmental radioactivity group. Tsukuba U., Aich Med. Coll.Purpose of 
Technique or Sample 
Research group 
Method, Nuclides, Detector 
Measurement 

Dose survey on road 
Ibaraki National Coll. 
GM-counter 

Dose survey of building 
Hiroshima Univ. 
NaI (Tl) survey meter 
Dose 
wall or boundary fence 

Ceramics 
Niigata Univ., Hiroshima U. 
TL meas 
Sugar 
NIRS 
ESR meas 

Fission number 
In-situ Ge measurement 
Tohoku U., Kanazawa U., 
FP by portable Ge 
Theoretical 
Neutron survey and 
Kyoto U., Hiroshima U. ERI 
Model calculation 
calculation 
activation data 

Soil 
Kanazawa U., Hiroshima U., 
all radioactive nuclides by Ge 
NIRS 

Concrete 
Kanazawa U., Tohoku U. 
all radioactive nuclides by Ge 

Table salt 
Kanazawa U., Tohoku U. 
32 P by Si b counter 

Tsukuba U. 
36 Cl by AMS 

Reagent 
Kanazawa U., Tohoku U., 
all radioactive nuclides by Ge 
Tsukuba U., Aich Med. Coll. 
Neutron fluence by 
Hiroshima U., Kanazawa U., 
activation data 
Stainless steel 
Aich Med. Coll., HADES 
51 Cr, 58 Co, 60 Co, 54 Mn by Ge 
(Belgium) 

Gold items 
Kanazawa U., Tohoku U. 

198 

Au by Ge 
Coins 
Kanazawa U., (NIRS) 
65 Zn, 110m Ag, 58 Co by Ge 

Fluorescent lamp 
Kanazawa U. 

152 

Eu, 122 Sb etc. by Ge 
Human hair 
Kanazawa U., (NIRS) 
32 P by Si β counter 

Plant leaves 
Ibaraki U., NIRS 
32 P and FP etc. 

Airborne dust 
Meteorol. Res. Inst., NIRS, 
Fissio Product by proportional 
Natl. Inst. Env. Sci. 
counter or Ge 

Leak of radioactivity Soil 
NIRS, Natl. Inst. Env. Sci., 

235 

U/ 238 U by ICP-MS 
Kanazawa U. 

Plant leaves 
Ibaraki U. 

3 

H by LSC 



## Table 3 .
3Candidates of radionuclides expected to be still detectable in environmental samples.Product 
Half-life 
Major radiation 
Production 
Sample 
γ -ray energy (abundance) 
Reaction 

3 H 
12.33 y 
β 18 keV 
6 Li (n, α) 
Li battery 

14 

C 
5730 y 
β 156 keV 
14 N (n, p) 
Reagent, Fertilizer 
22 Na 
2.60 y 
1275 (99.94) 

23 

Na (n, 2n) 
NaCl 
36 Cl 
3 × 10 5 y 
β 709 keV 
35 Cl (n, γ ) 
NaCl 

54 

Mn 
312 d 
834 (99.978) 

55 

Fe (n, p) 
Soil, Iron product 

55 

Fe 
2.73 y 
X ray 
54 Fe (n, γ ) 
Iron product 
60 Co 
5.27 y 
1173 (99.86), 1332 (99.98) 

59 

Co (n, γ ) 
Soil, SS Nickel coin 

63 

Ni 
100 y 
X-ray 
63 Cu (n, p) 
Copper wire 
65 Zn 
244.3 d 
1115 (50.75) 
64 Zn (n, γ ) 
Soil, Iron sheet 
109 Cd 
462.6 d 
X-ray 
108 Cd (n, γ ) 
Reagent 

108m 

Ag 
418 y 
434 (90), 614 (90), 723 (90) 
107 Ag (n, γ ) 
Coin, Silver product 

110m 

Ag 
249.9 d 
648 (94.74), 885 (72.86) 
109 Ag (n, γ ) 
Coin, Silver product 
119m Sn 
293 d 
X-ray 

118 

Sn (n, γ ) 
Tin plate, Tinware 
134 Cs 
2.06 y 
605 (97.6) 

133 

Cs (n, γ ) 
Soil, reagent 
137 Cs 
30.0 y 
662 (85.2) 
Fission 
Soil 

152 

Eu 
13.33 y 
122 (29.24), 344 (27.0) 

151 

Eu (n, γ ) 
Soil, Fluorescent lamp 

154 

Eu 
8.593 y 
123 (40.6), 1274 (35) 

153 

Eu (n, γ ) 
Soil, Fluorescent lamp 

155 

Eu 
4.76 y 
105 (21.2) 
154 Sm (n, γ ) 
Soil, Fluorescent lamp 
Fission 


Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/jrr/article-abstract/42/Suppl/S17/932172 by guest on 26 July 2018
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThe author expresses his sincere thanks to all members of the research groups for their enormous efforts to extract information from a number of environmental samples collected by 6 sampling campaigns. Thanks are also due to Prof. M. Sasaki, who organized a scientific research team financially supported by Monbusho. He also thanks the staff members of the JCO and Sumitomo Mining Company and the residents and staffs of Town Office of Tokai-mura and Naka-machi, who helped us in the sampling campaigns. This paper is devoted to the families of the deceased who fell victim to the criticality accident.
Report on the preliminary fact finding mission following the accident at the nuclear fuel processing facility in Tokaimura. IAEA. 35IAEA (1999) Report on the preliminary fact finding mission following the accident at the nuclear fuel processing facility in Tokaimura, Japan, pp.35, 1999, IAEA, Vienna.

The report of criticality accident investigation committee. NSC Investigation Committee. STA Japan, TokyoNSC Investigation Committee (1999) The report of criticality accident investigation committee Dec. 24 1999, Nuclear Safety Commissionm, STA Japan, Tokyo.

First summer school on environmental radiation and radioactivity held in Tatsunokuchi. K Shiraishi, Hoshasen Kagaku. 4211in JapaneseShiraishi, K. (1999) First summer school on environmental radiation and radioactivity held in Tatsunokuchi (in Japanese). Hoshasen Kagaku 42 (11) 359-362.

Air concentration of radiocaesium in Tsukuba, Japan following the release from the Tokai waste treatment plant ; comparisons of observations with prediction. Y Igarashi, M Aoyama, T Miyao, K Hirose, K Komura, M Yamamoto, Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 50Igarashi, Y., Aoyama, M., Miyao, T. Hirose, K., Komura, K. and Yamamoto, M. (1999) Air concentration of radiocaesium in Tsukuba, Japan following the release from the Tokai waste treatment plant ; comparisons of obser- vations with prediction. Applied Radiation and Isotopes 50: 1063-1073.

. K Komura, M Yamamoto, T Muroyama, Y Murata, T Nakanishi, M Hoshi, J Takada, M Ishikawa, S Takeoka, K Kitagawa, S Suga, S Endo, N Tosaki, T Mitsugashira, M Hara, T Hashimoto, M Takano, Y Yanagawa, T Tsuboi, M Ichimasa, Y Ichimasa, H Imura, S Shibata, H Yonehara, Y Watababe, S Kimura, K Sihiraishi, T Ban-Nai, S K Sahoo, Y Igarashi, M Aoyama, K Hirose, T Uehiro, T Doi, A Tanaka, T Matsuzawa, The JCO criticality accident at Tokai-mura. 50Journal of Environmental RadioactivityKomura, K., Yamamoto, M., Muroyama, T., Murata, Y., Nakanishi, T., Hoshi, M., Takada, J., Ishikawa, M., Takeoka, S., Kitagawa, K., Suga, S., Endo, S., Tosaki, N., Mitsugashira, T., Hara, M., Hashimoto, T., Takano, M., Yanagawa, Y., Tsuboi, T., Ichimasa, M., Ichimasa, Y., Imura, H., Shibata, S., Yonehara ,H., Watababe, Y., Kimura, S., Sihiraishi, K., Ban-nai, T., Sahoo, S.K., Igarashi, Y., Aoyama, M., Hirose, K., Uehiro, T., Doi, T., Tanaka, A. and Matsuzawa, T. (2000) The JCO criticality accident at Tokai-mura, Japan; an overview of the sampling campaign and preliminary results. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 3-14.

Passive gammar-ray spectrometry for the determination of total fission events in the JCO criticality accident '99 in Tokai. T Mitsugashira, M Hara, T Nakanishi, T Sekine, R Seki, S Kojima, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Mitsugashira, T., Hara, M., Nakanishi, T., Sekine, T., Seki, R. and Kojima, S. (2000) Passive gammar-ray spec- trometry for the determination of total fission events in the JCO criticality accident '99 in Tokai. Journal of Envi- ronmental Radioactivity 50: 21-26.

Levels of radionuclides in plant samples collected around the uranium conversion facility following the criticality accident in Tokai-mura. T Ban-Nai, Y Muramatsu, K Tagami, S Uchida, S Yoshida, S Kimura, Y Watanabe, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Ban-nai, T., Muramatsu, Y., Tagami, K., Uchida, S., Yoshida, S., Kimura, S. and Watanabe, Y. (2000) Levels of radionuclides in plant samples collected around the uranium conversion facility following the criticality accident in Tokai-mura. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 131-143.

Radioactive contamination from the JCO criticality accident. T Doi, T Uehiro, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Doi, T., Uehiro, T. (2000) Radioactive contamination from the JCO criticality accident. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 119-122.

Radioactivity of 51 Cr in stainless steel collected from residences in the JCO neighborhood. S Endo, N Tosaki, K Shizuma, M Ishikawa, J Takada, R Suga, Kitagawa, M Hoshi, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Endo, S., Tosaki, N., Shizuma, K., Ishikawa, M., Takada, J., Suga, R,Kitagawa, K and Hoshi, M. (2000) Radioac- tivity of 51 Cr in stainless steel collected from residences in the JCO neighborhood. Journal of Environmental Radio- activity 50: 83-88.

Tritium, deuterium and gamma-emitting nuclides in plant leaves in the JCO campus. M Ichimasa, E Sasajima, Sato, Y Ichimasa, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Ichimasa, M., Sasajima, E., Sato, K and Ichimasa, Y. (2000) Tritium, deuterium and gamma-emitting nuclides in plant leaves in the JCO campus. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 145-150.

An estimation of fast neutron flux by 35 Cl (n,α) 32 P reaction. H Kofuji, K Komura, Y Yamada, M Yamamoto, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Kofuji, H., Komura, K., Yamada, Y. and Yamamoto, M. (2000) An estimation of fast neutron flux by 35 Cl (n,α) 32 P reaction. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 49-54.

Activation of gold by the neutrons from the JCO accident. K Komura, A M Yousef, Y Murata, T Mitsugashira, R Seki, T Imanaka, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Komura, K. Yousef, A. M., Murata, Y., Mitsugashira, T., Seki, R. and Imanaka, T. (2000) Activation of gold by the neutrons from the JCO accident. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 77-82.

Neutron activation of chemical reagents exposed to the neutrons released by the JCO criticality accident. T Muroyama, Y Murata, H Kofuji, M Yamamoto, K Komura, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Muroyama, T., Murata, Y., Kofuji, H., Yamamoto, M. and Komura, K. (2000) Neutron activation of chemical reagents exposed to the neutrons released by the JCO criticality accident. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 55-60.

Neutron-induced radionuclides in soil from the JCO campus by non-destructive γ -ray spectrometry. Y Murata, T Muroyama, H Kofuji, Yamamoto, K Komura, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Murata, Y., Muroyama, T., Kofuji, H., Yamamoto, M and Komura, K. (2000) Neutron-induced radionuclides in soil from the JCO campus by non-destructive γ -ray spectrometry. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 69- 76.

Residual neutron-induced radionuclides in a soil sample collected in the vicinity of the criticality accident site in Tokai-mura. T Nakanishi, R Hosotani, K Komura, T Muroyama, H Kofuji, Y Murata, S Kimura, S K Sahoo, H Yonehara, Y Watanabe, T Ban-Nai, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Japan : A progress reportNakanishi, T., Hosotani, R., Komura, K., Muroyama, T., Kofuji, H., Murata, Y., Kimura, S., Sahoo, S. K., Yonehara, H., Watanabe, Y. and Ban-nai, T. (2000) Residual neutron-induced radionuclides in a soil sample collected in the vicinity of the criticality accident site in Tokai-mura, Japan : A progress report. Journal of Environmental Radioac- tivity 50: 61-68.

Radiation dosimetry using thermoluminescence from ceramic and glass samples at the JCO critical accident site. T Hashimoto, M Takano, Yanagawa, T Tsuboi, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Hashimoto, T., Takano, M., Yanagawa, Y and Tsuboi, T. (2000) Radiation dosimetry using thermoluminescence from ceramic and glass samples at the JCO critical accident site. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 97- 118.

Neutron dose and power released by the JCO criticality accident in Tokai-mura. T Imanaka, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Imanaka, T. (2000) Neutron dose and power released by the JCO criticality accident in Tokai-mura. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 15-20.

Neutron dose equivalent estimation from the specific activity of 51 Cr. S Endo, N Tosaki, Hoshi, K Shizuma, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Endo, S., Tosaki, N., Hoshi, M and Shizuma ,K. (2000) Neutron dose equivalent estimation from the specific activity of 51 Cr. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 89-96.

Uranium isotope ratios in the environmental samples collected after a criticality accident in the uranium conversion facilities of JCO. A Tanaka, T Doi, T Uehiro, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Tanaka, A., Doi, T. and Uehiro, T. (2000) Uranium isotope ratios in the environmental samples collected after a criticality accident in the uranium conversion facilities of JCO. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 151- 160.

Concentrations of uranium and 235 U/ 238 U ratios in soil and plant samples collected around the uranium conversion building in the JCO campus. S Yoshida, Y Muramatsu, K Tagami, S Uchida, T Ban-Nai, H Yonehara, S K Sahoo, Journal of Environmental Radioactivity. 50Yoshida, S., Muramatsu, Y., Tagami K., Uchida, S., Ban-nai T., Yonehara, H. and Sahoo, S. K. (2000) Concentra- tions of uranium and 235 U/ 238 U ratios in soil and plant samples collected around the uranium conversion building in the JCO campus. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity 50: 161-172.

Challenge to the detection limit of environmental radioactivity. K Komura, Proc. Wakasa Symposium on Environmental Radiation. Wakasa Symposium on Environmental RadiationTsuruga, JapanKomura, K. (1998) Challenge to the detection limit of environmental radioactivity. Proc. Wakasa Symposium on Environmental Radiation. Oct. 20, 1997, Tsuruga, Japan. pp. 56-75.

Neutron fluence in the vicinity of the criticality accident site in Tokai-mura : Estimation from measurement of neutron-induced radionuclides. T Nakanishi, R Hosotani, K Komura, Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity. First Workshop on Environmental RadioactivityKEK,TsukubaKEK ProcNakanishi, T., Hosotani, R. and Komura, K. (2000) Neutron fluence in the vicinity of the criticality accident site in Tokai-mura : Estimation from measurement of neutron-induced radionuclides. Proc. First Workshop on Environ- mental Radioactivity, KEK,Tsukuba, Japan Mar. 30-31, 2000. KEK Proc 2000-13. pp. 141-146.

Determination of (n,p) reaction products induced by neutrons from the JCO criticality accident. S Kojima, T Mitsugashira, T Nakanishi, R Seki, K Sasaki, T Saito, Y Yamaguchi, J Takada, M Furukawa, Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity. First Workshop on Environmental RadioactivityKEK,TsukubaKEK Proc 2000-13Kojima, S., Mitsugashira, T., Nakanishi, T., Seki, R., Sasaki, K., Saito, T., Yamaguchi, Y., Takada, J. and Furukawa, M. (2000) Determination of (n,p) reaction products induced by neutrons from the JCO criticality accident. Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity, KEK,Tsukuba, Japan Mar. 30-31, 2000. KEK Proc 2000-13. pp. 174-178.

Measurement of radioactivities of environmental samples around JCO, Tokai and estimation of neutron fluence in the criticality accident. K Sasaki, M Furukawa, D Samson, Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity. First Workshop on Environmental RadioactivityKEK,Tsukuba. KEK Proc. 2000-13Sasaki, K., Furukawa, M. and Samson, D. (2000) Measurement of radioactivities of environmental samples around JCO, Tokai and estimation of neutron fluence in the criticality accident. Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity, KEK,Tsukuba, Japan Mar. 30-31, 2000. KEK Proc. 2000-13. pp. 155-160.

. D Arai, R Seki, Y Nagashima, T Takahashi, H Kume, R Mawatari, 36Arai, D., Seki R., Nagashima, Y., Takahashi, T., Kume, H. and Mawatari, R. (2000) 36

Cl AMS measurement of JCO samples. 2000-13Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity. First Workshop on Environmental RadioactivityKEK,TsukubaKEK ProcCl AMS measurement of JCO samples. Proc. First Workshop on Environmental Radioactivity, KEK,Tsukuba, Japan Mar. 30-31, 2000. KEK Proc 2000-13. pp.161-164.

Measurement of environmental radioactivity by using imaging plate. Abstract of 28th seminar on Environmental Radioactivity. S Kimura, Y Watanabe, T Ban-Nai, S K Sahoo, H Yonehara, K Shiraishi, Y Igarashi, M Hoshi, K Komura, K Fujimoto, NIRS. Kimura, S., Watanabe, Y., Ban-nai, T., Sahoo, S. K., Yonehara, H., Shiraishi, K., Igarashi, Y., Hoshi, M., Komura, K. and Fujimoto, K. (2000) Measurement of environmental radioactivity by using imaging plate. Abstract of 28th seminar on Environmental Radioactivity. NIRS, Japan. Dec. 7-8, 2000. pp.21-22.

How to detect extremely low-level radioactivity. K Komura, BunsekiKomura, K. (2000) How to detect extremely low-level radioactivity. Bunseki 2000 (12) 730-735.

Recent Developments in ultra low-level γ -ray spectrometry at IRMM. M Hult, M J Martinez Canet, M Köhler, J Das Neves, P N Johnston, Applied Radiation and Isotopes. 53Hult, M., Martinez Canet, M. J., Köhler, M., das Neves, J. and Johnston, P.N. (2000). Recent Developments in ultra low-level γ -ray spectrometry at IRMM. Applied Radiation and Isotopes 53: 225-229.