# Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.ae Recording the Tilt of a Cast on a Surveyor

CorpusID: 10675971
 
tags: #Medicine

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07593532b4e1b0d4ef3fd217bc45a07c15b19020](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/07593532b4e1b0d4ef3fd217bc45a07c15b19020)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.ae Recording the Tilt of a Cast on a Surveyor
2015

Omid Savabi 
Department of Prosthodontics
School of Dentistry
Torabinejad Dental Research Center
Isfahan University of Medi-cal Sciences
IsfahanIran

Farinaz Shirban 
Department of Orthodontics
School of Dentistry
Torabinejad Dental Research Center
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences
IsfahanIran

Send Orders for Reprints to reprints@benthamscience.ae Recording the Tilt of a Cast on a Surveyor

The Open Dentistry Journal
92015174 1874-2106/15 2015 Bentham OpenPartial denturessurveyortilt
Some patients are not satisfied with removable partial dentures (RPDs), when it is not stable during mastication. A dental surveyor can be used to prevent problems related to production of RPDs. Determining the best path of insertion and removal is an initial and fundamental step in RDPs planning. The path of insertion record enables the technician to reproducing the cast in the same position on a surveyor that the dentist selected. This article describes new method for this purpose that could be useful for recording and reproducing the tilt of casts.

## INTRODUCTION

Removable dental prosthesis (RDP) is a choice of treatment of partially edentulous patients when fixed dental prostheses or implant-supported restorations are contraindicated due to economic, technical and biologic concerns.

The cast may be returned to the surveyor for trimming block out on the master cast or locating clasp arms in relation to undercut areas [1]. Appropriate analysis of the cast is one of the important and essential steps in preparation of RDP [2][3][4].

The clinician Surveys the diagnostic cast to design an adequate planning for RDP framework [5]. The path of insertion is determined with the surveyor regards to height of contours, guiding planes, interferences and esthetics for adequate retention, stability, support and esthetics for RDPs [3].

The path of insertion should be recorded on the diagnostic cast in order to be transferred into the definitive or working cast. Also the path of insertion record enables the technician to reproducing the cast in the same position on a surveyor that the dentist selected.

Traditional methods only allow repositioning of the cast on characters, which have been placed; but, accurate reproducing of this cast or the other casts such as duplicated casts on the surveyor may be difficult [1].

There are several methods for recording the tilt of a cast in surveyor [6][7][8][9].

Conventional method for recording the cast orientation includes tripodization method, to establish a plane of orientation with this method several areas on the cast needed and horizontal marks are placed on three divergent anatomic areas of the cast. Another method is the scoring method. In this *Address correspondence to this author at the Torabinejad Dental Research Center, Department of Orthodontics, School of Dentistry, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran; Tel: 00983137922841; Fax: 00983136687080; E-mail: Shirban123@yahoo.com method three vertical marks are made along the base of the cast on the posterior and lateral sides [10]. The analyzing rod of the surveyor is aligned with all three marks for reproduction of the cast. These methods allow reproduction of the cast on marks, which have been placed; however, correct reproduction of this cast or the other casts such as duplicated casts on the surveyor may be sometimes difficult [11].

Shakibamehr, et al. identified a method with using acrylic resin index, thereby shrinking the acrylic resin may result in inaccurate adaption of the acrylic index on the teeth occlusal surfaces [12].

This article describes another method for this purpose that could be useful for recording and reproducing the tilt of casts.


## MATERIALS AND METHODS

This article describes an effective method for recording the cast orientation on the surveyor table and reproducing this orientation to other casts using an additional constructed device.

1. Gradate the surveyor spindle into millimeters degrees (Fig. 1).

2. Attach three narrow strips (Vanguard, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia) two (short) with 5 and one (long) with 7 holes from one side to a hand-piece mandrel (Sunva, Jiangsu, China) (Fig. 2).

3. Attach a screw and nut (Vanguard, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia) to the other ending holes of two short narrow strips.

4. Fasten the mandrel screw in the surveyor spindle.

5. Adjust the two short narrow strips until screws touch two points on the cast. 6. Place a screw in a hole in the long narrow strip where the screw touches another point on the cast (Fig. 2).

7. Relate each point on the cast to corresponding narrow strips and record this relation in the patient file.

8. Record the length of the surveyor spindle from surveyor gradation and the hole that used in long narrow strip.

9. Set the recording device and surveyor spindle to the correct lengths. 10. Change the tilt of the cast until all screws touch the points on the cast.  


## DISCUSSION

The advantages of this method include accurate reproducing of diagnostic cast, duplicated or definitive cast on the surveyor with the same recording device.

Tripodization and scoring methods need major working time, they are not accurate and only useful for reproducing the tilt of the cast that the tilt of it recorded. Shakibamehr, et al. identified a method with using acrylic resin index, thereby shrinking the acrylic resin which may result in inaccurate adaption of the acrylic index on the teeth occlusal surfaces [12].

Need for additional device and time for constriction of the device are disadvantages of our method. More studies are needed to evaluate and compare the accuracy of available techniques.


## CONCLUSION

The reproduction of the casts on the surveyor can be performed rapidly on duplication, definitive casts or when new analysis is required . This method allows for the precise reproducing of the path of insertion for the patient.

## Fig. ( 1
1). Surveyor spindle with millimeters degrees.

## Fig. ( 2
2). Each screw touches a point on the cast.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSDeclared none.CONFLICT OF INTERESTThe authors confirm that this article content has no conflict of interest.
A new method for recording and reproducing cast orientation on a survey table. H B Dumbrigue, M I Chingbingyong, J Prosthet Dent. 89Dumbrigue HB, Chingbingyong MI. A new method for recording and reproducing cast orientation on a survey table. J Prosthet Dent 2003; 89: 76-8.

Device for recording the path of insertion for removable partial dentures. O L Bezzon, R F Ribeiro, Pagnano Vo, J Prosthet Dent. 84Bezzon OL, Ribeiro RF, Pagnano VO. Device for recording the path of insertion for removable partial dentures. J Prosthet Dent 2000; 84: 136-8.

Survey and design of diagnostic casts for removable partial dentures. R E Coy, P D Arnold, J Prosthet Dent. 32Coy RE, Arnold PD. Survey and design of diagnostic casts for removable partial dentures. J Prosthet Dent 1974; 32: 103-6.

A study of four methods of recording the path of insertion of removable partial dentures. A G Wagner, E G Forgue, J Prosthet Dent. 35Wagner AG, Forgue EG. A study of four methods of recording the path of insertion of removable partial dentures. J Prosthet Dent 1976; 35: 267-72.

A simplified procedure for survey and design of diagnostic casts. A M Lavere, A L Freda, J Prosthet Dent. 37LaVere AM, Freda AL. A simplified procedure for survey and design of diagnostic casts. J Prosthet Dent 1977; 37: 680-3.

McCracken's removable partial prosthodontics. 11 th ed. A B Carr, G P Mcgivney, D T Brown, St.Louis; MosbyCarr AB, McGivney GP, Brown DT. McCracken's removable partial prosthodontics. 11 th ed. St.Louis: Mosby 2005; pp. 177-8.

Reproduction of tilt of a cast on a surveyor. T M Kaloyannides, J Prosthet Dent. 30Kaloyannides TM. Reproduction of tilt of a cast on a surveyor. J Prosthet Dent 1973; 30: 465-7.

Recording and reproducing the tilt of a cast on a surveyor. A D Steas, J Prosthet Dent. 57Steas AD. Recording and reproducing the tilt of a cast on a sur- veyor. J Prosthet Dent 1987; 57: 121-5.

Reorientation simplified: a device for recording and reproducing the path of insertion for removable partial dentures. Vd1 Kamble, R D Parkhedkar, Indian J Dent Res. 25Kamble VD1, Parkhedkar RD. Reorientation simplified: a device for recording and reproducing the path of insertion for removable partial dentures. Indian J Dent Res 2014; 25: 260-2.

Stewart's clinical removable partial prosthodontics. 4 th ed. Hanover Park: Quintessence. R D Phoenix, D R Cagna, C F Defreest, K L Stewart, Phoenix RD, Cagna DR, DeFreest CF, Stewart KL. Stewart's clini- cal removable partial prosthodontics. 4 th ed. Hanover Park: Quin- tessence 2008; pp. 218-20.

A new method for recording and reproducing cast orientation on a survey table. H B Dumbrigue, M I Chingbingyong, J Prosthet Dent. 89Dumbrigue HB, Chingbingyong MI. A new method for recording and reproducing cast orientation on a survey table. J Prosthet Dent 2003; 89: 76-8.

A procedure for recording and reproducing the cast position on a surveyor. A H Shakibamehr, N Askari, M Abolhasani, H Moradpoor, F Nejatidanesh, Dent Res J (Isfahan). 10Shakibamehr AH, Askari N, Abolhasani M, Moradpoor H, Nejatidanesh F. A procedure for recording and reproducing the cast position on a surveyor. Dent Res J (Isfahan) 2013; 10: 695-6.