# New Galactic embedded clusters and candidates from a WISE Survey

CorpusID: 119002533
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d410dacb49eaf9a8122fb4b8aff0c0f673869ac9](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/d410dacb49eaf9a8122fb4b8aff0c0f673869ac9)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

New Galactic embedded clusters and candidates from a WISE Survey
24 Jun 2014

D Camargo 
Departamento de Astronomia
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Av. Bento9500, 91501-970Gonçalves, Porto AlegreRSBrazil

E Bica 
Departamento de Astronomia
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Av. Bento9500, 91501-970Gonçalves, Porto AlegreRSBrazil

C Bonatto 
Departamento de Astronomia
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Av. Bento9500, 91501-970Gonçalves, Porto AlegreRSBrazil

New Galactic embedded clusters and candidates from a WISE Survey
24 Jun 2014open clusters and associations
We carried out a search for new infrared star clusters, stellar groups and candidates using WISE images, which are very sensitive to dust emission nebulae. We report the discovery of 437 embedded clusters and stellar groups that show a variety of structures, both in the stellar and nebular components. Pairs or small groupings of clusters are observed, suggesting multiple generations at the early formation stages. The resulting catalogue provides Galactic and equatorial coordinates, together with angular sizes for all objects. The nature of a representative test sub-sample of 14 clusters is investigated in detail by means of 2MASS photometry. The colour magnitude diagrams and radial density distributions characterize them as stellar clusters. The 437 new objects were found in the ranges 145 • ≤ ℓ ≤ 290 • and −25 • ≤ b ≤ 20 • , and they appear to be a major object source for future studies of star cluster formation and their early evolution. WISE is a powerful tool to further probe for very young clusters throughout the disk.

## Introduction

Dust enshrouded star clusters have been systematically studied with relatively large samples in the near infrared since Hodapp (1994), as detectors became efficient enough. In the early 2000's several lists of new dusty clusters were provided (Ivanov et al., 2002;Bica et al., 2003a;Dutra et al., 2003). At that time efforts were made to compile catalogues of this object class (Lada & Lada, 2003;Bica et al., 2003b). Some young clusters have been studied in X-rays with Chandra (e.g. Ybarra et al., 2013). Recently, Majaess (2013) used WISE together with other data to discover 229 new dust related stellar clusters. The latter findings involving WISE near and mid infrared bands indicate the importance to carry out new searches for stellar clusters in formation and early evolutionary stages.

The Galaxy appears to contain ∼ 10 5 open clusters Piskunov et al., 2006) but only ∼ 2000 have astrophysical parameters determined (DAML02 1 , WEBDA 2 ). The completeness effects in the OC system are due mainly to the higher extinction and stellar crowding in the disc (Lada et al., 1991;Hodapp, 1994;Bica et al., 2003b).

Stellar clusters are fundamental tools to improve our understanding of the Galactic structure, star formation history, and evolution (Friel, 1995;Bonatto et al., 2006;Piskunov et al., 2006;Bobylev, 2007;Camargo, Bica & Bonatto, 2013;Bobylev & Bajkova, 1 http://www.astro.iag.usp.br/ wilton/ (Dias et al., 2002). 2 http://obswww.unige.ch/webda (Mermelliod, 1996). 2014). Most star formation occurs in crowded environments, such as in embedded clusters (ECs) and embedded stellar groups. ECs are formed in giant molecular clouds (GMCs), in dense clumps with size of ∼ 1 pc. Since ECs can be heavily obscured , most of them are detected in the infrared. The development of infrared array detectors in recent decades has boosted our knowledge of these objects. As a result sky surveys provided new objects (Dutra et al., 2003;Bica et al., 2003a,b;Bica & Bonatto, 2005;Kharchenko et al., 2005a,b;Mercer et al., 2005;Kronberger et al., 2006;Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery, 2007;Koposov et al., 2008;Glushkova et al., 2010;Borissova et al., 2011).

Recently, we discovered 16 new ECs (CBB 1 -CBB 16), some of them within groups of clusters (Camargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2011Camargo, Bica & Bonatto, 2013). A fundamental contribution of such detailed studies of individual clusters is homogenously derived astrophysical parameters.

Most (if not all) stars form in star clusters (Lada et al., 1991;Hodapp, 1994;Lada & Lada, 2003). In this sense, they are frequently considered as the building blocks in galaxy construction. Lada & Lada (2003) define a cluster as a group of physically related stars that survive longer than 100 Myr as a bound system. This requires at least 35 stars and stellar-mass density larger than 1M ⊙ /pc −3 . Adams & Myers (2001) indicate three ways to form stars: isolated singles and binaries, stellar groups (10 to 100 members), and clusters (> 100 stars). They argue that stellar groups are the most common way to form stars. Hodapp (1994) considers cluster the stellar groups with five or more stars.

In this paper we carry out a search for new embedded C 62 C 72 C 258 C 44 C 284 C 288 Figure 1 Examples of sample clusters. Top panels: W1 WISE images (10 ′ × 10 ′ ) centred on C 62, C 72, and C 258. Bottom: W2 images centred on C 44, C 284, and C 288. These objects are classified as ECs.

clusters using WISE band images. We were encouraged by the impressive large number of recent discoveries by Majaess (2013). However, we employ a complementary different method. This paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2 we present the new clusters found in this study. In Sect. 3 we discuss the stellar density and dust distributions. In Sect. 3 we highlight star formation stages that are possibly related to the dust distribution, and in turn infer forming processes themselves. In Sect. 4 we employ 2MASS photometry for a selection of 14 new clusters to test their reality. In Sect. 5 we analyse the corresponding CMDs and RDPs. Finally, in Sect. 6 we give the concluding remarks.


## New star clusters and candidates

We searched for new clusters, stellar groups, and candidates in the WISE 3 (Wright et al., 2010) image atlas. WISE is a survey covering the entire sky in the infrared bands W1, W2, W3, and W4 centred at 3.4, 4.6, 12 and 22µm. The project was funded by NASA and operated by 3 The Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). The data processing and analysis was done by the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center (IPAC). Processed images and data are online available via NASA/IPAC Infrared Science Archive (IRSA). WISE provides very efficient detections of star forming clusters (Majaess, 2013). We searched for new clusters, stellar groups and candidates in dust nebulae in the 3rd Quadrant and extensions to the 2nd and 4th Quadrants (Table 1). WISE images for a representative sample of the newly found clusters are shown in Figs. 1 to 6.

Recently, Majaess (2013) employed WISE in a search for very young clusters. His method differs from the present one in the sense that he employs a hybrid JHK s − W 1 W 2 W 3 W 4 photometry to identify concentrations of young stellar objects (YSOs). Our search focuses on the stellar density and gas/dust distribution to identify star clusters, stellar groups, and candidates. A similar early procedure was used by Hodapp (1994) who analysed 164 nebulae with molecular outflow sources, 54 of them resulting associated with embedded clusters. Also similarly, Bica et al. (2003a) and Dutra et al. (2003), in a survey around the Galactic disk, provided 346 infrared clusters, Top panels: W2 WISE images (10 ′ × 10 ′ ) centred on the OC C 79 and on the OCCs C 70, and C 193. Bottom: W2 images (10 ′ × 10 ′ ) centred on the ECC C 192 and W2 images (5 ′ × 5 ′ ) centred on the EGrs C 53, and C 43. stellar groups, and candidates.

The object search started with inspection of 2 • × 2 • WISE images near the Galactic plane. We used the WISE standard RGB colour images primarily looking for dust emission nebulae at different temperatures in the wavelength bands W1, W2, W3, and W4. Subsequently, we were guided by stellar concentrations.

The survey provided 437 new star clusters, stellar groups, and candidates. The discovered objects were classified in five classes: open clusters (OCs), open cluster candidates (OCCs), embedded clusters (ECs), embedded cluster candidates (ECCs), and embedded stellar groups (EGrs). The classification follows a stellar/dust density estimation on the W1, W2, W3, W4, and RGB WISE images. Populous dust-free objects are classified as OCs and the OCCs are in general poor or unresolved objects that require deeper photometry or higher resolution. Prominent objects that are still cradled in their natal molecular clouds are ECs and the less populous candidates are ECCs. Star-forming low density groups are EGrs. Fig. 1 shows a representative sample of ECs and Fig. 2 shows samples of OC, OCC, ECC, and EGr. Table 1 The new list of star clusters or candidates. We verified that the present objects do not have previous identifications in the literature. The comparison catalogue that we used is essentially complete for all published star clusters in the Galaxy and was made by one of us, E.B., and will be presented in a forthcoming paper. Additionally, we used e.g. SIMBAD, the catalogue of infrared star clusters, stellar groups and candidates by Bica et al. (2003a), the cluster and candidate catalogue by Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007), the recent protocluster results in WISE by Majaess (2013), and many others. We also cross correlated our cluster dust emission nebulae with the planetary nebulae catalogue of Acker et al. (1992). This way we could also classify some clump candidates as probable star-forming nebulae (SFNs) in the present list Table 1.
Target ℓ b α(2000) δ(2000) Size Type Avend. ( • ) ( • ) (h m s) ( • ′ ′′ ) ( ′ ) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7)(8)
During our WISE search for stellar clusters and candidates, we came across with 49 objects from the literature (Table 2). They belong mostly to our EC classification, except the OC NGC 2301, and the OCCs FSR 1144 and FSR 1149. The FSR object recognition as ECs was derived by us from the WISE images. This cross-identification effort is important to cross relate classifications in other lists, catalogues and individual papers. Avedisova (2002) presented 3300 star forming regions (SFRs), of which about 500 are candidates. She complemented this with available photometric data and presented information on diffuse and reflecting nebulae, dark and molecular clouds. Her data do not refer directly to star clusters. It is fundamental to cross-identify her results with ours found in the WISE bands, in view of establishing or not the presence of stellar clusters. These comparisons might help answer questions such as i) are very young clusters systematically found outside or inside Avendisova's SFRs? ii) Clues about the threshold of cluster/individual star formation? The cross-identifications within 5' of the central coordinates provided 95 coincidences between Avedisova (2002) and the present list of 437 entries. This amounts to 21.7% of our sample. We indicate in Table 1 the entries that coincided with Avendisova ones.

Out of the 437 objects, 297 (∼ 67.9%) were classified as ECs, 23 (∼ 5.3%) are ECCs, 90 (∼ 20.8%) are EGrs, and the remaining 27 (∼ 6.2%) are OCCs. These classes may suffer from completeness effects, especially the less dense Examples of objects with remarkable structure in the sample. Top panels: W3 WISE images centred on C 201 (5 ′ × 5 ′ ), and C 178 (10 ′ × 10 ′ ). Bottom panels: the W3 WISE image for C 219 (20 ′ × 20 ′ ) and W2 WISE image for C 219 (10 ′ × 10 ′ ).  Figure 6 Examples of clusters in the test sub-sample. Top panels: W2 images (10 ′ × 10 ′ ) centred on C 14, C 74, and C 133. Bottom panels: the same for C 209, C 18, and C 429.  . Cols. 7 -9: Galactocentric components.

EGrs. 


## Cluster structure and dust distribution

One of us (D. C.) carried out the cluster search and discovered 437 objects. The first 20 entries are listed in Table 1. The entire list is available in the online version of the paper. Table 1 shows the ranges of ℓ and b , so that most of the present survey was carried out in the 3rd Quadrant. Fig. 7 shows histograms of ℓ and b, while the Fig. 8 shows the ℓ × b distribution of the new clusters and candidates. The present objects are mostly projected within small Galactic latitude values, as expected for a peaked thin disk recent stellar cluster formation. As a cautionary remark, the dips along longitude (Figs. 7 and 8) reflect more where we searched clusters than any intrinsic distribution. The sample does not intend to be complete in any sense. The distribution in Fig. 8 of populated areas and excursions that we made to search for the clusters suggest that a large number of ECs and other classes are yet to be found.

Star clusters show a variety of structures that depend on their evolutionary phase. They are formed as embedded clusters and their morphology in the earliest stage is tightly associated with the formation process, reflecting the morphology of the gas in their natal molecular clouds (Lada & Lada, 2003;Cartwright & Whitworth, 2004).

Well known embedded cluster-forming regions are radially concentred or present a fractal-like structure with small ECs (Schmeja et al., 2008;Sánchez et al, 2010;Lomax et al., 2010;Camargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2011.

These substructures are quickly erased by dynamical effects forming a massive cluster by coalescence or being completely dissolved in the field. On the other hand, some of them may evolve to individual clusters, forming a group of clusters or aggregate (Feigelson et al., 2011;Camargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2011. In the early ages substructured clusters and EC aggregates appear to be more able to survive the primordial gas expulsion than those centrally concentred (Kruijssen et al., 2012). ECs may present an expanding bubble generated by OB stars (Lee et al., 2012), some of which may develop subsequently a second generation of stars, and possibly a second generation of ECs, by means of sequential star formation.

The stellar systems analysed in this work present diversified morphologies. ECs have a core as a rule. The core may be stellar, dusty or dusty/stellar, suggesting that a collapse has occurred. EGrs have in general little central concentration. ECs and EGrs appear to be in general related to dust emission in bubbles or winds.

In Fig. 1 we show representative WISE images of ECs found in this study (C 62, C 72, C 258, C 44, C 284, and C 288). These clusters present evident stellar-density contrast with respect to the background. C 62 and C 44 are ECs with prominent dust/stellar cores. and J × (J − K s ) (right). Middle panels: equal area comparison field. Bottom panels: field star decontaminated CMDs fitted with MS and PMS Padova isochrones. We also present the reddening vector for A V = 0 to 5. Fig. 3 shows standard RGB images of representative objects in the sample (C 245, C 253, C 40, C 292, C 241, and C 39). Fig. 4 shows interesting filamentary cluster-forming clouds. The s-shaped distribution of stars in C 260 may be linked to the remaining gas in the filamentary structure. The pair C 217 and C 213 are forming in a gas filament. C 217 presents an elongated stellar distribution aligned with the filament. It appears that the elongated shape of ECs in Fig. 4 is related to the primordial nebular structure.

In Fig. 5 we show some remarkable objects. C 201 presents a prominent structure resembling a diamond ring. C 178 is an EC-forming, which appears to be undergoing powerful wind shocks. C 219 together with C 218 and C   Figure 10 Colour-magnitude diagrams for the test subsample. 2MASS CMDs for the clusters C 149, C 14, C 18, and C 133. Top panels: observed CMDs J × (J − K s ). Middle panels: equal area comparison field. Bottom panels: field star decontaminated CMDs fitted with MS and PMS Padova isochrones. We show the reddening vector for A V = 0 to 5.

222 (in the same panel) form a probable group of clusters. They are aligned, probably as a consequence of the gas dynamics.

The dust in C 219 shows a twisted filamentary structure.

The WISE RGB images of some presently discovered clusters, e.g., C 39,C 40,C 253,C 292,and C 260 (Figs. 3 and 4) show Extended Green Objects (EGOs), which are considered to be young stellar object (YSO) candidates (Churchwell et al., 2006(Churchwell et al., , 2007Zavagno et al., 2007;Cyganowski et al., 2012;Deharveng et al., 2010, and references therein).

EGOs are often associated with infrared dark clouds (IRDCs) that are the precursors of cluster-forming clumps (Carey et al., 2000;Rathborne et al., 2010).

We conclude that dust enshrouded stellar clusters and aggregates in this work show a variety of projected stellar and dust distributions, and inferences can be made about star forming processes and stages.


## 2MASS photometry and analytical tools

In this Section we present the tools to test whether a representative sub-sample of 14 WISE candidates (Table 2) are physical stellar clusters. We employ 2MASS 4 photometry (Skrutskie et al., 2006) in the J, H and K s bands, extracted in circular concentric regions centred on the coordinates given in Table 3. 2MASS gives an adequate spatial and photometric uniformity required for wide extractions in view of a consistent field star decontamination. The analytical tools have been widely applied to stellar clusters in our previous papers, and below we refer to them for details on the methods. 4 The Two Micron All Sky Survey, available at www..ipac.caltech.edu/2mass/releases/allsky/   Aiming to uncover the intrinsic CMD morphology from the foreground/background stars, we applied a fieldstar decontamination procedure (Bonatto & Bica, 2007a). The decontamination algorithm developed by one of us (C.B.) is fully described in Bonatto & Bica (2007b) and Bica, Bonatto & Camargo (2008). In short, the CMD is divided into a 3D grid of cells with axes along the J magnitude and the (J − H) and (J − K s ) colours, then the expected number-density of field stars in a given cell is computed based on the number of comparison field stars. Subsequently, the expected number of field stars is subtracted from each cell, generating the decontaminated CMD.

Fundamental parameters are derived using the field decontaminated CMD fitted with MS and PMS Padova isochrones (Bressan et al., 2012). The derived parameters are the observed distance modulus (m − M ) J and reddening E(J − H), which converts to E(B − V ) and Santiago & Bica, 2002). We as-sume a constant total-to-selective absorption ratio R V = 3.1 (Cardelli, Clayton & Mathis, 1989). Decontaminated CMDs are shown in Figs. 9 to 12. The fundamental parameters are estimated by applying shifts to the isochrone set from the zero distance modulus and reddening to the best fit.
A V with the relations A J /A V = 0.276, A H /A V = 0.176, A Ks /A V = 0.118, A J = 2.76 × E(J − H) and E(J − H) = 0.33 × E(B − V ) (Dutra,
As a rule, a star cluster structure is studied by means of the stellar radial density profile (RDP). Usually, star clusters have RDPs following a power law profile (King, 1962;Wilson, 1975;Elson et al., 1987). However, ECs are often heavily embedded in their embryonic molecular cloud, which may absorb the near background and part of the cluster member stars. As a result, some ECs may present RDPs with decreasing density towards the cluster centre or bumps and dips (Lada & Lada, 2003;Camargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2011Camargo, Bica & Bonatto, 2013). Some RDP irregularities appear to be intrinsic to the embedded evolutionary stage and related to a fractal-like structure (Lada & Lada, 2003;Camargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2011Camargo, Bica & Bonatto, 2013). We thus argue that overdensities in general are not enough to describe ECs in the earliest stages (Fig. 13).  (Table 1). The middle panels correspond to the comparison fields of equal area, and the bottom panels give the decontaminated CMDs. The derived fundamental parameters (age, reddening, distance) are in Table 3.


## CMD and RDP analyses of 14 test objects

Most of the present ECs and EGrs are in an initial evolutionary phase, and cannot be fitted by King's profile (Fig. 13). Normally, we apply a colour magnitude filter to the observed photometry to enhance the RDP contrast relative to the background (e.g. Bonatto & Bica, 2007a, 2011bCamargo, Bonatto & Bica, 2009, and references therein), but the decontaminated CMDs of the present clusters show extremely reddened stars so that the filter is not effective by discarding such stars. Fig. 9 shows for illustrative purposes the (J − H) and (J − K s ) CMDs for C 209. This EC presents high absorption (A V ≈ 4.5 mag). The decontaminated CMDs show extremely reddened stars mainly in the (J − K s ) colour.

Probably, differential reddening contributed to the IR excess, but part of it can be intrinsic to their evolutionary stage, because the most reddened stars as a rule occupy the cluster core on the WISE images. Most of them are probably EGOs. In this sense, WISE is sensitive to the youngest stars in Class 0, which are still accreting material (Wright et al., 2010).

In Fig. 10 we show (J − K s ) CMDs for C 149, C 14, C 18, and C 133, respectively. C 149 was initially classified as ECC, but based on the decontaminated CMD we now confirm it as EC. The best-fitting Padova MS and PMS isochrones suggest an age of 2 ± 1 Myr, a distance from the Sun of d ⊙ = 9.1 kpc, and a distance from the Galactic centre of R GC = 15.45 ± 1.8 kpc. C 14 is recognised as a cluster by the presence of a core and combination of MS and PMS sequences in the decontaminated CMD. The estimated age is 3±2 Myr for d ⊙ = 2.8±0.26 kpc. The RDP of C 14 (Fig. 13) presents a high density contrast to the field suggesting a cluster. The decontaminated CMD of the EC C 18 presents extremely reddened stars, again suggesting a cluster initial evolutionary stage. We derived an age of 2 ± 1 Myr and d ⊙ = 5.6 ± 0.5 kpc. The RDP of C 18 is also irregular with the background density centrally decreasing. The prominent C 133 has decontaminated CMD and RDP suggesting a cluster. We derive for C 133 an age of 10 ± 5 and d ⊙ = 3.3 ± 0.3 kpc. In the early age range ECs may be centrally concentrated with R ∼ 1 pc (Parmentier & Pfalzner, 2012;Camargo, Bica & Bonatto, 2013). Fig. 11 provides CMDs of C 260, C 74, C 292, and C 64. The WISE image of C 260 (Fig. 5) shows very reddened stars, but they are absent in the 2MASS photometry. Nonetheless, the decontaminated CMD shows features of an EC. The best fit age using MS and PMS isochrones is 2 ± 1 Myr, which implies in a d ⊙ = 4.5 ± 0.4 kpc and R GC = 9 ± 0.2 kpc. The decontaminated CMD of C 74 is typical of ECs with a poorly populated MS and a well-defined PMS. The cluster presents an important absorption of A V ∼ 4.27 mag, age of 3 ± 2 Myr, and d ⊙ = 3.83 ± 0.27 kpc. The RDP of C 74 is constrasted with respect to the background. C 292 is an EC with age of 1 ± 1 Myr and d ⊙ = 3.86 ± 0.37 kpc. The decontaminated CMD shows a prominent PMS with very reddened stars. Despite a dip in the inner RDP region, the structure of C 292 points to a cluster. The EGr C 64 also presents extremely reddened stars (Fig. 11). The decontaminated CMD points to an early age and the RDP is irregular, but shows a central peak. Fig. 12 shows the CMDs for C 245, C 353, C 394, C 399, and the EGr C 429. The best fit of MS and PMS Padova isochrones provides an age of 1 ± 1 for these objects.

Some clusters appear to show an age spread, arising possibly from the merge of two generations of ECs or clusterforming clumps (e.g. C 14 and C 133, Fig. 10).

We conclude from this chapter's analyses of CMDs and density profiles that this representative subsample is made up of star clusters, in general in their cold gas and dust embryonic cloud. This in turn reinforces expectations that the present list of 437 objects will become a major source for future studies of star cluster early evolutionary stages.


## Concluding remarks

We report the discovery on WISE images of 437 Galactic star clusters, stellar groups, and candidates, mostly in the 3rd Galactic Quadrant. They are as a rule deeply embedded in their natal molecular clouds. Out of the 437 objects, 297 (∼ 67.9%) were classified as embedded clusters, 23 (∼ 5.3%) as candidates, 90 (∼ 20.8%) as embedded stellar groups, and the remaining 27 (∼ 6.2%) as open cluster candidates. We analysed in detail a subsample of 14 clusters by means of 2MASS photometry to probe their nature. We derived CMD fundamental cluster parameters for them. Radial density profiles do not follow a King's law, as expected for such young clusters. Most of them are very young (∼ 1 Myr) , and in part present decontaminated CMDs with extremely reddened stars, comparable to those in infrared dark clouds that are the precursors of ECs.

The present catalogue of newly found embedded clusters and alike objects will certainly become a major object source for future studies of star cluster formation and early evolution.          Avedisova (2002) SFRs or candidates within 5' of the central coordinates, y and n means yes and not.
Target ℓ b α(2000) δ(2000) Size Type Avend. Comments ( • ) ( • ) (h m s) ( • ′ ′′ ) ( ′ ) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)(9)Target ℓ b α(2000) δ(2000) Size Type Avend. Comments ( • ) ( • ) (h m s) ( • ′ ′′ ) ( ′ ) (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8)(9)
## Figure 2
2Examples of additional sample classifications.

## Figure 4 Figure 5
45Cluster in filamentary dust structures. Top panels: WISE RGB images centred on C 260 (40 ′ × 40 ′ ), and C 260 (10 ′ × 10 ′ ). Bottom panels: the same for C 217 and C 213 (30 ′ × 30 ′ ), and C 217 (10 ′ × 10 ′ ). These images show evidence of filamentary cluster formation. C 260 shows unusual s-shaped structure.

## Figure 7
7Distribution of the new clusters and candidates in Galactic latitude (top panel) and longitude (bottom panel).

## Figure 8 Figure 9
89Galactic distribution of the new clusters and candidates. Band combinations in the colour-magnitude diagrams. 2MASS CMDs extracted from the central region of C 209. Top panels: observed CMDs J × (J − H) (left)

## Figure 11
11Same asFig. 10for the ECs C 260, C 74, C 292, and the EGr C 64.

## Figure 12
12Same asFig. 10for the ECs C 245, C 353, C 394, C 399, and the EGr C 429.

## Fig. 6 shows
6WISE images of a representative subsample of objects analysed in this section. In Figs. 9 to 11 are show their CMDs. The upper panels give CMDs extracted from a circular area centred on the coordinates of each object

## Figure 13
13Radial density profiles for the embedded clusters and stellar groups in the test sub-sample.

## Table 2
2Objects from the literature detected during our WISE search.ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Diameter 
Type 
Designation 
Reference 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
160.48 
-17.81 
3:44:33 
32:09:19 
10 
EC 
IC 348 
Lada & Lada (2003) 
169.93 
-0.60 
5:16:49 
37:01:16 
7 
EC 
Majaess 54 
Majaess (2013) 
170.66 
-0.27 
5:20:16 
36:37:21 
6 
EC 
KKC 6 
Kumar et al. (2006) 
170.72 
-0.11 
5:21:07 
36:39:45 
7 
EC 
Majaess 56 
Majaess (2013) 
170.82 
0.01 
5:21:53 
36:38:52 
5 
EC 
Majaess 57 
Majaess (2013) 
171.87 
0.45 
5:26:37 
36:01:46 
8 
EC 
Czernik 21 
Maciejewski & Niedzielski (2007) 
173.08 
-3.46 
5:14:22 
32:48:13 
7 
EC 
Dolidze 16 
Camargo, Bonatto & Bica (2010) 
195.62 
-2.91 
6:08:32 
13:58:09 
8 
EC 
NGC 2169 
Krone-Martins et al. (2010) 
211.88 
-1.32 
6:44:49 
0:20:18 
6 
EC 
PHN 2 
Puga et al. (2009) 
212.27 
-1.08 
6:46:22 
0:04:46 
7 
EC 
PHN 3 
Puga et al. (2009) 
212.54 
0.28 
6:51:46 
0:28:21 
11 
OC 
NGC 2301 
Sharma et al. (2006) 
214.07 
-19.65 
5:42:49 
-9:47:22 
10 
EC 
Majaess 64 
Majaess (2013) 
216.84 
0.81 
7:01:27 
-3:06:41 
4.5 
EC 
de Wit 2 
de Wit et al. (2004) 
217.49 
-0.02 
6:59:43 
-4:04:00 
3 
EC 
Ivanov 9 
Ivanov et al. (2002) 
217.63 
-0.18 
6:59:24 
-4:15:54 
4 
EC 
BDS 89 
Bica et al. (2003b) 
218.15 
-0.64 
6:58:41 
-4:56:13 
5 
EC 
FSR 1129 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
219.47 
-10.57 
6:25:14 
-10:33:32 
5 
EC 
BDS 91 
Bica et al. (2003b) 
219.49 
-1.72 
6:57:15 
-6:37:12 
10 
OCC 
FSR 1144 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
220.07 
-0.11 
7:04:06 
-6:24:02 
10 
OCC 
FSR 1149 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
220.79 
-1.71 
6:59:42 
-7:46:29 
5 
EC 
NGC 2316 
Hodapp (1994) 
224.01 
-1.81 
7:05:16 
-10:40:10 
5 
EC 
FSR 1178 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
224.23 
-1.47 
7:06:56 
-10:43:45 
7 
EC 
Collinder 466 
Bukowiecki et al. (2011) 
224.44 
-2.36 
7:04:08 
-11:18:58 
4 
EC 
Soares-Bica 1 
Soares & Bica (2002) 
224.40 
-2.73 
7:02:42 
-11:27:03 
5 
EC 
FSR 1184 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
224.50 
-2.41 
7:04:03 
-11:23:40 
4 
EC 
BRC 27 
Soares & Bica (2002) 
224.79 
-1.73 
7:07:03 
-11:20:16 
4.5 
EC 
FSR 1190 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
225.48 
-2.57 
7:05:18 
-12:19:44 
4 
EC 
BDS 96 
Bica et al. (2003b) 
259.27 
-2.61 
8:22:22 
-41:36:14 
3 
EC 
Majaess 100 
Majaess (2013) 
259.29 
-3.04 
8:20:32 
-41:51:47 
3 
EC 
Majaess 98 
Majaess (2013) 
259.33 
-2.55 
8:22:49 
-41:37:10 
4 
EC 
Majaess 101 
Majaess (2013) 
259.50 
-2.57 
8:23:15 
-41:46:06 
6 
EC 
Majaess 104 
Majaess (2013) 
259.60 
-2.98 
8:21:45 
-42:04:55 
10 
EC 
Majaess 99 
Majaess (2013) 
259.61 
-2.70 
8:23:00 
-41:55:45 
9 
EC 
Majaess 103 
Majaess (2013) 
259.76 
-2.84 
8:22:52 
-42:07:58 
5 
EC 
DBS 18 
Dutra et al. (2003) 
260.76 
0.66 
8:41:07 
-40:52:05 
6 
EC 
MLG 1 
Massi et al. (2000) 
260.93 
0.11 
8:39:20 
-41:19:53 
3.5 
EC 
MLG 3 
Massi et al. (2000) 
263.53 
-0.35 
8:46:04 
-43:39:43 
6 
EC 
DBS 24 
Dutra et al. (2003) 
264.19 
0.18 
8:50:40 
-43:50:44 
8 
EC 
FSR 1424 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
264.23 
-0.85 
8:46:20 
-44:31:16 
5 
EC 
MLG 15 
Massi et al. (2000) 
264.32 
-0.18 
8:49:33 
-44:10:47 
1.0 
EC 
MLG 16 
Massi et al. (2000) 
264.47 
-0.27 
8:49:41 
-44:21:31 
4.5 
EC 
BH 54 
van den Bergh & Hagen (1975) 
264.67 
-0.28 
8:50:21 
-44:30:43 
1.7 
EC 
MLG 18 
Massi et al. (2003) 
264.73 
0.26 
8:52:55 
-44:12:39 
5 
EC 
FSR 1432 
Froebrich, Scholz & Raftery (2007) 
264.99 
0.99 
8:56:56 
-43:56:30 
7 
EC 
DBS 29 
Dutra et al. (2003) 
266.16 
1.14 
9:01:54 
-44:43:32 
6 
EC 
DBS 30 
Dutra et al. (2003) 
270.67 
-2.45 
9:03:43 
-50:28:32 
13 
EC 
Majaess 109 
Majaess (2013) 
276.96 
-2.04 
9:34:42 
-54:40:26 
6 
EC 
BH 75 
van den Bergh & Hagen (1975) 
281.76 
-2.02 
10:01:22 
-57:43:10 
4.5 
EC 
DBS 40 
Dutra et al. (2003) 
281.84 
-1.61 
10:03:40 
-57:26:38 
6 
EC 
Majaess 116 
Majaess (2013) 


## Table 3
3Derived fundamental parameters for a test sample of 14 star clusters fromTable 1.Cluster phase α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
A V 
Age 
d ⊙ 
R GC 
x GC 
y GC 
z GC 

( • ′ ′′ ) 
(mag) 
(Myr) 
(kpc) 
(kpc) 
(kpc) 
(kpc) 
(kpc) 

(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 

C 14 
EC 
5:10:50 
36:39:45 3.57 ± 0.2 
3 ± 2 
2.8 ± 0.26 
9.95 ± 0.26 
−9.93 ± 0.26 
0.50 ± 0.05 −0.09 ± 0.01 

C 18 
EC 
5:30:30 
36:39:53 2.28 ± 0.2 
2 ± 1 5.66 ± 0.54 12.85 ± 0.53 −12.82 ± 0.53 
0.81 ± 0.08 −0.14 ± 0.01 

C 64 
EGr 
6:08:49 
13:09:38 4.27 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 
3.8 ± 0.4 
10.9 ± 0.5 
−10.9 ± 0.5 
−1.1 ± 0.1 −0.22 ± 0.02 

C 74 
EC 
6:29:55 
12:32:30 4.27 ± 0.2 
3 ± 2 3.83 ± 0.27 
10.9 ± 0.34 −10.83 ± 0.34 −1.27 ± 0.12 
0.07 ± 0.01 

C 133 
EC 
6:54:54 
-3:21:39 2.28 ± 0.2 10 ± 5 
3.26 ± 0.3 
10.0 ± 0.25 
−9.85 ± 0.25 −1.93 ± 0.18 −0.04 ± 0.01 

C 149 
EC 
6:59:46 
-3:36:33 1.49 ± 0.2 
2 ± 1 
9.1 ± 2.0 
15.5 ± 1.8 
−14.45 ± 1.8 −5.47 ± 0.57 
0.03 ± 0.01 

C 209 
EC 
6:59:12 -11:58:49 4.46 ± 0.2 
2 ± 1 
4.1 ± 0.5 10.53 ± 0.28 −10.13 ± 0.28 −2.86 ± 0.27 −0.27 ± 0.03 

C 245 
EC 
8:25:16 -43:26:30 3.67 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 3.94 ± 0.40 
8.6 ± 0.3 
−7.8 ± 0.1 
−3.9 ± 0.4 −0.22 ± 0.02 

C 260 
EC 
8:30:24 -44:27:09 2.28 ± 0.2 
2 ± 1 4.50 ± 0.43 
9.0 ± 0.22 
−7.8 ± 0.1 −4.45 ± 0.42 −0.24 ± 0.02 

C 292 
EC 
9:14:28 -47:24:01 3.47 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 3.86 ± 0.37 
8.21 ± 0.17 
−7.25 ± 0.01 −3.86 ± 0.37 
0.06 ± 0.01 

C 353 
EC 
9:35:39 -54:11:40 3.47 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 4.23 ± 0.40 
7.9 ± 0.2 
−6.7 ± 0.1 
−4.2 ± 0.4 −0.12 ± 0.01 

C 394 
EC 
9:58:12 -56:08:24 1.98 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 5.12 ± 0.50 
8.1 ± 0.3 
−6.3 ± 0.1 
−5.1 ± 0.5 −0.09 ± 0.01 

C 399 
EC 
9:58:12 -56:27:03 5.46 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 
3.0 ± 0.30 
7.3 ± 0.2 
−6.7 ± 0.1 
−2.94 ± 0.3 −0.07 ± 0.01 

C 429 
EGr 10:04:07 -57:37:50 3.27 ± 0.2 
1 ± 1 
5.0 ± 0.50 
7.9 ± 0.3 
−6.2 ± 0.1 
−4.9 ± 0.5 −0.15 ± 0.01 

Table Notes. Col. 3: A V in the cluster central region. Col. 4: age, from 2MASS photometry. Col. 5: distance from the Sun. Col. 6: 
R GC calculated using R ⊙ = 7.2 kpc for the distance of the Sun to the Galactic centre 

## Table A .
A4. The list of discovered star clusters or candidates.

## Table A .
A4 ( continued) 

Target 
ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Size 
Type 
Avend. 
Comments 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 

Camargo 70 
199.09 
17.96 
7 : 33 : 19 
20 : 04 : 03 
8 × 8 
OCC 
n 
small core 
Camargo 71 
199.10 
0.19 
6 : 26 : 30 
12 : 22 : 04 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 72 
199.22 
0.53 
6 : 27 : 58 
12 : 25 : 38 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 73 
199.27 
0.90 
6 : 29 : 25 
12 : 33 : 03 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 74 
199.34 
1.01 
6 : 29 : 55 
12 : 32 : 30 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 75 
199.35 
19.88 
7 : 41 : 15 
20 : 34 : 57 
5 × 5 
SFN 
n 
dusty core? star forming? 
Camargo 76 
199.90 
18.10 
7 : 35 : 09 
19 : 24 : 44 
10 × 10 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 77 
202.29 
13.96 
7 : 23 : 12 
15 : 38 : 04 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 78 
204.30 
13.74 
7 : 25 : 47 
13 : 46 : 09 
6 × 6 
OCC 
n 
loose core 
Camargo 79 
208.92 
9.37 
7 : 17 : 44 
7 : 47 : 50 
7 × 7 
OC 
n 
loose core, impressive 
Camargo 80 
209.05 
9.98 
7 : 20 : 10 
7 : 57 : 19 
4 × 4 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 81 
211.58 
-1.13 
6 : 44 : 56 
0 : 41 : 16 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
wind 
Camargo 82 
211.66 
-1.05 
6 : 45 : 23 
0 : 38 : 55 
8 × 8 
EGr 
y 
wind 
Camargo 83 
211.78 
-1.50 
6 : 43 : 59 
0 : 20 : 37 
6 × 4 
EC 
n 
Camargo 84 
211.79 
-1.35 
6 : 44 : 32 
0 : 23 : 49 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
Camargo 85 
211.82 
-1.44 
6 : 44 : 17 
0 : 19 : 51 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
Camargo 86 
211.85 
-1.19 
6 : 45 : 14 
0 : 25 : 00 
8 × 8 
EC 
y 
wind, prominent 
Camargo 87 
211.89 
-1.28 
6 : 44 : 59 
0 : 20 : 47 
6 × 6 
EGr 
y 
Camargo 88 
211.90 
-1.20 
6 : 45 : 16 
0 : 22 : 20 
4 × 4 
EC 
y 
Camargo 89 
211.92 
-0.98 
6 : 46 : 07 
0 : 27 : 17 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
wind 
Camargo 90 
211.92 
-1.53 
6 : 44 : 09 
0 : 12 : 11 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
winds, prominent 
Camargo 91 
211.95 
-1.42 
6 : 44 : 36 
0 : 13 : 47 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
impressive morphology 
Camargo 92 
211.99 
-1.13 
6 : 45 : 40 
0 : 19 : 51 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
Camargo 93 
212.03 
-0.40 
6 : 48 : 22 
0 : 37 : 19 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
prominent dusty core 
Camargo 94 
212.04 
-1.08 
6 : 45 : 58 
0 : 18 : 15 
6 × 6 
EGr 
y 
winds 
Camargo 95 
212.10 
-1.28 
6 : 45 : 23 
0 : 09 : 19 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
scattered 
Camargo 96 
212.11 
-0.97 
6 : 46 : 28 
0 : 17 : 30 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
Camargo 97 
212.11 
-1.11 
6 : 46 : 00 
0 : 13 : 42 
7 × 7 
EGr 
y 
wind 
Camargo 98 
212.14 
-0.14 
6 : 49 : 30 
0 : 38 : 46 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent, wind, core 
Camargo 99 
212.14 
0.01 
6 : 50 : 02 
0 : 42 : 34 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 100 
212.15 
-1.42 
6 : 44 : 57 
0 : 03 : 05 
8 × 8 
EGr 
y 
impressive, winds 
Camargo 101 
212.18 
-1.34 
6 : 45 : 18 
0 : 03 : 30 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent, winds 
Camargo 102 
212.22 
-1.02 
6 : 46 : 31 
0 : 10 : 05 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
bubble 
Camargo 103 
212.26 
-1.27 
6 : 45 : 42 
0 : 01 : 08 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
small loose core 
Camargo 104 
212.28 
-0.62 
6 : 48 : 03 
0 : 17 : 56 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
impressive 
Camargo 105 
212.35 
-0.92 
6 : 47 : 07 
0 : 06 : 07 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
winds 
Camargo 106 
212.42 
-1.13 
6 : 46 : 30 
−0 : 03 : 35 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
bubble 
Camargo 107 
212.45 
-0.98 
6 : 47 : 04 
−0 : 01 : 08 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
long core 
Camargo 108 
212.86 
-19.45 
5 : 41 : 30 
−8 : 40 : 14 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 109 
212.95 
-19.69 
5 : 40 : 49 
−8 : 51 : 21 
7 × 7 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 110 
212.53 
-0.74 
6 : 48 : 05 
0 : 00 : 58 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 111 
212.64 
-0.79 
6 : 48 : 07 
−0 : 06 : 12 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
Camargo 112 
213.75 
-17.98 
5 : 48 : 21 
−8 : 47 : 32 
7 × 7 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 113 
214.05 
-17.54 
5 : 50 : 28 
−8 : 51 : 36 
5 × 5 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 114 
215.16 
-18.16 
5 : 50 : 05 
−10 : 04 : 34 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 115 
215.73 
0.20 
6 : 57 : 15 
−2 : 24 : 12 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
Camargo 116 
215.75 
-17.35 
5 : 54 : 01 
−10 : 14 : 29 
4.5 × 4.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 117 
215.79 
-0.27 
6 : 55 : 42 
−2 : 40 : 02 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 118 
215.86 
-17.54 
5 : 53 : 30 
−10 : 24 : 38 
3 × 2 
EGr 
n 
2nd generation, wind 
Camargo 119 
215.87 
-17.49 
5 : 53 : 42 
−10 : 23 : 52 
8 × 8 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 120 
215.91 
-0.56 
6 : 54 : 52 
−2 : 54 : 27 
10 × 10 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 121 
216.00 
-0.13 
6 : 56 : 35 
−2 : 47 : 11 
4 × 4 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 122 
216.02 
-0.38 
6 : 55 : 42 
−2 : 55 : 20 
7 × 7 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 123 
216.06 
-0.12 
6 : 56 : 44 
−2 : 50 : 19 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 124 
216.11 
-0.25 
6 : 56 : 22 
−2 : 56 : 24 
5 × 5 
EGr 
n 
PN A 18 3.5 NW 
Camargo 125 
216.14 
-0.24 
6 : 56 : 25 
−2 : 57 : 44 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
Camargo 126 
216.15 
-0.47 
6 : 55 : 38 
−3 : 04 : 46 
10 × 10 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 127 
216.18 
0.04 
6 : 57 : 30 
−2 : 52 : 12 
10 × 10 
ECC 
y 
Camargo 128 
216.18 
0.12 
6 : 57 : 48 
−0 : 50 : 26 
5 × 5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 129 
216.22 
-17.51 
5 : 54 : 13 
−10 : 42 : 37 
6 × 6 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 130 
216.23 
-0.50 
6 : 55 : 40 
−3 : 09 : 46 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
prominent dusty core 
Camargo 131 
216.23 
-0.11 
6 : 57 : 03 
−2 : 59 : 06 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
Camargo 132 
216.26 
-0.24 
6 : 56 : 38 
−3 : 04 : 10 
7 × 7 
ECC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 133 
216.32 
-0.76 
6 : 54 : 54 
−3 : 21 : 39 
10 × 10 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 134 
216.36 
-0.28 
6 : 56 : 43 
−3 : 10 : 45 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
wind 
Camargo 135 
216.41 
0.10 
6 : 58 : 08 
−3 : 02 : 50 
8 × 8 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 136 
216.41 
0.18 
6 : 58 : 26 
−3 : 00 : 52 
9 × 9 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 137 
216.45 
0.52 
6 : 59 : 43 
−2 : 53 : 20 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
Camargo 138 
216.51 
-0.06 
6 : 57 : 45 
−3 : 12 : 28 
10 × 10 
ECC 
n 
wind 


## Table A .
A4 ( continued) 

Target 
ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Size 
Type 
Avend. 
Comments 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 

Camargo 139 
216.64 
0.26 
6 : 59 : 08 
−3 : 10 : 50 
2.5 × 2.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 140 
216.66 
-0.46 
6 : 56 : 36 
−3 : 31 : 55 
8 × 8 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 141 
216.68 
0.54 
7 : 00 : 12 
−3 : 05 : 33 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
Camargo 142 
216.89 
0.28 
6 : 59 : 40 
−3 : 23 : 42 
3 × 2.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 143 
216.92 
0.03 
6 : 58 : 49 
−3 : 31 : 55 
2 × 1.5 
SFN 
n 
dust ring with bright spots 
Camargo 144 
216.92 
-0.34 
6 : 57 : 30 
−3 : 42 : 03 
10 × 10 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 145 
216.92 
0.82 
7 : 01 : 40 
−3 : 10 : 37 
2 × 2 
EC 
n 
Camargo 146 
217.03 
-0.14 
6 : 58 : 26 
−3 : 42 : 19 
4 × 4 
ECC 
y 
Camargo 147 
217.05 
0.91 
7 : 02 : 12 
−3 : 14 : 57 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
Camargo 148 
217.09 
0.34 
7 : 00 : 15 
−3 : 32 : 40 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 149 
217.09 
0.20 
6 : 59 : 46 
−3 : 36 : 33 
3 × 2 
EC 
n 
shock, few stars 
Camargo 150 
217.11 
0.43 
7 : 00 : 36 
−3 : 31 : 06 
2 × 2 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 151 
217.11 
-0.19 
6 : 58 : 24 
−3 : 48 : 18 
10 × 10 
EC 
y 
Camargo 152 
217.15 
-0.03 
6 : 59 : 03 
−3 : 46 : 04 
5 × 3.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 153 
217.19 
-0.07 
6 : 58 : 58 
−3 : 49 : 07 
2 × 2 
EC 
y 
core of a larger cluster? 
Camargo 154 
217.21 
0.48 
7 : 00 : 58 
−3 : 35 : 14 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 155 
217.27 
-0.34 
6 : 58 : 08 
−4 : 00 : 45 
10 × 10 
EC 
n 
Camargo 156 
217.32 
0.32 
7 : 00 : 35 
−3 : 45 : 23 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 157 
217.40 
0.09 
6 : 59 : 56 
−3 : 56 : 03 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 158 
217.42 
0.32 
7 : 00 : 46 
−3 : 51 : 15 
1.5 × 1.5 
EC 
y 
Camargo 159 
217.42 
0.28 
7 : 00 : 38 
−3 : 51 : 41 
2 × 2 
EC 
y 
shock induced? 
Camargo 160 
217.45 
0.35 
7 : 00 : 57 
−3 : 51 : 34 
2.5 × 2.5 
EC 
y 
shock induced? impressive 
Camargo 161 
217.62 
-0.15 
6 : 59 : 29 
−4 : 14 : 25 
2 × 1 
EC 
y 
bubble, subcluster or 2nd generation of BDS 89 
Camargo 162 
217.67 
1.14 
7 : 04 : 10 
−3 : 41 : 26 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
small cl. and large dust cores 
Camargo 163 
217.90 
0.35 
7 : 01 : 46 
−4 : 15 : 25 
2.5 × 2.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 164 
217.96 
-0.51 
6 : 58 : 49 
−4 : 42 : 12 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 165 
218.10 
-0.36 
6 : 59 : 35 
−4 : 46 : 01 
4 × 4 
EC 
y 
Camargo 166 
218.15 
-0.57 
6 : 58 : 57 
−4 : 53 : 56 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
include 1 SE possible subcluster, rel. [G84d]1-3 
Camargo 167 
218.16 
-0.58 
6 : 58 : 55 
−4 : 54 : 53 
1 × 1 
EC 
y 
subcluster or in pair 
Camargo 168 
218.16 
-0.29 
6 : 59 : 58 
−4 : 46 : 54 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
Camargo 169 
218.74 
-0.47 
7 : 00 : 24 
−5 : 22 : 42 
5.5 × 5.5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 170 
218.93 
-14.91 
6 : 08 : 19 
−11 : 57 : 17 
8 × 8 
OCC 
n 
core 
Camargo 171 
219.24 
-9.46 
6 : 28 : 53 
−9 : 52 : 08 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 172 
219.32 
-9.74 
6 : 28 : 00 
−10 : 03 : 43 
10 × 10 
EC 
y 
prominent 
Camargo 173 
219.68 
-0.94 
7 : 00 : 26 
−6 : 26 : 02 
4.5 × 4.5 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 174 
220.10 
1.09 
7 : 08 : 27 
−5 : 52 : 40 
6 × 6 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 175 
220.14 
-1.53 
6 : 59 : 10 
−7 : 06 : 31 
7 × 7 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 176 
220.25 
-0.36 
7 : 03 : 33 
−6 : 40 : 30 
4.5 × 4.5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 177 
220.30 
1.79 
7 : 11 : 19 
−5 : 43 : 49 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 178 
220.46 
-0.61 
7 : 03 : 02 
−6 : 58 : 26 
8 × 8 
EC 
y 
inc shock 
Camargo 179 
220.89 
-12.13 
6 : 21 : 56 
−12 : 29 : 22 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 180 
221.00 
-12.55 
6 : 20 : 34 
−12 : 46 : 16 
5 × 5 
OCC 
n 
core 
Camargo 181 
221.29 
0.07 
7 : 07 : 02 
−7 : 24 : 10 
3 × 2 
SFN 
n 
small dust neb, bright in W3, star forming? 
Camargo 182 
222.28 
-0.41 
7 : 07 : 08 
−8 :: 30 : 16 
8 × 8 
OCC 
n 
Camargo 183 
222.43 
-3.14 
6 : 57 : 35 
−9 : 52 : 41 
3 × 3 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 184 
222.43 
-0.12 
7 : 08 : 28 
−8 : 30 : 00 
4 × 4 
EC 
n 
shock origin, 1st generation 
Camargo 185 
222.47 
-0.06 
7 : 08 : 44 
−8 : 30 : 20 
3 × 2 
EC 
n 
shock induced,2nd generation 
Camargo 186 
222.74 
-0.32 
7 : 08 : 19 
−8 : 51 : 58 
8 × 8 
OCC 
n 
core 
Camargo 187 
222.74 
-3.42 
6 : 57 : 09 
−10 : 16 : 55 
4 × 4 
EC 
n 
Camargo 188 
222.95 
-0.05 
7 : 09 : 40 
−8 : 55 : 59 
5 × 5 
OCC 
n 
core 
Camargo 189 
222.98 
-3.98 
6 : 55 : 32 
−10 : 44 : 59 
1.5 × 1.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 190 
223.12 
-2.69 
7 : 00 : 30 
−10 : 17 : 37 
4.5 × 4.5 
ECC 
n 
bubble? 
Camargo 191 
223.13 
-2.15 
7 : 02 : 28 
−10 : 03 : 09 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 192 
223.16 
-3.51 
6 : 57 : 34 
−10 : 42 : 00 
7 × 7 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 193 
223.20 
-3.16 
6 : 58 : 56 
−10 : 34 : 46 
5 × 5 
OCC 
n 
prominent core 
Camargo 194 
223.24 
-0.18 
7 : 09 : 46 
−9 : 14 : 50 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 195 
223.45 
-0.94 
7 : 07 : 25 
−9 : 46 : 57 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
shock, impressive, winds 
Camargo 196 
223.51 
-1.78 
7 : 04 : 31 
−10 : 13 : 25 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 197 
223.51 
-3.75 
6 : 57 : 22 
−11 : 07 : 04 
1.5 × 1.5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 198 
223.54 
-1.86 
7 : 04 : 15 
−10 : 16 : 57 
4.5 × 4.5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 199 
223.62 
-1.89 
7 : 04 : 18 
−10 : 22 : 32 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 200 
223.71 
-1.90 
7 : 04 : 25 
−10 : 27 : 17 
4 × 4 
EC 
n 
Camargo 201 
223.71 
-2.20 
7 : 03 : 20 
−10 : 35 : 20 
2 × 2 
EC 
y 
diamond ring, shock impressive 
Camargo 202 
223.85 
-1.87 
7 : 04 : 48 
−10 : 33 : 43 
8 × 8 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 203 
224.01 
-1.70 
7 : 05 : 43 
−10 : 37 : 58 
5 × 4 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 204 
224.09 
-2.94 
7 : 01 : 22 
−11 : 16 : 02 
4.5 × 4.5 
EC 
n 
bubble 
Camargo 205 
224.09 
-2.84 
7 : 01 : 44 
−11 : 13 : 20 
4 × 4 
EGr 
n 
shock 
Camargo 206 
224.14 
-1.94 
7 : 05 : 05 
−10 : 51 : 39 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 207 
224.34 
-2.14 
7 : 04 : 44 
−11 : 07 : 14 
3 × 3 
EC 
n 
shock 


## Table A .
A4 ( continued) 



## Table A .
A4 ( continued) 

Target 
ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Size 
Type 
Avend. 
Comments 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 

Camargo 277 
266.20 
0.76 
9 : 00 : 25 
−45 : 00 : 04 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 278 
266.23 
0.88 
9 : 01 : 00 
−44 : 56 : 55 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
core 
Camargo 279 
266.27 
1.00 
9 : 01 : 41 
−44 : 53 : 52 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 280 
266.27 
1.10 
9 : 02 : 09 
−44 : 49 : 59 
5 × 5 
EGr 
n 
impressive mid IR core 
Camargo 281 
266.36 
0.75 
9 : 00 : 57 
−45 : 08 : 03 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 282 
266.42 
1.32 
9 : 03 : 36 
−44 : 47 : 43 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
Camargo 283 
266.51 
0.22 
8 : 59 : 15 
−45 : 35 : 33 
6 × 5 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 284 
266.60 
0.90 
9 : 02 : 29 
−45 : 12 : 35 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
core,impressive 
Camargo 285 
267.45 
1.33 
9 : 07 : 34 
−45 : 33 : 00 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive, core 
Camargo 286 
267.88 
1.83 
9 : 11 : 21 
−45 : 31 : 48 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
Camargo 287 
268.17 
2.07 
9 : 13 : 26 
−45 : 34 : 29 
8 × 8 
EC 
y 
small core 
Camargo 288 
268.32 
2.22 
9 : 14 : 39 
−45 : 35 : 01 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
wind, impressive 
Camargo 289 
268.62 
0.45 
9 : 08 : 22 
−47 : 01 : 04 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 290 
268.65 
0.18 
9 : 07 : 19 
−47 : 12 : 52 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 291 
269.21 
1.51 
9 : 15 : 14 
−46 : 42 : 57 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
central concentration 
Camargo 292 
269.61 
0.94 
9 : 14 : 28 
−47 : 24 : 01 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
impressive, winds 
Camargo 293 
269.67 
1.07 
9 : 15 : 18 
−47 : 21 : 23 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
impressive, cirrus 
Camargo 294 
269.79 
0.85 
9 : 14 : 51 
−47 : 35 : 21 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 295 
269.87 
0.78 
9 : 14 : 50 
−47 : 41 : 40 
2 × 2 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 296 
269.88 
1.14 
9 : 16 : 26 
−47 : 27 : 20 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 297 
269.97 
0.84 
9 : 15 : 34 
−47 : 43 : 39 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 298 
270.04 
0.76 
9 : 15 : 28 
−47 : 49 : 47 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 299 
270.20 
1.05 
9 : 17 : 22 
−47 : 45 : 09 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
winds 
Camargo 300 
270.25 
-1.26 
9 : 07 : 28 
−49 : 22 : 01 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 301 
270.33 
0.81 
9 : 16 : 52 
−48 : 00 : 37 
6 × 6 
EGr 
y 
winds 
Camargo 302 
270.37 
0.76 
9 : 16 : 52 
−48 : 04 : 15 
3 × 3 
EGr 
n 
wind 
Camargo 303 
270.37 
-1.24 
9 : 08 : 01 
−49 : 26 : 57 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 304 
270.39 
-1.13 
9 : 08 : 35 
−49 : 23 : 12 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 305 
270.45 
-1.21 
9 : 08 : 30 
−49 : 29 : 18 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
impressive, shock 
Camargo 306 
270.51 
0.74 
9 : 17 : 20 
−48 : 11 : 08 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
resolved dusty core, impressive 
Camargo 307 
270.53 
1.22 
9 : 19 : 29 
−47 : 51 : 59 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
bubble, impressive 
Camargo 308 
270.55 
0.46 
9 : 16 : 20 
−48 : 24 : 41 
10 × 8 
EC 
y 
Camargo 309 
270.56 
0.82 
9 : 17 : 55 
−48 : 10 : 03 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
impressive 
Camargo 310 
270.68 
-1.21 
9 : 09 : 27 
−49 : 38 : 50 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive, strong wind 
Camargo 311 
280.77 
-1.06 
9 : 59 : 49 
−56 : 21 : 56 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
dusty core 
Camargo 312 
270.77 
0.61 
9 : 17 : 54 
−48 : 27 : 34 
5 × 4 
EC 
y 
Camargo 313 
270.82 
-1.11 
9 : 10 : 30 
−49 : 41 : 27 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
impressive, wind 
Camargo 314 
270.82 
-1.40 
9 : 09 : 10 
−49 : 53 : 03 
4 × 4 
EC 
n 
Camargo 315 
270.88 
-0.72 
9 : 12 : 30 
−49 : 28 : 00 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
impressive, dusty core 
Camargo 316 
270.93 
0.70 
9 : 18 : 57 
−48 : 30 : 56 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 317 
270.95 
-1.38 
9 : 09 : 51 
−49 : 58 : 05 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
bubble 
Camargo 318 
270.96 
-1.11 
9 : 11 : 06 
−49 : 47 : 34 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 319 
271.12 
0.79 
9 : 20 : 09 
−48 : 35 : 00 
8 × 8 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 320 
271.33 
0.77 
9 : 20 : 58 
−48 : 44 : 39 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 321 
271.72 
-2.00 
9 : 10 : 17 
−50 : 57 : 01 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
prominent, wind 
Camargo 322 
271.73 
-2.27 
9 : 09 : 03 
−51 : 08 : 45 
4 × 4 
EC 
n 
dusty core 
Camargo 323 
272.25 
-1.19 
9 : 16 : 17 
−50 : 46 : 29 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
impressive, wind, 2nd generation 
Camargo 324 
272.35 
-2.61 
9 : 10 : 08 
−51 : 50 : 00 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
binuclear, impressive, sequential 
Camargo 325 
272.40 
-2.16 
9 : 12 : 29 
−51 : 33 : 10 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
dusty core, impressive 
Camargo 326 
272.49 
-1.49 
9 : 15 : 59 
−51 : 09 : 23 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
bubble 
Camargo 327 
272.58 
-1.73 
9 : 15 : 16 
−51 : 23 : 15 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive, dusty core 
Camargo 328 
272.70 
-1.82 
9 : 15 : 29 
−51 : 32 : 27 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 329 
274.92 
-1.06 
9 : 29 : 06 
−52 : 33 : 40 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
dusty core 
Camargo 330 
275.08 
-0.85 
9 : 30 : 48 
−52 : 31 : 16 
3 × 3 
EC 
n 
subcluster 
Camargo 331 
275.09 
-0.88 
9 : 30 : 45 
−52 : 33 : 10 
12 × 12 
EC 
n 
incl. subcluster 
Camargo 332 
275.07 
-1.09 
9 : 29 : 43 
−52 : 41 : 11 
3.5 × 3.5 
EC 
n 
dusty core shocks impressive 
Camargo 333 
275.142 
-0.77 
9 : 31 : 31 
−52 : 30 : 17 
10 × 10 
EGr 
y 
impressive winds 
Camargo 334 
275.14 
-1.07 
9 : 30 : 09 
−52 : 43 : 35 
7 × 7 
ECC 
n 
Camargo 335 
275.17 
-0.98 
9 : 30 : 40 
−52 : 40 : 49 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
small core 
Camargo 336 
275.57 
-2.20 
9 : 26 : 58 
−53 : 50 : 13 
5 × 5 
EC 
y 
Camargo 337 
275.65 
-2.19 
9 : 27 : 27 
−53 : 53 : 04 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
winds 
Camargo 338 
275.71 
-2.31 
9 : 27 : 11 
−54 : 00 : 43 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 339 
275.72 
-2.23 
9 : 27 : 35 
−53 : 57 : 34 
10 × 10 
EC 
n 
cavity, winds 
Camargo 340 
275.80 
-2.20 
9 : 28 : 08 
−53 : 59 : 51 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 341 
275.88 
-2.15 
9 : 28 : 45 
−54 : 00 : 50 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 342 
275.97 
-2.03 
9 : 29 : 46 
−53 : 59 : 22 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 343 
276.01 
-1.79 
9 : 31 : 05 
−53 : 50 : 23 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
impressive, dusty core 
Camargo 344 
276.03 
-1.45 
9 : 32 : 43 
−53 : 36 : 21 
3 × 3 
EC 
n 
include subcluster 
Camargo 345 
276.04 
-1.00 
9 : 34 : 51 
−53 : 17 : 11 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
winds impressive 


## Table A .
A4 ( continued)    Target 
ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Size 
Type 
Avend. 
Comments 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 

Camargo 346 
276.07 
-1.44 
9 : 33 : 02 
−53 : 37 : 36 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
incl. subcl. cavity 
Camargo 347 
276.38 
-2.64 
9 : 28 : 58 
−54 : 42 : 56 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
object is a loose core? 
Camargo 348 
276.51 
-2.45 
9 : 30 : 29 
−54 : 40 : 14 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
dusty core 
Camargo 349 
276.58 
-3.88 
9 : 23 : 54 
−55 : 44 : 35 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 350 
276.60 
-1.91 
9 : 33 : 27 
−54 : 20 : 01 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 351 
276.61 
-1.72 
9 : 34 : 24 
−54 : 12 : 08 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 352 
276.70 
-1.47 
9 : 36 : 00 
−54 : 04 : 35 
8 × 5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 353 
276.74 
-1.60 
9 : 35 : 39 
−54 : 11 : 40 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
Camargo 354 
276.97 
-4.02 
9 : 25 : 10 
−56 : 06 : 45 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 355 
277.06 
-3.16 
9 : 29 : 54 
−55 : 33 : 19 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
Camargo 356 
277.13 
-1.53 
9 : 37 : 58 
−54 : 24 : 25 
5 × 5 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 357 
277.15 
-1.60 
9 : 37 : 42 
−54 : 28 : 04 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 358 
277.22 
-1.55 
9 : 38 : 18 
−54 : 28 : 42 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 359 
277.23 
0.64 
9 : 48 : 00 
−52 : 49 : 47 
9 × 9 
EC 
n 
core, prominent 
Camargo 360 
277.36 
-1.36 
9 : 39 : 56 
−54 : 25 : 46 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 361 
277.50 
-1.23 
9 : 41 : 13 
−54 : 25 : 23 
7 × 6 
EGr 
n 
1st generation, bubble 
Camargo 362 
277.51 
-1.28 
9 : 41 : 02 
−54 : 28 : 18 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
protocl, 2nd gener winds, dusty core 
Camargo 363 
277.52 
-3.32 
9 : 31 : 28 
−55 : 59 : 33 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 364 
277.56 
0.56 
9 : 49 : 19 
−53 : 05 : 43 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 365 
277.63 
-1.05 
9 : 42 : 42 
−54 : 22 : 25 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
dusty core 
Camargo 366 
277.68 
0.89 
9 : 51 : 20 
−52 : 54 : 49 
9 × 9 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 367 
277.69 
-3.15 
9 : 33 : 10 
−55 : 58 : 52 
10 × 10 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 368 
277.71 
0.51 
9 : 49 : 54 
−53 : 13 : 48 
10 × 10 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 369 
277.80 
0.50 
9 : 50 : 18 
−53 : 17 : 38 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
bubble, winds, impressive 
Camargo 370 
277.84 
-3.08 
9 : 34 : 20 
−56 : 01 : 30 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 371 
277.94 
-1.43 
9 : 42 : 34 
−54 : 51 : 48 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
protocl, winds, dusty core 
Camargo 372 
277.95 
-2.65 
9 : 36 : 58 
−55 : 47 : 20 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 373 
278.35 
-0.89 
9 : 47 : 09 
−54 : 43 : 10 
8 × 8 
EC 
y 
impressive, dusty core 
Camargo 374 
278.60 
-0.99 
9 : 48 : 02 
−54 : 57 : 18 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
loose core 
Camargo 375 
278.63 
-0.37 
9 : 50 : 56 
−54 : 29 : 41 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
impressive stellar and dusty core 
Camargo 376 
278.78 
-0.65 
9 : 50 : 31 
−54 : 48 : 25 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
protocl., bubble, winds 
Camargo 377 
279.04 
-1.13 
9 : 49 : 49 
−55 : 20 : 45 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
Camargo 378 
279.12 
-1.22 
9 : 49 : 52 
−55 : 27 : 39 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 379 
279.12 
-1.22 
9 : 49 : 32 
−55 : 50 : 07 
10 × 10 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 380 
279.40 
-1.68 
9 : 49 : 19 
−55 : 59 : 45 
3 × 2 
EC 
n 
2nd generation, deeply absorbed 
Camargo 381 
279.42 
-0.96 
9 : 52 : 39 
−55 : 27 : 10 
6 × 6 
EGr 
y 
bubble, impress, 1st and 2nd gener 
Camargo 382 
279.43 
-1.69 
9 : 49 : 17 
−56 : 02 : 27 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
1st generation, shock,core 
Camargo 383 
279.50 
-1.52 
9 : 50 : 35 
−55 : 56 : 17 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
Camargo 384 
279.52 
-1.73 
9 : 49 : 44 
−56 : 06 : 48 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 385 
279.57 
-1.42 
9 : 51 : 27 
−55 : 54 : 12 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
Camargo 386 
279.67 
-1.02 
9 : 53 : 47 
−55 : 39 : 02 
5 × 5 
EGr 
n 
prominent 
Camargo 387 
279.93 
-0.40 
9 : 57 : 56 
−55 : 19 : 49 
11 × 11 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 388 
280.00 
-1.20 
9 : 54 : 47 
−55 : 59 : 49 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
winds, impressive 
Camargo 389 
280.02 
-1.42 
9 : 53 : 57 
−56 : 10 : 56 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive, core 
Camargo 390 
280.37 
-1.68 
9 : 54 : 46 
−56 : 36 : 20 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 391 
280.43 
-1.23 
9 : 57 : 09 
−56 : 17 : 09 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
poor core 
Camargo 392 
280.43 
-1.74 
9 : 54 : 48 
−56 : 41 : 15 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
small core, winds,impressive 
Camargo 393 
280.44 
-1.83 
9 : 54 : 30 
−56 : 45 : 46 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
winds 
Camargo 394 
280.46 
-1.02 
9 : 58 : 12 
−56 : 08 : 24 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
Camargo 395 
280.51 
-0.99 
9 : 58 : 38 
−56 : 08 : 48 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
dusty core 
Camargo 396 
280.57 
-0.47 
10 : 01 : 11 
−55 : 46 : 01 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
loose core 
Camargo 397 
280.58 
-1.44 
9 : 57 : 02 
−56 : 32 : 23 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
cavities 
Camargo 398 
280.62 
-1.19 
9 : 58 : 22 
−56 : 22 : 13 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
prominent, dusty core 
Camargo 399 
280.65 
-1.27 
9 : 58 : 12 
−56 : 27 : 03 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
impressive, central concentration 
Camargo 400 
280.66 
-0.88 
9 : 59 : 56 
−56 : 09 : 03 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
impressive 
Camargo 401 
280.69 
-1.15 
9 : 58 : 58 
−56 : 22 : 58 
6 × 6 
EGr 
n 
Camargo 402 
280.76 
-1.33 
9 : 58 : 34 
−56 : 34 : 13 
10 × 10 
EC 
y 
dusty core 
Camargo 403 
280.78 
-1.06 
9 : 59 : 50 
−56 : 21 : 58 
7 × 5 
EC 
n 
dusty core 
Camargo 404 
280.89 
-0.55 
10 : 02 : 41 
−56 : 01 : 30 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
bubble 
Camargo 405 
280.99 
-1.53 
9 : 59 : 00 
−56 : 51 : 42 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
wind,impressive 
Camargo 406 
281.05 
-1.55 
9 : 59 : 15 
−56 : 54 : 46 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
dusty core 
Camargo 407 
281.06 
-1.73 
9 : 58 : 29 
−57 : 04 : 15 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
core 
Camargo 408 
281.08 
-2.55 
9 : 54 : 53 
−57 : 43 : 36 
9 × 9 
EGr 
n 
inc. promin 9 sharp edge dust neb 
Camargo 409 
281.09 
-1.59 
9 : 59 : 17 
−56 : 58 : 39 
4 × 4 
EC 
y 
protocluster? impressive, rel DBS 125 
Camargo 410 
281.12 
-1.15 
10 : 01 : 26 
−56 : 38 : 49 
7 × 7 
EGr 
n 
cavity 
Camargo 411 
281.22 
-1.26 
10 : 01 : 33 
−56 : 47 : 15 
7 × 7 
EC 
y 
compact core, stellar and dusty 
Camargo 412 
281.26 
-1.69 
9 : 59 : 52 
−57 : 09 : 29 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
core 
Camargo 413 
281.30 
-2.25 
9 : 57 : 32 
−57 : 37 : 38 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
loose poor core 
Camargo 414 
281.42 
-1.80 
10 : 00 : 18 
−57 : 20 : 34 
12 × 12 
EC 
n 
inc. subclusters, 2nd gener, impres 


## Table A .
ANote. -Cols. 2 − 5: Central coordinates. Col. 6: cluster size. Col. 7: object type -OC means open cluster, OCC open cluster candidate, EC embedded cluster, ECC embedded cluster candidate, EGr stellar group, and SFN star-forming nebulae. Col. 8: cross-identifications with4 ( continued) 

Target 
ℓ 
b 
α(2000) 
δ(2000) 
Size 
Type 
Avend. 
Comments 
( • ) 
( • ) 
(h m s) 
( • ′ ′′ ) 
( ′ ) 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 

Camargo 415 
281.50 
-2.55 
9 : 57 : 23 
−57 : 59 : 20 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
core, impressive 
Camargo 416 
281.53 
-1.82 
10 : 00 : 54 
−57 : 25 : 49 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
winds, impressive core 
Camargo 417 
281.56 
-2.48 
9 : 58 : 02 
−57 : 50 : 00 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
dusty core, impressive 
Camargo 418 
281.63 
-1.29 
10 : 03 : 49 
−57 : 03 : 57 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
poor core 
Camargo 419 
281.64 
-2.54 
9 : 58 : 14 
−58 : 04 : 06 
8 × 8 
EC 
n 
core, prominent 
Camargo 420 
281.65 
-2.07 
10 : 00 : 28 
−57 : 41 : 57 
4 × 4 
ECC 
n 
protocl? bubble, core, dust & 3 sts 
Camargo 421 
281.69 
-2.06 
10 : 00 : 44 
−57 : 42 : 48 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
core, impressive 
Camargo 422 
281.70 
-1.10 
10 : 05 : 05 
−56 : 57 : 02 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
small dusty core 
Camargo 423 
281.81 
-1.09 
10 : 05 : 46 
−57 : 00 : 16 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
poor core, impressive 
Camargo 424 
281.86 
-1.65 
10 : 03 : 37 
−57 : 29 : 24 
2 × 2 
EC 
y 
dusty core 
Camargo 425 
281.87 
-2.12 
10 : 01 : 33 
−57 : 51 : 59 
7 × 7 
EGr 
y 
wind very poor core? 
Camargo 426 
281.88 
-1.85 
10 : 02 : 49 
−57 : 39 : 50 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
impressive, core 
Camargo 427 
281.94 
-1.52 
10 : 04 : 36 
−57 : 25 : 52 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
small dusty core 
Camargo 428 
281.98 
-1.37 
10 : 05 : 32 
−57 : 19 : 48 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
small dusty core, prominent 
Camargo 429 
282.00 
-1.72 
10 : 04 : 07 
−57 : 37 : 50 
8 × 8 
EGr 
n 
winds, impressive 
Camargo 430 
282.05 
-1.41 
10 : 05 : 48 
−57 : 24 : 21 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
small impressive core 
Camargo 431 
282.06 
-1.85 
10 : 03 : 55 
−57 : 46 : 09 
6 × 6 
EC 
y 
small dusty core, winds 
Camargo 432 
282.06 
-2.12 
10 : 02 : 44 
−57 : 58 : 51 
7 × 7 
EC 
n 
poor core, prominent, bubble 
Camargo 433 
282.16 
-1.57 
10 : 05 : 47 
−57 : 35 : 51 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
loose dusty core 
Camargo 434 
282.22 
-2.13 
10 : 03 : 36 
−58 : 05 : 04 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
small dusty core 
Camargo 435 
282.35 
-1.85 
10 : 05 : 42 
−57 : 56 : 11 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
unique long core, impressive 
Camargo 436 
282.52 
-1.98 
10 : 06 : 07 
−58 : 08 : 11 
6 × 6 
EC 
n 
loose core, impressive 
Camargo 437 
289.29 
-3.93 
10 : 44 : 38 
−63 : 23 : 22 
5 × 5 
EC 
n 
complex core struct in W3 and W4 

. 


Cyganowski, C. J., Whitney, B. A., Holden, E., Braden, E., Brogan, C. L., Churchwell, E., Indebetouw, R., Watson, D. F., et al., 2008, AJ, 136, 2391 Deharveng, L., Schuller, F., Anderson, L. D., Zavagno, A., Wyrowski, F., Menten, K. M., Bronfman, L., Testi, L. et al. 2010, A&A, 523, 6D de Wit, W. J., Testi, L., Palla, F., Vanzi, L., Zinnecker, H. 2004, A&A, 425, 937 Dias, W. S., Alessi, B. S., Moitinho, A., & Lépine, J. R. D. 2002, A&A, 389, 871 Dutra, C.M., Santiago, B.X. & Bica, E. 2002, A&A, 383, 219 Dutra, C.M., Bica, E., Soares, J., Barbuy, B. 2003, A&A, 400, 533
Acknowledgements: We thank an anonymous referee for important comments and suggestions. This publication makes use of data products from the Two Micron All Sky Survey and Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer. The first is a joint project of the University of Massachusetts and the Infrared Processing and Analysis Centre/California Institute of Technology. The second, is a joint project of the University of California, Los Angeles, and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory/California Institute of Technology. Both funded by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National Science Foundation. We acknowledge support from INCT-A and CNPq (Brazil).
A Acker, F Ochsenbein, B Stenholm, ESO-Strasbourg Catalogue of Galactic Planetary Nebulae. MunichESOAcker, A., Ochsenbein, F., Stenholm, B., et al. 1992, ESO-Strasbourg Catalogue of Galactic Planetary Nebulae, Munich (ESO)

. F C Adams, P Myers, ApJ. 553744Adams, F. C, Myers, P. 2001, ApJ, 553, 744

. V S Avedisova, ARep. 46193Avedisova, V. S. 2002, ARep, 46, 193

. E Bica, C M Dutra, B Barbuy, A&A. 397177Bica, E., Dutra, C. M., & Barbuy, B. 2003a, A&A, 397, 177

. E Bica, C M Dutra, J Soares, B Barbuy, A&A. 404223Bica, E., Dutra, C.M, Soares, J., Barbuy, B. 2003b, A&A, 404, 223

. E Bica, C Bonatto, A&A. 443465Bica, E., Bonatto, C. 2005, A&A, 443, 465

. E Bica, C Bonatto, B Barbuy, S Ortolani, A&A. 450105Bica, E., Bonatto, C., Barbuy, B. & Ortolani, S. 2006, A&A, 450, 105

. E Bica, C Bonatto, D Camargo, MNRAS. 385349Bica, E., Bonatto, C. & Camargo, D. 2008, MNRAS, 385, 349

. V V Bobylev, A T Bajkova, S V Lebedeva, As. Lett. 33720Bobylev, V. V., Bajkova, A. T., & Lebedeva, S. V., 2007, As. Lett., 33, 720

. V V Bobylev, A T Bajkova, MNRAS. 4371549Bobylev, V. V. & Bajkova, A. T., 2014, MNRAS, 437, 1549

. C Bonatto, L O Kerber, E Bica, B X Santiago, A&A. 446121Bonatto C., Kerber L. O., Bica E., Santiago B. X., 2006, A&A, 446, 121

. C Bonatto, E Bica, A&A. 473445Bonatto C. & Bica E. 2007a, A&A, 473, 445

. C Bonatto, E Bica, MNRAS. 4771301Bonatto C. & Bica E. 2007b, MNRAS, 477, 1301

. C Bonatto, E Bica, MNRAS. 3971915Bonatto C. & Bica E. 2009, MNRAS, 397, 1915

. C Bonatto, E Bica, A&A. 51681Bonatto, C. & Bica, E. 2010, A&A, 516, 81

. C Bonatto, E Bica, A&A. 53032Bonatto C. & Bica E. 2011, A&A, 530, 32

. J Borissova, C Bonatto, R Kurtev, J R A Clarke, F Peñaloza, S E Sale, D Minniti, J Alonso-García, A&A. 532131Borissova, J., Bonatto, C., Kurtev, R., Clarke, J. R. A., Peñaloza, F., Sale, S. E., Minniti, D., Alonso-García, J. et al. 2011, A&A, 532, 131

. A Bressan, P Marigo, L Girardi, B Salasnich, C Dal Cero, S Rubele, A Nanni, MNRAS. 427127Bressan, A., Marigo, P., Girardi, L., Salasnich, B., Dal Cero, C., Rubele, S., & Nanni, A. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 127b

. L Bukowiecki, G Maciejewski, P Konorski, A Strobel, A&A. 61231Bukowiecki, L., Maciejewski, G., Konorski, P., Strobel, A. 2011, A&A, 61, 231

. D Camargo, C Bonatto, E Bica, A&A. 508211Camargo, D., Bonatto, C. & Bica, E. 2009, A&A, 508, 211

. D Camargo, C Bonatto, E Bica, A&A. 52142Camargo, D., Bonatto, C. & Bica, E. 2010, A&A, 521, 42

. D Camargo, C Bonatto, E Bica, MNRAS. 4161522Camargo, D., Bonatto, C. & Bica, E. 2011, MNRAS, 416, 1522

. D Camargo, C Bonatto, E Bica, MNRAS. 4231940Camargo, D., Bonatto, C. & Bica, E. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 1940

. D Camargo, E Bica, C Bonatto, MNRAS. 4323349Camargo, D., Bica, E. & Bonatto, C. 2013, MNRAS, 432, 3349

. J A Cardelli, G C Clayton, J S Mathis, ApJ. 345245Cardelli, J. A., Clayton, G.C. & Mathis, J. S. 1989, ApJ., 345, 245

. S J Carey, P A Feldman, R O Redman, M P Egan, J M Macleod, S D Price, ApJ. 543157Carey, S. J., Feldman, P. A., Redman, R. O., Egan, M. P., MacLeod, J. M., & Price, S. D. 2000, ApJ, 543, 157

. A Cartwright, A P Whitworth, MNRAS. 348589Cartwright A., Whitworth A. P., 2004, MNRAS, 348, 589

. E Churchwell, M S Povich, D Allen, M G Taylor, M R Meade, B L Babler, R Indebetouw, C Watson, ApJ. 649759Churchwell, E., Povich, M. S., Allen, D., Taylor, M. G., Meade, M. R., Babler, B. L., Indebetouw, R., Watson, C. et al. 2006, ApJ, 649, 759

. E Churchwell, D F Watson, M S Povich, M G Taylor, B L Babler, M R Meade, R A Benjamin, R Indebetouw, B A Whitney, ApJ. 670428Churchwell, E., Watson, D. F., Povich, M. S., Taylor, M. G., Babler, B. L., Meade, M. R., Benjamin, R. A., Indebetouw, R., & Whit- ney, B. A. 2007, ApJ, 670, 428

. R A W Elson, S M Fall, K C Freeman, ApJ. 32354Elson, R.A.W., Fall, S.M. & Freeman, K.C. 1987, ApJ, 323, 54

. E D Feigelson, K V Getman, L K Townsley, P S Broos, M S Povich, G P Garmire, R R King, T Montmerle, ApJS. 1949Feigelson E. D., Getman, K. V., Townsley, L. K., Broos, P. S., Povich, M. S., Garmire, G. P., King, R. R., Montmerle, T., et al., 2011, ApJS, 194, 9

. E D Friel, ARA&A. 33381Friel, E.D. 1995, ARA&A, 33, 381

. D Froebrich, A Scholz, C L Raftery, MNRAS. 374399Froebrich, D., Scholz, A., & Raftery, C. L.2007, MNRAS, 374, 399

. E V Glushkova, S E Koposov, I Y Zolotukhin, Y V Beletsky, A D Vlasov, S I Leonova, Ast. Letters. 3675Glushkova, E. V., Koposov, S. E., Zolotukhin, I. Y., Beletsky, Y. V., Vlasov, A. D. & Leonova, S. I., 2010, Ast. Letters, 36, 75

. K.-W Hodapp, ApJS. 94615Hodapp, K.-W. 1994, ApJS, 94, 615

. V D Ivanov, J Borissova, P Pessev, G R Ivanov, R Kurtev, A&A. 3941Ivanov, V. D., Borissova, J., Pessev, P., Ivanov, G. R. & Kurtev, R. 2002, A&A, 394, 1

. N V Kharchenko, A E Piskunov, S Röser, E Schilbach, R.-D Scholz, A&A. 4381163Kharchenko, N.V., Piskunov, A.E. Röser, S., Schilbach, E. & Scholz, R.-D. 2005a, A&A, 438, 1163

. N V Kharchenko, A E Piskunov, S Röser, E Schilbach, R.-D Scholz, A&A. 440403Kharchenko, N.V., Piskunov, A.E. Röser, S., Schilbach, E. & Scholz, R.-D. 2005b, A&A, 440, 403

. I King, AJ. 67471King, I. 1962, AJ, 67, 471

. S E Koposov, E V Glushkova, I Zolotukhin, Yu, A&A. 486771Koposov, S. E., Glushkova, E. V. & Zolotukhin, I.Yu. 2007, A&A, 486, 771

. A Krone-Martins, C Soubiran, C Ducourant, R Teixeira, Le Campion, J. F. 5163A&AKrone-Martins, A., Soubiran, C., Ducourant, C., Teixeira, R., Le Campion, J. F., 2010, A&A, 516, 3

. J M D Kruijssen, T Maschberger, N Moeckel, C J Clarke, N Bastian, I A Bonnell, MNRAS. 419841Kruijssen, J. M. D., Maschberger, T., Moeckel, N., Clarke, C. J., Bastian, N., & Bonnell, I. A. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 841K

. M Kronberger, P Teutsch, B Alessi, M Steine, L Ferrero, K Graczewski, M Juchert, D Patchick, A&A. 447921Kronberger, M., Teutsch, P., Alessi, B., Steine, M., Ferrero, L., Graczewski, K., Juchert, M., Patchick, D., et al., 2006, A&A, 447, 921

. M S N Kumar, E Keto, E Clerkin, A&A. 4491033Kumar, M. S. N., Keto, E. & Clerkin, E. 2006, A&A, 449, 1033

. E A Lada, D L Depoy, Evans, N J Ii, I Gatley, ApJ. 371171Lada, E. A., Depoy, D. L., Evans, II, N. J. & Gatley, I. 1991, ApJ, 371, 171

. C J Lada, E A Lada, ARA&A. 4157Lada, C.J. & Lada, E.A. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 57

. E J Lee, N Murray, M Rahman, ApJ. 752146Lee, E. J., Murray, N. & Rahman, M. 2012, ApJ, 752, 146

. O Lomax, A P Whitworth, A T Cartwright, MNRAS. 412627Lomax, O., Whitworth, A. P. & Cartwright, A.T. 2011, MNRAS, 412, 627

. G Maciejewski, A Niedzielski, A&A. 4671065Maciejewski, G., Niedzielski, A. 2007, A&A, 467, 1065

. D Majaess, Ap&SS. 344175Majaess, D. 2013 Ap&SS, 344, 175

. F Massi, D Lorenzetti, T Giannini, F Vitali, A&A. 353598Massi, F., Lorenzetti, D., Giannini, T., Vitali, F., 2000, A&A, 353, 598

. F Massi, D Lorenzetti, T Giannini, A&A. 399147Massi, F., Lorenzetti, D., Giannini, T., 2003, A&A, 399, 147

. E P Mercer, ApJ. 635560Mercer, E. P. 2005, ApJ, 635, 560

J C Mermelliod, The Origins, Evolution, and Destinies of Binary Stars in Clusters. E. F. Milone, & J. C. Mermilliod90475Mermelliod, J. C. 1996, in The Origins, Evolution, and Destinies of Binary Stars in Clusters, ed. E. F. Milone, & J. C. Mermilliod, ASP Conf. Ser., 90, 475

. G Parmentier, S Pfalzner, arXiv:1211.1383v1Parmentier, G. & Pfalzner, S. 2012, arXiv:1211.1383v1

. A E Piskunov, N V Kharchenko, S Röser, E Schilbach, R.-D Scholz, A&A. 445545Piskunov A. E., Kharchenko N. V., Röser S., Schilbach E., Scholz R.-D., 2006, A&A, 445, 545

. E Puga, S Hony, C Neiner, A Lenorzer, A.-M Hubert, L M Waters, F Cusano, V Ripepi, A&A. 503107Puga, E., Hony, S., Neiner, C., Lenorzer, A., Hubert, A.-M., Waters, L. M., Cusano, F., Ripepi, V. 2009, A&A, 503, 107

. J M Rathborne, J M Jackson, R Simon, ApJ. 641389Rathborne, J. M., Jackson, J. M., & Simon, R. 2010, ApJ, 641, 389

. N Sánchez, N Anez, E J Alfaro, M C Odekon, arXiv:1007.3621v1Sánchez, N., Anez, N., Alfaro, E. J. & Odekon, M. C. 2010, arXiv:1007.3621v1

. S Schmeja, M S N Kumar, B Ferreira, MNRAS. 3891209Schmeja, S., Kumar, M. S. N. & Ferreira, B. 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1209

. S Sharma, A K Pandey, K Ogura, H Mito, K Tarusawa, R Sagar, AJ. 1321669Sharma, S., Pandey, A. K., Ogura, K., Mito, H., Tarusawa, K., Sagar, R. 2006, AJ,132, 1669

. M F Skrutskie, AJ. 1311163Skrutskie, M.F. et al. 2006, AJ, 131, 1163

. J B Soares, E ; S Bica, G L Hagen, A&A. 38811AJSoares, J. B., Bica, E. , 2002, A&A, 388, 172 van den Bergh, S., Hagen, G. L., 1975, AJ, 80, 11

. C P Wilson, AJ. 80175Wilson, C.P. 1975, AJ, 80, 175

. E L Wright, P R M Eisenhardt, A K Mainzer, AJ. 1401868Wright, E. L., Eisenhardt, P. R. M., Mainzer, A. K. et al. 2010, AJ, 140, 1868

. A Zavagno, M Pomarès, L Deharveng, T Hosokawa, D Russeil, J Caplan, A&A. 472835Zavagno, A., Pomarès, M., Deharveng, L., Hosokawa, T., Russeil, D., & Caplan, J. 2007, A&A, 472, 835

. J E Ybarra, E A Lada, C G Román-Zúñiga, Z Balog, J Wang, E D Feigelson, ApJ. 769140Ybarra, J. E., Lada, E. A., Román-Zúñiga, C. G., Balog, Z., Wang, J., & Feigelson, E. D. 2013, ApJ, 769, 140

Online material We carried out a search that provided 437 new star clusters, stellar groups, and candidates. A Appendix, 20Appendix A. Online material We carried out a search that provided 437 new star clus- ters, stellar groups, and candidates. The first 20