# IZ photometry of L dwarfs and the implications for brown dwarf surveys

CorpusID: 119502262
 
tags: #Physics

URL: [https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea7469ecb77057dd6e2de41d2b4bd695ff2130b](https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/7ea7469ecb77057dd6e2de41d2b4bd695ff2130b)
 
| Is Survey?        | Result          |
| ----------------- | --------------- |
| By Classifier     | False |
| By Annotator      | (Not Annotated) |

---

IZ photometry of L dwarfs and the implications for brown dwarf surveys
11 Feb 2000 19 March 2022

I A Steele 
Astrophysics Research Institute
Liverpool John Moores University
CH41 1LDLiverpool

L Howells 
Astrophysics Research Institute
Liverpool John Moores University
CH41 1LDLiverpool

IZ photometry of L dwarfs and the implications for brown dwarf surveys

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc
000000011 Feb 2000 19 March 2022Printed 19 March 2022 (MN L A T E X style file v1.4)stars: low mass, brown dwarfs
The I − Z colour has been recently shown to be a good temperature indicator for M dwarfs. We present the first IZ photometry of a small sample of L dwarfs ranging in spectral type from L0.5V to L6.0V. We find that the I − Z colour is not a good temperature indicator for objects between L1V and L5V, such objects having colours that overlap with mid M dwarfs. We attribute this to the reduction in the strength of the TiO and VO bands in the L dwarfs which are the dominant opacity source in the I band for late M dwarfs. Beyond L5V,I − Z appears to be a reasonable indicator. This has important implications for the planning of optical surveys for cool objects in clusters and the field.For example I − Z will cease to be a good method of discriminating brown dwarfs in the Pleiades below around 0.04M ⊙ , and at around 0.075M ⊙ in the Hyades and Praesepe.

# INTRODUCTION
 Kirkpatrick et al. (1999) 
have recently identified and classified the first large sample of L dwarfs (objects cooler than M-dwarfs) from the 2-micron all sky survey (2MASS). The optical spectra of these objects are characterised by the disappearance of the TiO and VO bands which dominate late M dwarfs, and their replacement by metallic Hydrides and neutral alkali metals. This would be expected to affect the optical colours one observes for such objects. This is important as many surveys for low mass objects (specifically brown dwarfs) in clusters have relied on colours such as V − I (e.g. Stauffer, Hamilton & Probst c 0000 RAS 2 I.A. Steele & L. Howells 1994), R − I (e.g. Jameson & Skillen 1989, Hambly et al. 1999, and I − Z (e.g Pinfield et al. 1997, Zapatero Osorio et al. 1999. The I − Z colour has been particularly favoured of late, as it has been found to be an excellent method of picking late cluster M dwarfs from the field. The lowest mass object so far detected in the Pleiades using this technique is the ∼ L1V dwarf Roque 25 which was recently identified by Martin et al. (1998). It is therefore useful to see if the I − Z colour would remain useful as a method of picking out later L dwarfs in cluster fields. For example at the distance of the Hyades an L3V dwarf would have I ∼ 19 based on the pseudo-photometry (derived from flux calibrated spectra) presented by Kirkpatrick et al. (1999). This is easily obtained with 2-m class telescopes, and therefore an optical survey at I and Z, at which wavelengths much larger fields of view are generally available than the near infrared JHK bands, would appear to be an excellent way of finding such objects.

In order to address this question of applicability to cluster surveys, as well as the more general question of the use of I − Z as a temperature indicator we have carried out I Harris (hereafter I H ) and Z RGO photometry of a small number of L dwarfs ranging in spectral type from L0.5V to L6V. This paper presents the results of that photometry, and discusses the results in the context set out above.


# OBSERVATIONS

Our observations were obtained using the 1.0-m Jacobus Kapteyn Telescope (JKT), La Palma on the night of 1999 December 19. The photometric conditions were excellent, with relative humidity always below 5% (giving good stability, especially in the Z band) and no cirrus or other cloud. The lunar phase was near full, however this does not affect the I and Z bands as much as the bluer optical bands. Through the course of the night the seeing was reasonable, slowly varying between 1.1 and 1.3 arcsec FWHM. This was sufficient to adequately resolve the two of our program objects (2MASSW J0147334+345411 and 2MASSs J0850359+105716) that are close (∼ 2 arcsec) binaries. Each object in the programme was observed three times through each filter, with an integration time of 600 seconds per observation (except for the faintest object, 2MASSs J0850359+105716, where the integrations were each 1200 seconds). The standard field PG0918 (Landolt 1992) was observed between each object (i.e. roughly once per 90 minutes) throughout the night.

The CCD employed was a SITE 2048x2048 pixel array, and the filters used were I H and c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000-000 Table 1. Photometry of 2MASS L-dwarfs. Spectral types from Kirkpatrick et al. (1999).


## Object

Spectral Type  Landolt (1992) standards and M-dwarfs by Cossburn et al. (2000). A comparison of the measured quantum efficiency curves of the two CCDs shows that they are identical to within ∼ 2% over the range 6000 -10000Å. The standards and M-dwarfs from Cossburn et al. (2000) are therefore directly applicable to the newer SITE detector. It is important to note that the Cossburn et al. (2000) calibration is based on an assigned I − Z colour of 0.0 for an unreddened A0 star and that this is different to the Gunn z and Sloan z ′ systems.
I H Z RGO I H − Z RGO 2MASSW J0147334+345311 L0.
Data reduction was carried out in the usual manner, using a combination of twilight fields and the median of the programme frames in the appropriate bands to flat field and defringe the data.

The results of our photometry are presented in Table 1. Errors were estimated from the dispersion of the measurements of each object. One object, 2MASSW J0918382+213406 has a very bright star roughly 1 arcminute SW, making background estimation difficult due to scattered light. This is reflected in the greater photometric errors for this object compared to the fainter 2MASSW J0913032+184150.


# DISCUSSION

In Figure 1 we plot I H − Z RGO (hereafter I − Z) versus spectral type (Kirkpatrick et al. 1999) for our sample (circles). Also plotted as crosses are the M-dwarf data of Cossburn et al. (2000) and their observation of DENIS-P J1228.2-1547, which Kirkpatrick et al. (1999) classify as L5V. Based purely on their M dwarf sample Cossburn et al. (2000) made the reasonable claim that I − Z was a good temperature indicator down to ∼ 2000K (M9).

However from the figure we see that between ∼ L1V and ∼ L5V the I − Z colour of the L dwarfs is bluer than the late M-dwarfs, and in fact overlaps with the mid-M dwarfs. I − Z is therefore not a good temperature indicator in the range ∼ 0.5 − 1.

The reason for the relatively blue I−Z colour of the early-mid L dwarfs can be understood by examining the spectra of Kirkpatrick et al. (1999). A comparison of the L0V spectra with (for example) the L3V spectra shows that the TiO and VO band strengths are much reduced in the L3V objects. These opacity sources are especially strong between 7800-8000Å (VO) and 8400-8600Å (TiO), i.e. in the region where the I band filter transmission is greatest.

Overlaying the spectra normalized at the pseudo-continuum point at ∼ 8250Å shows that the regions longward of ∼ 8600Å (where the Z band transmission is greatest) overlap well, but a significant flux excess for the L3V object shorter than this wavelength. Therefore such objects will appear bluer than earlier objects in I − Z. For objects later than ∼ L5V I − Z again becomes a reasonable temperature indicator. Examination of the spectra shows that this is simply due to the extremely cool temperature giving a very steep spectral slope through I and Z which 'overwhelms' the effect of the lack of opacity in the I band.

As stated previously, I − Z has recently become the favoured colour for cluster brown dwarf searches, often with considerable success (e.g. Cossburn et al. 1997, Zapatero Osorio et al. 1999). However from Figure 1 it appears that if we wish to find cluster L dwarfs (which compared with field objects have the advantage of known distance, age and metallicity, making mass derivations via. a comparison with isochrones feasible), the I − Z colour would not be appropriate. To confirm this in Figure 2 we plot the combined I, I − Z diagram for the four fields containing our L dwarfs. It is apparent that only the earliest and latest L dwarf would be identified from this diagram as a potentially interesting object, the middle two objects overlapping with the background objects (which may be distant M dwarfs, even more distant M giants or extragalactic) as would be expected from their bluer colours. It c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000-000 IZ photometry of L dwarfs and the implications for brown dwarf surveys 5 Figure 2. I, I − Z diagram for all of the objects in our observed fields. The L-dwarfs are indicated by circles with error bars and the other objects by crosses. Note that the photometry is based on a single observation of each field, and therefore differs slightly from the average value presented in Table 1.

is therefore apparent that I, Z searches for L dwarfs in clusters (and the field) will only be sensitive to objects earlier than ∼L1V and later than ∼L5V. Using the objects listed in Kirkpatrick et al. (1999) which have measured parallaxes to define an absolute I magnitude, spectral type relation for the L dwarfs, this indicates that I − Z will not be a useful colour in the absolute magnitude range M I ∼ 15 − 17. Assuming a Pleiades age of ∼ 120Myr and using an extension (Baraffe, priv. comm.) of the Lyon Group absolute magnitude-mass relationship presented by Baraffe et al. (1998) this implies that for that cluster objects with masses lower than ∼ 0.04M ⊙ will be difficult to pick out with IZ photometry. This is consistent with the lowest mass (spectroscopically confirmed) object so far found using that technique (Roque 25) which has a spectral type of ∼ L1V (M ∼ 0.04M ⊙ ) . For older clusters such as the Hyades and Praesepe (age ∼ 1 Gyr), objects in the range ∼ 0.075 − 0.06M ⊙ will be difficult to detect using the I − Z colour. This is consistent with the lowest mass objects detected in Praesepe with this technique having I ∼ 21.5 , Magazzu et al. 1998), corresponding to M I ∼ 15.


# CONCLUSIONS

We have presented observations that show that the I − Z colour is not a good temperature indicator for L dwarfs between L1V and L5V, these objects having I − Z colours which overlap with mid-late M dwarfs. We attribute this to the decreasing blanketing of the I band flux in L dwarfs due to the absence of strong TiO and VO bands in their spectra. This imposes limits on the use of I − Z as an indicator of very cool objects in cluster brown dwarf searches at around 0.04M ⊙ for the Pleiades and 0.075M ⊙ for Praesepe and the Hyades. For objects of lower mass than this near infrared (JHK) surveys should be considered.

## Figure 1 .
1Spectral Class, I H − Z RGO diagram for our observations of L-dwarfs (circles). Also plotted (crosses) are the M-dwarf and DENIS-P J1228.2-1547 data ofCossburn et al. (2000) 


Z RGO . These filters are typically the ones used for the majority of IZ surveys of clusters so far carried out. They have been calibrated using a TEK 1024x1024 CCD for a sample5V 
18.20 ± 0.05 
17.40 ± 0.05 
0.80 ± 0.07 
2MASSW J0918382+213406 
L2.5V 
18.25 ± 0.20 
17.75 ± 0.10 
0.50 ± 0.22 
2MASSW J0913032+184150 
L3.0V 
19.30 ± 0.10 
18.60 ± 0.05 
0.70 ± 0.12 
2MASSs J0850359+105716 
L6.0V 
20.00 ± 0.20 
18.70 ± 0.20 
1.30 ± 0.30 

of 
c 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000-000

. I Baraffe, G Chabrier, F Allard, P H Hauschildt, A&A. 337403Baraffe I., Chabrier G., Allard F., Hauschildt P.H., 1998, A&A, 337, 403

. M R Cossburn, S T Hodgkin, R F Jameson, D J Pinfield, MNRAS. 23Cossburn M.R., Hodgkin S.T., Jameson R.F., Pinfield D.J., 1997, MNRAS, 288, L23

. M R Cossburn, S T Hodgkin, R F Jameson, MNRAS. in pressCossburn M.R., Hodgkin S.T., Jameson R.F., 2000, MNRAS, in press

. R F Jameson, W J I Skillen, MNRAS. 247Jameson R.F., Skillen W.J.I., 1989, MNRAS, 239, 247.

. N C Hambly, S T Hodgkin, M R Cossburn, R F Jameson, MNRAS. 303835Hambly N.C., Hodgkin S.T., Cossburn M.R., Jameson R.F., MNRAS, 1999, 303, 835

. J D Kirkpatrick, ApJ. 519802Kirkpatrick J.D., et al., 1999, ApJ, 519, 802

. A U Landolt, AJ. 104340Landolt A.U., 1992, AJ, 104, 340

. A Magazzu, R Rebolo, Zapatero Osorio, M R Martin, E L Hodgkin, S T , ApJ. 49747Magazzu A., Rebolo R., Zapatero Osorio M.R., Martin E.L., Hodgkin S.T., 1998, ApJ, 497, L47

. E L Martin, G Basri, Zapatero Osorio, M R Rebolo, R , Lopez Garcia, R J , ApJ. 50741Martin E.L., Basri G., Zapatero Osorio M.R., Rebolo R., Lopez Garcia R.J., ApJ, 1998, 507, L41

. D J Pinfield, S T Hodgkin, R F Jameson, M R Cossburn, T Von Hippel, MNRAS. 287180Pinfield D.J., Hodgkin S.T., Jameson R.F., Cossburn M.R., von Hippel T., 1997, MNRAS, 287, 180

. J R Stauffer, D Hamilton, R G Probst, AJ. 108155Stauffer J.R., Hamilton D., & Probst R.G., 1994, AJ, 108, 155

. Zapatero Osorio, M R Rebolo, R Martin, E L Hodgkin, S T Cossburn, M R Magazzu, A Steele, I A Jameson, R F , A&AS. 134537Zapatero Osorio M.R., Rebolo R., Martin E.L., Hodgkin S.T., Cossburn M.R., Magazzu A., Steele I.A., Jameson R.F., 1999, A&AS, 134, 537

. MNRAS. 000c 0000 RASc 0000 RAS, MNRAS 000, 000-000